URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/VLRCCP/2019/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:52:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Contempt of Court [2019] VLRCCP 1
What is my submission used for?
How do I make a submission?
Confidential submissions
Anonymous submissions
Contempt of court,
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
and enforcement processes
Chapter 3: General issues with the law of contempt of court
Uncertainty of scope
Procedural safeguards
Overlap with criminal law
Chapter 4: Contempt in or near the courtroom—contempt in the face of the court
Definitional issues and possible reforms
Procedural issues and possible reforms
Chapter 5: Juror contempt
Chapter 6: Non-compliance with court orders or undertakings— disobedience contempt
Chapter 8: Contempt by publication (2)— scandalising the court
Divorce and related proceedings
The prohibition on reporting directions hearings and sentence indications
Victims of sexual offences
A victim’s ability to speak
Temporary restrictions—sex offences and family violence
Awareness of prohibitions and restrictions
Monitoring compliance with prohibitions and restrictions
Responsibility for instituting proceedings
Fault elements to prove breach of prohibitions and restrictions
Defences and exceptions
Legacy suppression orders
2 Referral to the Commission
Key principles of law relevant to this inquiry
The proper administration of justice
Freedom of expression
An underlying tension
A principles-based approach
Scope of this review
Contempt of court
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Previous reviews and reforms
Reviews and reforms of contempt of court
Review of the Open Courts Act
Other reviews
Conduct of this reference
Commission Chair
Advisory committee
Preliminary meetings
Consultation paper
Formal consultation process
How to use this consultation paper
14 Introduction
2. Existing legal framework for contempt of court
Introduction
History and jurisdiction
Unique features of contempt of court
The language of the law of contempt of court
The discretionary nature of the courts’ powers
The standard of proof
Summary proceedings
Who can bring proceedings
The distinction between civil and criminal contempt
Manifestations of contempt of court
Contempt in the face of the court
Juror contempt
Disobedience contempt
Contempt by publication (1)—sub judice contempt
Contempt by publication (2)—contempt by scandalising the court
24 Introduction
3. General issues with the law of contempt of court
Introduction
Uncertainty of scope
Possible reforms
Procedural safeguards
Possible reforms
Overlap with criminal law
Possible reforms
Sentencing Act 1991
Pre-emptive warnings
Show cause warnings
Possible reforms
Contempt in the
Introduction
4. Contempt in the face of the court
Introduction
Defining contempt in the face of the court
The need for statutory provisions
Insulting or disrespectful behaviour
Defining ‘in the face of the court’
Conduct covered by other criminal offences
The procedure for contempt in the face of the court
A consistent approach to disruptive conduct
The impact on certain groups of people
Juror contempt
60 Introduction
Jury trials in Victoria
The regulation of juror conduct
Forms of contempt by jurors
Jurors accessing information
Jurors disclosing information
Possible reforms to contempt by jurors
Education of jurors
The juror oath
Jury directions
Disobedience contempt
Introduction
The elements of disobedience contempt
Who brings proceedings?
Issues with disobedience contempt
The distinction between civil and criminal contempt
Are contempt proceedings necessary to enforce court orders?
Possible reforms to disobedience contempt
Australian Law Reform Commission recommendations
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia recommendations
New Zealand Law Commission recommendations
82 Introduction
The tendency test
The definition of ‘publication’
The definition of ‘pending’
The strict liability standard
The public interest principle
The summary procedure for sub judice contempt
Penalties for sub judice contempt
Sub judice contempt and the fair trial
The influence on jurors
Can jurors be protected from prejudicial information in today’s media landscape?
Suppression orders and take-down orders
Possible reforms to sub judice contempt
A statutory offence of sub judice contempt
Other ways to manage jury behaviour
Legal education about social media and sub judice contempt
Contempt by
114 Introduction
The uncertain test
Balancing scandalising contempt and fair criticism
Truth as a defence
Prosecution of high-profile individuals
The appropriateness of the summary procedure
Apologies and retractions
Is the law of scandalising contempt adaptable and relevant?
Criticism of the judiciary
Scandalising contempt and freedom of expression
Alternatives to scandalising contempt
Possible reforms to scandalising contempt
Abolition of scandalising contempt
Redefining scandalising contempt
Introduction
Indecent matters and public morals
The option of repeal
Divorce and related proceedings
The option of repeal
Directions hearings and sentence indications
Possible reforms to prohibitions on reporting directions hearings and sentence indications
Victims of sexual offences
Possible reforms to prohibitions against identifying victims
A victim’s ability to speak
Consent to publication
Possible reforms—greater autonomy for victims
Temporary restrictions—sex offences and family violence
Possible reforms to restrictions in cases of sexual and family violence
Introduction
Implementation of recommendations
Data about enforcement
Orders under the Open Courts Act
Data about initiation of proceedings for contempt by the Director of Public Prosecutions
Access to data
Definitions of ‘publication’
Online publication
Definitions of ‘publication’
Definitions of ‘public’ and ‘a section of the public’
Duration of publication
Liability of online intermediaries
Possible reforms—laws concerning publication
Enforcement in Victoria
Enforcement in Australia
Enforcement in foreign jurisdictions
Possible reforms—enforcement outside Victoria
Awareness of prohibitions and restrictions
Court notification process
Possible reforms—notifying the public
Monitoring compliance with prohibitions and restrictions
Responsibility for instituting proceedings
The ‘prosecutorial gap’
Possible reforms—instituting proceedings
Fault elements to prove breach of prohibitions
Proving fault elements
Notification processes
Possible reforms—fault elements
Defences and exceptions
Statutory defences and exceptions
Defence of honest and reasonable mistake of fact
Possible reforms—defences and exceptions
Penalties and remedies
Injunctions
Legacy suppression orders
Access to data
Need for clarity in notification and compliance
Lack of provision for legacy suppression orders
11. Conclusion
Appendix A: Advisory committee members
Contempt of Court
CONSULTATION PAPER
Published by the Victorian Law Reform Commission
The Victorian Law Reform Commission was established under the
Law Reform Commission Act 2000
as a central agency for developing law reform
in Victoria.
© Victorian Law Reform Commission 2019.
This publication of the Victorian Law Reform Commission follows the Melbourne
University Law Review Association
Australian Guide to Legal Citation
ed., 2018).
This report reflects the law as at 11 April 2019. Contempt of Court:
Consultation Paper
ISBN: 978-0-9943725-0-5
acting chair
Bruce Gardner PSM
commissioners
Liana Buchanan
Dr Ian Hardingham QC Prof. Bernadette McSherry Dan Nicholson
Alison O’Brien Gemma Varley PSM
The Hon. Frank Vincent AO QC
chief executive officer
Merrin Mason
Lindy Smith (11 Feb –12 Jul 2019)
reference team
Anna Beesley (team leader)
Annie Blatchford (senior research and policy officer) Helen Donovan (senior
research and policy officer) Mary Kozlovski (senior research
and policy officer)
Octavian Simu (research assistant)
cover design
text layout
Contempt of Court
CONSULTATION PAPER
Victorian Law Reform Commission GPO Box 4637
Melbourne Victoria 3001 Australia
DX 144, Melbourne
333 Queen Street Melbourne Victoria 3000 Australia
+61 3 8608 7800
1300 666 555
(within Victoria)
+61 3 8608 7888
law.reform@lawreform.vic.gov.au
www.lawreform.vic.gov.au
Call for submissions
Terms of reference
Questions x
PART ONE: GENERAL OVERVIEW 1
Introduction 2
Referral to the Commission 2
Why this review is needed 2
Key principles of law relevant to this inquiry
The proper administration of justice 3
Freedom of expression 4
An underlying tension 6
A principles-based approach 6
Scope of this review 7
Contempt of court 7
The Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958 (Vic)
The Open Courts Act 2013 (Vic) 8
Previous reviews and reforms 8
Reviews and reforms of contempt of court
Review of the Open Courts Act 9
Other reviews 9
Conduct of this reference 10
Commission Chair 10
Division 10
Advisory committee 10
Preliminary meetings 10
Consultation paper 10
Formal consultation process 11
How to use this consultation paper 11
Juror contempt 60
Introduction 60
The importance of trial by jury 60
Jury trials in Victoria 61
The regulation of juror conduct 61
The Juries Act 2000 (Vic) and the Jury
Directions Act 2015 (Vic) 61
Forms of contempt by jurors 63
Jurors accessing information 63
Jurors disclosing information 64
Possible reforms to contempt by jurors
Amendments to the Juries Act 2000 (Vic)
Education of jurors 65
The juror oath 66
Jury directions 66
Disobedience contempt 70
Introduction 70
Defining disobedience contempt 71
The elements of disobedience contempt
Penalties 73
Who brings proceedings? 73
Issues with disobedience contempt 74
The distinction between civil and criminal
contempt 74
Are contempt proceedings necessary to enforce
court orders? 75
Possible reforms to disobedience contempt
Australian Law Reform Commission
recommendations 78
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
recommendations 78
New Zealand Law Commission recommendations
Contempt by publication (1)—sub judice
contempt 82
Introduction 82
Issues with sub judice contempt 85
The tendency test 85
The definition of ‘publication’
The definition of ‘pending’
The strict liability standard 91
The public interest principle 93
The summary procedure for sub judice contempt
Penalties for sub judice contempt 96
Sub judice contempt and the fair trial
The influence on jurors 97
Can jurors be protected from prejudicial
information in today’s media landscape? 101
Suppression orders and take-down orders
Possible reforms to sub judice contempt
A statutory offence of sub judice contempt
Other ways to manage jury behaviour 107
Legal education about social media and sub
judice contempt 110
Contempt by publication
(2)—scandalising the court 114
Introduction 114
Issues with the law of scandalising contempt
The uncertain test 116
Balancing scandalising contempt and fair
criticism 117
Truth as a defence 117
Prosecution of high-profile individuals
The appropriateness of the summary procedure
Apologies and retractions 120
Is the law of scandalising contempt adaptable
and relevant? 121
Criticism of the judiciary 122
Scandalising contempt and freedom of expression
Alternatives to scandalising contempt
Possible reforms to scandalising contempt
Abolition of scandalising contempt 126
Redefining scandalising contempt 127
PART THREE: THE JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS REPORTS
Prohibitions on publication under the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 132
Introduction 132
A principles-based approach 133
Indecent matters and public morals 134
The option of repeal 134
Divorce and related proceedings 135
The option of repeal 135
Directions hearings and sentence indications
Possible reforms to prohibitions on reporting
directions hearings and
sentence indications 137
Victims of sexual offences 138
Possible reforms to prohibitions against
identifying victims 140
A victim’s ability to speak 141
Consent to publication 141
Possible reforms—greater autonomy for
victims 144
Temporary restrictions—sex offences and
family violence 145
Possible reforms to restrictions in cases of
sexual and family violence 146
PART FOUR: ENFORCEMENT 149
Enforcing laws that restrict publication
Introduction 150
Open Courts Act Review—recommendations
Implementation of recommendations 152
Data about enforcement 152
Orders under the Open Courts Act 152
Consent to prosecute under the Judicial
Proceedings Reports Act 1958 (Vic) 153
Data about initiation of proceedings for
contempt by the
Director of Public Prosecutions 154
Access to data 154
Definitions of ‘publication’
Online publication 155
Definitions of ‘publication’
Definitions of ‘public’ and
‘a section of the public’ 157
Duration of publication 157
Liability of online intermediaries 158
Possible reforms—laws concerning
publication 159
Enforcement in Victoria 161
Enforcement in Australia 161
Enforcement in foreign jurisdictions
Possible reforms—enforcement outside
Victoria 163
Awareness of prohibitions and restrictions
Court notification process 164
Possible reforms—notifying the public
Monitoring compliance with prohibitions and
restrictions 167
Responsibility for instituting proceedings
The ‘prosecutorial gap’
Possible reforms—instituting proceedings
Fault elements to prove breach of prohibitions
Proving fault elements 171
Notification processes 171
Possible reforms—fault elements
Defences and exceptions 172
Statutory defences and exceptions 172
Defence of honest and reasonable mistake of
Possible reforms—defences and exceptions
Penalties and remedies 175
Injunctions 176
Legacy suppression orders 180
Access to data 181
Need for clarity in notification and
compliance 182
Lack of provision for legacy suppression
Possible reforms—legacy suppression
Conclusion 186
Appendix A: Advisory committee members
Appendix B: Summary of other reviews of the
law of contempt of court 189
Appendix C: Recommendations of the Open Courts
Act Review 200
Appendix D: Jurisdiction and powers of the courts to deal with contempt of
Appendix E: Common law contempt of court
It seems to me that this jurisdiction of committing for contempt being
practically arbitrary and unlimited, should be most jealously
and carefully
watched, and exercised, if I may say so, with the greatest reluctance and the
greatest anxiety on the part of Judges
to see whether there is no other mode
which is not open to the objection of arbitrariness, and which can be brought
upon the subject. - Jessel, M.R.,
In re Clements, Clements v.
(1877), 46 L. J. Ch. 383.
As the observations of Lord Jessel more than 140 years ago confirm, the law
has long been aware not only of the unique features of
that sui generis branch
of law broadly described as ‘contempt’, but also of the
corresponding need to approach with caution
attempts to define it, along with
the desirability of employing less arbitrary and more certain means of
addressing the wrongs which
the law of contempt seeks to remedy.
As a subject for potential reform, contempt is a mine of possibilities, if
for no other reason than that almost every aspect of
the law of contempt, as
it exists in Victoria at present, presents
the researcher or practitioner with a web of uncertainties and exceptions to
principles which collectively seem to remain in place
more through inertia
than design.
There are both civil and criminal contempts, but the distinction is unclear
and has been described by the High Court as illusory.
It has been said that
contempt is a criminal offence but not a crime. When pursued as a criminal
offence, a civil procedure is
used to prosecute, and for some contempts, the
court itself is the victim, witness, prosecutor, judge and jury.
A warning by the judge, or an apology from the potential contemnor, may avoid
a finding of contempt, but if a common law contempt
is proven, the penalty is
‘at large’, and the application of ‘criminal’ statutes,
such as the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), is unclear, as are the avenues of
Contempt may be pursued despite the existence of more certain statutory
contempt-related offences which may be a fairer response to
the impugned
behaviour. The criteria which might be invoked by the court or others in
deciding whether to proceed at all, and if
so for what offence, may only
partially overlap with the better-defined discretions which apply to
prosecutorial decision- making
for more conventional offences.
The balancing of competing legal principles is a common task for the judge,
the prosecutor and the law reformer. Contempt does not
disappoint in the array
of competing principles underlying it; the obvious tension between the
principles of ‘open justice’
and ‘fair trial’ is only
one of many which are discussed in this Reference.
Along with many other areas of law, contempt is based largely on a series of
assumptions, the validity of which might have been in
issue anyway, but which
have in any event been brought into sharp focus by the rapid emergence of
technologies which have revolutionised
human communication and
information-sharing in ways unimaginable during the era when the law of contempt
was established.
Much of the law of sub judice contempt appears to assume that jurors cannot
be fully trusted to obey their oath, or the jury directions
they receive. Is
that assumption valid? Similarly, much of the law relating to suppression
orders assumes that potential jurors
can be successfully quarantined
from material readily available to any person with a computer or a smartphone.
of ‘take-down’ orders is based partially on an
assumption that a court order for the removal of material from the
whether first published before or after the case in issue became sub judice,
can be effectively complied with. Are those
assumptions valid?
The current law with respect to the breaching of suppression orders—or
automatically-applying provisions—assumes that
potentially affected
parties have the means to readily discover whether such orders or provisions
even exist. Is that assumption
Some of the related statutory law in the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
(Vic) assumes that it is in the best interests of victims of sexual
assault that they should not have an unhindered right to publicly
self-identify,
if they wish to do so. Is that assumption valid?
This Reference will give close attention to those and other assumptions
underlying the current law of contempt, and related provisions.
It will also
involve a careful identification of the competing legal principles and attempt
to identify a point of balance which
is consistent with immutable principles,
while also being sustainable and defensible in the age of mass digital
communication.
Throughout the Reference, careful attention will also be given to the
developments and reforms in comparable jurisdictions, which
offer valuable
commentary about various models for possible reform in Victoria.
At the time of the commencement of this Reference, the Commission Chair was
the Hon. Philip Cummins AM. Philip led the early stages
of this Reference until
his untimely passing in February. His leadership in this Reference, as with all
of his other law reform work,
was exemplary and an inspiration to all who worked
with him. The Commission is striving to maintain the high standards which Philip
I thank the members of the Contempt reference team at the Commission for
their tireless work, under sometimes difficult conditions,
to produce this
comprehensive consultation paper. I thank my fellow Commissioners, all of whom
are members of the Contempt Reference
Division. I also acknowledge the valuable
contribution to date of the members of the Advisory Committee, who will continue
their expertise during the remainder of the review.
The Commission now looks forward to the very important formal
consultation stage of this Reference, and I invite all interested
make submissions, every one of which will assist the Commission in formulating
the recommendations which will be made
in its report to the Attorney- General
in December.
Bruce Gardner PSM
Acting Chair
Victorian Law Reform Commission May 2019
submissions
The Victorian Law Reform Commission invites your comments on this
consultation paper.
What is a submission?
Submissions are your ideas or opinions about the law under review and how to
improve it. This consultation paper contains a number
of questions, listed on
page xix, that seek to guide submissions.
You do not have to address all of the questions to make a submission.
You may choose to answer some, but not all questions. Alternatively, you may
wish to provide a response that does not address individual
questions posed
throughout the paper, but nonetheless relates to the issues outlined in the
terms of reference.
Submissions can be anything from a personal story about how the law has
affected you to a research paper complete with footnotes and
bibliography. We
want to hear from anyone who has experience with the law under review. Please
note that the Commission does not
provide legal advice.
What is my submission used for?
Submissions help us understand different views and experiences about the law
we are researching. We use the information we receive
in submissions, and from
consultations, along with other research, to write our reports and develop
recommendations.
How do I make a submission?
You can make a submission in writing, or verbally to one of the Commission
staff if you need assistance. There is no required format
for submissions,
though we prefer them to be in writing, and we encourage you to answer the
questions contained in each chapter and
set out at the end of the consultation
Submissions can be made by:
Completing the online form at
www.lawreform.vic.gov.au
law.reform@lawreform.vic.gov.au
Mail: GPO Box 4637, Melbourne Vic 3001 Fax: (03) 8608 7888
Phone: (03) 8608 7800, 1300 666 557 (TTY) or 1300 666 555 (cost of a local
Please contact the Commission if you need an interpreter or other assistance
to make a submission.
Publication of submissions
The Commission is committed to providing open access to information. We
publish submissions on our website to encourage discussion
and to keep the
community informed about our projects.
We will not place on our website, or make available to the
public, submissions that contain offensive or defamatory
comments, or which
are outside the scope of the reference. Before publication, we may remove
personally identifying information
from submissions that discuss specific
cases or the personal circumstances and experiences of people other than
author. Personal addresses and contact details are removed from all
submissions before they are published. The name of the submitter
is published
unless we are asked not to publish it.
The views expressed in the submissions are those of the individuals or
organisations who submit them and their publication does not
acceptance of, or agreement with, those views by the Commission.
We keep submissions on the website for 12 months following the completion of
a reference. A reference is complete on the date the
Commission’s report
is tabled in Parliament. Hard copies of submissions will be archived and sent to
the Public Record Office
The Commission also accepts submissions made in confidence. Submissions may
be confidential because they include personal experiences
or other sensitive
information. These submissions will not be published on the website or
elsewhere. The Commission does not allow
external access to confidential
submissions. If, however, the Commission receives a request under the
of Information Act 1982
(Vic), the request will be determined in accordance
with the Act. The Act has provisions designed to protect personal information
and information given in confidence. Further information can be found at
www.foi.vic.gov.au
Confidential submissions
When you make a submission, you must decide whether you want your submission
to be public or confidential.
Public submissions
can be referred to in our reports, uploaded to our
website and made available to the public to read in our offices. The names of
will be listed in the Commission’s report. Private addresses
and contact details will be removed from submissions before they
public, but the name of the submitter is published unless we are asked not to
publish it.
Confidential submissions
are not made available to the public.
Confidential submissions are considered by the Commission but they are not
referred to in
our reports as a source of information or opinion other than in
exceptional circumstances.
Please let us know your preference when you make your submission. If you do
not tell us that you want your submission to be treated
as confidential, we will
treat it as public.
Anonymous submissions
If you do not put your name or an organisation’s name on your
submission, it will be difficult for us to make use of the information
provided. If you have concerns about your identity being made public, please
consider making your submission confidential
rather than submitting it
anonymously.
More information about the submission process and this reference is available
on our website:
www.lawreform.vic.gov.au
Submission deadline: 28 June 2019.
[Referral to the Victorian Law Reform Commission pursuant to
section 5(1)(a)
Victorian Law Reform Commission Act 2000
(Vic) on 12 October
Contempt of court, Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
1958 and enforcement processes
The Victorian Law Reform Commission is asked to review and report on the law
relating to contempt of court, the possible reform of
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
and the legal framework for enforcement of
prohibitions or restrictions on the publication of information.
The Commission should consider whether, and how, the common law of contempt
should be reformed, and whether and to what extent it
should be replaced by
statutory provisions.
The Commission should consider all types of contempt in its review,
• contempt in the face of the court;
• sub judice contempt;
• contempt by publication;
• juror contempt; and
• contempt by scandalising the court.
The Commission is asked to consider whether, and how, the
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(JPRA) should be reformed, including whether
the Act should be repealed and prohibitions
against publication of certain information should instead be contained in
subject-specific legislation or in the
Open Courts Act 2013
. As part of
this review, the Commission should consider whether the JPRA, or alternative
legislation, should be amended to temporarily
restrict the publication of
sensitive information in relation to alleged sexual or family violence criminal
offences upon the laying
of charges.
The Commission should also consider the underlying principles for enforcement
of prohibitions or restrictions on the publication of
information, with
particular reference to the law relating to contempt, the JPRA and the
. It should recommend new procedural,
administrative and legislative changes if appropriate to do so. The
Commission should consider, in addition to any matters it considers
• the adequacy of existing penalties for breaches of orders;
• appropriateness of the fault elements that must be proven to
establish an offence;
• relevant defences to the commission of an offence; and
• the process for bringing proceedings to enforce these laws, including
who should be empowered to commence proceedings for
In considering enforcement of restrictions on the publication of information
the Commission should also review and make recommendations
in relation to
existing suppression orders made before the commencement of the
Open Courts Act
which do not contain an end date.
In conducting this reference, the Commission should take into account the
development of the internet and new media, and research
decision-making. It should also have regard to the recommendations of the
Review, published in March 2018.
The Commission is to report by 31 December 2019.
Found not guilty of the charge or charges on the
indictment.
Person charged with a
criminal offence
or offences but
who has not been found guilty or pleaded guilty.
Balance of probabilities
standard of proof
proceedings. Often described as
‘more likely than not’ or ‘more probable than not’.
This is a lesser standard than
beyond reasonable doubt.
Beyond reasonable doubt
standard of proof
in criminal
proceedings. This is a higher
standard than the
balance of probabilities.
A person under the age of 18 years.
Civil jurisdiction
The procedures for hearing legal disputes other
than criminal
Committal for trial or sentence
The process of transferring a case against an accused from the
Magistrates’ Court to the Supreme Court or County Court.
Law that derives its authority from decisions of the
courts rather
than from legislation.
Complainant
Term used in the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
legislation to describe the person against whom a sexual offence is alleged
to have been perpetrated.
A person who has been found to have committed a
Contempt by publication
Publishing material which has a real and
definite tendency to
interfere with, or is intended to interfere with, particular pending civil or
criminal proceedings. Also referred to as sub judice
Contempt in the face of the court
Intentional acts of contempt that occur within, or in the precincts of, a
Contempt of court
Words or actions which interfere with the proper
administration
of justice or constitute a disregard for the authority of the court.
Comprises both the physical disturbance of particular
proceedings in a court that prevent a court from attending to its business
and any interference with the authority of the court that
impairs confidence and
respect in the court and its judgments.
contempt in the face of the court
contempt by
publication.
Contempt proceedings
Proceedings in which it is alleged that a
contempt of court has
been committed. Can be instituted by a court, the Attorney- General, a party
or private person.
Criminal offence
A crime against the state. Most criminal offences are
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic). The main categories of criminal offence
indictable offences
indictable offences triable summarily
summary offences
The legal team representing the
(in the lead-up
to and before the determination of guilt), or the
determination of guilt).
Directions hearing
A brief hearing in front of a judicial officer in
which orders are
made about what should happen next in a case before a court or tribunal,
such as how the case is to be managed and the timeframes
that are to
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP)
The official who makes decisions about whether to prosecute serious criminal
matters and is independent of government. The Victorian
Director of Public
Prosecutions is responsible for
criminal offences
under Victorian law.
Office of Public Prosecutions
conducts criminal prosecutions on
behalf of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
The situation where a magistrate determines that there is
not enough evidence to justify sending an accused person to trial, thereby
ending the prosecution.
Discharge a juror
To release a
the jury has been sworn in.
Empanelment of the jury/ empanelling the jury
The process of selecting the jury for a trial.
Family member
Includes a person’s child, parent, spouse,
domestic partner or
relative, including grandparents, grandchildren, brothers, sisters, aunts,
uncles, nieces and nephews, as well as a person who is
regarded in Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander tradition or custom as a family member.
Family violence
Has the meaning as defined in the
Family Violence
(Vic). Refers to behaviour by a person towards a
family member
that is physically abusive, sexually abusive,
emotionally abusive, psychologically abusive, economically abusive, threatening,
or in any other way controls or dominates the family member and causes
them to fear for their safety or that of someone else.
Indictable offences
Serious crimes which attract higher maximum
Prosecuted by the
Office of Public Prosecutions.
Usually triable
before a judge and jury.
Indictable offences triable summarily
Less serious
indictable offences
which can be heard before a
magistrate.
The charge or charges against the
Director of Public Prosecutions
has filed in the Supreme or County
Inferior court
Any court which is not a superior court. At common law
includes both the County Court of Victoria and the Magistrates’
Court of Victoria.
Inherent jurisdiction
The authority to adjudicate vested in a court as
a consequence of
it being a court of a particular description, notably a superior court of
unlimited jurisdiction. Inherent jurisdiction extends to
matters necessary for
proper administration of justice and includes the power to prevent abuse
of process and to punish for
contempt of court.
Describes a system administered, or a decision made, by a
judicial officer
Judicial direction/ jury direction
Instructions provided by the judge to the
directions guide the conduct of
and provide instructions on what
they need to consider in deciding the case.
Judicial officer
Usually a judge or magistrate. Can also sometimes
refer to a coroner or judicial registrar.
Juries Commissioner’s Office (JCO)
The office responsible for jury administration in Victoria.
The scope of a court’s power to examine and
determine the facts,
interpret and apply the law, make orders and declare judgment. Jurisdiction
may be limited by geographic area, the type of parties
who appear, the type of
relief that can be sought, and the point to be decided.
A member of the
The group of
selected to make findings of
guilt or otherwise in criminal matters and findings of fault and damages in
civil matters. The jury
is selected in court from the
The group of prospective jurors from which the selection
of the jury is made in court. The jury panel is randomly selected from
The group of prospective jurors from which the jury panel
is randomly selected.
Includes barristers (sometimes referred to as counsel) and
solicitors.
The permission of a judge or magistrate.
The use of digital technologies for mass communication, such
as online news, blogs and social media. New media are easily
accessible to a worldwide audience, publish content instantly, are
interactive, and are an alternative to traditional media such as
newspapers, television and radio broadcasts.
Used to describe a person who has been found guilty or who
has pleaded guilty to a
criminal offence
. The term ‘alleged
offender’ is used to describe a person who is alleged to have
a criminal offence, but who may not have been charged with or convicted of
that offence.
Office of Public Prosecution (OPP)
The independent statutory authority that institutes, prepares and conducts
criminal prosecutions in the County and Supreme Courts
on behalf of the
Director of Public Prosecutions
A direction by a court or tribunal that is final and binding
unless overturned on appeal.
An answer by the accused to a charge of an offence which usually
takes the form of ‘guilty’ or ‘not guilty’.
Practice Direction
A procedural guideline issued by a
to guide the practice of a court or tribunal.
Procedural fairness
The requirement that legal proceedings are
conducted in a
manner that is fair. In particular, procedural fairness requires that parties
have the opportunity to be heard, and have their disputes
determined by an
impartial decision maker.
Prosecutorial body
In this paper, refers to either Victoria Police,
which prosecutes less
serious offences (
summary offences
) or the Victorian
Public Prosecutions
, which prosecutes more serious offences (
). Other agencies are also empowered to initiate prosecutions and
are therefore also prosecutorial bodies, for example the Environment
Authority, under the
Environment Protection Act 2017
(Vic), and WorkSafe
Victoria, under the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
and other occupational health and safety laws and workers compensation
A lawyer who appears in court on behalf of the
of Public Prosecutions
Prospective juror
A person who has been summoned to attend for jury
service, but
not yet selected for a jury.
Prothonotary
The principal registrar and chief administrative
officer of the Supreme Court of Victoria.
Sentencing hearing
Sometimes referred to as a plea hearing. Matters
relevant to
imposing sentence, including matters personal to the
victim impact statement, are presented to the judge.
Standard of proof
The degree of certainty required to prove
A Latin term meaning ‘before a judge’. A matter
that is still being considered by a court and is not yet decided.
Summary offences
Less serious offences heard by a magistrate without a
Summary trial
A trial involving a judge or magistrate as the sole fact
finder. Can
also be described as a trial being heard ‘summarily’, that is
without a jury.
Superior court
A higher court of record or general jurisdiction. The
of Australia, and the Supreme Court of Victoria are both superior courts
inherent jurisdiction
A person who has suffered harm as a direct result of the
and includes a parent of a child victim, or a family
member of a homicide victim. It applies to a person alleged by the prosecution
to be a victim prior to a determination of guilt as
well as a victim of an offence for which an offender has been found
Victim of family violence
A person who has experienced
Victims of Crime Assistance Tribunal (VOCAT)
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT)
The tribunal established under the
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
(Vic) to provide financial assistance to
of violent crime
committed in Victoria. It works through the Magistrates’ Court of
The tribunal established under the
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) that hears civil and administrative legal cases in
the State of Victoria.
Chapter 1: Introduction
Principles of law relevant to this inquiry
1 What other principles of law, if any, are relevant to the
Commission’s consideration of the laws the subject of this review?
Chapter 3: General issues with the law of contempt
Uncertainty of scope
2 Do the courts need a general power to punish any conduct that has a
tendency to interfere with the proper administration of justice?
Alternatively,
should the law specify the conduct subject to sanction? If so, should only
conduct that is intended to interfere with
the administration of justice be
subject to punishment?
Procedural safeguards
3 Should the procedure for filing and prosecuting a charge of contempt of
court be the same as for other criminal offences? If not,
what are the reasons
necessitating a different procedure for contempt of court and what should be the
features of that procedure?
Overlap with criminal law
4 Is there a need for statutory guidance on when the court may exercise
its power to punish for contempt of court in circumstances
where the conduct
is also a statutory offence? If so, what guidance should be provided?
5 Should there be a statutory maximum penalty for contempt of court? If
(a) What penalties should apply?
(b) Should different penalties apply for different manifestations of
6 What weight, if any, should be given to apologies in determining whether
and what penalty is imposed for contempt of court?
7 Should the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) apply to contempt
proceedings?
8 In what circumstances do the courts give warnings for contempt?
9 When should contempt warnings be given?
10 Is there a need for guidance to the courts on the use of contempt
warnings? If so, should such guidance be set out in statutory
provisions?
11 Is there a need for greater clarity as to whether, when a court gives a
contempt warning, there has been a finding that a contempt
has in fact been
committed and, if so, the status or effect of such a finding?
Chapter 4: Contempt in or near the
courtroom—contempt in the face of the court
Definitional issues and possible reforms
The need for statutory provisions
12 Is there a need to retain the law of contempt in the face of the
13 If the law of contempt in the face of the court is to be retained, should
the common law be replaced by statutory provisions? If
so, how should it be
defined and what fault elements, if any, should be required?
Insulting or disrespectful behaviour
14 If the law of contempt in the face of the court is to be replaced by
statutory provisions, should insulting or disrespectful behaviour
be included
within the scope of the offence?
Defining ‘in the face of the court’
15 If the law of contempt in the face of the court is to be replaced by
statutory provisions, should it be limited to conduct
which is directly
seen or heard by the presiding judicial officer? In other words, should
the underlying test be whether
the judicial officer can decide the contempt on
the basis of their own observations, without the need to receive evidence from
Conduct covered by other criminal offences
16 Should conduct covered by other criminal offences be excluded from any
statutory offence of contempt in the face of the court?
Procedural issues and possible reforms
The procedure for contempt in the face of the court
17 Should the procedure for initiating, trying and punishing a charge of
contempt in the face of the court be set out in statutory
provisions? If so,
what should the procedure be? In particular:
(a) Is there a need to preserve the power of the courts to deal with
contempt in the face of the court summarily?
(b) Should the process for dealing with a disruption to proceedings be
separated from the process for trying and punishing the disruptive
(c) Who should try the offence? Should the offence be able to be tried by the
judicial officer before whom the offence was committed?
A consistent approach to disruptive conduct
18 What measures, if any, are required to ensure there is a consistent
approach by judicial officers to disruptive behaviour in
the courtroom?
The impact on certain groups of people
19 Under the current law, does the actual or threatened use of the power to
punish for contempt in the face of the court affect certain
groups of people
unfairly? If so, how should this be addressed?
Chapter 5: Juror contempt
20 Does the
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) adequately regulate the conduct of
jurors and potential jurors? If not, what amendments to the
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) should be made?
21 To the extent courts have the power to deal with juror contempt at common
law, is there a need to retain this power?
22 If the law of juror contempt is to be retained, should the common law be
replaced by statutory provisions? If so:
(a) How should it be defined?
(b) What fault elements, if any, should be required?
(c) Should conduct already covered by other statutory offence provisions be
23 Do current jury directions adequately instruct juries about determining
cases only on the evidence, prohibitions on research and
disclosure and asking
questions of the trial judge? If not, what reforms are required?
24 How well are jurors and potential jurors currently educated about their
functions and duties during the selection and empanelment
process? How should
they be educated about, and assisted in performing, their functions and
Chapter 6: Non-compliance with court orders or
undertakings— disobedience contempt
25 Is there a need to retain the law of disobedience contempt?
26 If the law of disobedience contempt is to be retained:
(a) What benefit does the distinction between civil and criminal contempt
provide? Should this distinction be maintained?
(b) Should the common law of disobedience contempt be replaced by
statutory provisions? If so, should it be replaced by statutory
provisions and/or a statutory procedure for civil enforcement of court orders
and undertakings? In either case,
i. Who should be responsible for and/or be able to commence proceedings?
ii. What should the party commencing proceedings be required to establish and
to what standard of proof?
iii. What penalties should apply?
Chapter 7: Contempt by publication (1)—sub judice contempt
27 Is there a need to retain the law of sub judice contempt?
28 If the law of sub judice contempt is to be retained, should the common law
be replaced by statutory provisions? If so:
(a) How should the law and its constituent elements be defined,
i. The ‘tendency’ test
ii. The definition of ‘publication’
iii. The beginning and end of the ‘pending’ period?
(b) Should fault be an element, or alternatively should there be a defence to
cover the absence of fault?
(c) Should the public interest test be expressly stated?
(d) Should upper limits for fines and imprisonment be set?
29 Is there a need for greater use of remedial options, for example jury
directions or trial postponement? If so:
(a) How should this be facilitated?
(b) Are other mechanisms, for example pre-trial questioning of jurors, also
30 Is there a need for education about the impact of social media on the
administration of justice and sub judice contempt to be targeted
to particular
groups, for example judicial officers and jurors?
31 What other reforms should be made, if any, to this area of the law of
contempt of court?
Chapter 8: Contempt by publication (2)—
scandalising the court
32 Is there a need to retain the law of scandalising contempt?
33 If the law of scandalising contempt is to be retained, should the common
law be replaced by statutory provisions? If so:
(a) How should the law and its constituent elements be described,
i. The ‘tendency’ test
ii. What constitutes ‘fair comment’?
(b) Should truth be a defence?
(c) What fault elements, if any, should be required?
(d) What weight, if any, should be given to an apology?
34 In stakeholders’ experience, is criticism of the judiciary
on social media a problem that should be dealt with
by a law such as
scandalising contempt or is it best managed outside of the law?
35 What other reforms, if any, should be made to this area of law?
Chapter 9: Prohibitions on publication under the
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act
Indecent matters and public morals
36 Should the prohibition in
section 3(1)(a)
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act 1958
(Vic) on the publication of indecent matter and indecent
medical, surgical or physiological details in relation to any judicial
proceedings
be repealed?
Divorce and related proceedings
37 Should the prohibition in
section 3(1)(b)
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act 1958
(Vic) on the publication of the details of divorce and
related proceedings be repealed?
The prohibition on reporting directions hearings and
sentence indications
38 Are the statutory prohibitions in
section 3(1)(c)
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) on the reporting of criminal directions
hearings and sentence indication hearings necessary? If so:
(a) What should be the scope of such prohibitions?
(b) Where should such prohibitions be located to optimise awareness of their
existence and operation?
(c) Should other pre-trial hearings, such as bail hearings or committal
proceedings also be subject to statutory reporting restrictions?
Victims of sexual offences
39 Should the statutory prohibition on identifying victims of sexual
offences under
section 4(1A)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
(Vic) continue to apply automatically from the time of complaint,
throughout proceedings and after proceedings have concluded?
(a) What further legislative guidance should be provided about the scope of
the prohibition?
(b) Should the prohibition continue to be located in the
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) or is the provision more appropriately
located in other legislation?
A victim’s ability to speak
40 How should the law accommodate a victim’s ability to speak?
41 When should a victim be able to consent to publication of identifying
(a) Should the court’s supervision and permission also be required?
(b) What, if any, special provision should be made for child victims?
Temporary restrictions—sex offences and family
42 Is a statutory prohibition required to temporarily restrict reporting in
cases where an accused has been charged with a sexual
or family violence
criminal offence? If so:
(a) What information should be permitted to be published—should the
court have discretion to order that additional or less
information be
(b) When should the temporary prohibition apply?
(c) Should the temporary prohibition only apply to cases where the accused
has been charged with a sexual or family violence criminal
Chapter 10: Enforcement of prohibitions and restrictions on
publication
Publication
43 Should the terms ‘publish’ and ‘publication’ be
defined consistently? If so, how should these terms be
44 Are there any other issues arising out of the definitions of
‘publish’ and ‘publication’ that should also
45 To what extent are potential reforms to the definition of the terms
‘publish’ and ‘publication’ affected
or limited by
Commonwealth law?
46 What reforms, if any, should be made to address the liability of online
intermediaries for the publication of prohibited and restricted
information?
47 Should the law seek to enforce prohibitions and restrictions on
publication:
(a) in other Australian states and territories
(b) in foreign jurisdictions?
If so, how should this be achieved?
Awareness of prohibitions and restrictions
48 What processes should be in place for notifying or reminding the media and
the wider community of the existence of prohibitions
and restrictions on
publication, including court orders and the operation of automatic statutory
provisions?
Monitoring compliance with prohibitions and
restrictions
49 Should there be a system for monitoring compliance with prohibitions and
restrictions on publication? If so:
(a) How should such compliance be monitored?
(b) Who should be responsible for monitoring such compliance?
Responsibility for instituting proceedings
50 Who should be responsible for instituting proceedings for breach of
prohibitions and restrictions on publication?
51 Should the ‘DPP consent’ requirements under the
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) be retained?
Fault elements to prove breach of prohibitions and
restrictions
52 Should liability arise where there is a lack of awareness of the relevant
prohibition or restriction on publication?
Defences and exceptions
53 Are the existing exceptions for information-sharing agencies appropriate?
Alternatively, do they inhibit information-sharing? If
so, how should these
barriers be addressed?
54 What defences, if any, should be available to people who have published
information which is prohibited or restricted?
Penalties and remedies
55 Are the existing penalties and remedies for breaches of prohibitions and
restrictions on publication appropriate? If not, what
penalties and remedies
should be provided?
56 Should penalties for breaches of common law suppression orders and
pseudonym orders be set out in statutory provisions?
57 Should a court be able to issue an order for internet materials to be
taken down (‘take- down order’)? If so:
(a) Should the process for seeking and making such orders be embodied in
legislation?
(b) Who should be responsible for monitoring the Internet (and social media)
for potential ‘take-down’ material?
(c) Who should be responsible for making applications for take-down
(d) Should such applications be conducted on an adversarial or ex parte
Legacy suppression orders
58 How many legacy suppression orders with no end date issued by the Supreme,
County and Magistrates’ courts are currently in
59 Should there be provisions in the
Open Courts Act 2013
another statute, which specify the duration of legacy suppression orders? If
(a) Should there be a deeming provision in the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic), or another statute, which provides that legacy suppression orders
are deemed to have been revoked from a particular
date, subject only to
applications from interested parties to:
i. vary the order?
ii. continue the order for a further specified time?
iii. revoke the order at an earlier date?
(b) Should there be provisions in the
Open Courts Act 2013
another statute, which specify procedures for notification of legacy suppression
orders and applications for continuation
or revocation of such orders?
GENERAL OVERVIEW
Introduction
2 Referral to the
Why this review is needed
Key principles of law relevant to this
A principles-based approach
Scope of this review
Previous reviews and reforms
Other reviews
Conduct of this reference
How to use this consultation paper
Introduction
Referral to the Commission
1.1 The Victorian Law Reform Commission (the Commission) has been asked to
review and report on the law relating to contempt of court,
the possible reform
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) and the legal framework for
enforcement of prohibitions or restrictions on the publication of
information.
1.2 The terms of reference are set out on page xii.
1.3 The referral was made by the then Attorney-General, the Hon. Martin
Pakula MP by letter to the Commission dated 12 October 2018
and was publicly
announced the same day.1
Why this review is needed
1.4 The law of contempt of court is concerned with the protection of the
proper administration of justice by empowering the
courts at common law to
punish conduct that interferes
with the due administration of justice, either in a particular case or more
generally as a continuing process.2 Such conduct may be
by a party to a
proceeding, a person with official duties in connection with the proceeding, a
member of the public attending the
court, a person reporting or commenting on
proceedings, or anyone else whose actions obstruct or undermine the
administration of
1.5 The purpose of the law of contempt is ‘to uphold and preserve the
undisturbed and orderly administration of justice in the
courts according to
1.6 The courts have said that the ‘legal principles concerning contempt
of court are well known and uncontroversial’.4
However, as evidenced by
other statements by the courts,5 extra-curial comment,6 and the number of
reviews both in Australia and
in other jurisdictions, there have long been
concerns with the common law of contempt of court in terms of its nature,
and enforcement.7
1 Attorney-General (Victoria), ‘Major Review of Contempt of Court
Laws’ (Media release, 12 October 2018). 2
A-G (UK) v Leveller
[1979] AC 440
The Queen v Hinch (No 2)
[2013] VSC 554
, [12]. See also
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union v Mudginberri Station Pty
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 161 CLR 98
R v Nationwide News Pty Ltd
[2018] VSC 572
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v
Grocon Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
[222] where the court noted ‘the discourse with respect to contempt is
littered with language ... which is imprecise and
potentially confusing’;
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36
(2008) 235 CLR 125
, [25] where Kirby J
noted that the law of civil contempt ‘lacks conceptual coherence
and is replete with uncertainties,
inadequacies and fictions’. In
this context, in
A-G (UK) v British Broadcasting Corporation
[1980] 3 All ER 161
, 169 Lord Salmon stated that ‘[t]his branch
of our law is in urgent need of careful consideration by Parliament’.
6 See, eg Justice Emilios Kyrou, who noted that the law of contempt of court
is a ‘very complex topic’: ‘Courts:
the Independent, Low
Profile Third Arm of Government’ (Speech, La Trobe Law Students’
Association, 17 August 2017).
7 See, eg Committee on Contempt of Court (UK),
Report of the Committee on
Contempt of Court
(December 1974); The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, December 1987); Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of Contempt
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003); New
South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
100, 2003); Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court:
Scandalising the Court
(Report No 335, 2012); Law Commission (England and
Contempt of Court (1): Juror Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013); Law Commission (England and Wales),
of Court (2): Court Reporting
(Report No 344, 2014); Law Reform Commission
Contempt of Court and Other Offences and Torts Involving the
Administration of Justice
(Issues Paper, 2016); Law Commission (New
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A Modern Statute
(Report 140, 2017).
addition, and as recognised by other reviews8 and commentators,9 the law of
contempt of court is now facing new challenges
with the emergence of the
internet and the rise
of social media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter. Technology is
fundamentally changing the way people access and share information,
providing a
new and borderless vehicle for people to interpret, challenge, discuss and
augment information published by the mainstream
print and broadcast media.
1.8 At the same time, there is also a growing body of research on jurors
which challenges traditional understandings of juror decision
1.9 Accordingly, and as well as the long-standing technical issues
noted above, these developments reinforce the need for
a reconsideration of
the law of contempt of court, in particular the law of sub judice contempt
and the way in which jury trials
are protected from potentially prejudicial
1.10 However, as discussed below, the terms of reference are broader than
solely a focus on sub judice contempt.
1.11 The terms of reference require the Commission to consider all types of
contempt, as well as the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts
(Vic) and the legal framework for the enforcement of prohibitions
or restrictions on the publication of information.
1.12 As such the reference is an opportunity for a thorough review of
the measures available to the courts to ensure the proper
administration of
justice, and in particular a fair trial, with a view to ensuring such
measures remain fit for the modern era.
At its heart is the question of what
measures are required by the courts to ensure the proper administration of
justice. Are existing
measures as provided for by the law of contempt of court,
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
still appropriate
or are they in need of reform? In
this context, and if it is considered these laws are in need of reform, the
question arises as to what extent should such laws,
in particular the
common law of contempt of court, be replaced by statutory provisions? Should
such legislative reform be confined
to minor technical amendments incorporated
into existing legislation or alternatively should such
legislative reform entail major change, for example by full codification of
the common law of contempt of court.
Key principles of law relevant to this
The proper administration of justice
1.13 The proper administration of justice is a principle of fundamental
importance in our society as an aspect of the integrity
of the courts, and is
the cornerstone of the Commission’s review. As Lord Diplock has stated,
the principle of the proper
administration of justice requires that all
• have unhindered access to the courts for the determination of
disputes as to their legal rights and liabilities;
• be able to rely on obtaining in the courts a decision free from bias
based on the facts proved in evidence properly adduced;
8 See, eg Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of
Court: A Modern Statute
(Report 140, 2017); Law Commission (England and
Contempt of Court (1): Juror Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013).
9 See, eg Ian Cram,
Borrie & Lowe: The Law of Contempt
(LexisNexis, 4th ed, 2010) Chapter 3: The Impact of Globalisation and New
Technology.
10 See, eg Jacqueline Horan and Mark Israel, ‘Beyond the Legal
Barriers: Institutional Gatekeeping and Real Jury Research’
(2016) 49(3)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
; Annie Cossins et
Jury Reasoning in Joint and Separate Trials of Institutional Child
Sexual Abuse: An Empirical Study
(Royal Commission into Institutional
Responses to Child Sexual Abuse, May 2016); Jane Johnston et al,
Social Media: A Report Prepared for the Victorian Department of Justice
(Report, 2013); Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st
(The Federation Press, 2012); Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline
Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair Trial in the 21st Century -
Trial by Jury Been Caught in the World Wide Web?’
Law Journal
; Cheryl Thomas and Nigel Balmer,
Diversity and Fairness
in the Jury System
(Ministry of Justice Research Series No 2/07, 2007); Law
Commission (New Zealand),
Juries in Criminal Trials Part Two - A summary of
the research findings
(Preliminary Paper, 1999).
dispute has been submitted to the court, be able to rely on there being no
usurpation by any other person of the
function of that court to decide the
dispute according to law.11
1.14 This principle is therefore broad and overarching.
1.15 However the principle of the proper administration of justice can
sometimes be in tension with other constitutional, statutory
or common law
rights and principles. This includes at common law:
• the principle of open justice, which to maintain confidence in the
integrity and independence of the courts requires that
the administration of
justice take place in open court12
• the right of an accused to receive a fair trial according to law, or
what the High Court has described as ‘a right not
to be tried
unfairly’, and which is ‘manifested in rules
of law and practice designed to regulate the course of a trial’,13
including procedural fairness, natural justice, the right
to be heard and the
rule against bias
• the recognition of the victims’ interests ‘as part of a
modern conception of fairness and a fair trial’14
1.16 In support of these common law rights and principles, the Victorian
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Charter) provides that:
• A person must not be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention, and
must not be deprived of their liberty except on grounds
and in accordance with
procedures established by law and must be promptly informed about any
proceedings to be brought against them15
• A person charged with a criminal offence or a party to a civil
proceeding has the right to have the charge or proceeding decided
competent, independent and impartial court or tribunal after a fair and public
• A court or tribunal may exclude members of media organisations or
other persons or the general public from all or part of
a hearing if permitted
to do so by law.17
• All judgments or decisions made by a court or a tribunal in a
criminal or civil proceeding must be made public unless the
best interests of a
child or otherwise requires or a law otherwise permits.18
• A person charged with a criminal offence has the right to be presumed
innocent until proven guilty according to law, to be
informed promptly and in
detail of the nature and reason for the charge and to have adequate time to
prepare their defence.19
Freedom of expression
1.17 The Charter also provides that every person has the right to hold an
opinion without interference and a right to freedom of expression.20
Charter rights are supported by the common law and rules of statutory
interpretation which also provide ‘partial protection’
for freedom
of expression.21
A-G (UK) v Times Newspapers Ltd
[1974] AC 273
Scott v Scott
[1913] AC 417, 435 (Viscount Haldane LC), 441 (Earl
of Halsbury). However this principle is not absolute. See also
Russell v Russell
(1976) 134 CLR 495
, 520 (Gibbs J);
(2011) 243 CLR 506
, 531–2 [21–22] (French
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
, 299–300 (Mason CJ,
14 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report, August 2016) 27. See also
Jago v District
Court of New South Wales
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
, 49–50 where Brennan J
stated ‘the court must not forget those who, though not represented, have
a legitimate interest
in the court’s exercise of its
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
and (2)(a)–(b).
However the Charter also provides that this right is not
absolute and may be subject to lawful restrictions reasonably necessary
respect the rights and reputation of other persons or for the protection of
national security, public order, public health
or public morality.
Tajjour v NSW
[2014] HCA 35
(2014) 313 ALR 221
Brown v Members of the
Classification Review Board of the Office of Film and Literature Classification
[1998] FCA 319
(1998) 154 ALR 67
, 76–7 (French J).
1.18 In addition, the
Constitution
provides for the protection of freedom of communication
informed choices as electors.22 The effect of this implied freedom is to
Parliament and the executive government from exercising their powers to
curtail the implied freedom. It does not confer personal rights
individuals.23 It is a constitutional limit on both statute and the common
law.24 However it remains uncertain whether the implied
freedom protects
discussion about the exercise of federal and state judicial power and the
workings of the courts and the judiciary.25
1.19 As the courts have recognised, freedom of expression must sometimes be
restrained to protect other aspects of the public interest,
such as the
administration of justice.26 As Brennan J noted in
R v Glennon:
Free speech is not the only hallmark of a free society, and sometimes it must
be restrained by laws designed to protect other aspects
of the public
interest. Thus the law of contempt of court seeks to strike a balance
between the two competing public
interests [in the integrity of the
administration of justice and in freedom of expression] ... The
of the administration of justice in criminal proceedings is of fundamental
importance in a free society. Freedom of public expression
with respect to
circumstances touching guilt or innocence is correspondingly
1.20 However, as Justice Stephen has observed, while the administration of
justice and freedom of expression can conflict, they can
also sometimes
complement each other:
a fair and proper administration of justice provides the only available
safeguard of the citizen when freedom of speech is unlawfully
denied; and it is
only in an open society, where freedom of scrutiny and expression prevails, that
justice is likely to be fairly
administered.28
1.21 As already noted, the principle of open justice is critical to the
proper and effective administration of justice. However, such
openness can come
at the cost of a person’s privacy.29 Victims, witnesses and others, such
as people who work in courts, may
also be exposed to undue trauma or
intimidation through their participation in the criminal justice process. For
victims, giving
evidence and being cross-examined about a traumatic event can be
highly distressing due to the publicity of trials and the need for
evidence to
be properly tested in court.30 Victims may also encounter accused persons and
their family members and supporters in
courtrooms and court precincts, which can
expose them to intimidation.31
1.22 In this context, the
Victims Charter Act 2006
(Vic) provides that
a victim’s privacy is to be protected and that their personal
information is not to be disclosed.32
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
(the Charter) also provides that every person has the right not to have his
or her privacy unlawfully or arbitrarily interfered
with and not to have his or
her reputation unlawfully attacked.33
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
560; Peter Hanks, Frances Gordon and Graeme Hill,
Constitutional Law in
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 4th ed, 2018) 696 [10.237].
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
24 Ibid 568;
Wotton v Commonwealth
(2012) 246 CLR 1
, 13 [20] (French
CJ, Gummow J, Hayne J, Crennan and Bell JJ) citing
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1
, 77 [195] (Gummow and Hayne JJ).
APLA Ltd v Legal Services Commissioner (NSW)
[2005] HCA 44
, 360–1 [63]–[66], 439–40 [346]–[347] (Kirby
J), citing;
Cunliffe v Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 44
(1994) 182 CLR 272
(Mason CJ);
Herald & Weekly Times Ltd v Popovic
[2003] VSCA 161
(2003) 9 VR 1
8–11 [5]–[10] (Winneke ACJ), 51–53 [244]–[252]
(Gillard AJA), 103 [499]–[500] (Warren AJA).
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
, 611–12 (Brennan J), citing
Hinch v Attorney-General
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 18 (Mason CJ).
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
, 611–12; See also
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520.
Victoria v Australian Building Construction Employees’ and
Builders’ Labourers’ Federation
[1982] HCA 31
(1982) 152 CLR 25
(Stephen J).
29 Beverley McLachlin, ‘Courts, Transparency and Public Confidence - To
the Better Administration of Justice’ (2003) 8(1)
30 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 34 [3.78]. 31 Ibid 34
Victims Charter Act 2006
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
this context and in relation to child victims, the Charter provides that
every child has the right, without discrimination
to such protection as is in
his or her best interests and is needed by him or her by reason of being a
An underlying tension
1.25 Underlying this review is a tension between:
• the need to safeguard the proper and effective administration of
• freedom of expression and freedom to criticise public
institutions36
• the protection of a person’s privacy and reputation.
1.26 As such, this review is fundamentally concerned with how the common law
of contempt of court, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts
should be reformed to better accommodate and balance these often competing
and conflicting principles.
1.27 However, in considering options for reform and the impact on the
principles noted above, the Commission must be mindful of the
principle of
legality, which rests on the assumption that ‘unless clear words are used,
the courts will not interpret legislation
as abrogating or contracting
fundamental rights or freedoms’.37
1 What other principles of law, if any, are relevant to the
Commission’s consideration of the laws the subject of this review?
A principles-based approach
1.28 The principles identified above provide the framework for the
Commission’s consideration of the laws the subject of this
1.29 As will be discussed, the law of sub judice contempt and scandalising
contempt, as well as the
Open Courts Act
Judicial Proceedings Reports
, all limit freedom of expression and curtail the principle of open justice.
They do this to ensure the proper and
effective administration of justice, particularly as it applies in criminal
proceedings, by seeking to protect the courts’
decision-making process
and to prevent jury access to extraneous materials.
1.30 In addition, both the
Open Courts Act
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act
limit freedom of expression and curtail the principle of open
justice for the purpose of protecting a person’s privacy and
reputation.
However such laws can also operate to shield offenders from public
accountability and prevent a victim who wishes to
speak from doing so.
1.31 Finally, the common law of contempt in the face of the court, in seeking
to ensure the proper administration of justice by enabling
the judicial officer
to immediately and summarily address any interference with proceedings, can also
operate to deny an alleged
contemnor a fair hearing before a competent,
independent and impartial court, contrary to the principle of a fair trial.
34 Ibid s 17(2).
35 See, eg,
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
Victoria v Australian Building Construction Employees’ and
Builders’ Labourers’ Federation
[1982] HCA 31
(1982) 152 CLR 25
, 56 (Gibbs
Hinch v Attorney-General (Victoria)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
22 (Mason CJ), citing ;
Ex parte Bread Manufacturers Ltd; Re Truth and
Sportsman Ltd
[1937] NSWStRp 22
(1937) 37 SR (NSW) 242
, 249–50 (Jordan CJ); 57 (Deane
J); 83 (Gaudron J);
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
, 243 (Gibbs CJ,
Mason, Wilson and Brennan JJ) citing;
R v Dunbabin v Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
, 447 (Dixon J);
Attorney-General v Times Newspapers Ltd
[1974] AC 273
, 294 (Lord Reid); 302 (Lord Borth-Y-Gest); 322 (Lord Cross
of Chelsea).
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
, 34 (Mason CJ);
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
, 246 (Murphy J).
Momcilovic v The Queen
(2011) 245 CLR 1
177–8 [444] (Heydon
issues are explored further in following chapters.
1.33 Accordingly, in considering what reforms to the common law of contempt
of court, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
necessary to ensure the proper administration of justice, the Commission adopts
a principles-based approach. The Commission does
• considering each of the identified laws from the perspective of
what is required for the proper administration of justice
at the same time as
balancing the need for open justice, the right to freedom of expression and the
need to protect a person’s
• articulating some of the principles underlying each of the identified
• identifying some of the assumptions which have informed the
development and application of each of the identified laws
• evaluating each of the identified laws in terms of how they operate
to ensure the proper administration of justice
• discussing options for reform from within that principled context,
including whether there is a need for legislative reform
to replace the common
law of contempt of court with statutory provisions.
Scope of this review
1.34 The terms of reference ask the Commission to review and report on the
law relating to contempt of court, the possible reform
Proceedings Reports Act
and the legal framework for the enforcement of
prohibitions or restrictions on the publication of information. In considering
last issue the terms of reference also ask the Commission to look at the
Open Courts Act
1.35 The terms of reference therefore encompass three distinct but related
sources of law:
• the common law of contempt of court
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
Contempt of court
1.36 The terms of reference ask the Commission to consider all types of
contempt. In undertaking this review, the Commission focuses
on the most common
and problematic manifestations of the common law of contempt of court,
• contempts in or near the courtroom—also known as contempt in
the face of the court
• juror contempt
• disobedience contempts arising from non-compliance with court orders
or undertakings
• contempts by publication that interfere with or prejudice pending
proceedings—also known as sub judice contempt
• contempts by publication that interfere with the administration of
justice as a continuing process—also known as contempt
by scandalising the
1.37 Each of these manifestations of contempt is outlined in Chapter 2,
together with an overview of some of the unique features of
the law of contempt
of court. Key issues in relation to each of the most common and problematic
manifestations of contempt of court,
together with some options for reform, are
then set out in Chapters 4–8. Chapter 3 considers some general issues with
of contempt of court.
relevant, other forms of contempt of court are noted by way of comparison but
are not the focus of the Commission’s
review. These other forms of
contempt are also briefly discussed in Chapter 2.
1.39 This review does not consider contempt arising in other contexts, such
as contempt of parliament or contempt of tribunals or
commissions of inquiry, as
these types of contempt are outside the Commission’s terms of
1.40 However, tribunals such as the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal are also regularly confronted with issues of contempt,
in particular
contempt in the face of the court and disobedience contempt, and are empowered
to deal with such contempts under their
constituting legislation.38
Similarly, other bodies or persons with a quasi-judicial role, such as
the Chief Examiner,
are also confronted with issues of contempt, and
have statutory powers to address such contempts.39 Accordingly, the
implications of any reforms to the common law of contempt of court for
Victoria’s court system as a whole, including
tribunals and other bodies with a quasi-judicial role, will be considered by
the Commission in undertaking this review.
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
1.41 The terms of reference ask the Commission to consider whether there is a
need to retain the provisions of the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
whether such provisions should instead be contained in subject-specific
legislation or in the
Open Courts Act
. These issues are considered in Chapter
1.42 The terms of reference also ask the Commission to consider the
Proceedings Reports Act
in the context of the enforcement of prohibitions
and restrictions on publication. Accordingly, the Act is also considered
as part of the broader consideration of the enforcement of prohibitions
and restrictions on publication discussed in
Chapter 10.
Open Courts Act 2013
1.43 In considering the enforcement of prohibitions and restrictions on the
publication of information, the terms of reference ask
the Commission to
consider the law relating to contempt of court, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports
Open Courts Act
1.44 Accordingly, and given its recent comprehensive review by the Hon. Frank
Vincent AO QC in the
Open Courts Act
the Commission’s
consideration of the
Open Courts Act
is limited to the issues expressly
identified in the terms of reference, which includes existing suppression orders
made before the
commencement of that Act which do not contain an end date. These
issues are discussed in Chapter 10.
1.45 This review does not consider other legislation with prohibitions or
restrictions on the publication of information, except as
may be required by the
terms of reference by way of comparison.
Previous reviews and reforms
Reviews and reforms of contempt of court
1.46 As noted above, there have been many reviews of the common law of
contempt of court both in Australia and overseas. Indeed in
the last 45 years,
there have been at least 13 reviews of different aspects of the law of contempt
of court, including four reviews
each in Australia and the United Kingdom, and
two reviews in Ireland. A summary of these other reviews including terms of
key recommendations and reform implementation status is set out at
Appendix B.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Major Crime (Investigative Powers) Act 2004
a result of these reviews there has been legislative change in the United
Kingdom,40 New South Wales,41 and in Australia
Family Law Act 1975
1.48 At the time of writing, New Zealand and Ireland each have Bills before
their respective parliaments to reform aspects of their
contempt of court
1.49 In 1984 a Bill to reform the Canadian law of contempt of court was
introduced to the Canadian parliament but was never passed.44
Review of the Open Courts Act
1.50 As already noted, in March 2018 a report in relation to the
Open Courts
by the Hon. Frank Vincent AO QC, the
Open Courts Act
was published. The report made 18 recommendations to ensure that suppression
orders are used only where absolutely necessary.
These recommendations are set
out at Appendix C.
1.51 The terms of reference require the Commission to have regard to the
recommendations of the
Open Courts Act
Accordingly, the
recommendations of the
Open Courts Act
are considered in this
consultation paper where relevant.
1.52 The Victorian Government has also committed to giving effect to the
recommendations of the
Open Courts Act
1.53 On 2 May 2019, as a first stage of suppression order reforms, the
Parliament of Victoria passed the
Open Courts and Other Acts Amendment Act
(Vic).47 This Act amends existing laws to reinforce the presumption in
favour of open justice and the disclosure of information in
Victorian courts.
The Act requires suppression and closed court orders to be used only when
necessary, such as where publication
of information would be unfair or would
risk harming victims or other parties.
Other reviews
1.54 A number of other reviews both in Australia and overseas are relevant
and may have implications for the Commission’s review.
These include:
• the Victorian Department of Justice and Community Safety review into
the use of judge-alone trials for criminal cases, currently
• the New South Wales Law Reform Commission review on the operation of
legislative prohibitions on the disclosure or publication
of New South Wales
court and tribunal information, New South Wales court suppression and
non-publication orders, and tribunal orders
restricting disclosure of
information, and access to information in New South Wales courts and tribunals,
announced in February 201949
• the Senate Select Inquiry on the Future of Public Interest Journalism
report tabled in the Australian Parliament in February
Contempt of Court Act 1981
Criminal Justice and Courts
Court Information Act 2010
Family Law Amendment Act 1989
43 See Administration of Justice (Reform of Contempt of Court) Bill 2018
(NZ). This Bill has also been considered by the Justice Committee
recommended the Bill be passed with amendment. Justice Committee,
Administration of Justice (Reform of Contempt of Court) Bill
Report, 5 April 2019); Contempt of Court Bill 2017 (Ireland).
44 Criminal Law Reform Act 1984, Bill C-19, 32nd Parl., 2d sess.,
1983–84 (1st reading 7 February 1984) cited in Linda Faust
Ottawa Law Review 316.
45 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
46 Attorney-General (Victoria), ‘First Stage of Suppression Order
Overhaul Begins’ (Media release, 19 February 2019).
Open Courts and Other Acts Amendment 2019 Act
48 Farrah Tomazin and Sumeyya Ilanbey, ‘Andrews Government Considers
‘Judge-only’ Trials for Criminal Cases’,
Page, 13 December 2018) <
www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/andrews-government-considers-judge-only-trials-for-criminal-cases-20181213-
p50m5u.html>.
49 Attorney-General (New South Wales), ‘Open Justice Under
Examination’ (Media release, 28 February 2019).
50 Public Interest Journalism Committee, Parliament of Australia,
of Public Interest Journalism
(Final Report, February 2018, February
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission Digital Platforms Inquiry, the
preliminary report and recommendations for
which were published in December
• in the United Kingdom, the Cairncross Review on a sustainable future
for journalism report published on 12 February 2019.52
Conduct of this reference
Commission Chair
1.55 This reference was commenced under the leadership of the Hon. Philip
Cummins AM, who was Chair of the Commission from 1 September
2012 until his
death on 24 February 2019.
1.56 On 4 March 2019 Mr Bruce Gardner PSM was appointed Acting Chair of the
Commission. Mr Gardner has continued to lead the conduct
of the reference and
the preparation of this consultation paper.
1.57 In accordance with
section 13(1)(b)
Victorian Law Reform
Commission Act
a Division has been constituted to guide and oversee the conduct
of the reference. All members of the Commission are members of the
Advisory committee
1.58 Committees of experts often assist the Commission in identifying issues
and exploring options for reform, although they are not
involved in developing
or voting on the Commission’s recommendations. They are a valuable source
of advice and the Commission
appreciates the time and expertise that the members
contribute.
1.59 Given the technical nature of many aspects of this reference, an
advisory committee comprising experts on the law of contempt
of court and in the
understanding of juror decision making has been formed for this reference.
1.60 The first meeting of the advisory committee was held on 21 February 2019
to assist the Commission in identifying key issues.
A further meeting will be
held in the middle of the year to discuss reform options. The members of the
advisory committee are listed
at Appendix A.
Preliminary meetings
1.61 To help inform the development of this consultation paper and as part of
its research, the Commission has conducted preliminary
meetings with
representatives of key stakeholders from the courts and the judiciary, and
1.62 The purpose of these meetings was to enable the Commission to gain an
understanding of some of the key issues, and to start identifying
proposals and
options for reform.
1.63 These preliminary meetings do not form part of the Commission’s
formal consultations for this reference. Formal consultations
will be conducted
in conjunction with the publication of this consultation paper, along with a
call for public submissions.
Consultation paper
1.64 The Commission’s preliminary consultations and other research form
the basis of this consultation paper.
1.65 This consultation paper does not represent any final conclusions or
views on the matters raised.
51 Australian Competition & Consumer Commission,
Digital Platforms
(Preliminary Report, December 2018).
52 Culture Department for Digital, Media and Sport (UK),
Cairncross Review: A Sustainable Future for Journalism
consultation process
1.66 The next stage of the reference will involve consulting with a wide
range of stakeholders, interested organisations and individuals
examine the issues raised in this consultation paper, to identify additional
issues and to develop and test options for
1.67 The Commission also welcomes submissions from the broader community.
1.68 The feedback and information the Commission receives from submissions
and consultations, combined with additional research, will
recommendations to the Attorney-General.
1.69 A report setting out the Commission’s recommendations will be
provided to the Attorney- General by the reporting date of
31 December 2019.
Within 14 sitting days of receipt of the report, the Attorney-General must table
the report in the Victorian Parliament.
The Victorian Government will decide
whether to implement the Commission’s recommendations and if so whether to
do so by legislative
How to use this consultation paper
1.70 The terms of reference and the law of contempt of court are such that
this is necessarily an expansive consultation paper, encompassing
many different
aspects. However, it is also
understood that some readers may wish to focus on a particular issue or type
of contempt.
1.71 Accordingly, readers should note the following:
• Chapter 2 sets out the existing legal framework for contempt
of court, outlining the law’s purpose and identifies
some of its unique
features. It also provides a brief overview of the key manifestations of
contempt which are discussed in detail
in subsequent chapters. This chapter
does not contain any questions.
• Chapter 3 discusses general issues with the law of contempt of court,
including the scope of the law and the procedures to
be applied generally, the
overlap with general criminal law, the penalties that may be imposed and the
place of warnings. A number
of options for reform are outlined together with
some questions for consideration. This includes the broad question of whether
courts today still require a general power to punish any conduct that has a
tendency to interfere with the proper administration
of justice.
• Chapter 4 discusses ‘contempt in the face of the
court’, that is, a court’s power to punish
behaviour in the
courtroom or, possibly, the vicinity of the courtroom which interferes with
or tends to interfere with
the proper administration of justice. This
power is important for the efficient and fair conduct of proceedings and to
public confidence in those proceedings. This power is also important
for the protection of witnesses, jurors and others with
duties to the court,
so that they can perform
their duties effectively without fear or intimidation. However if this power
is exercised arbitrarily it has the potential to jeopardise
public confidence
in the integrity and authority of the courts. Accordingly, this chapter
considers and poses questions
between the need for flexibility and the need for certainty in defining what
constitutes
contempt in the face of the court, and whether there is a need for
this aspect of the law to be replaced by statutory
provisions. In addition, this chapter considers more broadly whether there
is a need for a more consistent approach to disruptive
conduct and the
potentially disproportionate of impact of this area of the law on some groups
• Chapter 5 discusses what the terms of reference describe as
‘juror contempt’. The chapter notes the broad
range of behaviours
relating to juries, and that these can be classified broadly as either
misbehaviour by or interference with jurors.
The chapter also notes that juror
behaviour is regulated by the
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) and the
Directions Act 2015
(Vic). The chapter then focuses on two issues: jurors
information about cases and jurors disclosing information. Questions are
asked about
the need to reform the
Juries Act 2000
(Vic), and whether there is a
need for courts to also retain the power to deal with common law contempt by
jurors. In addition, this
chapter considers the place of jury directions and
whether there is a need for further education of jurors about their role,
and duties.
• Chapter 6 discusses ‘disobedience contempt’, that is, the
power of the court to deal with a person who fails to
comply with a court order
or undertaking. The distinction between civil and criminal contempt and the
implications this has for proceedings
and the procedures that are to be adopted
is also considered. This chapter asks questions about whether there is a need to
this aspect of the common law of contempt, particularly given the
availability of other enforcement procedures to secure compliance,
and, if it is
to be retained, what reforms may be required to clarify its purpose and
procedures.
• Chapter 7 discusses the law of ‘sub judice contempt’
which is concerned with ensuring a fair trial by protecting
jurors from
extraneous information by limiting the information which may be published when
legal proceedings are pending. It discusses
some of the assumptions underpinning
this area of the law and asks the question of whether these assumptions remain
valid and appropriate
for the modern age, including whether this area of the law
of should be retained. In addition, this chapter considers some of the
technical issues and difficulties which are raised by this area of the law. To
address these issues, a number of options for
reform are then outlined together
with some questions for consideration.
• Chapter 8 discusses ‘scandalising contempt’, that is,
acts or publications which are calculated to impair
public confidence
in the judiciary and the courts. The purpose of this aspect of the law
of contempt is to protect the
courts and the judiciary from attacks and
criticism in order to maintain the public’s confidence in the system.
However, as
this chapter discusses, there are a number of uncertainties in the
operation and application of this area of the law, as well
underlying assumption on which this law is based. A number of options for
reform are outlined together with some
for consideration—this includes whether the law of scandalising
contempt should be abolished, or alternatively if it were to
be retained whether
it should be replaced by statutory provisions.
• Chapter 9 discusses the four statutory prohibitions on
publication in the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
. This chapter considers
whether there is a need to retain these prohibitions and if so where they
should best be located in the
Victorian statute book. As required by the
terms of reference, this chapter considers and poses questions about whether a
statutory prohibition is required to temporarily restrict the
publication of sensitive information upon the laying of charges
relation to sexual and family violence criminal matters. In addition, this
chapter considers and poses questions about how
statutory prohibitions which are
designed to protect the anonymity of victims can afford appropriate agency and
choice to those victims
who wish to speak about their experiences.
• Chapter 10 considers the enforcement of prohibitions and restrictions
on the publication of information. This chapter involves
consideration of the
common law of contempt of court, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
. It considers and asks questions in relation to issues of the
definition of publication, the enforcement
of Victorian laws outside of Victoria, the awareness of these laws and the
notification of court orders, the monitoring of compliance
with these laws,
responsibility for bringing proceedings for breach of these laws, fault elements
that must be proven to establish
breach of these laws, and the adequacy of
existing penalties and the defences to alleged breaches of these laws. In
addition, and
in accordance with the terms of reference this chapter also
considers the enforcement of suppression orders with no end date that
Open Courts Act
contempt of court
14 Introduction
History and jurisdiction
Unique features of contempt of court
18 Manifestations of contempt of court
legal framework for contempt of court
Introduction
2.1 This chapter provides a brief history of the common law of contempt of
court, including jurisdiction to punish, a discussion of
the law’s purpose
and an overview of its unique features and key manifestations.
2.2 The law of contempt of court has developed over many centuries to ensure
that courts operate effectively and justice is administered
properly without
interference.1
2.3 Traditionally, the law of contempt of court has been common law made by
judges. Today the common law is supplemented by laws passed
by parliaments. As a
consequence, the law of contempt of court is a complex mix of statute and common
2.4 This creates challenges for the courts in seeking to apply the law and
for legal practitioners and others in knowing what the
law is, how to comply
and when it may be applied against them.
2.5 General issues with the law of contempt of court are discussed in Chapter
History and jurisdiction
2.6 Historically, the common law of contempt of court developed out of the
King’s power as a source of justice to punish abuses
and affronts to the
King’s peace and the King’s courts.2 Subsequently this power was
assumed by the superior courts of
common law in England as part of their
inherent jurisdiction.3
2.7 In Australia, this inherent jurisdiction has been described as deriving
from a superior court’s general responsibility for
the administration of
2.8 In Victoria, the inherent jurisdiction to punish for contempt of court
vests in the Supreme Court of Victoria as ‘the superior
Court of Victoria
with unlimited jurisdiction’.5
2.9 At common law and as part of its inherent jurisdiction, the
Supreme Court of Victoria can punish summarily for contempt
‘wherever it may occur, whether inside or outside of the court’6
and can exercise its ‘protective jurisdiction’
to deal summarily
with contempts of inferior courts.7
1 C J Miller and David Perry,
Miller on Contempt of Court
University Press, 4th ed, 2017) 2.
2 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Contempt in Modern New Zealand
Paper (2014) 6.
3 C J Miller and David Perry,
Miller on Contempt of Court
University Press, 4th ed, 2017) 3–4.
Grassby v R
(1989) 168 CLR 1
, 16 (Dawson J, Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane
and Toohey JJ agreeing); see also
R v Forbes; Ex parte Bevan
[1972] HCA 34
, 7 (Menzies J, Barwick CJ, Stephen and Walsh JJ agreeing).
Constitution
(Vic) s 85(1).
R v Metal Trades Employers’ Association; Ex parte Amalgamated
Engineering Union (Australian Section)
[1951] HCA 3
(1951) 82 CLR 208
, 241 (Latham CJ),
254 (Dixon J);
R v Taylor; Ex parte Roach
[1951] HCA 22
(1951) 82 CLR 587
, 598 (Dixon,
Webb, Fullagar and Kitto J).
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
(1955) 93 CLR 351;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
75.05(1)(c).
2.10 In contrast, as inferior
courts of the common law, the powers of the County Court of Victoria and the
Magistrates’ Court
of Victoria are limited to punishing for contempts
in the face of that court.8 However, the County Court has been given by
statute the same jurisdiction, powers and authority in respect
of any contempt
of the Court as the Supreme Court has in respect of a contempt of the Supreme
2.11 The common law jurisdiction of an inferior court to deal with contempt
of court can also be supplemented by express legislative
provisions restating
the aspects of the common law of contempt of court that are to apply.10 A table
setting out the jurisdiction
and powers of the courts to deal with contempt of
court is provided at Appendix D.
2.12 Tribunals such as the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(VCAT) are not courts. They do not have any inherent
common law power
to address conduct constituting a contempt of court. Instead, a
tribunal’s power to deal with
conduct that may interfere with
the proper administration of justice is limited to the powers expressly provided
in that tribunal’s
constituting statute.11
2.13 The Victorian Parliament can amend the jurisdiction and powers of the
Victorian Supreme Court.12 However, the High Court
has held that there are
constitutional limits to the exercise of this power. State parliaments
cannot legislate to ‘alter
the constitution or character of their
Supreme Court [so] that it ceases to meet the constitutional description’
‘Supreme Court of a State’.13 State parliaments also cannot
confer functions or powers on a Supreme Court that
are incompatible with
the court’s institutional integrity as a repository of federal
Constitution.14 The ‘defining
characteristics’ of a ‘court’
or ‘Supreme Court’ which ‘mark a court apart from other
decision-making bodies’ must be maintained.15 However,
there is no fixed
set of defining characteristics, although courts
have identified certain characteristics in case law.16 These constitutional
limits may curtail the extent to which the common law
of contempt of court can
be reformed.
2.14 The purpose of the law of contempt of court is to protect against any
‘interference with the due administration of justice,
either in a
particular case or more generally as a continuing process’.17 As Lord
Diplock has stated, it ‘is justice
itself that is flouted by contempt
of court, not the individual court or judge who is attempting to
administer it’.18
2.15 The law of contempt of court is therefore ‘based on the broadest
of principles’ and is universal in its application.19
2.16 However, as recognised by common law courts both in Australia and
overseas, and as will be discussed in this consultation paper,
contempt of court is also ‘fraught with difficulties and
uncertainties’.20
Lane v Morrison
[2009] HCA 29
(2009) 239 CLR 230
, 243 (French CJ and Gummow J)
Master Undertakers’ Association of New South Wales v Crockett
[1907] HCA 65
(1907) 5 CLR 389
, 392–3 (Griffith CJ);
K-Generation Pty Limited v
Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR 501
, 538 (Gummow, Heydon, Hayne,
Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
County Court Act 1958
10 See, eg,
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
11 See, eg,
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Constitution
(Vic) s 85(4). For a discussion of this
provision, see Greg Taylor,
Constitution
of Victoria
(Federation
Press, 2006) 496–509.
Kirk v Industrial Court (NSW)
(2010) 239 CLR 531, 580 (French CJ,
Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ) citing
Forge v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission
[2006] HCA 44
(2006) 228 CLR 45
, 76 (Gummow, Hayne
and Crennan JJ).
Russell v Russell
(1976) 134 CLR 495
, 517 (Gibbs J);
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51
, 96 (Toohey J),
103–4 (Gaudron J), 115–9 (McHugh J), 127–8 (Gummow J);
(NT) v Emmerson
(2014) 253 CLR 393
, 424 (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel,
Bell and Keane JJ).
Forge v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2006] HCA 44
, 76 (Gummow, Hayne and Crennan JJ).
A-G (UK) v Leveller Magazine Ltd
[1979] AC 440
A-G (UK) v Newspaper Publishing
[1988] Ch 333
[1990] 2 AC 154
features of contempt of court
2.17 In empowering the courts to punish for contempt of court, including by
imprisonment, the law of contempt of court has a number
of unique features which
distinguish it from other types of court proceedings.
2.18 Some of these features are discussed below.
The language of the law of contempt of
2.19 As recognised by the New Zealand Law Commission (NZ Commission), the
legal terminology used to describe the law of contempt of
‘antiquated’ and out of step with common understandings.21 Terms
such as ‘in the face of the court’
and ‘scandalise’ have
technical legal meanings unfamiliar to the general public. Not only does this
create confusion
but many of these terms are also fraught with legal
uncertainties, as is discussed in later chapters.
2.20 In addition, confusion is created by the way in which the law of
contempt of court borrows the language of criminal proceedings,
by describing
proceedings as ‘summary proceedings’ and contempt as an
2.21 Notwithstanding the linguistic barriers, legal uncertainties and
confusion such terminology causes, it continues to be used by
the courts.
Accordingly, this consultation paper also uses this terminology.
2.22 However, in considering the reform of the law of contempt of court,
consideration will also need to be given to the reform of
its language so that
the law of contempt of court is clear and readily understandable both by those
who may be affected by it as
well by those who practise the law and are familiar
with its currently archaic language. Such reforms will help provide certainty
what is an uncertain and confusing area of law.
The discretionary nature of the courts’
2.23 The exercise of a court’s power to punish for common law of
contempt of court is entirely at the discretion of the
court before which or
in relation to which the alleged contempt arises. For the Supreme Court of
Victoria, this power may be
exercised whenever and wherever an alleged contempt
may occur.22
2.24 Although the case law provides examples of when the courts’
contempt powers have been exercised in the past, there is no
certainty about the
future circumstances in which a judicial officer may exercise their power in
relation to contempt of court.
2.25 As the courts have recognised, the common law of contempt of court
provides the courts with flexibility and enables the recognition
of contemptuous
behaviour in new situations.23
2.26 In addition, there is no certainty that just because one judicial
officer considers certain conduct to be contemptuous, another
judicial officer
will also consider the same conduct to be contemptuous.24
21 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
, Report No 140 (2017), 27.
R v Metal Trades Employers’ Association; Ex parte Amalgamated
Engineering Union (Australian Section)
[1951] HCA 3
(1951) 82 CLR 208
, 241 (Latham CJ),
254 (Dixon J);
R v Taylor; Ex parte Roach
[1951] HCA 22
(1951) 82 CLR 587
, 598 (Dixon,
Webb, Fullagar and Kitto J).
R v Douglass (No 3)
[2018] NSWSC 1939
, [21]–[23] in which the
presiding judge stated, ‘It does not follow from the fact that no earlier
authority can be found
which has dealt with such conduct, that [the conduct in
question] could not involve contempt of the Court.’
24 Compare a case in a Queensland where a magistrate reportedly threatened a
witness with contempt for wearing a t-shirt with the
words ‘villain’
and another case in Victoria where the judge held ‘It may be offensive,
but it is not contempt
of court, for a person to describe
a judge as a wanker.’: Monique Preston, ‘Villains Shirt nearly
Lands Man in Trouble’,
Whitsunday Times
(Web Page, 16 November
www.whitsundaytimes.com.au/news/villains-shirt-lands-man-in-court-trouble/3578005/
Anissa Pty Ltd v Parsons
[1999] VSC [22] (Cummins J).
standard of proof
2.27 All charges of contempt of court must be proved to the criminal standard
of proof, that is, beyond all reasonable doubt.25 However,
proceedings for
contempt of court do not
constitute a trial of a criminal charge, although as already noted the
language of a criminal trial is often adopted.
Summary proceedings
2.28 Common law contempt of court is an indictable offence. However, unlike
other indictable offences, which ordinarily involve trial
by jury, charges for
contempt of court are heard summarily by a judicial officer alone, and in the
case of contempt in the face of
the court they can be actioned on the spot by
the presiding judicial officer using what this consultation paper describes as a
summary procedure’.26 This special summary procedure is
discussed in this chapter further below.
2.29 As noted at the beginning of this chapter, the law of contempt of court
is today a mix of statute and common law, with contempt-related
offences arising
not just at common law but also in statute. As a consequence, not only is the
law of contempt of court fragmented
and disparate but so are its offences and
prosecution procedures. These issues are discussed further in subsequent
2.30 A comparative table illustrating the fragmented nature of
contempt-related offences, penalties and prosecution procedures
is provided at
Appendix E. Many other statutes also contain contempt-related offences.
However for the purposes of this consultation
paper the Appendix is limited to
the most major and frequently used.
Who can bring proceedings
2.31 In Victoria, proceedings for common law contempt of court are commenced
by way of summons or originating motion in either the
Supreme Court27 or the
County Court.28
2.32 Depending on the type of contempt, the summons or originating motion may
be filed by:
• a party to the proceedings in the event of a civil contempt
• the Attorney-General29
• the Director of Public Prosecutions30 or
• the Court, which may direct the Prothonotary in the Supreme Court or
the Registrar in the County Court to initiate proceedings.31
2.33 The Supreme Court and County Court may also adopt a special summary
procedure where there is an alleged contempt in the face
of the court. This
procedure enables a judge to immediately punish the contempt summarily, rather
than commencing separate formal
proceedings by way of summons or originating
motion.32 This summary procedure is discussed further in Chapter 4.
The distinction between
civil and criminal contempt
2.34 Historically, contempts of court have been categorised as either
civil or criminal, depending on whether the purpose
was to enforce a
court’s process and orders, or to punish acts that interfere with the
administration of justice, such as
obstructing proceedings while court
is sitting or publishing comments on a pending case.33
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
26 Ibid (Brennan, Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ) citing
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 49 (Deane J).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.06.
R v Metal Trades Employers’ Association; Ex parte Amalgamated
Engineering Union (Australian Section)
[1951] HCA 3
(1951) 82 CLR 208.
Public Prosecutions Act 1994
s 22(1)(ba)(iii).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.07;
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.07.
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75;
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.
Australian Meat Industry Employees’ Union v Mudginberri Station
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 161 CLR 98
, 106 (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and Deane JJ) citing
Ansah v Ansah
[1977] Fam 138
primary basis for this distinction is that disobedience of court processes
and orders in civil proceedings is a civil
wrong and enforcement is coercive or
remedial in the interests of private individuals, whereas interfering with the
administration
of justice is a public wrong and enforcement is punitive in
the public interest.34
2.36 Although this distinction is time-honoured,35 it has also been the
subject of various criticisms, including that:
• There is no real distinction between proceedings in the public
interest and in the interest of the individual, as the underlying
of all contempt powers is ensuring the proper and effective administration
of justice and vindicating a court’s
authority.36
• Contempts of court do not always fall neatly within either civil or
criminal contempt, and often there may be a ‘middle
ground’ where
the two categories can overlap.37
• Punitive and remedial objects are ‘inextricably
intermixed’.38 As the High Court has stated, ‘punishment
punishment, whether it is imposed in vindication or for remedial or coercive
purposes’.39
• There are some circumstances in which breach of an order in civil
proceedings cannot be remedied, in which case the only effect
of contempt
proceedings is the vindication of judicial authority.40
• The purpose of contempt proceedings is not the same as the purpose of
an individual bringing proceedings. When an individual
brings proceedings it is
to secure the benefit of an order or undertaking, whereas courts may exercise a
disciplinary jurisdiction’ even when parties have settled their issues
and do not wish to proceed further.41
2.37 Notwithstanding these criticisms, and statements by the High Court
expressing concerns about the distinction,42 Victorian courts
continue to
distinguish between civil and criminal contempt.43
2.38 The distinction between civil and criminal contempt is discussed further
in Chapter 6, in the context of disobedience contempt.
Manifestations of contempt of court
2.39 At common law, the courts have long recognised different manifestations
of contempt of court. The distinctions between them are
not clear—people
can interfere with the administration of justice in many ways,44 and
accordingly, the law of contempt of court
can ‘assum[e] an almost infinite
diversity of forms’.45 To add to this lack of certainty, as
noted above, the common law of contempt of court has been supplemented by
Australian Meat Industry Employees’ Union v Mudginberri Station
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 161 CLR 98
, 106 (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and Deane JJ) citing
Ansah v Ansah
[1977] Fam 138
Witham v Holloway
, 531 (Brennan, Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ), 539 (McHugh J).
35 See, eg,
R v Metal Trades Employers’ Association; Ex parte
Amalgamated Engineering Union (Australian Section)
[1951] HCA 3
(1951) 82 CLR 208
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
363–4 (Dixon CJ, Fullagar, Kitto and Taylor JJ);
Consolidated Press Limited v Morgan
[1965] HCA 21
(1965) 112 CLR 483
, 489 (Barwick CJ),
500 (Windeyer J).
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union v Mudginberri Station
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 161 CLR 98
, 107 (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and Deane JJ);
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
, 532–3 (Brennan, Deane,
Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
R v Metal Trades Employers’ Association; Ex parte Amalgamated
Engineering Union (Australian Section)
[1951] HCA 3
(1951) 82 CLR 208
, 253 (Dixon J);
Australian Consolidated Press Limited v Morgan
[1965] HCA 21
(1965) 112 CLR 483
(Windeyer J).
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
, 534 (Brennan, Deane, Toohey
and Gaudron JJ), 539 (McHugh J). See also
Australasian Meat Industry
Employees’ Union v Mudginberri Station Pty Ltd
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 161 CLR 98
(Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and Deane JJ).
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
, 534 (Brennan, Deane, Toohey
and Gaudron JJ).
40 Ibid 532–3 (Brennan, Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
41 Ibid 533–4 (Brennan, Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ);
Australasian
Meat Industry Employees’ Union v Mudginberri Station Pty Ltd
[1986] HCA 46
, 108 (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and Deane JJ);
Consolidated Press Limited v Morgan
[1965] HCA 21
(1965) 112 CLR 483
, 489 (Barwick
CJ), 500 (Windeyer J).
42 See, eg,
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36
(2008) 235 CLR 125
, 135 (Kirby J);
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union v Mudginberri Station Pty
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 161 CLR 98
, 107–8 (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and Deane JJ);
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
, 532–4 (Brennan, Deane, Toohey
and Gaudron JJ).
43 See, eg,
Moira Shire Council v Sidebottom Group Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2018] VSC 556
[19]–[29] (Zammit J) (citations omitted);
[2018] VSC 794
[9]–[10] (McDonald J) (citations omitted).
44 Committee on Contempt of Court (UK),
Report of the Committee on
Contempt of Court
(December 1974) 3 [3].
45 Joseph Moskovitz, ‘Contempt of Injunctions, Civil and
restatement,
particularly in terms of conduct amounting to contempt in the face of the
court46 and juror contempt.47 Given this, the
common law today provides only
part of the picture of the type of conduct and the punishment available to a
court to ensure the proper
administration of justice.
2.40 In addition, there are different views about how the law of contempt of
court is best described and classified.48 The categories
of contempt of court
are thus uncertain.49
2.41 In this context, and as noted above, the common law gives courts the
flexibility to find conduct contemptuous in novel circumstances
and to address
the infinite variety of behaviours that may interfere with the administration of
justice. However, this flexibility
also makes the content and application of the
law of contempt of court unclear and uncertain.
2.42 A key concern for the Commission, and a theme running through this
consultation paper, is therefore the lack of certainty and
clarity in the common
law of contempt of court, and the effect of that uncertainty on the proper and
effective administration of
justice and public confidence in the work of the
2.43 As noted in Chapter 1, in undertaking this reference the
Commission’s focus is on the most common manifestations of contempt,
• contempt in or near the courtroom—contempt in the face of the
• juror contempt
• non-compliance with court orders or undertakings—disobedience
• contempt by publication—publications that interfere with or
prejudice pending proceedings—sub judice contempt
• contempt by publication—publications that interfere with the
administration of justice as an ongoing process—contempt
by scandalising
2.44 Each of these manifestations of contempt is outlined briefly below. They
are discussed in detail in Chapters 4–8.
2.45 However, the manifestations of contempt are not discrete or fixed. In
addition, and for completeness, it is noted that contempt
of court can also
arise where there is:
• interference with people who have duties to discharge in court
proceedings, for example where a person improperly interferes
with a witness by
making threats
• interference with persons over whom the courts exercise special
• a breach of duty by persons who are officially connected with court
proceedings
• abuse of process.50
Contempt in the face of the court
2.46 The essence of contempt in the face of the court is articulated in the
same broad terms as criminal contempt more generally.
It is described as:
action or inaction amounting to an interference with, or obstruction to, or
having a tendency to interfere with or obstruct the due
administration of
46 See, eg,
Coroners Act 2008
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Juries Act 2000
48 Compare Thomson Reuters,
The Laws of Australia
(Web Page, 25
September 2018) 10 Criminal Offences, ‘10.11 Administration of Law and
Justice’; LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
25 September 2018) 105 Contempt.
A-G (UK) v Times Newspapers Ltd
[1974] AC 273
, 294 (Lord Reid).
50 For a discussion of these manifestations of contempt, see LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
(online at 25 September 2018) 105
51 John C Fox,
The History of Contempt of Court: The Form of Trial and the
Mode of Punishment
(Oxford University Press, 1927), 497;
DPP (Vic) v
[2002] VSC 583
R v Slaveski
[2011] VSC 643
[2012] VSC 216
2.47 Borrie
and Lowe have described contempt in the face of the court, as ‘the
unlawful disruption or obstruction of court proceedings’.52
2.48 The distinguishing factor for this category of contempt is that the
conduct must occur ‘in the face of the court’,
an expression
described by Justice Kirby in
European Asian Bank AG v Wentworth
‘ambiguous and antique’.53
2.49 Today the common law of contempt in the face of the court has also been
supplemented by statutory restatement.54
2.50 The meaning of the term ‘in the face of the court,’55
together with the issue of the courts’ power to punish
it immediately
and summarily, is discussed in Chapter 4.
2.51 In addition, Chapter 4 considers how the law of contempt in the face of
the court can disproportionately impact certain groups
such as unrepresented
litigants or litigants with mental illness.
Juror contempt
2.52 At common law, contempt by jurors is any conduct by members of the
jury that interferes with the proper administration
of justice. Most
significantly, and as discussed in Chapter 5, it includes jury members making
their own inquiries and undertaking
their own unauthorised research in relation
to trial participants and events. However, contempt by jurors can include other
of misbehaviour associated with a trial, such as a refusal to answer
questions or give an oath or affirmation. It can therefore
circumstances also constitute contempt in the face of the court, as well
as constituting a breach of one or
more of the offence provisions in
Juries Act 2000
(Vic). Contempt by jurors can also be characterised
as a manifestation of contempt by breach of duty by a person officially
with court proceedings.56
2.53 In addition to the common law, the duties and obligations of jury
members are now also expressly stated in the
. These include a
specific prohibition on jurors conducting research, among other things.57
Disobedience contempt
2.54 Disobedience contempt arises when a person fails or refuses to comply
with an order of the court or an undertaking given to the
court. In these
circumstances, contempt proceedings are one mechanism by which to compel
compliance with the court order or undertaking
given and may also provide a
mechanism to punish the non-compliance, particularly where the non-compliance
involves deliberate defiance
of the court or where compliance is no longer
2.55 However, the courts have held that such contempt proceedings should
not be commenced where there are more appropriate civil
remedies available to
enforce an order of the court.58 It is noted that there are many
other such mechanisms available
to enforce court orders.59
2.56 In addition to the technical issues, which include consideration of
the distinction between civil and criminal contempt and
its effects, is a more
fundamental question of whether there is a need to retain the common law of
disobedience contempt, particularly
given the availability of alternative
enforcement mechanisms.
2.57 Disobedience contempt and these issues are discussed further in Chapter
52 Ian Cram,
Borrie & Lowe: The Law of Contempt
(LexisNexis, 4th
ed, 2010) 456.
European Asian Bank AG v Wentworth
(1986) 5 NSWLR 445
54 See, eg,
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
European Asian Bank AG v Wentworth
(1986) 5 NSWLR 445
v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(1987) 7 NSWLR 588
(1984) 3 NSWLR 212.
56 LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
(online at 25
September 2018) 105 Contempt, ‘2 Criminal Contempt’
Juries Act 2000
(Panel member or juror must not make
enquiries about trial matters).
Morgan v State of Victoria
[2008] VSCA 267
(2008) 22 VR 237
, 269 [145].
59 For a discussion of alternative mechanisms, see the section of this paper
beginning at [6.33].
by publication (1)—sub judice contempt
2.58 At common law, sub judice contempt arises where there is a
‘publication’ which has a ‘real and definite tendency’
as a ‘matter of practical reality’ to prejudice or embarrass
particular legal proceedings.60
2.59 There is no requirement to prove the actual effect of the publication or
that the prejudice actually occurred.61 There is also
no requirement that the
contemnor had an intention to cause prejudice.62
2.60 The tendency of a publication to prejudice proceedings is assessed at
the time of publication, alongside a consideration of the
nature of the
publication and other circumstantial factors.63
2.61 Publication of print or broadcast material is taken to occur at the time
and place it was first made available to the public
or a section of the
2.62 The courts have held that a publication will prejudice or interfere with
proceedings where the publication:
• refers to an accused’s guilt or innocence65
• details prior convictions,66 confessions or admissions by the
• makes statements about the character of the accused68
• gives opinions about the quality of the case.69
2.63 As discussed in Chapter 7, there are technical issues with the law of
sub judice contempt and the way in which the test is constructed.
These issues
have also been the subject of other reviews and inquiries.
2.64 However, also discussed in Chapter 7, the emergence of new media poses a
fundamental challenge to the law of sub judice contempt.
Unlike print or
broadcast publications, publication in the new media is permanent,70 without a
specific location,71 easily accessible
by searching,72 and can be readily copied
and published in digital media outside Victoria.73 The question therefore arises
whether in this new media landscape there remains a role for the law of
sub judice contempt in ensuring a fair trial, and whether
the assumptions
underpinning the law in terms of juror decision making are still valid. These
questions are discussed further in
Contempt by publication (2)—contempt by
scandalising the court
2.65 Scandalising contempt is an interference with the course of justice
arising from:
publications which tend to detract from the authority and influence of
judicial determinations; publications calculated to
impair the confidence
of the people in the Court’s judgments because the matter published
aims at lowering the
authority of the Court as a whole or that of its
Judges and excites misgivings as to the integrity, propriety and
impartiality
brought to the exercise of the judicial office.74
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
Bell v Stewart
(1920) 28 CLR 419, 432.
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
63 Ibid 34;
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
Viner v Australian Building Construction Employees’ and Builders
Labourers Federation
(1963) 56 FLR 5
DPP (NSW) v Wran
(1987) 7 NSWLR 616.
R v Hinch (No 1)
[2013] VSC 520
R v The Herald and Weekly Times
(2007) VR 248.
A-G (NSW) v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 368.
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15.
Packer v Peacock
[1912] HCA 8
(1912) 13 CLR 577.
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
, 268 [76].
71 Ibid [77].
72 Ibid [78]–[83].
73 Ibid 270 [84].
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434.
2.66 As stated by the High Court in
Gallagher v Durack
The authority of the law rests on public confidence, and it is important for
the stability of society that the confidence of the public
should not be shaken
by baseless attacks on the integrity or impartiality of courts or judges.75
2.67 The law of scandalising contempt is therefore aimed at protecting
the proper administration of justice as an ongoing process
and at ensuring
public confidence in the courts. The law
of scandalising contempt is concerned with publications which comment on the
courts and judges generally.76 In this context the courts
have held that the
power to punish for
scandalising contempt is not to be used to punish personal attacks on
individuals or judges.77
2.68 As discussed in Chapter 8 there is some controversy surrounding the use
of this manifestation of contempt, which has also been
the subject of recent
reviews in both the United Kingdom and New Zealand. Significantly, while this
manifestation of contempt has
been abolished in the United Kingdom, the NZ
Commission has recommended its retention and codification.
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
R v Fletcher
[1935] HCA 1
(1935) 52 CLR 248
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
TWO: CONTEMPT OF COURT
General issues with
the law of contempt of court
24 Introduction
24 Uncertainty of scope
26 Procedural safeguards
29 Overlap with criminal law
31 Penalties
33 Warnings
issues with the law of contempt of court
Introduction
3.1 This chapter identifies questions about a number of overarching issues
with the law of contempt of court.
3.2 The offence of contempt of court is often described in case law as
, which means that it belongs to a species all of its own and so is
3.3 The consequences of this are twofold. First, there are many unusual
features of the law
of contempt of court which are not easily reconciled with community
expectations about how a law—particularly a law which provides
imposition of punitive sanctions—should operate.
3.4 Secondly, there is significant uncertainty about the scope of the law of
contempt of court and the procedures to be applied in
contempt proceedings.
3.5 Issues covered in this chapter include:
• whether the scope and elements of the offence of contempt of court
are too broad and discretionary to enable people to know
what conduct might be
subject to punishment
• whether the procedural safeguards which apply to contempt proceedings
are sufficiently clear and adequate given the punitive
nature of those
proceedings
• whether greater guidance is required about the relationship between
statutory offence provisions and the courts’ inherent
• whether there should be a statutory maximum penalty for contempt of
court and whether the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) should directly apply to
contempt proceedings
• whether there is a need for greater clarity and certainty about the
use and role of judicial warnings in deciding whether
and how a person should be
dealt with for contempt.
Uncertainty of scope
3.6 Under the common law, it is not possible to define with precision what
conduct might be liable to punishment as a contempt of
3.7 In 1906, Justice Cussen in the Supreme Court set out a broad definition
of contempt of court which has since been cited with approval
many times,
including by the High Court:2
Its essence is action or inaction amounting to an interference with, or
obstruction to, or having a tendency to interfere with or
obstruct the due
administration of justice, using that term in a broad sense.3
Encyclopaedic Australian Legal Dictionary,
(Web Page, 9 April 2019)
‘sui generis’.
Lane v The Registrar of the Supreme Court of New South Wales (Equity
[1981] HCA 35
(1981) 148 CLR 245
[1906] ArgusLawRp 80
[1906] VLR 493
3.8 Following from this definition, Victorian courts have, in general
terms, held that:
• The offence of contempt will be established if it can be proved
beyond reasonable doubt that the alleged contemnor wilfully
engaged in conduct
and that conduct had a tendency to interfere with the administration of
• It is not necessary to prove that the alleged contemnor had an
intention to interfere with the administration of justice.
• It is not necessary to prove that the conduct did in fact interfere
with the course of justice.4
3.9 Case law and academic texts list and describe general categories of
contempt. However, these do not provide an exhaustive catalogue
‘many and varied’5 ways in which a person may be found to be in
contempt of court. At its highest, a list of the
categories of contempt is a
list of thematically grouped
of conduct which the courts have
found, in the past, to be an interference with the proper administration of
justice and therefore
punishable as contempt. Conduct which constitutes contempt
of court may fit within multiple categories or it may not fit within any
established category but still be regarded as contempt.
3.10 The lack of precision in defining the offence of contempt
affords the court the flexibility to deal with any conduct,
unforeseen or novel, which interferes with or has a tendency to interfere
with the due administration of justice.
In effect, the courts are able to
take an approach of ‘we will know it when we see it’ to
defining contempt
3.11 However, the result is that members of the public are not able to know
in advance what behaviour might be regarded as sufficiently
unacceptable to
warrant conviction and punishment for contempt.
3.12 A recent New South Wales case provides an illustrative example.
A journalist, attending court to report on a murder
trial, allegedly
entered the jury room where she was found by the sheriff and removed
before she had spoken to any
jury members.6 The presiding judicial officer
informed the journalist that she might be in contempt of court and gave the
an opportunity to show cause why she should not be dealt
with for contempt.7 Evidence was provided to the court
that the journalist
was not an experienced court reporter, was unfamiliar with the layout of
the particular court and had
inadvertently attempted to enter
the jury room, where she was stopped by the sheriff. There were no signs that
prohibited her entry.8
3.13 At the ‘show cause’ hearing, the journalist apologised to
the court for her actions and the disruption they caused.9
It was submitted on
her behalf that her conduct did not require referral for contempt because
she had not intended to
influence or corrupt a juror or otherwise
interfere with the administration of justice. It was submitted that what she
done was not the result of an attempt to interfere with the jury, but rather
the result of a series of very unfortunate events.
It was also noted that in
the circumstances her actions had fortunately not in fact resulted in a
serious interference with the
due administration of justice.10
3.14 In view of the journalist’s apology and submissions, the
presiding judicial officer decided not to refer her to
the Prothonotary
to be dealt with for contempt. However, she commented that:
R v Vasiliou
[2012] VSC 216
[2011] VSC 643
R v The Age Co Ltd
DPP (Vic) v
[2002] VSC 583
[7]–[9]; DPP v Johnson & Yahoo!7
[2016] VSC 699
[24]. In some cases, particularly those involving contempt
by publication, the requisite tendency has been described as ‘a
definite tendency as a matter of practical reality’ to interfere with the
administration of justice.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
R v Douglass (No 3)
[2018] NSWSC 1939
7 Ibid [1], [8].
8 Ibid [9]–[12].
9 Ibid [15].
10 Ibid [18] – [19].
I do not accept
what was encompassed in the submission that a successful attempt by a
journalist to gain entry to a jury room, or
to speak to a juror there, is
not “a recognised category of contempt”. It does not follow
from the fact
that no earlier authority can be found which has dealt with
such conduct, that it could not involve contempt of the Court.
That there is
no previous case where such behaviour has arisen to be considered, simply
reflects how extraordinary it is for
a journalist to make any attempt to enter a
jury room, during an ongoing trial. While, as in this case, relevant
arise as to what the journalist intended, there can be no
question, in my view, that such conduct can involve
a contempt, given that it can undoubtedly have a real prospect of interfering
with the administration of justice, during an ongoing
3.15 The case raises a number of questions: Could an inadvertent but
unauthorised entry into the jury room constitute a contempt?
Or only if it
is a journalist who gains entry? Or only if there is an attempt to talk to
the jurors? Or only if there is an
attempt to talk to the jurors about a matter
related to the case?
3.16 Such questions are not readily answered by reference to the broad
definition of contempt propounded by Justice Cussen and set
out above. Such
questions are also not readily answered in a context where it is accepted
that conduct may constitute contempt
of court even where there is no intention
on the part of the contemnor to interfere with the proper administration of
justice and
no interference has in fact occurred.
Possible reforms
3.17 The power of the courts, particularly the inherent power of superior
courts, to punish for contempt is not limited to specific
conduct. It is a power directed towards safeguarding the proper administration
of justice rather than prohibiting any
precisely identified mischief.
3.18 As currently expressed in case law, the power to punish for
contempt gives the courts significant flexibility to address
conduct that
might represent a threat to the proper administration of justice. The price
of this flexibility is a lack of certainty
which will attract conviction and punishment.
3.19 The following chapters consider the implications of this uncertainty in
the context of specific manifestations of contempt of
court and pose questions
replaced by statutory provisions.
2 Do the courts need a general power to punish any conduct that has a
tendency to interfere with the proper administration of justice?
Alternatively,
the law specify the conduct subject to sanction? If so, should only conduct
that is intended to interfere with the administration
of justice be subject to
punishment?
Procedural safeguards
3.20 The right of an accused person to a fair trial is a central pillar of
the criminal justice system.12 This is reflected in the
Charter of Human
Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic) which establishes a framework
for the protection and promotion of human rights in Victoria.
11 Ibid [21]–[23].
Dietrich v R
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
, 298–9 (Mason CJ and
McHugh J) (citations omitted).
Section 24(1)
of the Charter states:
A person charged with a criminal offence or a party to a civil proceeding has
the right to have the charge or proceeding decided by
a competent, independent
and impartial court or tribunal after a fair and public hearing.
sets out a more extensive list of fair trial rights which are
described as ‘rights in criminal proceedings’.
3.23 Although a person found guilty of contempt of court may be convicted and
imprisoned or fined, contempt proceedings are not conducted
as criminal
proceedings. Contempt
proceedings are heard under the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure
Rules) 2015
(Vic) and the
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) (General Civil Procedure Rules)13 by a judge sitting alone.
3.24 The unusual nature of contempt proceedings has given rise to
considerable uncertainty about the laws, principles and procedures
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Boral Resources
(Vic) Pty Ltd (CFMEU v Boral)
14 the High Court confirmed that contempt
proceedings commenced under Order 75 of the General Civil Procedure Rules are
civil proceedings
and cannot be regarded as the equivalent of a criminal
trial.15 The High Court confirmed that Order 75 does not stand outside the
General Civil Procedure Rules and that contempt proceedings are within the
ordinary application of those Rules.16 In that context,
Justice Nettle, in a
concurring judgment, set out a number of general principles, all drawn from
previous High Court cases, about
the nature of contempt proceedings:17
• All proceedings for contempt must now realistically be seen as
criminal in nature.
• Not all contempts are criminal.
• A failure to obey an injunction [court order] is not a criminal
contempt unless the failure to comply is defiant or contumacious.
• A proceeding for contempt is not a proceeding for criminal contempt
if the proceeding appears clearly to be remedial or coercive
in nature as
opposed to punitive.
• A criminal contempt is a common law offence, albeit not part of the
ordinary common law.
• Even a proceeding for criminal contempt is not a criminal
proceeding.
• Although proceedings for contempt of court are civil proceedings,
some of the safeguards applicable to criminal proceedings
also apply to a civil
proceeding for criminal contempt.
3.26 Even if each of these statements of principle is accepted as settled
law, there is still residual procedural uncertainty, especially
the procedural safeguards traditionally available to an accused facing a
serious criminal charge can also be invoked
by an alleged contemnor.18
CFMEU v Boral
was an appeal from part of the Victorian Court of
Appeal’s judgment in
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v
Grocon Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd (CFMEU v Grocon).
19 In that case, the
Court of Appeal had noted the difficulty that courts have faced in determining
what statutory procedures apply
to contempt proceedings
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) Order 75;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) Order 75.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Boral Resources (Vic)
[2015] HCA 21
(2015) 256 CLR 375.
15 Ibid, 389–390.
16 Ibid, 386.
17 Ibid, 395–6 (citations ommitted).
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
, 582. It should be noted that the Court
of Appeal expressed this uncertainty as existing ‘before
Lee’. However, later in their judgment, the Court of Appeal concluded
that, at least for the purposes of the procedural
questions before them, the law
had not been relevantly changed or clarified by the X7 or Lee
cases—see [341]–[350].
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527.
when the question so often turns on fitting those
proceedings within a dichotomy that consists only of ‘civil’ and
proceedings.20
3.28 The Victorian Court of Appeal noted that particular ambiguity is created
by the need to
co-opt language from other contexts in order to describe contempt
proceedings, which are otherwise unique:
‘the discourse with respect to contempt is littered with language
— we have set out some of it at [126] above21 —
which is imprecise
and potentially confusing. No doubt that reflects the peculiar nature of
contempt. The application of that language
to a particular statutory context is,
we consider, a fraught task. It is made more difficult still where the available
choice is between ‘civil proceedings’ and ‘criminal
proceedings ... for an offence’.22
3.29 The Victorian Court of Appeal outlined several examples of how contempt
proceedings, because of their peculiar nature, have presented
questions for determination, such as:
• whether the rule against duplicity applies to the formulation of a
contempt of court charge23
• whether the principle in
Jones v Dunkel
applies in contempt
proceedings24
• whether and under what statutory regime an appeal from a final or
interlocutory decision is available in contempt proceedings25
• whether the
Evidence Act 2008
(Vic) applies to contempt
proceedings as though the proceedings were criminal proceedings26
• whether contumacy must be pleaded in a charge seeking punishment for
a contempt arising from breach of an order or undertaking27
• whether and in what circumstances discovery under civil procedure
rules is available against an alleged contemnor.28
3.30 The High Court, in
CFMEU v Boral,
affirmed the decision of the
Victorian Court of Appeal in
CFMEU v Grocon
with respect to the last of
these matters.29 However, the broader observations of the Court of Appeal about
the unique nature of contempt
proceedings and the resultant procedural
uncertainties remain pertinent.
3.31 In that context, consideration must be given to whether the current
procedure guarantees an alleged contemnor, faced with the
serious prospect of
imprisonment and/or a fine, a fair process.
Possible reforms
3.32 The following chapters pose questions about the appropriateness of the
current procedures for contempt proceedings in the context
of specific
manifestations of contempt. The issue of whether and how those procedures should
be reformed and replaced by statutory
provisions is discussed in light of the
different circumstances in which particular types of contempt occur and the
different purposes
for which those contempts are punished.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
21 ‘offence’, ’offence of a criminal character’,
‘criminal proceeding’, ‘criminal prosecution’,
‘criminal proceedings for an offence’ and ‘prosecution of an
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon
Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
,561 [126].
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
23 Ibid 582–583. This rule prohibits the prosecution alleging two or
more offences in a single charge on a charge-sheet or indictment.
The case law
indicates that the rule does not strictly apply to contempt proceedings.
24 Ibid 583. This principle provides that the unexplained failure of a party
to call certain evidence may lead to an inference that
the evidence would not
have helped that party.
25 Ibid 572–574
26 Ibid 630–631.
27 Ibid 584–600
28 Ibid 634–639.
29 The High Court held that, because the General Civil Procedure Rules apply
to contempt proceedings commenced under Order 75, discovery
could be ordered
against a respondent in such proceedings, or at the very least could be ordered
against a corporate respondent in
contempt proceedings brought by a private
party and arising from the breach of an order made in civil proceedings.
3 Should the procedure for filing and prosecuting a charge of contempt of
court be the same as for other criminal offences? If not,
what are the reasons
necessitating a different procedure for contempt of court and what should be the
features of that procedure?
Overlap with criminal law
3.33 Increasingly, conduct which may constitute contempt of court is
also criminalised under specific statutory offence
provisions. These
provisions provide greater clarity and certainty about the type of conduct
which will attract criminal
sanction and the penalty that will apply. However,
these provisions do not necessarily oust the broader contempt
of the court. This adds to the potential confusion and
complexity of this area of law.
3.34 There are also several common law offences which overlap and have a
strong correlation with the law of contempt, such as the
offence of embracery,
attempting to pervert the course of justice, and perverting the course of
justice. The existence of these offences
is recognised by
section 320
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), the purpose of which is to provide statutory
penalties for some (but not all) common law offences.
3.35 Chapters 4 and 5 of this consultation paper list a number of statutory
offences in the
Juries Act 2000
Summary Offences
Court Security Act 1980
(Vic) that criminalise
behaviour which is also punishable as a contempt in the face of the court or
juror contempt.
3.36 However, the overlap is not confined to these manifestations of
contempt. For example, in relation to contempt by interference
with people who
have particular roles or responsibilities in court proceedings, the
Australian Law Reform Commission found
In any case involving pressure or inducement brought to bear on a participant
in proceedings (other than a party), the likelihood
that the relevant conduct
will be both an instance of contempt and a criminal offence (at common law or
under statute) is very high
3.37 Good examples of this overlap with interference contempt from Victorian
legislation are:
section 257
under which it is an offence,
punishable by 10 years imprisonment, to intimidate or to cause physical harm or
detriment to a person
(the victim) because of their involvement in a criminal
investigation or a criminal proceeding31
section 52A
Summary Offences Act
under which it is an offence
punishable by 12 months imprisonment or a fine of 120 penalty units to
‘harass a person
because that person has taken part, is about to take
part or is taking part in a criminal proceeding in any court as a witness
any other capacity’.32
3.38 There is a common law maxim of statutory interpretation,
generalia specialibus non derogant,
which presumes that ‘general
things or words do not derogate from special things or words’.33
The maxim was explained
by Justice Deane in
Refrigerated Express Lines
(A/Asia) v Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation
30 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 103
Crimes Act 1958
Summary Offences Act 1966
DPP (Vic) v
[2013] VCC 2030
R v McLachlan
[1998] 2 VR 55
Encyclopaedic Australian Legal Dictionary,
(Web Page, 9 April 2019)
‘generalia specialibus non derogant’.
Refrigerated Express Lines (A/Asia) v Australian Meat and Livestock
Corporation
[1980] FCA 38
(1980) 29 ALR 333.
As a matter of general construction, where
there is repugnancy between the general provision of a statute and
dealing with a particular subject matter, the latter must prevail
and, to the extent of any such repugnancy, the general provisions
inapplicable to the subject matter of the special provisions. ...
Repugnancy can be present in cases where
there is no direct
contradiction between the relevant legislative provisions. It is present
where it appears, as a matter
of construction, that special provisions were
intended exhaustively to govern their particular subject matter and
general provisions, if held to be applicable to the particular subject
matter, would constitute a departure from that intention
by encroaching
on that subject matter.35
3.39 This maxim is usually applied by courts to determine the interaction
between two potentially applicable statutory offence provisions.
that this maxim has application in determining the interaction between a
specific statutory offence provision
and a more general common law
offence, like contempt of court. Another view is that the principle of
legality operates
to provide that only express words in a statute can abrogate
the inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to punish for contempt.
Regardless of which principle or maxim is relied on, the policy effect is
the same; that where for the same conduct there
is both a statutory
provision with a clear offence and a common law offence there should be a clear
preference for invoking the
statutory provision.
3.40 In the English case
Solicitor-General v Cox
,36 two people were
punished for contempt of court for taking photographs in court and publishing
them online. The same conduct could
also have been prosecuted under a specific
statutory offence provision which criminalised conduct of that kind. The Court
refer to the maxim
generalia specialibus non derogant
The fact that taking photographs in court and publishing them are
criminal offences, does not prevent those acts being
punishable as
contempts of court as, for the reasons we have given, these actions
pose serious risks to and interfere
with the due administration of
justice: the court obviously has power, as it needs, to deal
immediately with anyone
seen taking photographs, in order to maintain control
over its proceedings, and to avoid it
standing powerless while the law designed to protect the administration of
justice is broken before it. ... Whilst the later publication
photographs may not be a contempt in the face of the court, it is still a
contempt, quite apart from the fact that it
is a criminal offence, since
publication for a variety of reasons may be the very purpose behind the taking
of the photograph illegally.
While a summary criminal charge may be the
appropriate response
to some illegal photography, there are other cases in which it will not be
and needs either swifter or more condign action by the
court to uphold the
due administration of justice; this was such a case. It clearly required the
Attorney General to bring
proceedings for contempt, taking into account the
gravity of the risks and of the interference with the due administration of
Possible reforms
3.41 The intersection between statutory and common law offences and
the courts’ power to punish for contempt provides
options for dealing
with an alleged contempt. This in turn gives rise to the risk of inconsistency
and unfairness. A person charged
under a statutory offence provision or with a
common law criminal offence will have the benefit of all the procedural
which ordinarily apply to criminal proceedings. However, a
person who is dealt with for the same behaviour under the
common law of
contempt will not have the benefit of some of those safeguards. For
example, the offence will not be
subject to a maximum penalty and will
not be tried before a jury.
35 Ibid 347.
Solicitor-General v Cox
[2016] EWHC 1241
[2016] 2 Cr App R 15
37 Ibid 202.
3.42 However, there is
limited guidance on when a person should be prosecuted for a statutory or common
law offence, or dealt with
under the law of contempt. Where the contempt occurs
in the face of the court, the path which is adopted appears to be largely a
matter for the discretion of the presiding judicial officer.
4 Is there a need for statutory guidance on when the court may exercise its
power to punish for contempt of court in circumstances
where the conduct is also
a statutory offence? If so, what guidance should be provided?
3.43 Statutory limits are placed on the penalties that the Magistrates’
Court,38 Children’s Court39 and Coroners Court40
may impose for contempt
of court. There is no statutory limit on the maximum penalty that may be imposed
for contempt of court by
the County or Supreme Courts.41 Contempt of court is a
common law offence and so, unless statute provides otherwise, the penalty
3.44 Punishment for contempt in the County and Supreme Courts is regulated by
, Order 75 of the General Civil Procedure Rules.
3.45 In prescribing the penalties available for contempt, the General Civil
Procedure Rules do not distinguish between types of contempt.
The Rules afford
the court considerable discretion to determine whether a punishment should be
imposed for contempt and what form
it should take. For example:
• Where the court finds a person guilty of contempt of court, the court
may punish the contempt by committal to prison or fine
• Where the contemnor is a corporation, the court may punish for
contempt by sequestration or fine or both.44
• Where the court imposes a fine, it may commit, or further commit, the
contemnor to prison until the fine is paid.45
• The court may make an order for punishment on terms, including a
suspension of punishment.46
• Where a person has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment for
contempt, the court retains the discretion to order their
discharge before
the end of the term.47
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
A person found
guilty of contempt in the face of the court may be sentenced to imprisonment
for up to six months, and fined
up to 25 penalty units.
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
found guilty of failing to answer a summons, refusing to be sworn or
affirmed, refusing to answer lawful
questions, or refusing to follow a
direction may be sentenced to imprisonment for up to one month or fined up to
five penalty
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Children’s Court has the same powers to punish for contempt as the
Magistrates’ Court but a person under the age
of 18 cannot be committed
to prison for contempt, they may be committed to a youth justice or a youth
residential centre instead.
Coroners Act 2008
s 103(7)(a).
A person found guilty of
contempt under
section 103
Coroners Act
may be sentenced to a term
of imprisonment of no more than 12 months or fined up to 120 penalty units.
DPP (Vic) v Johnson
[2002] VSC 583
(2013) 36 VR 565, 574. The
Crimes Act 1958
lists the maximum term of imprisonment for certain common law offences but
the offence of contempt of court is not included on this
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(1).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(2).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(3).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(4).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.12.
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
respect to determining the sentence in any particular case, the Supreme
Court has indicated that there is ‘little
assistance is to be had ... by
a minute comparison between the penalties imposed in other cases’ because
‘the circumstances
are infinitely variable as is the impact of different
contempts upon the court process’.48
3.47 However, in sentencing appeals, superior courts do give consideration to
sentences imposed in comparable contempt cases as one
yardstick for evaluating
the sentence under review.49
3.48 The Supreme Court has stated that it is clear that the penalty for
serious contempts may be substantial.50 Nonetheless, it is
widely accepted that
the court should impose a term of
imprisonment as a disciplinary sanction only in the most serious contempt
cases and only as a sentence of last resort.51
3.49 The courts also have a discretion not to impose a penalty for
contempt— even where the court is satisfied that a contempt
committed.52 A sincere and prompt apology proffered by the contemnor may be
particularly relevant to the court’s decision
to exercise this
discretion.
3.50 Apologies can play an important role in contempt proceedings. An apology
may not only mitigate the punishment imposed,53 it may
be regarded as
‘purging’ the contempt so that it is no longer necessary to impose
any penalty or even commence contempt
proceedings.54
3.51 Both the
Magistrates’ Court Act
Coroners Act
specifically
provide that the court may accept an apology given for a contempt and decide to
reduce or forego any punishment accordingly.55
Sentencing Act 1991
3.52 It is uncertain and has not been clearly resolved by the courts whether
and what provisions of the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) are relevant to
contempt proceedings, and on what legal basis.56
Sentencing Act
provides that the purpose of the Act is to have within the one Act all general
provisions dealing with the powers of courts to sentence
offenders. However the
Act does not state clearly that it applies only to “criminal
offences” and the terms “offence”
and “crime” are
not defined, although the Act does define offences as “category 1”
and “category
2” offences.57
3.53 Victorian courts often have regard to the
Sentencing Act
when imposing a
punishment for contempt. For example, courts have held that the following
provisions of the
Sentencing Act
are relevant to sentencing in contempt
proceedings:
• If a person is guilty of an offence, the court may order the person
to pay a fine, with or without recording a conviction
(section 7(1)(f)).58
• In exercising its discretion over whether or not to record a
conviction, the court must have regard to all the circumstances
of the case
(section 8(1)).59
• The court must not impose a custodial sentence where a non-custodial
sentence would achieve the purposes for which the sentence
A-G (Vic) v Rich
[1998] VSC 45
DPP (Vic) v Johnson
[2002] VSC 583
[2013] VSCA 44
(2013) 36 VR 565
Vaysman v Deckers Outdoor
Corporation Inc
[2011] FCAFC 17
(2011) 276 ALR 596.
DPP (Vic) v Johnson
[2002] VSC 583
Vaysman v Deckers Outdoor Corporation Inc
[2011] FCAFC 17
(2011) 276 ALR 596
Re Perkins; Mesto v Galpin
[1998] 4 VR 505
, 512–513 (Brooking
53 See, eg,
R v The Age Co Ltd
[2008] VSC 305.
54 See, eg,
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
(2017) 52 VR
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Coroners Act
Grocon v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (No 2)
(2014) 241 IR 288
[2014] VSC 134
Sentencing Act 1991
R v The Herald & Weekly Times Pty Ltd
[2008] VSC 251
59 Ibid [50]–[51].
R v Hinch (No 2)
[2013] VSC 554
3.54 Other provisions of the
Sentencing Act
that have been relied upon in contempt proceedings include:
• fixing of non-parole periods
(sections 11
• order of service of sentences
(section 15)62
• whether sentences are concurrent or cumulative
3.55 However, the precise relevance of the
Sentencing Act
to the imposition
of punishment in contempt proceedings is unclear. The balance of case law
suggests that the
Sentencing Act
does not apply directly to contempt
proceedings but that the Act is relevant by way of analogy and that courts
should approach the
question of penalty for criminal contempt, as far as
possible, in a way which is consistent with that adopted when dealing with
conduct generally.64
5 Should there be a statutory maximum penalty for contempt of court? If
(a) What penalties should apply?
(b) Should different penalties apply for different manifestations of
6 What weight, if any, should be given to apologies in determining whether
and what penalty is imposed for contempt of court?
7 Should the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) apply to contempt
proceedings?
3.56 Contempt warnings play an important, although informal, role in
addressing perceived or potential interferences with the proper
administration
of justice.
3.57 The term ‘contempt warnings’ is used here to refer to
warnings given by a judicial officer in two different contexts:
• a warning given to a person that they are engaging in or are
proposing to engage in conduct that the judicial officer considers
constitute contempt of court and for which, if they do not desist, they might be
• a warning given to a person that the judicial officer has formed a
preliminary view that they have committed a contempt of
court and that, subject
to any submissions made, they may be dealt with for contempt of court.
3.58 Contempt warnings assist the courts to navigate the space between two
competing imperatives:
a) The power to punish for contempt is an important one that the courts must
be able to employ to safeguard and defend the proper
administration of justice
against interference.65
b) The power to punish for contempt is to be used sparingly and should be
invoked only when necessary.66
DPP (Vic) v Johnson
(2002) 6 VR 235
Varnavides v Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
[2005] VSCA 231
Law Institute of Victoria v Nagle
[2005] VSC 47
Grocon v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (No 2)
(2014) 241 IR 288
[2014] VSC 134
65 See, eg,
Morris v Crown Office
[1970] 2 QB 114
, 122 (Lord
66 See, eg,
(1946) SC 301
3.59 Contempt
warnings allow the courts to assert their authority without actual recourse to
their considerable punitive powers.
3.60 The use of contempt warnings demonstrates the highly discretionary
nature of the courts’ contempt power. However, because
contempt warnings
do not represent a formal procedural step, they may also give rise to procedural
uncertainty and even, in some
circumstances, procedural unfairness.
Pre-emptive warnings
3.61 Giving a person a pre-emptive warning that if they do not cease certain
conduct they might be punished for contempt of court
serves a number of useful
3.62 The offence of contempt of court is broad and ill-defined. In this
uncertain context, a judicial warning operates to put a person
clearly on notice
that their conduct, if persisted in, may expose them to criminal sanction.
3.63 In relation to contempts in the face of the court, the use of a warning
acts as a reminder that the court possesses the power
to punish for contempt and
this may suffice to establish or confirm the authority of the court and address
any disruption to proceedings.
3.64 This was recognised by the New Zealand Law Commission in its review of
the law of contempt. The Commission noted:
People do not expect judges to hold someone in contempt of court for
low level interruptions. Most everyday low-level interruptions
are and should
be able to be managed by other means. In some situations, the judge may be
able to deal with the disruptive
behaviour with a warning or by taking a
short adjournment. Indeed, sometimes the threat of contempt is enough
the judge to retain or regain authority over his or her
3.65 The Australian Law Reform Commission also acknowledged a role for
warnings in dealing with contempt in the face of the court
and noted that
frequently a judge’s power to issue a warning is ‘effective against
disruption, and a prosecution, with
all its disadvantages in terms of expense
and use of court time, is averted’.68
Use of pre-emptive contempt warnings
3.66 Notwithstanding the recognised usefulness of contempt warnings, there is
potential for them to be used improperly. For example,
a judicial officer may
use a contempt warning to pressure a person appearing before the court to
abandon an application, submission
or line of argument that the presiding
judicial officer has pre-emptively determined is without merit.69 Given that
issuing a warning
does not involve the exercise of a power and does not generate
a court order or judgment, the improper use of contempt warnings will
necessarily be exposed to scrutiny.
Magistrates Court of Victoria (Heidelberg) v Robinson
contempt warning was issued against a solicitor in response to an application
that the presiding magistrate disqualify himself.
3.68 On review, Justice Brooking in the Victorian Court of Appeal stated:
The magistrate behaved like a bully and, worst of all, threatened the
solicitor with instant committal for contempt of court if he
persisted in his
application. What Martin, J. once called the immensity of the power to commit
makes the abuse of that power in the
present case deplorable ... He refused to
hear a party, and moreover in a criminal proceeding, and did so by using his
contempt power
as an instrument of oppression.70
67 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 59 [3.2].
68 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 83
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria at Heidelberg v Robinson
[2000] VSCA 198
(2000) 2 VR 233.
70 Ibid 241.
3.69 Justice
Charles also noted that a ‘threat to deal with an advocate for contempt is
very serious matter’ and that
it is particularly important that the power
to punish for contempt ‘not be misused to prevent an advocate in
faith making proper submission to a court’.71
Pre-emptive warnings cannot substitute for a charge
3.70 In practice, warnings are often issued in the course of proceedings as
events are unfolding. Issuing a warning is not a formal
procedural step and the
warning may be given in general terms without precisely identifying the conduct
alleged to constitute a possible
contempt of court. After a warning is given,
the proceeding may continue, the impugned conduct may cease for a period and
then resume
or it may change in nature but continue to disrupt the
proceeding.
3.71 There is a risk that where a presiding judicial officer proceeds to
deal with a person for contempt in circumstances where
they have already
issued a warning, they may regard the earlier warning as a substitute for a
formal articulation of the charge.
Coward v Stapleton
,72 the High Court explained that ‘no
person ought to be punished for contempt of court unless the specific charge
him be distinctly stated and an opportunity of answering it given to
him’. This was described by the High Court as a matter
‘elementary justice’.73
3.73 The role of warnings was considered by the Victorian Court of Appeal
DPP v Green
.74 In that case the DPP made submissions to the effect
a failure to lay a charge can be remedied by the giving of a warning in
advance (for example, that a refusal to answer carries a risk
of contempt) so
that if the conduct against which the warning has been given occurs, or is
repeated, the laying of a charge is redundant
and need not occur at all or only
as a preliminary step before determining an
appropriate penalty. On the DPP’s approach, a warning is to be treated
as tantamount to a charge depending on the circumstances.75
3.74 Justice Tate, with whom Justices Whelan and Kaye agreed, did not accept
this submission and stated:
without a formal charge there is a real risk of uncertainty attaching to the
process, an uncertainty that taints the proceeding and
the administration of
criminal justice more generally.76
Show cause warnings
3.75 The second context in which contempt warnings are given is where the
court forms a view that a contempt of court may have been
committed, and the
alleged contemnor is asked to show cause why a contempt proceeding should not be
initiated.77
3.76 By affording an alleged contemnor an opportunity to be heard before
deciding whether to deal with or refer them for contempt,
the court will be in a
better position to make a decision about how to exercise its discretion.
3.77 However, for an alleged contemnor, a contempt warning that is framed as
an exercise in procedural fairness, can potentially be
quite fraught. It may
require them, at a stage where no clear charge has been formulated, to risk
incriminating themselves78 and
to decide upon and commit to a de facto plea or
71 Ibid 244.
Coward v Stapleton
[1953] HCA 48
(1953) 90 CLR 573
, 579–80. See also
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(2) which all require the alleged contemnor to be informed of the
contempt with which they are charged.
Coward v Stapleton
[1953] HCA 48
(1953) 90 CLR 573
DPP (Vic) v Green and Magistrates’ Court
[2013] VSCA 78.
DPP (Vic) v Green and Magistrates’ Court
[2013] VSCA 78
[71]. 76 Ibid [72].
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
(2017) 52 VR 296.
Registrar of Court of Appeal v Maniam (No 1)
(1991) 25 NSWLR
3.78 The amorphous nature of criminal contempt adds to the challenge of
responding to a show cause contempt warning. To establish
a charge of
contempt, it is not necessary to prove either an intent to interfere with
the administration of justice or
actual interference with the administration of
justice. Therefore, it will not help to rebut a contempt allegation to submit
the alleged contemnor’s conduct was not intended to interfere
with the administration of justice or did not result
in any such an
interference. Such a submission may actually constitute an admission.
3.79 At the same time, the court’s discretion to decline to exercise
its contempt jurisdiction is absolute and may well be influenced
by a submission
that an alleged contemnor lacked intent, especially if the submission is
accompanied by an apology.79 Therefore there
is significant impetus for an
alleged contemnor to engage with the show cause process and accept any
allegation of contempt made
by the court and to apologise.
3.80 The added impetus for an alleged contemnor to respond in this way is
that failure to promptly acknowledge the court’s concerns
and apologise
may, if the contempt is subsequently proven, be looked upon unfavourably by the
court in determining whether to impose
a penalty and if so, what penalty.80
The case of Besim
3.81 The Victorian Court of Appeal case
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v
illustrates how show cause contempt warnings can be
used in practice.
3.82 In that case, the Court of Appeal was considering appeals against
sentence brought by the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
terrorism cases. While the Court’s decision was still reserved,
newspaper published an article titled ‘Judiciary Light on
Terrorism’ which related to the sentencing appeal and included
attributed to three federal ministers
82 The Court was concerned that,
among other things, the newspaper article and in particular the ministers’
statements:
• were impermissible at law and improperly made in an attempt to
influence the Court in its decision83
• purported to scandalise the court84
• on their face, breached the principle of sub judice.85
3.83 The Court wrote to the possible contemnors and gave notice that
it required the individuals or their legal representatives
to appear and make
any submissions as to why they should not be referred for prosecution for
3.84 A mention hearing was convened for this purpose. The Court described the
purpose of the hearing as follows:
This morning is not an occasion to debate whether the court’s concerns
are justified at law. That is, it is not to debate whether
contempt has been
committed. That may be for another court to determine. Rather, it is an
opportunity for those involved
to inform the court of any relevant
matters they wish before we determine whether to refer the publication for
prosecution
for contempt of court
79 See, eg,
R v Douglass (No 3)
[2018] NSWSC 1939.
[2008] VSC 189
DPP (Vic) v Johnson &
Yahoo!7 (No 2)
[2017] VSC 45
[18]–[19] where an early apology was
given but the contemnors went on to contest liability.
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
(2017) 52 VR 296.
82 For a description of the facts leading up to the case, see Dyson Heydon,
‘Does Political Criticism of Judges Damage Judicial
Independence?’
(Judicial Power Project Paper Policy Exchange, February 2018) 5–6.
83 Supreme Court of Victoria,
Statement of the Court of Appeal in
Terrorism Cases
(Web Page, 16 June 2017) <
www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/
news/statement-of-the-court-of-appeal-in-terrorism-cases>.
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
(2017) 52 VR 296
86 Supreme Court of Victoria,
Statement of the Court of Appeal in
Terrorism Cases
(Web Page, 16 June 2017) <
www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/
news/statement-of-the-court-of-appeal-in-terrorism-cases>.
3.85 At the hearing, counsel for
The Australian
newspaper parties
informed the Court that his clients apologised for and retracted the publication
‘sincerely and fully’.88
3.86 The ministers admitted making the statements, but denied any intent
• undermine public confidence in the judiciary
• suggest or imply that the Court would not apply the law in disposing
of the matters before it
• pressure the Court in relation to the manner in which it disposed of
the appeal concerning Mr Besim
3.87 They expressed regret that they had used language that was capable of
conveying that meaning when no such meaning was intended,
but initially no
apology was given
3.88 After the submissions were made, the Court reserved its
decision. In the interim the ministers changed their
position, the
matter was relisted and the Solicitor-General made a full and unqualified
apology for the statements on behalf
of the ministers and retracted the
statements in their entirety
3.89 The Court then issued a ruling in which it stated that but for those
apologies and retractions, the parties would have
been referred to the
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court for prosecution for
3.90 The ruling of the Court of Appeal stated that the Court had formed the
view that there was a ‘strong prima facie case’
against the
ministers93 and that, in the case of
The Australian
newspaper parties,
the Court was satisfied that there was ‘a prima facie, serious breach of
sub judice’.94
3.91 However, the Court’s ruling also indicates that the respondents
were able to avoid referral to the Prothonotary only by
acknowledging,
apologising for and ‘purging’ their contempt, which although never
charged, was assumed to have been committed.
For example, the Court stated:
• ‘The Court accepts
The Australian
parties’ full
apology. It is sufficient acceptance by them of their contempt of Court and
sufficient purging of the contempt.’95
• ‘The Court accepts that the Ministers have sufficiently
acknowledged and accepted their contempt of Court and sufficiently
purged their
contempt.’96
• ‘On one view, it has only been after the stern discussion with
the bench and commentary in the media that the Ministers
have made their
apologies and retractions. This delay is most regrettable and aggravated the
contempt.’97
3.92 Former Justice of the High Court Dyson Heydon considered the above
statements and noted:
The language of the Court even as it decided that there would be no
prosecution for the contempt left the impression that the Ministers
newspaper had been guilty of contempt despite the absence of the usual
safeguards which a prosecution for that crime afforded.98
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
(2017) 52 VR 296
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
(2017) 52 VR 296
90 Ibid 299.
91 Ibid 301.
92 Ibid 302.
93 Ibid 301.
96 Ibid 301–02.
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
(2017) 52 VR 296
98 Dyson Heydon, ‘Does Political Criticism of Judges Damage Judicial
Independence?’ (Judicial Power Project Paper Policy
Exchange, February
3.93 The way
proceeded and was resolved suggests that the different stages of
contempt proceedings are not always distinct and are sometimes
into a more global discretionary exercise.99 Whether there is a prima facie
contempt, whether contempt proceedings
should be commenced, whether the
contempt is proven and whether the contempt should be punished are
questions which are not
always approached discretely and sequentially.
3.94 The result for an alleged contemnor faced with a show cause
warning can be that, before a clear charge has been articulated
evidence presented, they may be required to simultaneously try to defend the
charge of contempt, make an admission and put
a plea in mitigation.
Decision to charge and prosecute
3.95 The decision-making process undertaken by the court in determining
whether and how to deal with a contempt is not unique. It
is comparable to the
process that the police or the DPP may respectively undertake in determining
whether to file a charge or proceed
with the prosecution, on indictment, of an
offence. Both the police and the DPP have discretion not to proceed with
charging or prosecuting
an offender notwithstanding that there is sufficient
evidence to indicate that an offence has been committed and that there are
prospects of securing a conviction. Both the police and the DPP may
receive submissions from alleged offenders before exercising
discretion.
3.96 On that analysis, it is possible to interpret the processes
followed by the judicial officer in a contempt matter
as being broadly
analogous with the prosecutorial discretion processes
followed by the police or the DPP, which may quite properly include a
finding or conclusion that an offence has technically been
committed, but that
in the exercise of the prosecutorial discretion, an actual prosecution should
not be instituted.
3.97 However, there are also important differences in these decision-making
processes. First, the nature and extent of the discretion
which is being
exercised by the police or the DPP is clear. Both agencies are only tasked with
the decision whether to file a charge
or to prosecute on indictment. Given their
comparatively limited mandates, there can be no confusion that they are
determining whether
a charge is proven or whether a penalty should be
3.98 There is also a policy framework within which the police and the DPP
exercise their discretion. For example, the Policy
of the Director of
Public Prosecutions for Victoria provides that, if there is a reasonable
prospect of conviction,
the prosecution must proceed unless there are
public interest factors tending against prosecution which outweigh those
tending in favour
100 The Policy then lists the relevant public
interest factors. An alleged offender therefore has notice of the criteria
which will govern the exercise of the discretion
Possible reforms
3.99 Contempt warnings play a significant role in determining when and how
courts exercise their discretion to punish for contempt
of court. However, the
use of contempt warnings is governed more by informal convention than
established procedural rules.
3.100 In that context, the Commission seeks the views of the courts, legal
profession, court users, media and the community on whether
there is sufficient
transparency, clarity and consistency surrounding the use contempt warning
in contempt proceedings.
99 See, eg,
Re Perkins; Mesto v Galpin
[1998] 4 VR 505.
100 Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria (authorised by K Judd QC),
‘Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria’,
(Policy, March 2019) 2.
8 In what circumstances do the courts give warnings for contempt?
9 When should contempt warnings be given?
10 Is there a need for guidance to the courts on the use of contempt
warnings? If so, should such guidance be set out in statutory
provisions?
11 Is there a need for greater clarity as to whether, when a court gives a
contempt warning, there has been a finding that a contempt
has in fact been
committed and, if so, the status or effect of such a finding?
Contempt in the
face of the court
Introduction
Defining contempt in the face of the
50 The procedure for contempt in the face of
56 The impact on certain groups of
in the face of the court
Introduction
4.1 This chapter considers contempt in the face of the court. This form of
contempt is concerned with behaviour in the courtroom,
or in the vicinity of
the courtroom, which interferes with or tends to interfere with the proper
administration of justice.
4.2 All Victorian courts have inherent jurisdiction and/or jurisdiction
conferred by statute to punish this manifestation of
contempt of
court.1 This power is one of the mechanisms that judicial officers use to
control proceedings before them and,
in particular, to address disruptive
behaviour or refusals to comply with lawful directions.
4.3 The power of judicial officers to maintain order and authority in the
courtroom, both in fact and appearance, is important to
the efficient and fair
conduct of proceedings and to public confidence in those proceedings.2
Maintaining order and authority in
the courtroom is also important to ensuring
that witnesses, jurors and others with duties to the court are able to perform
duties effectively and without fear or intimidation.3 However, if judicial
officers exercise this power arbitrarily, because it is
not subject to defined
limits or the requirement to observe fair procedure, it cannot serve the proper
administration of justice.
On the contrary, it has the potential to jeopardise
public confidence in the authority and integrity of the courts.
4.4 In that context, this chapter considers and poses questions about whether
there is an appropriate balance between the need for
flexibility and the need
for certainty in defining what constitutes contempt in the face of the court.
In particular, the chapter
considers whether the offence of contempt in the
face of the court should be replaced by statutory provisions and if so,
it should encompass:
• conduct which is insulting or disrespectful but does not disrupt
proceedings
• conduct which is already covered by other statutory criminal
• conduct which is not directly seen or heard by the presiding
judicial officer.
4.5 This chapter also considers and poses questions about whether there is an
appropriate balance between empowering the court to
deal promptly and
effectively with courtroom disruptions and the requirement to afford alleged
contemnors a fair and consistent process.
In particular, the chapter considers
and poses questions about whether:
R v Metal Trades Employers’ Association; Ex parte Amalgamated
Engineering Union (Australian Section)
[1951] HCA 3
(1951) 82 CLR 208
, 241–3, 254;
Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd v Dagi
[1996] VicRp 62
[1996] 2 VR 117
, 125, 137;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) Order 75 Part 2;
County Court Act 1958
County Court Civil Procedure Rules
(Vic) Order 75 Part 2;
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Coroners Act 2008
Keeley v Mr Justice Brooking
(1979) 143 CLR 162, 170 (Barwick
DPP (Vic) v Johnson
[2002] VSC 583
special summary procedure that may be adopted to deal with contempts committed
in the face of the court should be reformed
and replaced by statutory
• measures are required to ensure a consistent approach between
judicial officers to potential contempts
• the current law and procedure disproportionately or unfairly impact
on particular groups.
Defining contempt in the face of the court
4.6 The power to punish for contempt in the face of the court is conferred by
statute4 or regulated by court rules,5 but there is
no exhaustive statutory
definition as to what constitutes the offence. This remains a matter for the
common law.
4.7 At common law, the essence of contempt in the face of the court is
articulated in the same broad terms as criminal contempt
more generally:
‘any action or inaction which interferes, or has a tendency to
interfere, with the due administration
of justice’.6
4.8 The distinguishing feature of this category of contempt is that the
conduct must occur ‘in the face of the court’,
an expression
described by Justice Kirby in
European Bank AG v Wentworth
‘ambiguous and antique’.7
4.9 Contempt in the face of the court ‘is an offence that can be
committed in a multitude of ways’8. Nonetheless, general
categories of
conduct which have been found to constitute contempt in the face of the court
have been identified.9 These include:
• assaults or threats towards persons in court, including the presiding
judicial officer, witnesses, jurors, counsel or other
officers of the
• insults or disrespectful behaviour directed towards the court,
presiding judicial officer, witnesses, jurors, or other officers
court, including swearing and insolent gestures11
• disruptions to the course of proceedings, including by yelling or
protesting, engaging in outbursts of anger or abuse, repeatedly
interrupting, or
refusing to sit or stand when directed to do so12
• contempts by witnesses, including refusing without lawful excuse to
be sworn or affirmed, refusing to answer a question or
engaging in
prevarication13
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Children, Youth
and Families Act 2005
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) Order 75 Part 2;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) Order 75
[1906] ArgusLawRp 80
[1906] VLR 493
DPP (Vic) v Johnson
[2002] VSC 583
R v Slaveski
[2011] VSC 643
R v Vasiliou
[2012] VSC 216
[13] – [15].
European Bank A-G v Wentworth
(1986) 5 NSWLR 445
[2013] VSCA 44
(2013) 36 VR 565
9 See, eg, LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
25 September 2018) 105 Contempt, ‘2 Criminal Contempt’
[105–30]; Judicial College of Victoria,
Victorian Criminal Proceedings
(Web Page, 26 February 2018) [8.5] <
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/
VCPM/index.htm#27318.htm>; Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Contempt in the Face of the Court
(Discussion Paper, Project No 93(I),
August 2001) 5.
10 See, eg,
A-G (Vic) v Rich
[1998] VSC 41
, where an accused
threatened to kill or seriously harm the prosecutor;
DPP (Vic) v Johnson
[2002] VSC 583
where an accused threw a bag of human excrement into the jury
box hitting a juror and repeated, serious and graphic threats were
made to harm
R v Slaveski
[2015] VSC 400
, where the respondent made
menacing threats to the magistrate to ‘go over your property’ and
‘come after your house’
if the magistrate ‘came after’
the respondent’s property.
11 See, eg,
R v Slaveski
[2011] VSC 643
, where a party to civil
proceedings made repeated allegations of impropriety, partiality and corruption
and other abusive statements
against the presiding judge;
DPP (Vic) v Johnson
[2002] VSC 583
, where a number of accused exposed themselves, made repeated,
disruptive noises and crudely abused the presiding judge, a witness,
member of counsel;
Lewis v Ogden
[1984] HCA 26
(1984) 153 CLR 682
, where counsel for
the accused was convicted for insulting the judge in his address to the jury by
suggesting that the judge had
shown a strong disposition to the prosecution
case, although the conviction was overturned on appeal;
Zukanovic v
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria at Moorabbin
[2011] VSC 141
[2011] 32 VR 216
the defendant was convicted for blowing and popping a bubble in court, although
the conviciton was later quashed because of
the magistrate’s failure to
observe procedural fairness.
12 See, eg,
R v Slaveski
[2011] VSC 643
, where a defendant interrupted proccedings by physically struggling
with the correctional officers and screaming constantly and
continually while in
Re Perkins; Mesto v Galpin
[1998] 4 VR 505
, where counsel refused
to resume his seat and continued to talk and press his submissions after the
presiding judge had repeatedly
directed him to sit.
13 See, eg,
[2013] VSCA 44
(2013) 36 VR 565
where the witness, one of the
victims of the alleged offence, refused to enter the witness box, be sworn
or answer questions;
Keeley v Mr Justice Brooking
(1979) 143 CLR 162,
where the witness falsely and repeatedly asserted that he could not remember
any of his evidence;
R v Garde-Wilson
[2005] VSC 441
(2005) 158 A Crim R 20
(Vic) v Garde-Wilson
[2006] VSCA 295
(2006) 15 VR 640
, where the witness refused to answer
any questions due to fear for her safety.
• contempts
by jurors, including refusing to be sworn or affirmed, impersonating a juror,
attending court intoxicated or refusing
to follow directions14
• unauthorised recording of proceedings, by taking photographs, filming
or otherwise recording in the courtroom15
• contempts by legal practitioners.16
4.10 The lack of precision in defining contempt in the face of the court
allows the court the flexibility to respond to varied and
circumstances. However, it also gives rise to a lack of clarity about the type
of conduct which might attract punishment
for contempt.
4.11 The Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) in its review of the law
of contempt noted that the proper administration of
justice generally requires
that criminal offences be defined with sufficient precision to enable all people
to understand what they
4.12 The lack of certainty and clarity about what conduct constitutes
contempt in the face of the court conflicts with this principle.
4.13 In this context, the Law Reform Commission of Western Australia (WA
Commission) has stated:
similar to other contempt offences, liability for contempt in the face of the
court is currently based on the general concept of interference
with the due
administration of justice. Such a broad and potentially discretionary test can
no longer be justified in light of contemporary
demands to make the application
of the law more certain and consistent.18
4.14 The Law Reform Commission of Ireland (Irish Commission) has also noted
that ‘the uncertainty of the law makes it difficult
for persons to know
what sort of conduct will place them in contempt and so arguably deprives them
of standard due process rights’.19
The need for statutory provisions
4.15 Both the WA Commission and the ALRC recommended the offence of contempt
in the face of the court be replaced with statutory provisions.20
4.16 The ALRC recommended that the substantive law of contempt in the face of
the court should be replaced by a series of offences.
The recommended
replacement offences were:
• acting so as to cause substantial disruption of a hearing
• witness misconduct such as refusing to appear, to be sworn or make an
affirmation or to answer a lawful question.21
4.17 The ALRC recommended that an accused person should only be liable for
the offence of ‘substantial disruption’ if
they intended to disrupt
the relevant proceedings or were recklessly indifferent as to whether the
conduct in question would have
this effect.22
4.18 The offences that the WA Commission recommended should replace the
existing law of contempt in the face of the court were broader
in scope and
encompassed:
14 See, eg,
R v Tomlinson
(Unreported, Supreme Court of Victoria,
Beach J, 16 January 1996) where, on the sixth day of a trial, a juror arrived
late and affected
by alcohol after spending the previous night celebrating his
15 See, eg,
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v
(2011) 202 A Crim R 117
, where a person attending court
filmed on a digital camera a witness giving evidence in a criminal trial
relating to violent
offences allegedly committed by one chapter of a motorcycle
gang against another.
16 It is recognised that legal practitioners must have freedom to present
their client’s case, and must be able to do so robustly.
However, legal
practitioners have faced contempt proceedings when their conduct or submissions
have been deemed by the presiding
judicial officer to transgress the boundaries
of legitimate advocacy to become insulting, disrespectful or disrupting. See,
Lewis v Ogden
[1984] HCA 26
(1984) 153 CLR 682
Re Perkins; Mesto v Galpin
[1998] 4 VR 505
Magistrates’ Court of Prahran v Murphy
A-G (Qld) v Di Carlo
[2017] QSC 171.
17 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 60
18 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 59.
19 Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Contempt of Court and Other Offences
and Torts Involving the Administration of Justice
(Issues Paper No 10, 2016)
20 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 61; The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 71.
21 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
‘Summary of recommendations’, lxxii. Both the ALRC and the
WA Commission also recommended
that the offence provisions to replace contempt
in the face of the court should include a provision relating to
photographing,
recording and broadcasting proceedings without permission. As the
Court Security Act 1980
already contains a statutory offence
provision in relation to conduct of that type, those recommended provisions are
not discussed
22 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 73
• wilfully insulting the presiding judicial officer or officer of a
court acting in the course of his or her official duties
• interrupting or disrupting proceedings of a court, not necessarily
wilfully but without reasonable excuse
• witness misconduct such as refusing to be sworn or make an
affirmation or to answer a lawful question.23
4.19 In New Zealand, statutory provisions already define the type of
disruptive courtroom behaviour that is punishable as contempt
of court. The
relevant provisions encompass:
• wilfully insulting a judge, witness or counsel during proceedings or
where they are going to or from the court
• wilfully interrupting the proceedings of the court or otherwise
misbehaving in court
• wilfully and without lawful excuse disobey[ing] any order or
direction of the court in the course of the hearing of any proceedings.24
4.20 In Victoria, the statutory provisions which confer contempt jurisdiction
on the Coroners Court and the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal also
define the types of courtroom conduct liable to be punished as contempt of
court,25 although neither provision is exhaustive.26
For example,
section 103(1)
Coroners Act 2008
(Vic) provides that a person is guilty of
contempt of the Coroners Court if, among other things, the person:
• insults an officer of the Coroners Court while that officer is
performing functions as an officer of the Coroners Court27
• insults, obstructs or hinders a person attending an inquest28
• misbehaves at or interrupts an inquest.29
Section 134(1)
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
also defines a number of contempt in the face of the court offences which relate
specifically to witnesses. These include:
• refusing to be sworn or make an affirmation
• refusing to answer lawful questions
• wilfully disobeying an order to leave the Court and to remain beyond
the hearing of the Court until required to give evidence
• wilful prevarication.
4.22 The recommendations and statutory provisions set out above demonstrate
that, beyond the threshold question of whether there should
be a statutory
definition of contempt in the face of the court, there are a number of
subsidiary questions to be considered. These
include whether the offence should
be limited to:
• conduct which is wilful30
• conduct which is disruptive to proceedings31
• conduct which is not already covered by other statutory criminal
• conduct which occurs in the courtroom and before the presiding
judicial officer.
23 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 63, 65.
District Court Act 2016
(NZ) s 212(1);
Senior Courts Act 2016
(NZ) s 165(1). See also
Contempt of Court Act 1981
(UK), s 12(1).
Coroners Act 2008
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Coroners Act 2008
s 103(1)(f).
In addition to the
specific conduct set out, both sections define contempt to
include ‘any act, which
if it occurred before the Supreme Court
would constitute contempt of that court’.
Coroners Act 2008
s 103(1)(b).
s 103(1)(c).
s 103(1)(d).
30 See, eg, The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
73; cf Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 63.
31 See, eg, The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
71–3; cf Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the
Law of Contempt
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 62.
32 See, eg, Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of
Court: A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 58 [3.2]; Law Reform
Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of Contempt
Project No 93, June 2003) 63.
last three of these questions are discussed further below.
12 Is there a need to retain the law of contempt in the face of the
13 If the law of contempt in the face of the court is to be retained,
should the common law be replaced by statutory provisions? If
so, how should it
be defined and what fault elements, if any, should be required?
Insulting or disrespectful behaviour
4.24 If the offence of contempt in the face of the court is
replaced by statutory provisions, the question arises whether
encompass insulting and disrespectful behaviour or
whether it should focus on behaviour which disrupts or hinders proceedings.
This is an issue on which past reviews of the law of contempt
diverged.33
4.25 Where a person insults or expresses a lack of respect for the court
through words or conduct, this will not necessary disrupt
or interfere with the
proceedings. A person’s behaviour may challenge or fail to recognise the
authority of the court without
affecting the fair and efficient conduct of
proceedings. An example of such behaviour might include a refusal to stand when
the presiding
judicial officer enters the room.
4.26 The ALRC recommended that the ‘fact that things said or done in a
courtroom are disrespectful or insulting, or constitute
an affront to the
authority of the court in question or of courts generally, should not of itself
be enough to attract criminal liability’.34
The ALRC noted that
‘criminal penalties are usually not an appropriate mechanism for
attempting to
maintain the dignity of a public institution such as a court, when nothing
else but dignity is at stake’.35
4.27 The ALRC explained that this did not mean that words or conduct which
were insulting or offensive would never attract liability
and suggested that,
if persisted in, such words or conduct would most likely result in substantial
disruption to proceedings and
on that basis
, invite penalty.36
4.28 However, more recently, both New South Wales and South Australia have
adopted the opposite position and introduced statutory
offences specifically
criminalising disrespectful behaviour in the courtroom.37
4.29 The statutory offence provisions introduced in New South Wales provide
that an accused person, defendant, party to, or person
called to give evidence
in proceedings before the court is guilty of an offence if they intentionally
engage in behaviour in the
court during the proceedings and that behaviour is
disrespectful to the court or presiding judge.38 Whether
‘behaviour’,
which includes both an act and a failure to act, is
disrespectful to the court is determined according to established court practice
and convention.39 A judicial officer who opts not to deal with a person
summarily for contempt can refer disrespectful behaviour
in proceedings over
which they have presided for prosecution. However, a prosecution may be
commenced regardless of whether a referral
has been received.40
33 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
71–3; cf Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law
of Contempt
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 62 .
34 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 72 [115].
35 Ibid 73 [115].
36 Ibid 72–3 [115].
Summary Offences (Disrespectful Conduct in Court) Amendment Act 2018
Courts Legislation Amendment (Disrespectful Behaviour) Act 2016
Supreme Court Act 1970
District Court Act 1973
Local Court Act 2007
Supreme Court Act 1970
s 131(1)(c)
District Court Act
s 200A(1)(c)
Local Court Act 2007
s 24A(1)(c).
Supreme Court Act 1970
Court Act 1973
Local Court Act 2007
South Australian provisions define disrespectful conduct to include refusing to
stand up after being requested to do so by
the court; using offensive or
threatening language; and interfering with or undermining the authority, dignity
or performance of
the court.41 In South Australia, a person must first be warned
by the court that their conduct may result in a charge.42 It is a
defence to the
charge if the person’s conduct was due to a cognitive impairment
(including mental illness) or a physical disability.43
Likewise, a child cannot
be charged.44
Possible reforms
4.31 The ALRC’s recommendations when contrasted with the New South
Wales and South Australian statutory offence provisions demonstrate
is a broad spectrum of opinions on what the proper and effective administration
of justice requires. Is it sufficient
to ensure that the efficient and fair
conduct of the court’s proceedings is not disrupted
or interfered with? Alternatively, is there a need to preserve and vindicate
the dignity and authority of the court even where there
is no direct impact on
the current proceedings?
4.32 Victoria has no statutory offence provisions equivalent to the
legislation in New South Wales or South Australia discussed above.
4.33 It is not certain from case law where the line is drawn in Victoria. The
courts have often emphasised that the contempt power
‘is rarely, if ever,
exercised to vindicate the personal dignity of a judge’45 and does not
serve to ‘assuage the
injured feelings of the judicial officer’.46
Nonetheless, disrespectful or insulting conduct directed towards the judge may
still be dealt with as contempt on the basis that it has the potential to
diminish the authority of the court.47
14 If the law of contempt in the face of the court is to be replaced by
statutory provisions, should insulting or disrespectful behaviour
be included
within the scope of the offence?
Defining ‘in the face of the
4.34 There is a divergence of views in case law about the meaning of the term
‘in the face of the court’ and its precise
meaning remains unsettled
at common law.48
4.35 Determining the geographical and temporal boundaries of the offence of
contempt in the face of the court is not merely a matter
of academic
classification—it has real practical implications.
Summary Offences Act 1953
Lewis v Ogden
[1984] HCA 26
(1984) 153 CLR 682
Magistrates’ Court of Prahran v Murphy
[1997] 2 VR 186
(Callaway JA).
47 See, eg,
Zukanovic v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria at Moorabbin
[2011] VSC 141
[2011] 32 VR 216
48 See, eg,
European Bank A-G v Wentworth
(1986) 5 NSWLR 445
Registrar, Court of Appeal v Collins; Collins v Registrar, Court of
[1982] 1 NSWLR 682
Fraser v The Queen
(1984) 3 NSWLR 212.
4.36 The jurisdiction of the Magistrates’ Court to summarily punish a
contempt under
section 133
Magistrates’ Court Act
is limited to
contempts ‘committed in the face of the court’. Likewise, the County
Court and Supreme Courts General Civil
Procedure Rules provide for a judge to
directly charge, try and punish a contempt themselves only where it is
‘committed in
the face of the court’.49
4.37 On one view, expressed in obiter by Justice Kirby in
European Bank
A-G v Wentworth,
contempt ‘in the face of the court’ should be
limited to conduct that is seen, heard or otherwise sensed by the judge.50
that view, contempt in the face of the court would not, for example, include an
alleged assault on a witness committed in the
courtroom but after judgment had
been delivered, the proceeding had been adjourned and the judge had left the
4.38 Justice Kirby noted a number of policy reasons for adopting
this interpretation. In particular he noted that confining
the expression
in this way had the ‘appropriate’ result of limiting both
the contempt jurisdiction of inferior
courts and the availability of the special
summary procedure to try and punish the contempt. He also noted that
this approach
‘takes the summary procedure back to its historical
origin where it was undoubtedly confined to things which the court actually
heard or otherwise sensed and did not need evidence precisely for that
4.39 The alternative view, expressed by Justice Moffitt in obiter in
Registrar, Court of Appeal v Collins
, is that contempt in the face of the
court extends to conduct outside the courtroom which has not been directly heard
or observed
by the presiding judicial officer but which exhibits ‘such
proximity in time and space between the conduct and the trial of
the proceedings
that the conduct provides a present confrontation to the trial then in
progress’.53
4.40 These are both New South Wales cases. The New South Wales legislation
which regulates the courts’ jurisdiction to deal
with contempt refers to
contempt in the face or
in the hearing
of the court.54 The inclusion of
these additional words, which do not appear in Victorian legislation, may mean
that the New South
Wales cases on this issue are distinguishable and need to be
considered with some caution in Victoria.
4.41 The position in Victoria is equally unresolved. In the 1906 Victorian
55 Justice Cussen remarked in obiter that approaching a
juror in the corridors of the court and seeking to influence their verdict
constitute a serious contempt, but not a contempt in the face of the court.
4.42 Conversely, in a 1989 Supreme Court case, an employer who sent a letter
to the Sheriff of the Supreme Court claiming, falsely,
that his employee would
be interstate when required for jury duty, was found to have committed a
contempt in the face of the court.56
4.43 The Commission has been unable to find any more recent Victorian
authorities in which the expression ‘in the face of the
been given detailed consideration.
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) Order 75, Part 2;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) Order 75,
European Bank A-G v Wentworth
(1986) 5 NSWLR 445
, 457–8. See
Fraser v The Queen
(1984) 3 NSWLR 212
, 229–32 (Kirby P and
McHugh JA).
European Bank A-G v Wentworth
(1986) 5 NSWLR 445.
In that case
Kirby P in obiter held that a party who struck a potential witness in the
courtroom but after the judge had left could
not be guilty of contempt in the
face of court.
European Bank A-G v Wentworth
(1986) 5 NSWLR 445
Registrar, Court of Appeal v Collins; Collins v Registrar, Court of
[1982] 1 NSWLR 682
Supreme Court Act 1970
ss 48(2)(i)
Court Act 1973
Local Court Act 2007
[1906] ArgusLawRp 80
[1906] VLR 493.
Re Newton, Alan Henry
(Unreported, Supreme Court of Victoria,
Nathan J, 24 July 1989) 2.
15 If the law of contempt in the face of the court is to be replaced by
statutory provisions, should it be limited to conduct which
is directly seen or
heard by the presiding judicial officer? In other words, should the underlying
test be whether the judicial officer
can decide the contempt on the basis of
their own observations, without the need to receive evidence from other
Conduct covered by other criminal offences
4.44 Much of
the conduct which is liable to be
punished as a contempt in the face of the court under common law, can also be
prosecuted under statutory
offence provisions or as a common law criminal
offence. For example:
Summary Offences Act 1966
(Vic) prescribes statutory
offences which include wilfully damaging property;57 using profane, indecent or
obscene language or threatening,
abusive or insulting words;58 behaving in a
riotous, indecent, offensive or insulting manner, including by exposing
oneself;59 behaving
in a disorderly manner;60 common assault;61 and harassing a
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) prescribes statutory offences which
include threats to kill;63 threats to inflict serious injury;64 extortion with
kill;65 intimidating or causing harm or detriment to a person,
including a witness or juror; because of their involvement in criminal
proceedings;66 and perjury.67
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) prescribes a number of statutory
offences with which a juror might be charged, including refusal to be sworn or
affirmed;68
failing to attend;69 failing to answer questions;70 and
impersonating a juror.71
Court Security Act 1980
(Vic) prescribes a statutory
offence in relation to making a recording of a proceeding in circumstances not
authorised by the Act.72
Court Security Act 1980
(Vic) empowers an authorised
officer to give a person who wishes to enter court premises, or is on the court
premises, a reasonable
direction to do or not do a thing, for the purpose of
maintaining or restoring the security, good order or management of the court
premises.73 The Act also prescribes a statutory offence in relation to refusing
to comply with such a direction.74
• The offences of attempting to pervert the course of justice,
perverting the course of justice, embracery and perjury are indictable
law offences in Victoria, specifically recognised by the Crimes Act.75
Summary Offences Act 1966
s 17(1)(c).
s 17(1)(d).
Crimes Act 1958
Juries Act 2000
Court Security Act 1980
Crimes Act 1958
a person is charged under one of these statutory offence provisions
or with a common law offence they are
likely to have the benefit of
greater procedural safeguards than a person who is dealt with for
contempt, particularly
under the special summary procedure. For example,
they will receive a written charge or indictment which particularises the
alleged offence, the offence will be subject to a maximum penalty, the
offence will not be tried by the judicial officer
before whom the alleged
offence was committed, the ordinary rules of evidence will apply, they
will have clearer rights
of appeal and, if the offence is indictable,
it may be tried before a jury.76
4.46 Despite the differences in procedures and the interest the alleged
offender may have in the matter being dealt with one way
or the other, at
present there is no statutory direction which determines, or even guides,
whether a person is prosecuted for a
statutory or common law offence, or
dealt with, in the alternative, by way of the contempt procedure. The path
is adopted appears to be largely a matter for the discretion of the
presiding judicial officer.77
4.47 The common law maxim of statutory interpretation,
specialibus non derogant,
states that ‘general things or words
do not derogate from special things or words.’78 In practice, it
that a general statutory provision is presumed, unless otherwise
indicated, not to interfere with or override a specific statutory
The maxim may have relevance to how the overlap between potentially
applicable offences should be resolved. This maxim
is discussed in Chapter 3
at [3.38]–[3.40].
16 Should conduct covered by other criminal offences be excluded from any
statutory offence of contempt in the face of the court?
The procedure for contempt in the face of the
The special summary procedure
4.48 As with other forms of contempt, proceedings to punish contempt in the
face of the court can be commenced in the Supreme or County
Court by way of
summons or originating motion under
, Order 75 of the
Supreme Court
(General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure
(the General Civil Procedure Rules).
4.49 In addition, there is an alternative, more direct procedure that may be
adopted only in cases of contempt in the face of the
court. This procedure is
set out in Part 2, Order 75 of the General Civil Procedure Rules and it is truly
summary in nature. To distinguish
it from the summary procedure adopted in
general contempt proceedings, it is referred to in this chapter as the
‘special summary
procedure’.
4.50 Under the special summary procedure, where it is alleged or appears to
the court that a person is guilty of contempt committed
in the face of the
court, the court, of its own motion and without any formal proceedings being
instituted, may:
76 See generally Law Commission (New Zealand),
Contempt in Modern New
, Issues Paper No 36 (2014) 16 [3.5]; Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A Modern Statute
(Report No 140,
2017) 58 [3.2].
Solicitor-General v Cox
[2016] EWHC 1241
[2016] 2 Cr App R 15
example of where two people were found guilty of contempt of court for
taking photographs of people in the courtroom,
even though they could have been
prosecuted under a statutory offence which criminalised taking photographs in
Encyclopaedic Australian Legal Dictionary,
(Web Page, 9 April 2019)
‘generalia specialibus non derogant’.
• by oral order or arrest warrant have the contemnor brought
before the court79
• inform the contemnor either orally or in writing of the contempt with
which they are charged80
• order that the contemnor be kept in custody or be released on terms
(including the giving of security), until the charge is
finalised81
• adopt thereafter such procedure as in the circumstances the court
thinks fit to try the charge.82
Sections 133(1)
(2)84 of the
Magistrates’ Court
prescribe the same special summary procedure to try contempts in the face of
the court or witness contempts in the Magistrates’
4.52 The special summary procedure enables the court to deal with a contempt
swiftly and decisively and allows the presiding judicial
officer to effectively
place themselves in the position of prosecutor, witness, jury and judge.86 The
consequence is that the procedural
safeguards adhered to in ordinary criminal
proceedings are not expressly guaranteed.
4.53 Beyond providing the mechanism for a contemnor to be brought before the
court, informed of the charge and if necessary detained,
, Order 75 of the
General Civil Procedure Rules and
sections 133
Magistrates’
provide no further legislative guidance or limitations on the
procedure to be adopted to determine the charge of contempt. This gap
filled by the common law.
Zukanovic v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria at Moorabbin
(Zukanovic)
, Justice Forrest set out the steps that a fair hearing requires
must be followed prior to determining a charge of contempt in the
face of the
court under
section 133
Magistrates’ Court Act
. These steps are a
synthesis of earlier authorities, including the decisions of the High Court in
Coward v Stapleton
Witham v Holloway
.88 They provide:
• The charge must be set out orally or in writing, so that the
contemnor understands the charge being laid against them.
• The contemnor must be afforded the opportunity to consider the
charge, and if necessary, to seek further legal advice, an
adjournment, or
further particulars of the charge.
• The contemnor must be given the opportunity to plead guilty or not
guilty to the charge.
• In the event the contemnor pleads not guilty, the contemnor must
be given the opportunity to present evidence and make
submissions relevant
to the determination of the charge.
• The judicial officer must carefully consider all of the evidence
before deciding whether the court is satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the
accused is guilty of the charge, while being mindful of the unusual position the
judicial officer is in having assumed
the role of witness, prosecutor and
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.03(a).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.04;
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.04.
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.03(b).
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
85 In the Magistrates’ Court, the
Bail Act 1977
applies, with any
necessary modifications, to a person brought before the Court under section 133
as if the person were accused
of an offence and were being held in custody in
relation to that offence:
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
86 See, eg,
Allen v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 44
(2013) 36 VR 565
Clampett v A-G
[2009] FCAFC 151
(2009) 260 ALR 462
Zukanovic v Magistrates’ Court of
Victoria at Moorabbin
[2011] VSC 141
(2011) 32 VR 216
Fraser v The Queen
(1984) 3 NSWLR 212
[1953] HCA 48
(1953) 90 CLR 573.
(1995) 183 CLR 525.
Zukanovic v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria at Moorabbin
[2011] VSC 141
(2011) 32 VR 216
4.55 The decision of Justice Forrest was considered and approved by the Court
of Appeal in
Director of Public Prosecutions v Green
.90 In that case
Justice Tate noted, however, that the procedural steps set out in
were not intended as ‘a set of rigid prescriptive rules that bore no
capacity to adapt to the circumstances of the proceedings’.91
4.56 Further, Justice Whelan added the qualifying remark:
this case and Zukanovic concern contempts governed by statutory
provisions. The exercise of inherent jurisdiction to summarily
contempt may not necessarily be subject to the same requirements in every
conceivable case.92
4.57 Therefore, while the common law has supplied some content to the
procedures to be observed by the court before summarily imposing
a punishment
for contempt in the face of the court, the court continues to reserve for itself
a degree of flexibility.
4.58 Moreover, where the special summary procedure is adopted, the court has
recognised that special measures may be permissible if
circumstances demand
their use. For example:
• The court may receive hearsay evidence.93
• The presiding judicial officer may rely on his or her own
observations of the alleged contemnor’s conduct.94
• There is no requirement for sworn evidence.95
• The right of the alleged contemnor to cross-examine witnesses against
him or her may be restricted.96
A power to be used sparingly
4.59 Given its unusual nature, this special summary procedure has been
described in case law as an ‘exceptional and very significant
power which
should be exercised sparingly and with great caution’.97
4.60 Superior courts have stated that this procedure should only be used:
• ‘in those exceptional cases where the conduct is such that it
cannot wait to be punished because it is urgent and imperative
immediately to preserve the integrity of a trial in progress or about to
• where the ‘swift resolution of comparatively simple and
virtually indisputable fact situations’ call ‘for
4.61 Accordingly, superior courts have been critical of reliance on the
special summary procedure where it was not evident that there
was the requisite
degree of urgency to justify its
use.100 For example, in
,101 Justice Priest noted that there
was no urgency or other circumstances requiring that a witness, who refused
to be sworn
or give evidence in a County Court trial, be tried for
contempt promptly and by the judge presiding over the trial.102
no miscarriage of justice occurred in that case, Justice Priest noted that it
would have been preferable to proceed to deal
with the contempt by way of
originating motion or summons.103
DPP (Vic) v Green and Magistrates’ Court
[2013] VSCA 78.
91 Ibid [76].
92 Ibid [98].
[1993] VicRp 51
[1993] 1 VR 703
Fraser v The Queen
Foley v Herald-Sun TV Pty Ltd
[1981] VicRp 34
[1981] VR 315
Fraser v The Queen
(1984) 3 NSWLR 212
, 227–8. 96 Ibid 227;
[1993] VicRp 51
[1993] 1 VR 703
[2013] VSCA 44
(2013) 36 VR 565
, 576. See also
Lewis v Ogden
[1984] HCA 26
(1984) 153 CLR 682
Zukanovic v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
at Moorabbin
[2011] VSC 141
(2011) 32 VR 216
Clampett v A-G (Cth)
[2009] FCAFC 151
(2009) 260 ALR 462
Keeley v Mr Justice Brooking
(1979) 143 CLR 162, 173–4.
Keeley v Mr Justice Brooking
(1979) 143 CLR 162, 174.
Fraser v The Queen
(1984) 3 NSWLR 212
Clampett v A-G (Cth)
[2009] FCAFC 151
(2009) 260 ALR 462
[2013] VSCA 44
[2013] VSCA 44
(2013) 36 VR 565.
102 Ibid 575–8 .
103 Ibid 578.
4.62 However, while it is clear from the case law that the special summary
procedure should be used sparingly, the courts have
not abandoned its use
nor suggested that this should
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon
Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd
, the Victorian Court of Appeal referred to
Justice Priest’s remarks in
and emphasised that the facts of
were unusual and that ‘the case does not stand for any
general proposition to the effect that the use of summary procedures
possible, be avoided’.104
4.63 As a practical example, in
, where the alleged contempt
involved a defendant in the Magistrates’ Court blowing and then popping a
bubble, the Supreme
Court quashed the conviction on the grounds that the
contemnor had not been afforded procedural fairness. However, as to the choice
of procedure, Justice Forrest held:
it was appropriate for the Magistrate to deal with this matter
himself and to exercise summary jurisdiction. It would
appear that he
was the only witness to the asserted contempt which was committed in
the face of the Court. ... Given
that the Magistrate in this case was the
only person who appears to have perceived the “popping” of the
bubble gum,
I think, out of necessity, it was reasonable for him to determine
the charge himself.105
Consistency with the proper administration of justice
4.64 The power to punish for contempt in the face of the court is intended to
address and deter conduct that interferes with the proper
and effective
administration of justice. Therefore, the exercise of the power must be itself
consistent with this principle.106
4.65 The summary procedure to initiate and try contempts committed in
the face of the court does not provide the procedural
safeguards usually
observed in criminal proceedings. One significant departure is the multiple
roles played by the presiding judicial
officer (prosecutor, witness, jury and
judge) and the resultant potential for the proceedings to appear weighted
against the alleged
contemnor.107
4.66 A further problem explained by Chief Justice Black in
Attorney-General of the Commonwealth of Australia
Contempt in the face of the court is a criminal offence yet when a person
is charged with such an offence in circumstances such
as those in this case,
the onus of proof is in effect reversed. Instead of a case for the prosecution
being presented by a prosecutor
and tested by or on behalf of the person
accused in proceedings presided over by an independent judge or
magistrate,
in a case such as the present the accused stands charged
and is required to justify or otherwise defend his or her
conduct.108
4.67 Given the unusual, and potentially unjust nature of the special summary
power, Chief Justice Black warned:
If fundamental principles of justice are to be departed from it must surely
be for the reason that, quite exceptionally, the broader
interests of justice so
require. Indeed, this consideration is so strong that if the same person were to
act as prosecutor, witness
and judge when the broader interests of justice did
not manifestly so require, proceedings intended to uphold the authority of the
court would be seen to diminish that authority so that the process would, at
best, be self-defeating.109
4.68 This raises the question of when, if ever, the proper administration of
justice will require and justify the use of the special
summary procedure.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
, 561–2 fn 37. See also
[2011] VSC 643
Zukanovic v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria at Moorabbin
[2011] VSC 141
(2011) 32 VR 216
106 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
70–1 [112].
Keeley v Mr Justice Brooking
(1979) 143 CLR 162, 173 (Stephen
Clampett v A-G (Cth)
[2009] FCAFC 151
(2009) 260 ALR 462
, 470 (Black CJ).
109 Ibid 470.
4.69 Generally the case law suggests that the use of the special summary
procedure is necessary and justified when it is urgent or
imperative to act
immediately to maintain the authority of the court, prevent disorder and to
enable those with duties to the
court to perform them free from
4.70 However, while the proper administration of justice may require
immediate action in response to and to deal with certain
disruptive or
obstructive conduct, it does not necessarily follow that the proper
administration of justice will require that the
conduct be subject to
immediate punishment.111
4.71 For example, judicial officers have other powers available to them to
address disruptions to proceedings including removing the
person or persons
responsible for the disruption from the courtroom. Likewise, under the
Court Security Act
, authorised officers have powers which allow them to
issue directions to people within the court premises and, in certain
circumstances,
to remove them from court premises.112
Possible reforms
4.72 Given the potential for actual or perceived injustice in the use
of the special summary procedure, recommendations
for procedural reform have
been made in other jurisdictions.113 These vary, in particular with respect
• whether and when the judicial officer before whom the contempt
occurred is permitted to try the offence114
• whether and when the process for dealing with a disruption in court
is separated from the process of citing and trying the
conduct alleged to
constitute the offence.115
4.73 For example, the ALRC recommended that summary trial by the presiding
judge should be retained, but only where the accused consents.116
Commission recommended that a contempt offence may be tried by the presiding
judicial officer either where the alleged offender
consents to that procedure,
• the impugned conduct occurred in the presence of the judicial
officer, and
• the judicial officer considers that the alleged contempt presents an
immediate threat to the authority of the court or the
integrity of the
proceedings then in progress
unless dealt with in a summary
4.74 The WA Commission also recommended that statutory procedural safeguards
should exist for the benefit of the accused.
4.75 The New Zealand Law Commission recommended a new statutory procedure for
dealing with disruptive behaviour in the courtroom which
would separate out the
citation for disruptive behaviour and removal from the courtroom from the
hearing and punishment of any charge.
It was recommended that the new statutory
provisions dealing with disruptive behaviour in the court should, among other
• authorise the judge to deal with the immediate disruption by citing
the person for disrupting the court and, if necessary,
ordering the person to be
taken into the court cells until the rising of the court that day
Balogh v St Albans Crown Court
[1975] QB 73
, 85 (Lord Denning
111 See recommended reforms discussed in Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A Modern Statute
(Report No 140,
2017) 63–4. See also
DPP (Vic) v Green and Magistrates’ Court
[2013] VSCA 78
[60(1)] (Tate JA) and [99] (Whelan JA) for discussion of
power to control the court and direct arrest.
Court Security Act 1980
113 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 70; The Law Reform Commission,
t No 35, 1987) 79–82; Law Reform Commission
of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of Contempt
(Report, Project No
93, June 2003) 70.
114 See, eg, The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
79–80 [130]; Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
the Law of Contempt
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 73–4.
115 See, eg, Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt
of Court: A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 63–8.
116 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 71,
117 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 74.
the person the opportunity to exercise his or her right to consult and instruct
a legal practitioner
• allow the person a reasonable opportunity to apologise to the
• require the judge to review the matter before the rising of the court
that day and decide whether he or she considers further
punishment may be
necessary by having the matter set down for determination
• if the matter is set down for determination, direct the judge to
consider whether exceptional circumstances warrant a
different judge
hearing the case.118
17 Should the procedure for initiating, trying and punishing a charge of
contempt in the face of the court be set out in statutory
provisions? If so,
what should the procedure be? In particular:
(a) Is there a need to preserve the power of the courts to deal with
contempt in the face of the court summarily?
(b) Should the process for dealing with a disruption to proceedings be
separated from the process for trying and punishing the disruptive
(c) Who should try the offence? Should the offence be able to be tried by
the judicial officer before whom the offence was committed?
A consistent approach to disruptive
4.76 The offence of contempt in the face of the court intersects with other
laws and powers. Often there will be multiple options
for addressing conduct
which might constitute contempt in the face of the court. The court has
considerable discretion in choosing
between these options based on its
assessment of the seriousness of the conduct and the need for an immediate
response. The path
which is adopted has significant consequences for the alleged
contemnor with respect to the potential liability that they are exposed
the procedural safeguards which apply.119 However, there is no statutory
guidance for the exercise of this discretion and
no requirement for the
presiding judicial officer to explain their choice to adopt a particular course.
This may give rise to uncertainty
and the potential for inconsistency and
unfairness between cases involving similar conduct.
4.77 For example, the presiding judicial officer may:
• adjourn the proceedings to allow for a disruptive party to compose or
remove themselves or reflect on their conduct
• determine that a warning or reprimand is sufficient120
• accept an apology as sufficient to address the contempt and restore
the authority of the court121
• exercise their power to exclude a person from the court, and even to
exclude the accused from the courtroom122
118 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 67–8.
119 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 65
[103]–[104].
Doughty-Cowell (Victoria Police) v Kyriazis
[2018] VSCA 216.
Re Perkins; Mesto v Galpin
[1998] 4 VR 505.
Roberts v Harkness
(2018) 85 MVR 314
[2018] VSCA 215
Boros v O’Keefe
[2017] VSC 560
, [18]–[19];
Tubman; Re Lucas
[1970] 3 NSWR 41.
the conduct involves a legal practitioner, refer the conduct to the Legal
Services Commissioner for investigation
• refer the matter to the DPP or police to consider whether the person
should be prosecuted for one of the statutory or common
law offences discussed
above at [4.44]
• refer the matter to the Prothonotory or Registrar and direct them to
commence contempt proceedings to punish the contempt
by way of originating
motion or summons
• adopt the special summary procedure to try and punish the
18 What measures, if any, are required to ensure there is a consistent
approach by judicial officers to disruptive behaviour in the
The impact on certain groups of people
4.78 The Commission is unaware of any empirical data on the number of
proceedings commenced to punish for contempt in the face of
the court, the
procedure adopted and the penalties imposed, if any.
4.79 The Commission is also unaware of any empirical data on how often a
contempt warning is issued in court proceedings by the presiding
officer as a means to secure greater cooperation and compliance from people in
the courtroom regarded as disruptive or recalcitrant.123
4.80 The variety of reported cases referred to in this chapter and media
articles reporting on local court proceedings suggest that
judicial officers do
continue to use or threaten to use the power to punish for contempt in the face
of the court to maintain order
in proceedings and uphold the court’s
authority.124
4.81 The case law suggests that there may be some groups of people who are
disproportionately more likely to be subject to proceedings
for contempt in the
face of the court or to be warned about the possibility of such proceedings,
including self-represented litigants,125
and people who have mental health
4.82 In her study on the offence of contempt in the face of the court and its
impact on people with mental health issues, Dr Suzie
O’Toole identified a
number of aspects of the law and procedure in this area which may be
particularly disadvantageous to people
with mental health issues.127
123 For an example of a rare case where the Victorian Court of Appeal was
able to consider and comment, in this case critically, on
the use of a warning
to punish for contempt, see
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria at
Heidelberg v Robinson and Another
[2000] VSCA 198
(2000) 2 VR 233.
124 See, eg, Monique Preston,‘Villains Shirt Lands Man in Court
Whitsunday Times
(Web Page, 16 November 2018) <
whitsundaytimes.com.au/news/villains-shirt-lands-man-in-court-trouble/3578005/>;
Caroline Schelle, ‘Family Outburst at Judge
as Brain- damaged Shooter
Jailed: ‘Get f**ked’’,
News.com.au
(Web Page, 19
December 2018) <
www.news.com.au/national/victoria/courts-law/
family-outburst-at-judge-as-braindamaged-shooter-jailed-get-fked/news-story/b8cf09c3916dfd3f9432fd52f76b4bcf>;
Elizabeth Byrne,
‘Woman Jailed for Hurling Water, Swearing at Canberra
Magistrate in Court Outburst’,
(Web Page, 1 August 2017)
net.au/news/2017-08-01/jail-for-woman-who-swore-and-threw-water-in-court/8763930>
125 See, eg
Doughty-Cowell (Victoria Police) v Kyriazis
[2018] VSCA
Clampett v A-G (Cth)
[2009] FCAFC 151
(2009) 260 ALR 462
R v Slaveski
[2011] VSC 643
R v Vasiliou
R v Slaveski
[2015] VSC 400.
126 See, eg,
Registrar of the Supreme Court of South Australia v
Moore-McQuillan
[2007] SASC 447
Moore-McQuillan v Registrar of the
Supreme Court
[2009] SASC 265.
127 Suzie O’Toole,
I Find You in Contempt: Contempt in the Face of
the Court in Australia
(Halstead Press, 2017) 123–5.
19 Under the current law, does the actual or threatened use of the power to
punish for contempt in the face of the court affect certain
groups of people
unfairly? If so, how should this be addressed?
Juror contempt
60 Introduction
60 The importance of trial by jury
63 Forms of contempt by jurors
65 Possible reforms to contempt by
Introduction
5.1 This chapter considers what the terms of reference describe as
‘juror contempt’.
5.2 As noted in Chapter 2, ‘juror contempt’ is not a discrete
area of the law of contempt of court. Rather, juror contempt
encompasses
contempt in the face of the court by jurors, for example by refusing to answer
questions or to be sworn or make an affirmation,
as well as other conduct by
jurors which may also constitute a breach of the
Juries Act 2000
At common law, contempt by jurors can also be characterised as a manifestation
of contempt by breach of duty by a person officially
connected with court
proceedings.1
5.3 This chapter therefore describes the different manifestations of
common law juror contempt as well as the statutory
regulating juries. It describes the use of jury trials in Victoria,
identifies some of the current issues with
the laws regulating jurors and
identifies a number of reform options. A number of questions are then posed for
consideration.
5.4 The chapter begins by noting the importance of Victoria’s jury
trial system.
The importance of trial by jury
5.5 A jury is a group of citizens randomly selected from the Victorian
electoral roll to determine questions of fact and apply the
law to those facts
to reach a verdict in criminal and civil trials.2
5.6 Trial by jury helps to ensure that an accused person receives a fair
trial according to law and that members of the community
are directly
involved in the judicial process.3 Jury trials help to safeguard the rights
of the accused by limiting the power
of the state, and to ensure that justice
is administered in accordance with community standards.4
5.7 Juries therefore play a critical role in the administration of
justice in Victoria, particularly in the criminal justice
system. Jurors take
an oath or affirmation to faithfully and impartially try the issues before
them and give a true verdict according
to the evidence put before them in
1 LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
(online at 25
September 2018) 105 Contempt, ‘2 Criminal Contempt’ [105–70].
See (E) ‘Breach of Duty by Persons
Officially Connected with Court
Proceedings’, in particular [105–170].
2 For an overview of the purposes, availability and laws of jury trials in
Victoria, see Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Empanelment
(Report No 27, May 2014) 8–17.
Alqudsi v R
[2016] HCA 24
(2016) 258 CLR 203
, 208 [2] (French CJ).
4 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Empanelment
(Report No 27, May
2014) 8 (citations omitted).
Juries Act 2000
trials in Victoria
5.8 Juries may be used in criminal cases to try parties accused of indictable
offences and to help determine an accused person’s
fitness to stand
trial.6 Juries may also be used in certain civil proceedings.7 Generally,
criminal trials have 12 jurors and civil
trials have six jurors.8
5.9 Jury trials are held in the Supreme Court of Victoria and County Court of
5.10 In 2016–17, 30 criminal jury trials were conducted in the Supreme
Court and 371 criminal jury trials in the County Court
of Victoria.10 During the
same period, 50 civil jury trials were conducted in the Supreme Court of
Victoria and 60 civil jury trials
in the County Court of Victoria.11
The regulation of juror conduct
5.11 The Victorian jury system is maintained and protected by statute, the
law of contempt of court and other common law offences.12
5.12 The fundamental purpose of these laws is to preserve the integrity of
the trial process by ensuring on the one hand that jury
members are not
interfered with, and on the other that jurors make decisions based solely on the
evidence put before them in court.
A suite of laws have developed to ensure that
jurors are ‘shielded’ or ‘quarantined’ from extraneous
information.
5.13 These laws address a range of behaviours relating to juries, which can
be broadly classified as either misbehaviour by jurors
or interference with
5.14 Significantly, particular conduct can at the same time constitute both a
statutory and a common law offence, including contempt
of court. The
expressly provides, however, that the courts cannot punish a person more than
once for the same act or omission.13
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) and the
Jury Directions Act 2015
5.15 The two main statutes which regulate juries in Victoria are:
which regulates the system of trial by jury
Jury Directions Act
which regulates the instructions, known as
‘directions’, given to juries during trials.
5.16 Under the
it is an offence for a juror to, among other
• fail to answer questions, fail to produce a document or to give an
answer that is false or misleading14
• fail to inform the Juries Commissioner of their disqualification or
ineligibility for service15
• supply false or misleading information16
• fail to attend for jury service17
Juries Act 2000
(definition of ‘criminal
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) ss 7(3), 11(2)– (6), 12, 16–18.
Juries Act 2000
(definition of ‘civil
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 2000
(definition of
10 Supreme Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2016–17
As at the time of writing, the Supreme Court of Victoria’s annual report
for 2017–18 had not been tabled in
Parliament.
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
, 244 [16]. Common law offences include
perversion of the course of justice and embracery.
Juries Act 2000
• refuse to be sworn or make an affirmation18
• make enquiries about trial matters.19
5.17 In addition, the
provides that it is an offence for a member
of a jury to disclose their deliberations.20
5.18 Significantly, the
preserves the power of a court to deal
with a contempt of court summarily of its own motion.21 However, the
also protects against double jeopardy by providing that if an act or omission
constitutes any two or more of the following:
• an offence against the
• an offence against the common law or
• conduct that the court can deal with summarily under Division 2 of
• a contempt of the court
the offender is liable to be prosecuted or dealt with in any or all of the
applicable ways but is not liable to be punished more than
once for the same act
or omission.22
5.19 In contrast with the
Jury Directions Act
contain any offence provisions. Instead, the purpose of this Act is to
regulate the instructions given to juries during
5.20 As recommended by the Commission in its report on jury directions,23 the
Jury Directions Act
includes guiding principles which note that Parliament
recognises that, among other things:
• The law of jury directions in criminal trials has become increasingly
complex in recent decades.
• This development
- has made jury directions increasingly complex, technical and
- has made it increasingly difficult for trial judges to comply with the law
of jury directions and avoid errors of law, and
- has made it increasingly difficult for jurors to understand and apply
jury directions.
• Research indicates that jurors find complex, technical and lengthy
jury directions difficult to follow.24
5.21 The guiding principles also expressly provide that the Parliament
intends that a trial judge, in giving directions to a jury
in a criminal trial,
• give directions on only so much of the law as the jury needs to know
to determine the issues in the trial
• avoid using technical legal language wherever possible
• be as clear, brief, simple and comprehensible as possible.25
18 Ibid s 73.
19 Ibid s 78A.
20 Ibid s 78.
21 Ibid s 84.
22 Ibid s 86.
23 Victoria Law Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, Final Report
(2009) 8, 13 and Recommendations 4 and 5.
Jury Directions Act 2015
of contempt by jurors
5.22 There have been few Victorian cases involving contempt by jurors. Jurors
who have attended jury service while intoxicated have
been found in contempt.26
However, a jury foreman who sent a letter to a judge in the County Court of
Victoria in 2017 discussing
trial matters and suggesting the judge could
privately respond was not considered to be in contempt, although the judge would
referred the matter to the DPP for consideration
of contempt if the letter had had a ‘nefarious purpose’.27
Similarly, a juror was held not to be in contempt for procuring
signatures from
other jurors on a petition to the Attorney-General which described jury
deliberations after a trial, but would have
been if the communications contained
‘deliberate misstatements or threats, or otherwise displayed an intention
to defeat the
due course of justice’.28
5.23 However, the Supreme Court of South Australia found two jurors in a
criminal case guilty of contempt in 2016 after they contravened
judge’s direction by researching trial
matters online and discussing the information they found with other jurors.29
In contrast, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal
made no finding of
contempt in 2004 after two jurors visited a park relevant to the case during
jury deliberations, but mentioned
contempt ‘to indicate, for the
information of jurors in other trials, the potential seriousness with which the
law views this
Jurors accessing information
5.24 Jurors take an oath to ‘faithfully and impartially’ try the
issues before them and to ‘give a true verdict
according to the
evidence’ presented in the trial which has been found to be admissible.31
There is nevertheless a risk that
jurors may independently access
information
presented and tested in court. As a consequence, there remains
a risk that an
accused person may not receive a fair trial.
5.25 The internet has exacerbated existing difficulties with preventing
juror research and exposure to prejudicial, and potentially
inaccurate,
material. Jurors can readily search for information about cases, and
courts can struggle to shield jurors
from material that is now so
easy to access and share. Jurors may seek information about trials, or be
unwittingly exposed
to prejudicial material. This section focuses on jurors
who actively seek information about trials.
5.26 Examples of jurors conducting research during trials in Victoria include
jurors downloading material about the meaning of ‘beyond
doubt’,32 downloading and printing descriptions of words from Wikipedia
and Reference.com,33 and using the
Concise Oxford Dictionary
to look up a
word mentioned at trial.34
5.27 Except for the reported decisions, there is limited information about
the number of Victorian cases in which jurors have conducted
research.35
5.28 However, the Victorian Court of Appeal observed in 2008:
In recent years, there have been occasions when jurors have engaged
in inappropriate conduct with the potential to compromise
a trial. Internet
prejudicial to the accused, may necessitate
a discharge of the jury or,
failing that, on appeal an order for a new trial. In general, these cases
[1886] VicLawRp 83
(1886) 12 VLR 341
R v Tomlinson
(Supreme Court of
Victoria, Beach J, 16 January 1996).
In the matter of IH, a juror
[2017] VCC 2042
Re Mann; Re King; Ex parte A-G (Vic)
[1910] ArgusLawRp 123
[1911] VLR 171
Registrar of Supreme Court of South Australia v S
[2016] SASC 93.
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86
, 97 [239].
Juries Act 2000
[2010] VSCA 153
(2010) 28 VR 579
, 579–80 [2]–[3],
[57]–[58] (Ashley JA).
Benbrika v R
[2010] VSCA 281
(2010) 29 VR 593
, 640 [194].
Benbrika v R
[2010] VSCA 281
(2010) 29 VR 593
, 646 [226]–[228] (citations
R v Benbrika (Rulings No 35.01–35.11)
[2009] VSC 142
35 Data provided to the Commission by the County Court of Victoria indicates
that in 2017 a jury was discharged because of juror investigations,
and that in
both 2016 and 2018 a jury was discharged because the jury saw inappropriate
internet searches of a kind that bear specifically upon the evidence in the
trial, and the particular circumstances and history
of the accused.36
5.29 To address this issue a new section,
section 78A
, was inserted into the
in 2008. In introducing this amendment, the then Attorney-General for
Victoria, the Hon. Mr Rob Hulls MP stated:
In light of advances in technology, there are ever-increasing
opportunities for jurors to undertake research relating to
participants and events. A number of appeals in New South Wales have
emphasised the damage caused by undirected
juror investigations, not
only to the viability of public prosecutions, but also to the peace of mind of
victims of crime. Such
investigations can lead to jurors accessing potentially
irrelevant and prejudicial material, which will affect the result of
trial. The bill prohibits jurors from undertaking investigations to ensure
that a jury’s decision is based solely
on the evidence heard and seen
in court.37
Section 78A
provides that a juror in a trial, or panel
member for a trial, must not make an enquiry for the purpose of obtaining
information
except in the proper exercise of their functions as a juror.38 Making
• consulting with another person
• conducting any research by any means, such as using the internet to
• viewing or inspecting a place or object that is relevant to the
• conducting an experiment
• requesting another person to make an enquiry.39
5.31 The penalty for this offence is 120 penalty units.40
Jurors disclosing information
5.32 Like jurors seeking extraneous information about a trial, jurors
disclosing information about deliberations to people outside
of the jury is not
a new concern. However, the internet, social media networks and modern
technologies such as the smartphone expand
the reach and impact of juror
communications. A juror’s Facebook post about a high-profile trial, for
instance, could be communicated
to the juror’s Facebook friends, sent by
the juror’s friends to other people or seen by other people if the
page is public, then screenshotted, reported in the media and
communicated to larger audiences through a variety of media. In 2016,
lawyers sought a mistrial in the Supreme Court of Queensland after a juror
deliberating in a high-profile murder case made
several Instagram posts about
her role as a juror.41
5.33 It is unclear whether disclosure by jurors of deliberations after a
trial in Victoria constitutes contempt of court, although
the courts have
expressed disapproval of such actions.42
5.34 Under the
, a juror, or former juror, cannot disclose
statements made, opinions expressed, arguments advanced or votes cast in
jury deliberations
if they have reason
to believe the information will, or is likely to, be published to the
public. The penalty for this offence is 600 penalty units
or imprisonment
for five years.43 Disclosure offences are
Benbrika v R
[2010] VSCA 281
(2010) 29 VR 593
, 644 [214]. However Maxwell P, Nettle
and Weinberg JJA also stated that the case was not one where the internet
on the evidence in the trial, or the history and
circumstances of the accused.
37 Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 29 May 2008,
2064 (Rob Hulls, Attorney-General).
Juries Act 2000
41 Alexandra Blucher, ‘Gable Tostee Juror’s Instagram Posts a
Sign Jury Act Must Roll with the Times, Legal Experts Say’,
(Web Page, 21 October 2016) <
www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-21/tostee-juror-instagram-posts-sign-jury-act-needs-review/7952550
42 See, eg,
Re Matthews & Ford
[1973] VicRp 18
[1973] VR 199
[1986] VicRp 25
[1986] VR 219
, 249. A juror would have been in contempt if a
petition with jurors’ signatures sent to the Attorney-General and
deliberations included ‘deliberate misstatements or threats, or
otherwise displayed an intention to defeat the due course of
Re Mann; Re King; Ex parte A-G (Vic)
[1910] ArgusLawRp 123
[1911] VLR 171.
Juries Act 2000
indictable.44
Statutory exceptions allow jurors to disclose information to certain people and
for specific purposes.45
Possible reforms to contempt by jurors
Amendments to the
Juries Act 2000
5.35 Currently, juror behaviour is regulated under the
common law, including the law of contempt. The
preserves the
court’s common law powers to deal with a contempt of court summarily of
its own motion.46
5.36 There are important questions about statutory and common law powers
that regulate jurors:
• Do existing provisions under the
adequately address
problematic juror behaviour?
• What amendments, if any, to the
are required?
• Should the common law of contempt continue to apply to jurors, given
the few cases involving contempt by jurors and provisions
that regulate juror behaviour?
• If the common law of contempt should continue to apply to jurors,
should behaviour that constitutes a common law contempt
by jurors be replaced
by statutory provisions in the
Juries Act 2000
(Vic), or another
Education of jurors
5.37 Potential jurors are given information about jury duties when they
are in the jury pool.47
There is also publicly available information about the role of juries and
provisions that regulate juror behaviour.48
5.38 In 2017, the New Zealand Law Commission (NZ Commission) recommended a
review of educational information provided to people called
for jury service and
jurors to ensure it provided adequate guidance on the problems, risks and
consequences if jurors undertake their
own research.49 The Commission commented
that jurors should be told why doing their own research poses a risk to fair
trials.50 It
also recommended that jurors and potential jurors be educated about
why there are restrictions on disclosing deliberations and the
consequences of
breaching these restrictions, with an increased focus on the impropriety of
jurors posting information online.51
5.39 The Law Commission of England and Wales recommended that the Department
of Education look at ways to encourage schools to teach
children about the role
and importance of jury service.52 It considered that jurors are more likely to
comply with their obligations
if they understand why the obligations are
important.53
5.40 A possible reform may be a review of the information and material
currently provided to potential jurors during the selection
and empanelment
process. If necessary, these materials could be redeveloped to include, for
instance, an explanation of why prohibitions
on juror research and disclosure of
deliberations are critical to fair trials, and potential consequences of
breaching these prohibitions.54
, (5), (7) (12).
47 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Empanelment
(Report No 27,
May 2014) 15 [2.46] .
48 See, eg, Juries Commissioner’s Office Victoria, Supreme Court of
Juror’s Handbook
(2012); Court Services Victoria,
‘During Trial’,
Jury Service
(Web Page, 27 April 2016)
www.courts.vic.gov.au/jury-service/during-trial
W Benjamin Lindner, ‘Juries’,
The Law Handbook
30 June 2017) <
www.lawhandbook.org.au/2018_01_02_05_juries/
49 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 10, 76 [4.32]. 50 Ibid 76
51 Ibid 11, 85–6 [4.88].
52 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court (1): Juror
Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013) 111–2
[5.12]–[5.16].
53 Ibid 111 [5.15].
54 See, eg, Ministry of Justice (UK),
‘Your Legal Responsibilities
as a Juror’
(information sheet, March 2018).
5.41 In Victoria, jurors take an oath or affirmation to
‘faithfully and impartially’ try the issues before
them and to
‘give a true verdict according to the evidence’.55 Possible
amendments to the juror oath to address concerns
disclosure of deliberations have been considered in other jurisdictions.
5.42 The Law Commission of England and Wales recommended in 2013 that the
oath be amended to include an agreement to base the verdict
only on the evidence
presented in court and not to seek or disclose information about the case.56 It
also recommended that jurors
sign a written declaration acknowledging that they
have been warned not to conduct trial-related research.57
5.43 In 2017, the NZ Commission noted that its oath and affirmation
implicitly required jurors not to privately obtain or use extraneous
before or during the trial in order to reach a verdict, but that jurors may not
always understand that implicit requirement.58
Like the Law Commission of
England and Wales, the NZ Commission recommended the oath and affirmation be
amended so that jurors explicitly
agree to base their verdict solely on the
evidence presented in court and not to undertake research, to ensure that jurors
specifically
turn their minds to this issue.59 The Law Commission did not,
however, recommend that the oath and affirmation include a promise
by jurors not
to disclose information, citing concerns that this would make the oath and
affirmation ‘overly long’.60
5.44 A possible reform may be amendments to the current wording of the oath
and affirmation under the
to specify that jurors have a duty not to
independently conduct trial- related research or disclose information about
deliberations.
Jury directions
5.45 Jurors are given directions by the trial judge throughout the
5.46 Courts today generally assume that juries can follow judicial directions
and make decisions based only on the evidence presented
in court, even if they
have been exposed to irrelevant or prejudicial material.61 However, some
judicial officers have questioned
this assumption.62
5.47 The extent to which jury directions can prevent juror misconduct or cure
prejudice where misconduct has occurred, and whether
existing directions are
adequate for this purpose, are key questions in this reference.
5.48 Judicial officers have suggested the need for more precise jury
directions in cases where jurors’ understanding of directions
questioned. For instance, in
, the Court of Appeal found that
judicial officers would be wise to instruct juries that the
prohibition in
section 78A(1)
extends to searching legal
dictionaries or texts ‘in an attempt to elaborate the meaning of [beyond
reasonable doubt]’.63
Juries Act 2000
56 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court (1): Juror
Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013) 116 [5.35].
57 Ibid 115–16 [5.31]–[5.32].
58 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 78 [4.41]–[4.42]. 59 Ibid 10, 78
60 Ibid 86 [4.89].
61 See, eg,
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
, 603 (Mason CJ and Toohey
General Television Corporation Pty Ltd v DPP
[2008] VSCA 49
(2008) 19 VR 68
(1993) 69 A Crim R 450
John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd v District Court of NSW
[2004] NSWCA 324
(2004) 61 NSWLR 344
, 366 [103]
(Spigelman CJ, Handley JA, Campbell AJA agreeing).
62 See, eg,
R v Dupas (No 2)
[2005] VSCA 212
(2005) 12 VR 601
, 627 [81] (Nettle JA)
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
, 614–5 (Brennan J);
Gilbert v R
(2000) 201 CLR 414
, 425 [31] (McHugh J);
R v Rich (Ruling No 7)
[14] (Lasry J).
[2010] VSCA 153
(2010) 28 VR 579
, 587 [92] (Ashley JA, Buchanan and
Redlich JJA agreeing). See also
[2011] VSCA 374
(2011) 33 VR 306
(Ashley JA), [75] (Weinberg JA), [76] (Harper JA).
5.49 The NZ Commission recommended that jurors be reminded about
prohibitions on conducting research and investigations
throughout a
trial, given jurors must process a lot of new information at the outset
of a trial.64 It also encouraged
judicial officers to consider the
desirability of giving juries comprehensive directions about asking questions,
in order to
dissuade jurors from conducting their own enquiries and to reinforce
that it is preferable to raise questions with the judge.65
5.50 The Law Commission of England and Wales said jurors needed to understand
they are permitted to ask questions about the evidence
heard in court, and
should be empowered to do so.66 Jurors who are deterred from asking questions
may be tempted to undertake research
themselves.67 It recommended a direction to
juries that would reflect the ‘correct balance between being too explicit
questions from jurors, which could lead to judges being inundated and
time wasted with unanswerable or irrelevant questions, and
deterring jurors from
asking proper and pertinent questions’.68
5.51 Currently, the Judicial College of Victoria publishes bench notes and
sample directions that guide judicial officers in instructing
juries about
determining cases on the evidence and prohibitions on juror research and
disclosure of deliberations. These include
directing jurors to avoid online
research and posting on social media about the case, explaining why these
actions are problematic
and describing the consequences of breaching the
prohibitions.69 The College also provides some guidance on directing juries
asking questions of the judge.70
5.52 The Commission may consider proposed reforms to the content and delivery
of jury directions to adequately inform jurors about
their functions and duties.
Such reforms could be proposed statutory amendments or non-statutory
20 Does the
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) adequately regulate the conduct of
jurors and potential jurors? If not, what amendments to the
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) should be made?
21 To the extent courts have the power to deal with juror contempt at
common law, is there a need to retain this power?
22 If the law of juror contempt is to be retained, should the common law be
replaced by statutory provisions? If so:
(a) How should it be defined?
(b) What fault elements, if any, should be required?
(c) Should conduct already covered by other statutory offence provisions be
64 Law Commission,
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A Modern
, Report No 140 (2017) 79 [4.50], [4.52]. 65 Ibid 80 [4.57].
66 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court (1): Juror
Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013) 117 [5.39].
68 Ibid 117 [5.41].
69 Judicial College of Victoria, ‘1.5.1 – Bench Notes: Decide
Solely on the Evidence’,
Victorian Criminal Charge Book
21 October 2013) <
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/CCB/index.htm#1285.htm
Judicial College of Victoria, ‘1.5.2 – Charge: Decide Solely on
the Evidence’,
Victorian Criminal Charge Book
(Web Page, 15
November 2018) <
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/CCB/index.
htm#1286.htm>.
70 See Judicial College of Victoria, ‘1.4.2—Charge: The Role of
Judge and Jury’,
Victorian Criminal Charge Book
(Web Page, 19
December 2006) <
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/CCB/index.htm#1283.htm
23 Do current jury directions adequately instruct juries about determining
cases only on the evidence, prohibitions on research and
disclosure and asking
questions of the trial judge? If not, what reforms are required?
24 How well are jurors and potential jurors currently educated about their
functions and duties during the selection and empanelment
process? How should
they be educated about, and assisted in performing, their functions and
Disobedience
Introduction
Defining disobedience contempt
74 Issues with disobedience contempt
77 Possible reforms to disobedience
Disobedience
Introduction
6.1 Disobedience contempt arises when a person fails or refuses to comply
with an order of the court or an undertaking given to the
court. In these
circumstances, commencing contempt proceedings against the person is one
mechanism by which to compel compliance.
Contempt proceedings may also provide a
mechanism to punish the non-compliance, particularly where it involves
deliberate defiance
of the court or where compliance is no longer possible.
6.2 Contempt proceedings arising from non-compliance are generally commenced
by the party for whose benefit the order was made and
any sanctions issued
usually serve the interests of that party. However, there is a broader public
interest in the exercise of the
disobedience contempt power. As the High Court
Even when proceedings are taken by the individual to secure the benefit of
an order or undertaking that has not been complied
with, there is also
a public interest aspect in the sense that the proceedings also vindicate
the court’s authority.
Moreover, the public interest in the
administration of justice requires compliance with all orders and
undertakings,
whether or not compliance also serves individual or private
interests.1
6.3 The seriousness with which courts view breaches of a court order was
expressed by Justice Gillard in
Law Institute of Victoria v Nagle:
It is vital to the administration of justice in this State that a person
bound by an Order obeys it. Disobedience of an order
poses a threat to
the administration of justice and attacks its very foundation. It threatens
the rule of law and its
destruction results in anarchy and a return to
the law of the jungle. If a person bound by an order wilfully refuses to obey
and is not severely punished for wilful disobedience then parties in
litigation will have no confidence in the legal system.
Respect for the
system must be maintained. There is a public interest factor in punishing a
contemnor in most cases, especially
where the contempt is a criminal
6.4 The different contexts in which disobedience contempt arises, and the
different purposes for which disobedience contempt proceedings
are initiated,
have led to uncertainty about the nature of the proceedings and the procedures
that should be adopted. In particular,
those differences have led to an
ambiguous distinction between:
• civil contempt which serves the purpose of
compelling obedience
with court orders, and
• criminal contempt which serves the purpose of
disobedience
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
Law Institute of Victoria Ltd v Nagle
[2005] VSC 47
chapter considers whether this distinction between civil and criminal contempt
is sustainable and necessary and poses questions
6.6 In approaching that overarching question, this chapter considers the
range of alternative enforcement procedures available to
secure compliance with
court orders and poses questions about whether it is necessary for parties
to have recourse to disobedience
contempt proceedings as an additional
enforcement tool.
6.7 Finally, this chapter considers and poses questions about how
disobedience contempt might be reformed to clarify its purpose and
procedures.
Defining disobedience contempt
6.8 Court orders and undertakings to the court take many forms and address an
almost infinite variety of subject matter. Consequently,
disobedience contempt
can be committed in many different ways.3
6.9 For example, disobedience contempt proceedings can be commenced where a
person refuses or neglects to do an act that they were
required by a judgment or
court order to do by a specified date.4 This may include a failure to: pay money
into court or to another
person;5 give possession of land;6 deliver goods;7or comply with an order for
interrogatories, discovery or the production of documents.8
6.10 Disobedience contempt proceedings can also be commenced where a court
order requires a person to abstain from doing an act, and
the person has
disobeyed the order.9 This may involve breach of an order which restrains a
person from:
• dealing with their assets10
• being at a certain place11
• contacting a certain person12
• publishing certain information.13
6.11 Even in the absence of a judgment or order, disobedience contempt
proceedings can be commenced when a person contravenes an undertaking
given to the court to do or to refrain from doing a particular thing.14
6.12 Finally, failure to comply with a subpoena without lawful excuse may
also be a contempt of court.15
Morgan v State of Victoria
[2008] VSCA 267
(2008) 22 VR 237
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
66.05(1)(a), 66.05(2);
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
r 66.05(1)(a), 66.05(2).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
66.02(1)(f), 66.02(2)(b);
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
rr 66.02(1)(f), 66.02(2)(b). For special considerations which might apply
when the judgment or order concerns the payment of money,
Morgan v State of Victoria
[2008] VSCA 267
(2008) 22 VR 237
Bellerive Homes Pty
Ltd v FW Projects Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWSC 193.
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
66.03(2)(b);
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
66.03(2)(b).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
66.04(1)(b);
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
66.04(1)(b); See, eg,
Harris v Marubeni Equipment Finance (Oceania) Pty
[2018] VSCA 211
, where the defendant failed to deliver up an excavator
to the plaintiff (the mortgagee) by the date the court ordered.
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
29.14(1),(3), r 30.10(1), (3);
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 29.14(1), (3), r 30.10(1), (3).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
66.05(1)(b), 66.05(2);
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
rr 66.05(1)(b), 66.05(2).
10 See, eg,
Zhang v Fortune Holding Group Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2018] VSCA
Fortune Holding Group Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2018] VSC 22
Holding Group Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2017] VSC 738.
11 See, eg,
VICT v CFMMEU
[2018] VSC 794.
12 See, eg,
Legal Services Board v Forster (No 2)
[2012] VSC 633.
13 See, eg,
National Australia Bank Ltd v Juric
Australian Consolidated Press Limited v Morgan
[1965] HCA 21
(1965) 112 CLR 483
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon
Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
Sidebottom v The
[2018] VSCA 280
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 42.12(1). See
Supreme Court (Criminal Procedure) Rules 2017
(Vic) r 1.12 and
County Court Criminal Procedure Rules 2009
(Vic) r 1.09 which provide
that Order 42 (Subpoenas) of the General Civil Procedure Rules applies to
criminal proceedings.
6.13 As a superior court of record, the Supreme Court of Victoria has
inherent power to punish for contempt of court, including where
the contempt is
by way of non-compliance with a court order or an undertaking given to the
court. Further, the Supreme Court has
power to deal not only with contempts of
itself but with contempts of any inferior court.16
6.14 The County Court has no inherent jurisdiction to deal with
non-compliance with court orders or undertaking by punishing for contempt.17
However, this power is conferred on the County Court by statute.18
6.15 As with all manifestations of contempt, in the Supreme and County Courts
the procedure for commencing and hearing disobedience
contempt proceedings, the
punishments which may be imposed and the costs orders which the court may make
are regulated by the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure Rules) 2015
(Vic) and the
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) (General
Civil Procedure Rules). For relevant purposes, the Rules mirror each other.
6.16 The Magistrates’ Court also has no inherent jurisdiction to deal
with non-compliance with court orders or undertakings
by punishing for contempt.
section 135
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
out the powers of the Magistrates’ Court to make and enforce orders, other
than for the payment of money.19
The elements of disobedience contempt
6.17 In order to prove disobedience contempt, the party bringing the
proceedings must establish five elements
1) that an order was made by the court
2) that the terms of the order were clear, unambiguous, and capable of being
complied with
3) that the order was served on the alleged contemnor or that service was
excused in the circumstances, or service dispensed with
pursuant to the Rules of
4) that the alleged contemnor had knowledge of the terms of the order
5) that the alleged contemnor breached the terms of the order.
6.18 The party bringing the contempt proceedings must prove each of these
elements beyond reasonable doubt.22
6.19 Unless the terms of the order require otherwise, it is unnecessary to
prove that the alleged contemnor committed the breach
with an intention
to disobey the court order.23 It is sufficient to establish that the
alleged contemnor had knowledge
of the terms of the order and they
deliberately and voluntarily committed an act or omitted to do some act which
effect of breaching the order.24
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
(1955) 93 CLR 351, 360;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
75.05(1)(c).
Morgan v State of Victoria
[2008] VSCA 267
(2008) 22 VR 237
County Court Act 1958
19 See also
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
in relation
to contempt arising from failure to comply with a summons.
Advan Investments Pty Ltd v Dean Gleeson Motor Sales Pty Ltd
Grocon Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(2013) 234 IR 59
[2013] VSC 275
Law Institute of Victoria Ltd v Nagle
[2005] VSC 35
Australia Bank Ltd v Juric
[2001] VSC 375
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 66.10;
Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 66.10.
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
Advan Investments Pty
Ltd v Dean Gleeson Motor Sales Pty Ltd
[2003] VSC 201
Law Institute
of Victoria v Nagle
[2005] VSC 35
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
Investments Pty Ltd v Dean Gleeson Motor Sales Pty Ltd
[2003] VSC 201
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
Investments Pty Ltd v Dean Gleeson Motor Sales Pty Ltd
[2003] VSC 201
6.20 As with other types of contempt, the penalties for disobedience contempt
are imprisonment or fine or both
25 and, for a corporation,
sequestration26 or fine or both
27 The flexibility of the available
punishments supports their potential use as a coercive tool. For example, where
the court makes
an order for imprisonment, fine or sequestration, the court can
suspend execution of the order on condition that the contemnor comply
specified terms.28 Where a contemnor has been imprisoned, the court may order
the release of a contemnor at any time.29
6.21 What penalty is imposed for disobedience contempt depends on the purpose
of the proceedings. Where the purpose is to coerce compliance
with a court
order, the penalty may be open ended, for example a fine which accrues until the
breach is remedied or
imprisonment until the contempt has been purged. However, where the purpose
is to punish for a past breach, the term of imprisonment
or the quantum of the
fine is more likely to be fixed.30 The courts have held that where the contempt
involves non-compliance with
court orders that is not wilfully defiant, a
sentence of imprisonment will rarely be appropriate as a disciplinary
sanction.31
Who brings proceedings?
6.22 Where a contempt arises from a breach of court orders made in civil
proceedings it has generally been left to the parties, or
to the court, to bring
proceedings to deal with the contempt.32
6.23 One explanation given for why it has not been the practice for the
Attorney-General (or the DPP) to prosecute contempts arising
proceedings is that, unlike criminal
proceedings, they have ‘no direct control over civil litigation and,
unless informed by a party, could not be expected to know
of interferences with
such litigation’.33
6.24 The result is that disobedience contempts arising from civil
proceedings are generally prosecuted by a private party
even though, if the
contempt is proven, it may lead to imprisonment or fine and possibly
conviction. The result is also that it
is a private party who bears the
financial risk of the contempt proceedings.
6.25 The costs of contempt proceedings are at the discretion of the court,
whether a penalty is imposed or not.34 In Victoria a party
found to be in
contempt will usually be ordered to pay the applicant’s costs of the
proceeding on an indemnity basis.35 This
recognises that the party bringing the
proceeding has vindicated the public interest in upholding the rule of law,36
and that ‘the
litigant who must come to court to enforce an order which
has been breached by contempt, or to have a person dealt with [for] contempt,
should not be out of pocket’.37
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(1);
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.11(1).
26 A sequestration order is directed to named sequestrators who are required
to take possession of the contemnor’s property
and to retain it
until the contempt has been purged and the court has made appropriate orders:
see LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
(online at 25
September 2018) 105 Contempt, ‘8 Punishment, Injunctions and
Enforcement of Orders’ [105–515].
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(2);
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.11(2).
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(4);
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.11(4). See
McNair Anderson Associates Pty Ltd v Hinch
[1985] VicRp 30
[1985] VR 309.
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.12;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.12.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
, 563, 569–70.
Vaysman v Deckers Outdoor Corporation Inc
[2011] FCAFC 17
(2011) 276 ALR 596
(Bromberg J).
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
, 562. For enforcement of orders by
or against a non-party, see
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 66.12 (1), (2);
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules
(Vic) r 66.12 (1), (2). It is also established in case law that a
person, not directly bound by an order, can be guilty of contempt
if that person, with knowledge of the order, does an act which infringes, or
frustrates, the efficacy of the order.
[2016] VSC 19
R v Hinch (No 1)
[2013] VSC 520
Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd v Dagi
[1996] VicRp 62
[1996] 2 VR 117
(Winneke P).
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.14;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.14.
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Gashi & Anor (No 3)
[2011] VSC 448
National Australia Bank Limited v Juric (No
[2001] VSC 398
VICT v CFMMEU
[2018] VSC 794
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Gashi & Anor (No 3)
[2011] VSC 448
[2011] VSC 448
VICT v CFMMEU
[2018] VSC 794
National Australia Bank Limited v Juric (No 2)
[2001] VSC 398
with disobedience contempt
The distinction between civil and criminal
6.26 Almost all forms of contempt are classified as criminal in nature and
are described as criminal contempts. Traditionally, however,
a contempt arising
from breach of a court order or undertaking, particularly in civil
proceedings, has been characterised
differently. Contempts of this kind are
usually described as civil contempts.38 This is not a fixed classification and
circumstances a civil contempt might be converted into a
criminal contempt.
6.27 For example, where it can be shown that the breach of a court order or
undertaking involved deliberate defiance, often referred
‘contumacy’, this may be relevant to whether the contempt is
classified as civil or criminal.39 This is because
where the breach is
contumacious, the purpose of the contempt charge is said to shift from achieving
compliance with the court’s
order to punishing the alleged
contemnor.40
6.28 The High Court has described the distinction between civil and criminal
contempts as illusory41 and unsatisfactory.42 The High
Court has noted that
‘very great difficulty has been experienced in maintaining the distinction
between civil and criminal
contempts and, in particular, in elaborating a
precise and certain criterion which divides one class of contempt from the
The High Court has observed that the concept that disobedience
an order becomes criminal when the primary purpose of exercising the contempt
power changes from vindication of the private rights
of the plaintiff to
vindication of the authority of the court is both complex and artificial.44
6.29 When identifying the uncertainty of the distinction between criminal and
civil contempt, the courts have at the same time noted
that the significance of
the distinction has become less relevant to the procedures adopted, the standard
of proof required and the
penalties available.45
6.30 The General Civil Procedure Rules do not distinguish between
civil and criminal contempts and there is no provision
for different
procedures or punishment based on whether the contempt is civil or
criminal.46 Nonetheless, the courts in
practice continue to make this
distinction. The case law shows that categorisation of a contempt as civil or
criminal is often
determined at the penalty stage of proceedings and is
closely linked to the question of whether or not a conviction
be recorded.47
6.31 The distinction between civil and criminal contempt complicates
proceedings for disobedience contempt because, at the commencement
proceedings, the type of liability the alleged contemnor is exposed to may not
always be entirely clear.48 This aspect of disobedience
contempt proceedings has
been the subject of judicial criticism because of the potential unfairness to an
alleged contemnor who must
determine how to defend the charge
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
, 562. It is noted that part of the Victorian Court of
Appeal’s judgment in this case was appealed to the High Court. In
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Boral Resources (Vic) Pty
[2015] HCA 21
(2015) 256 CLR 375
the appeal was dismissed and the judgment of the
Court of Appeal was affirmed. The judgment of the High Court was concerned with
the nature of contempt proceedings, that is whether they are civil or criminal
proceedings, and the Rules which govern them. The
judgment of the High Court did
not consider in detail the difference between civil and criminal contempts,
except to cite earlier
authorities which had described the distinction as
illusory and an insufficient justification for the allocation of different
of proof for civil and criminal contempt. The judgment of the High
Court is discussed further in Chapter 3 under the heading ‘Adequacy
procedural safeguards’.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
, 564–5, 599;
[2018] VSC 794
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union v Mudginberri Station
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 161 CLR 98
43 Ibid 108.
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
, 541 (McHugh J).
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) Order 75;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) Order 75.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
48 Ibid 527, [279]–[285];
Seymour v Migration Agents Registration
[2006] FCA 965
(2006) 234 ALR 350
, 373 (Rares J).
fully knowing the nature of the liability they are exposed to.49
6.32 Given the complexity and uncertainty generated by the distinction
between civil and criminal contempt, the question arises
whether the
classification of ‘civil contempt’ should be abandoned and
all disobedience contempts should
simply be treated, like other
contempts, as criminal. The answer to this question will likely also be informed
contempt proceedings are still regarded as having a necessary role
to play in enforcing compliance with court orders or whether
in practice
their purpose is now primarily punitive.
Are contempt proceedings necessary to enforce court
6.33 Case law indicates that disobedience contempt proceedings should not be
commenced lightly, particularly when other more appropriate
civil remedies are
available to enforce an order of the court.50 In the Supreme Court case,
Advan Investments Pty Ltd v Dean Gleeson Motor Sales Pty Ltd
Gillard commented:
The enforcement of a court order by the remedy of contempt is indeed drastic,
bearing in mind that the penalty includes imprisonment,
and in my opinion
contempt proceedings to enforce an order should be a remedy of last resort. As a
general rule, the coercive function
of the proceeding should only be employed
when there are no other effective means of doing so. The cases support that
proposition.51
6.34 There are many alternative mechanisms which a party may use to enforce
a court order made in their favour or an undertaking
given to the
court. Examples of alternative mechanisms available to enforce court
orders include:
• Where the judgment or order concerns the possession of land, it may
be enforced by a warrant of possession.52
• Where the judgment or order concerns the payment of money, it may be
enforced by a warrant of seizure and sale,53 attachment
of debts,54 attachment
of earnings,55 a charging order56 or the appointment of a receiver.57
• Where the judgment or order concerns the payment of money, there is
also legislation which specifically regulates the recovery
of judgment debts,
including the
Imprisonment of Fraudulent Debtors Act 1958
(Vic)58 and the
Judgment Debt Recovery Act 1984
(Vic). This later Act, for example,
provides for
- the examination of debtors59
- the making of instalment orders60
Seymour v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2006] FCA 965
(2006) 234 ALR
, 373 (Rares J). In
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v
Grocon Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
593–600, the Victorian Court of Appeal considered whether a disobedience
contempt charge must put the alleged contemnor on
notice that what is alleged is
a criminal contempt. The Court of Appeal concluded that deliberate
defiance or contumacy, the
existence of which might determine whether
non-compliance with an order is a criminal contempt, does not need to be pleaded
of the contempt charge. However, from a procedural fairness perspective,
the Court of Appeal held that the alleged contemnor must
at least be made
aware that the charge is for a criminal offence or may be converted into a
criminal offence if the conduct alleged
is found to have been contumacious.
Morgan v State of Victoria
[2008] VSCA 267
(2008) 22 VR 237
Advan Investments Pty Ltd v Dean Gleeson Motor Sales Pty Ltd
(13 June 2003) [93].The cases cited in support by Gillard J are
Danchevsky v Danchevsky
[1975] Fam 17
at 22–3 and
Ansah v Ansah
[1977] Fam 138
52 This warrant directs the Sheriff to cause the plaintiff to have
possession of the subject land:
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 66.03(a), Order 70;
Supreme Court (General Civil
Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 66.03(a), Order 70.
53 This warrant directs the Sheriff to take and sell the property of the
person bound:
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
r 66.02(1)(a), Order 69;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules
(Vic) r 66.02(1)(a), Order 69;
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
s 111(1)(a).
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 66.02(1)(b), Order
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
66.02(1)(b), Order 71;
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 66.02(1)(c), Order
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
66.02(1)(c), Order 72;
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 66.02(1)(d), Order
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
66.02(1)(d), Order 73.
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) rr 66.02(1)(e),
66.02(2)(a), Order 74;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) rr 66.02(1)(e), 66.02(2)
58 For discussion of the
Imprisonment of Fraudulent Debtors Act
interacts with the Supreme and County Courts’ powers to commit
for contempt, see
Morgan v State of Victoria
[2008] VSCA 267
(2008) 22 VR 237
Judgment Debt Recovery Act 1984
- the stay of enforcement of the judgment when an instalment order is in
- the enforcement of instalment orders in the event of default.62
• Where the judgment or order concerns the delivery of goods, it may be
enforced by a warrant of delivery.63
• Where the order relates to interrogatories, discovery or the
production of documents, other remedies for failure to comply
include that the
court may dismiss the action, strike out the defence, enter judgment for
non-compliance and make orders as to costs.64
• Where the judgment or order requires the person bound to do an act
and the person bound does not do the act, the court may
order substituted
performance, that is, they may direct the act to be done by a person appointed
by the court and direct the person
bound to pay any costs and expenses
occasioned by the default.65
6.35 Where court orders are made under a statutory regime, the relevant Act
may specifically provide for enforcement powers and procedures
and also include
statutory offences in relation to non-compliance. For example:
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) empowers the
court to make family violence intervention orders66 and counselling
orders.67 The Act further provides
that breach of a family violence
intervention order is an offence punishable by imprisonment or fine or both.68
Likewise, a failure,
without reasonable excuse, to attend counselling as
ordered is an offence liable to a penalty not exceeding 10 penalty
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic) regulates the power of various
courts to make proceeding suppression orders, broad suppression orders and
closed court orders.
The Act creates offence provisions in relation to breach of
orders made under the Act.70
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) contains provisions dealing with
the powers of courts to sentence offenders convicted of a range of criminal
of that Act is concerned with contravention of sentencing
orders and includes a number of offence provisions, for example, in relation
breach of a community correction order71 or breach of a fine conversion
Fines Reform Act 2014
(Vic), in conjunction with the
Sentencing Act,73 provides for the management, collection and enforcement of
court-imposed fines.
Section 378
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) provides for the enforcement of fines against children.
In particular,
section 19(1)
provides that a judgment debtor
who has the means to pay the instalments under an instalment order
and persistently and
wilfully and without an honest and reasonable excuse
defaults in the payment of those instalments shall be liable to
imprisonment
for not more than 40 days.
63 This warrants directs the Sheriff to cause the subject goods to be
delivered to the plaintiff or, if the Sheriff cannot do this
to levy the
property of the person bound for the assessed value of the goods:
Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 66.04(1)(a);
Supreme Court
(General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 66.04(1)(a);
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
64 See, eg,
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) rr 24.02,
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) rr 24.02,
Civil Procedure Act 2010
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 66.11(1);
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 66.11(1);
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
s 135(2)(c)
Magistrates’ Court General Civil Procedure Rules 2010
66.11(1). See also
Vella v Waybecca Pty Ltd (No 2)
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Open Courts Act 2013
Sentencing Act 1991
statutory enforcement and non-compliance offence provisions do not necessarily
oust the disobedience contempt powers and
particularly the inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. In some contexts,
the contempt jurisdiction
and power of the courts are specifically preserved.74
However, the
Victorian Criminal Proceedings Manual,
published by the
Judicial College of Victoria, advises that where applicable, these specific
statutory offences should be used in
preference to general contempt
6.37 In view of the range of alternative enforcement options outlined above,
it is arguable that it is no longer necessary for parties
to have recourse to
contempt proceedings as a means to compel compliance with court orders.
Possible reforms to disobedience contempt
6.38 The ability of courts to enforce their orders is of critical importance
to the proper administration of justice.
6.39 As Justice Vincent in the Victorian Court of Appeal noted in
The status and enforceability of orders of the Court must be maintained if
our system of civil dispute resolution is to possess efficacy
and the respect of
the community. As a general proposition, those who treat such orders with
the contumelious disregard
demonstrated in the present case must anticipate
that they will be subject to significant sanctions, including, where
appropriate,
incarceration. The principles of general and specific
deterrence are applicable to such situations in order to protect not
rights created or vindicated by court orders but also the status of such orders
and the very viability of the process itself.76
6.40 The law of disobedience contempt therefore serves two interconnected
• coercing compliance with court orders and undertakings for the
benefit of the party in whose favour the order was made
• punishing non-compliance with court orders and undertakings in order
to safeguard the authority of the court and ensure that
the public has
confidence in the fact that court orders cannot be disobeyed without
consequence.
6.41 As a result of these dual purposes, disobedience contempt proceedings
may be characterised as hybrid in nature and considerable
has been generated focused on determining what laws, principles and
procedures should apply.77 In
Hearne v Street
, Justice Kirby
commented that the law of civil contempt:
as conventionally understood, lacks conceptual coherence and is replete with
uncertainties, inadequacies and fictions. It calls out
for re-expression or
reform. Despite proposals for legislative change, such reform has thus far
failed to materialise.78
6.42 Disobedience contempt proceedings are generally prosecuted by a
private party even though, if the contempt is
proven, it may result
in the imposition of a punishment and, possibly, a conviction. Further,
despite the penalties
that may be imposed, the proceedings do not
attract all the procedural safeguards traditionally available to an
accused facing a serious criminal charge. Moreover, as a result of the
ongoing distinction between civil and criminal
contempt, proceedings can be
commenced and tried without the alleged contemnor knowing, until the penalty
stage, whether the contempt,
if proven, will amount to a criminal offence.
74 See, eg,
Open Courts Act 2013
75 Judicial College of Victoria,
Victorian Criminal Proceedings Manual
(Web Page, 26 February 2018), [8.3.2] <
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/
eManuals/VCPM/index.htm#27318.htm>. See also
R v Nationwide News Pty Ltd
[2008] VSC 526
(2008) 22 VR 116
, 129 (Mandie J).
Miller v Eurovox Pty Ltd
[2004] VSCA 211
77 See, eg,
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon
Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527.
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36
(2008) 235 CLR 125
, 136 (Kirby J).
other manifestations of contempt, disobedience contempt has been subject to
review in other Australian and overseas jurisdictions.79
A common theme of the
recommendations from these reviews is that the law of disobedience contempt
should be subject to some degree
of legislative reform to clarify:
• when and for what purpose proceedings may be commenced
• what procedures should govern the proceedings
• who should be empowered to commence proceedings
• what penalties should apply.
6.44 Key aspects of some of these recommendations are summarised below.
The differences between them highlight that the extent
to which it is
necessary for parties to have recourse to contempt proceedings to enforce
court orders is an important consideration
in whether and how
disobedience contempt is reformed.
Australian Law Reform Commission
recommendations
6.45 The Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) in its 1987 report
recommended abolishing the common law of civil contempt and replacing
• a statutory form of proceedings for civil enforcement of court orders
which could be commenced only by the party in whose
favour the order was made.
The ALRC recommended that the penalties available in such proceedings should
imprisonment for a fixed term with the power to order earlier release if
the contempt is purged; accruing fines subject to a
daily limit and maximum
cap; sequestration; and other sanctions.80
• an indictable offence of wilful failure or refusal to comply with an
order of the court in such a way as to constitute a flagrant
challenge to the
authority of the court. The ALRC recommended that the court should be able to
direct that one of its officers institute
a prosecution for the offence.81
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
recommendations
6.46 The Law Reform Commission of Western Australia (WA Commission) concluded
that the civil jurisdiction of contempt by disobedience
should be abolished and
replaced by offence provisions:82
• an indictable offence, defined to include an element that the
defendant wilfully disobeyed the order or undertaking, but with
available that the disobedience was due to a failure, based on reasonable
grounds, to understand the nature of the obligation
imposed by the order
• a lesser offence, not involving an element of wilful
disobedience.83
6.47 The WA Commission recommended that maximum penalties should apply to
both offences84 and that imprisonment should only be available
in relation to
the wilful disobedience offence.85
79 See, eg, Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Contempt of Court and Other
Offences and Torts Involving the Administration of Justice
(Issues Paper No
10, 2016); Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003); Law Commission (New
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A Modern Statute
Report No 140 (2017); The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35,
December 1987).
80 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
lxxxiv–vii. 81 Ibid 326 [561].
82 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 95.
83 Ibid 98.
84 Ibid 107.
85 Ibid 98.
respect to applicable procedures, it was recommended that the more serious
indictable offence for wilful disobedience should
be tried according to the
ordinary rules for indictable offences. However, it was recommended that the
summary jurisdiction should
be retained for the lesser offence, with a proviso
that there should be a prohibition against the same judicial officer hearing the
disobedience contempt matter as had made the original order or as had been
presiding when the undertaking was made.86
6.49 In relation to the lesser offence, it was also recommended that
provision be made for a plaintiff to apply to the
presiding judge for leave
to initiate proceedings for the lesser offence of disobedience contempt
within the summary jurisdiction
of that court.87
New Zealand Law Commission recommendations
6.50 The New Zealand Law Commission (NZ Commission) also recommended that new
statutory provisions should be enacted to replace the
common law in respect of
disobedience contempt. However, the NZ Commission did not consider that these
should take the form of offence
provisions. The NZ Commission recommended as
We agree that the party in whose favour the court makes an order should
retain the ability to enforce that order through the ultimate
sanction of
contempt, because without contempt the party would not have adequate civil
enforcement remedies. We agree with submitters
that prosecuting an offence does
not give the party an effective remedy. ... We
therefore recommend enacting a statutory form of contempt for responding to
breaches of court orders, rather than a criminal offence.88
6.51 The new provisions proposed by the NZ Commission contemplate that either
a person who has obtained an ‘applicable court
order’ or the
Solicitor-General would be able apply to the court for an order that the other
party has failed to comply with
the order.89 An ‘applicable court
order’ would not include an order requiring the payment of money or an
order relating
to the recovery of land. However, it would include an undertaking
given to the court.90
6.52 The courts would not be empowered to initiate this form of contempt
proceedings of their own motion.91
6.53 Under the proposed new provisions, where it is proven beyond reasonable
doubt that the other party has, without reasonable excuse,
intentionally failed
to comply with the order, the court would be empowered to make an enforcement
order which may include imposing
a term of imprisonment or a fine. The
Commission recommended that these
penalties be subject to a maximum limit and recommended that this be set at
six months for imprisonment and $25,000 for a fine.92
86 Ibid 101.
87 Ibid 102.
88 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 100 [5.61]. 89 Ibid [5.62].
90 Ibid 100 [5.63], 101 [5.65].
91 Ibid 100 [5.62].
92 Ibid 101 [5.66]–[5.67].
25 Is there a need to retain the law of disobedience contempt?
26 If the law of disobedience contempt is to be retained:
(a) What benefit does the distinction between civil and criminal contempt
provide? Should this distinction be maintained?
(b) Should the common law of disobedience contempt be replaced by statutory
provisions? If so, should it be replaced by statutory
offence provisions and/or
a statutory procedure for civil enforcement of court orders and undertakings? In
either case,
i. Who should be responsible for and/or be able to commence
proceedings?
ii. What should the party commencing proceedings be required to establish
and to what standard of proof?
iii. What penalties should apply?
sub judice contempt
82 Introduction
85 Issues with sub judice contempt
97 Sub judice contempt and the fair
Suppression orders and take-down
Possible reforms to sub judice
by publication (1)—sub judice contempt
Introduction
7.1 This chapter considers contempt by publication which interferes with or
prejudices legal proceedings. This manifestation of contempt
is also known as
sub judice contempt. Today, the law of sub judice contempt is facing new
challenges which not only test the technical
and operational adaptability of the
offence, but also whether the law and the assumptions on which it is based, are
compatible with
ensuring a fair trial in the 21st century.1
7.2 The law of sub judice contempt operates to restrict the publication of
material which has, as a matter of practical reality, a
real and definite
tendency to prejudice or embarrass legal proceedings pending in court at the
time of publication.2 Sub judice means
‘under judicial
consideration’.
7.3 Sub judice contempt aims to ensure a fair trial by quarantining jurors
from extraneous information. As stated by Justice Dixon
DPP v Johnson
& Yahoo!7 (Yahoo!7)
the purpose of the law of sub judice contempt:
is to ensure that the actions of those involved, whether directly or
indirectly, with any proceeding that is subject to adjudication
in the courts
do not interfere with or compromise the administration of justice. Conduct
by a publication that interferes
with the due administration of justice by
materially prejudicing the fair hearing of a criminal trial before a jury
is classified
contempt of court.3
7.4 The law of sub judice contempt also seeks to ensure a fair trial by:
• reinforcing the rules of evidence which ensure that the material
before a jury to make their decision is relevant to the
charge being heard and
to uphold the assumption that the accused person is innocent until proven
• protecting the integrity5 of the trial itself and the efficient
running of proceedings6
• ensuring justice is ‘seen to be done’7 by avoiding the
risk that decisions appear to the public and the parties
involved to be
influenced by the media.8
1 Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair
Trial in the 21st Century - Has Trial by Jury Been Caught
in the World Wide
Criminal Law Journal
, 105; Zak Rich, ‘The
Past and Future of Sub Judice Contempt: A Historically Contingent Rhetoric, a
Modern Age Threat, and the
Lessons to be Learned from the United States’
Media and Arts Law Review
361, 372–3; Bell, Virginia,
‘How to preserve the integrity of jury trials in a mass media age’
Judicial Review
, 314; Chief Justice Spigelman, ‘The
Internet and the Right to a Fair Trial’
Criminal Law Journal
, 332; Michael Chesterman, ‘OJ and the Dingo: How Media Publicity
Relating to Criminal Cases Tried by Jury is Dealt with in
Australia and
(1997) 45(1)
The American Journal of Comparative Law
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
(Dixon CJ, Fullagar, Kitto and Taylor JJ);
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
, 34 (Wilson J).
DPP (Vic) v Johnson & Yahoo!7
[2016] VSC 699
4 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 19 [2.18]. See also Law Reform Commission of Western
Review of the Law of Contempt
(Report, Project No 93, June
2003)) 18–19.
5 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 19.
6 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 31 [1.70].
R v Sussex Justices; Ex parte McCarthy
[1923] EWHC KB 1
[1924] 1 KB 256
, 259 (Hewart
8 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 19 [2.19].
7.5 Sub judice contempt engages with the principle of open justice, which
requires that the administration of justice by courts
takes place in
public.9 Sub judice contempt does not restrict the publication of material
which is a fair and accurate
report of court proceedings. The law only
restricts the publication of extraneous information which may be
prejudicial
until court proceedings are complete.10
7.6 Sub judice contempt limits the principle of freedom of expression, which
is provided ‘partial protection’ by common
law and rules of
statutory interpretation.11 As the High Court has recognised, freedom of
expression must sometimes be restrained
in order to protect other aspects of the
public interest, such as the proper administration of justice.12
7.7 However, the courts have recognised that the summary power to punish for
sub judice contempt should be exercised only in exceptional
circumstances.13
Where there is significant public interest in the matter being discussed, the
right to a fair trial may be overridden.14
7.8 The balancing of the principles of a right to a fair trial, open justice
and freedom of expression, means the law of sub judice
contempt must be flexible
enough to adapt to novel types of publication and circumstances which might
interfere with a fair trial.15
this flexibility also creates uncertainty and inconsistency in how the law is
defined, and in its scope and application.
7.9 The law of sub judice contempt is underpinned by the following
assumptions:
• Media publicity can influence jurors by diverting them from the
evidence before them, contributing to preconceptions which
will make them
partial and unreliable when making their decision.16
• These preconceptions and prejudices will survive the length of a
trial and deliberations despite judicial directions.17
• The public accesses news information through traditional media such
as newspapers, television and radio broadcasts18 and such
news information can
be controlled, ‘taken-down’ or prevented from being published.19
7.10 Further, the law of sub judice contempt presupposes that jurors
are more susceptible to media publicity than are
judges or magistrates
(judicial officers) who are considered less likely to be influenced or
biased. This perception originated
from a distrust held by a
‘formally educated and socially privileged judiciary’ about the
ability of the rest
of the community to make a decision based on the
information before them.20
Scott v Scott
[1913] AC 417, 435 (Viscount Haldane LC);
Dickason v Dickason
[1913] ArgusLawRp 109
(1913) 17 CLR 50
, 51 (Barton ACJ; Isaacs, Gavan
Duffy, Powers and Rich JJ). See also
Russell v Russell
(1976) 134 CLR
, 505 (Barwick CJ); 520 (Gibbs J); 532–3 (Stephen J);
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR 506
, 530 [20] (French CJ).
10 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 19 [2.17].
Brown v Members of the Classification Review Board of the Office of
Film and Literature Classification
[1998] FCA 319
(1998) 154 ALR 67
, 76–7 (French
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
, 611–12 (Brennan J), citing
Hinch v Attorney-General (Victoria)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 18 (Mason CJ).
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
(Dixon CJ, Fullagar, Kitto and Taylor JJ).
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 22 (Mason CJ);
Bread Manufacturers Ltd; Re Truth and Sportsman Ltd
[1937] NSWStRp 22
(1937) 37 SR (NSW) 242
242 (Jordan CJ);
Victoria v Australian Building Construction Employees’
and Builders’ Labourers’ Federation
[1982] HCA 31
(1982) 152 CLR 25
, 56 (Gibbs
15 Ian Cram,
Borrie & Lowe: The Law of Contempt
(LexisNexis, 4th
ed, 2010) 78.
16 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 22; The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 159–60 [280].
17 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) xlii.
18 Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair
Trial in the 21st Century—Has Trial by Jury Been
Caught in the World Wide
Criminal Law Journal
19 Zak Rich, ‘The Past and Future of Sub Judice Contempt: A
Historically Contingent Rhetoric, a Modern Age Threat, and the Lessons
Learned from the United States’ (2010) 15
Media and Arts Law Review
361, 372–3; Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the
Right to a Fair Trial in the 21st Century—Has Trial
by Jury Been Caught in
the World Wide Web?’
Criminal Law Journal
20 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 122 [484]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
7.11 There are conflicting views as to the validity of this assumption but
the weight of authority21 and the operation of the law
of sub judice contempt
appear to support the view that judicial officers are not susceptible to the
same extent as jurors.22
7.12 The validity of these assumptions and the operation of sub judice
contempt are, however, being questioned in the context of the
21st century.
7.13 New media have significantly transformed the media landscape so that
traditional distinctions between print, broadcast and online
news are now
dissipating. News is increasingly accessed online through digital platforms such
as Facebook, Twitter and Google,23
publications are permanent, immediate,
accessible and may be published and disseminated outside the jurisdiction not
just by media
outlets, but also by members of the general public who may be
unidentifiable.24
7.14 These issues are not new. In 1974, the United Kingdom’s Committee
on Contempt of Court considered the advent of television
and the need for
contempt of court laws to adapt to ‘modern conditions’:
The ambit and power of the press have increased enormously. It is only fair
to say that this power is on the whole used responsibly,
but the potential
dangers to the administration of justice are obvious, and new forms of
communication such as television, can make
a powerful impact on the
7.15 The ‘ambit and power’ of the media in today’s context
of online news and social media have not only affected
the volume of
information that can be published by a wider group of individuals, but have
also changed the way news information
is accessed and consumed. In turn, the
influence of the media on individuals may be of a different nature to when the
news was confined
to a newspaper headline or television bulletin. These changes
not only impact the technical operation of sub judice contempt, but
court’s ability to enforce the law and protect jurors of the 21st
7.16 Conflicting judicial opinion and research about the influence of media
publicity on jurors and their decision-making capabilities
also raise questions
whether they can be trusted to make
decisions based only on the admissible
evidence before them.27
7.17 Accordingly, at the heart of this chapter are the questions of whether
or not the assumptions on which sub judice contempt rest
are still valid, and
whether the law is appropriate for, and is capable of adapting to, the modern
7.18 This chapter begins by considering a number of technical and operational
issues with the law of sub judice contempt which have
been the subject of
extensive review, and some reform, in other jurisdictions.
7.19 The larger question of whether the law of sub judice contempt can
still operate effectively to ensure a fair trial in the
modern media age is
then considered. A number of options for reform are then discussed and
finally some questions for consideration
are set out.
Bell v Stewart
(1920) 28 CLR 419, 425–6 (Knox CJ,
Gavan Duffy and Starke JJ);
A-G (UK) v Times Newspapers Ltd
, 301 (Reid LJ);
Victoria v Australian Building Construction
Employees’ and Builders’ Labourers’ Federation
[1982] HCA 31
, 58 (Gibbs CJ), 102 (Mason J), 136 (Wilson J).
22 See discussion in The Law Reform Commission,
35, 1987) 218–19 [377].
23 Senate Select Committee on the Future of Public Interest Journalism,
Parliament of Australia,
(February 2018) 23; Sora Park et al
Digital News Report: Australia 2018
(News & Media Research
Centre, University of Canberra, 2018) 50; Culture Department for Digital, Media
and Sport (UK),
The Cairncross Review: A Sustainable Future for Journalism
(February 2019) 14.
24 For a discussion of the unique characteristics of online publications, see
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
HM Advocate v
Beggs (No 2)
(2001) 4 SLT 139;
Fairfax Digital Australia and New Zealand
Pty Ltd v Ibrahim
[2012] NSWCCA 125
(2012) 83 NSWLR 52.
25 Committee on Contempt of Court (UK),
Report of the Committee on
Contempt of Court
(December 1974) 5.
26 See Marilyn Warren, ‘Open Justice in the Technological Age’
[2014] MonashULawRw 5
(2014) 40(1)
Monash University Law Review
; Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline
Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair Trial in the 21st Century—Has
Trial by Jury Been
Caught in the World Wide Web?’
Law Journal
; Jacqueline Horan, ‘Communicating with Jurors in the
Twenty-first Century’
Australian Bar Review
Chief Justice Spigelman, ‘The Internet and the Right to a Fair
Criminal Law Journal
; Justice Kirby,
‘Delivering Justice in a Democracy III—the Jury of the Future’
Australian Bar Review
R v Dupas (No 2)
[2005] VSCA 212
(2005) 12 VR 601
, 627 [81] (Nettle JA)
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
, 614–15 (Brennan J);
Gilbert v R
(2000) 201 CLR 414
, 425 [31] (McHugh J);
(Ruling No 7)
[2008] VSC 437
[14] (Lasry J). For a summary of the
research, see Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st Century
Federation Press, 2012).
with sub judice contempt
The tendency test
7.20 The test for sub judice contempt is set out in the High Court case
Hinch v Attorney-General (Victoria) (Hinch)
that the matter published has, as a matter of practical reality, a tendency
to interfere with the due course of justice. The impugned
material must exhibit
a real and definite tendency to prejudice or embarrass pending proceedings
7.21 The cour
ts have held that the tendency of the
publication to prejudice proceeding is assessed at the time of
publication alongside
a consideration of the nature of the publication
and other circumstantial factors.29 These factors include:
• the content of the publication30
• the nature of the proceedings that may be affected31
• the profile of the person making the statement or publishing the
• the size of the publication33 and the audience34
• the stage of the legal proceedings35
• the time between publication and the legal proceedings36
• whether prejudicial material has already been published.37
7.22 It appears that directions given to a jury to ignore media publicity are
not considered a relevant consideration when determining
the tendency of a
publication to prejudice an accused’s right to a fair trial. This is
despite the ‘overwhelming judicial
experience’ that juries follow
such directions. As stated by Justice Lasry in
to take account
of directions as disproving the publication’s tendency to prejudice
necessarily significantly undermine the law’s protections of the
integrity of the jury process. It remains essential that
the media respect the
restraints imposed upon them by the law of contempt.38
7.23 It has also been stated that the fact a trial was aborted because of
prejudicial media coverage is not a relevant consideration
determining whether that publication is contemptuous.
The reason for this is that a judge’s consideration of whether
or not to abort a trial does not involve hearing from
the publisher of the
prejudicial publication and the relevant issues are different.39 However,
the Victorian Supreme Court has
stated that the fact a trial was
aborted as a result of the prejudicial article will be considered in relation
to the penalty.40 For example, in
R v Spectator Staff
, the fact the news
article, which included material which had been presented the jury’s
absence, had led to the discharging
of a jury was considered when sentencing the
respondents.41
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 34 (Wilson J).
DPP (Vic) v Johnson & Yahoo!7
[2016] VSC 699
Hinch (No 1)
[2013] VSC 520
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 34 (Wilson J).
[2013] VSC 520
[94] (Kaye J) citing
A-G (NSW) v
John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
(1985) 6 NSWLR 695
, 699 (Samuels JA), 711
(McHugh JA);
R v The Age Co Ltd
[2006] VSC 479
[16] (Cummins J). The
delay between the internet publication and trial of accused did not
affect the finding of contempt
because the publication was about prior
convictions, custodial history and about graphic content and so would remain in
the public’s
R v Hinch (No 1)
[2013] VSC 520
[94] (Kaye J) citing
A-G (NSW) v
John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
(1985) 6 NSWLR 695
, 711 (McHugh JA).
DPP (Vic) v Johnson & Yahoo!7
[2016] VSC 699
R v Spectator Staff
[1999] VSC [107].
41 Ultimately a stay of proceedings for the remaining charge was allowed with
no eventual retrial:
R v Spectator Staff
[1999] VSC 431
7.24 The tendency test has been formulated by the courts in different ways,
with the differing formulations being used interchangeably.42
These formulations
include that:
• The publication must create a
substantial risk of serious
interference.
• The publication must reveal as a matter of
practical reality
tendency to interfere with the due course of justice in a pending case.44
• The publication’s interference with the proceedings is
7.25 These different formulations have been criticised for being uncertain
and creating a broad scope of liability.46
Chief Justice Mason stated that the ‘substantial
risk’ approach provided an appropriate balance between the administration
of justice and freedom of expression.47
7.27 The law reform commissions of New South Wales and Western Australia also
considered that the ‘substantial risk’ test
was an appropriate test,
being more precise, allowing the media greater certainty about what might
constitute sub judice contempt,
creating a higher threshold for liability and
therefore not excessively infringing on freedom of expression.48
7.28 The New South Wales Law Reform Commission recommended a statutory
formulation of the test comprising two elements:
1) that there is a substantial risk jury members or witnesses will become
aware of the publication
2) that there is a substantial risk jury members or witnesses will recall the
content of the publication at the relevant time.49
7.29 This approach reflects research indicating that a juror’s recall
of pre-trial publicity is piecemeal, whereas their recall
of in-trial publicity
is more prominent and therefore has a greater tendency to prejudice.50
7.30 As another way to help clarify this area of the law, the Australian,51
New South Wales,52 and Irish53 law reform commissions
considered introducing a
prescribed list of the types of statement that may be capable of creating a
substantial risk of prejudice
to a fair trial.
7.31 The identified statements reflect the common types of statement found to
constitute sub judice contempt at common law. For
• statements as to the accused’s guilt or innocence54
• prior convictions55
• confessions or admissions by the accused56
• statements about the character of the accused57
42 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 68 [4.11].
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 27–8 (Mason CJ);
Victoria v Australian Building Construction Employees’ and
Builders’ Labourers’ Federation
[1982] HCA 31
(1982) 152 CLR 25
, 99 (Mason
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
(Dixon CJ, Fullagar, Kitto and Taylor JJ);
Victoria v Australian Building
Construction Employees’ and Builders’ Labourers’ Federation
[1982] HCA 31
(1982) 152 CLR 25
, 133 (Wilson J), 166, 176–7 (Brennan J);
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 34 (Wilson J), 70 (Toohey J).
Bell v Stewart
(1920) 28 CLR 419, 432 (Isaacs and Rich JJ);
parte Bread Manufacturers Ltd; Re Truth and Sportsman Ltd
[1937] NSWStRp 22
(1937) 37 SR (NSW)
, 248 (Jordan CJ).
46 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
[288]–[295]; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by
Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000) [4.6]–[4.9]. See also
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 27 (Mason CJ).
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 27–8 (Mason CJ).
48 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 69 [4.13]; Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of Contempt
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 29.
49 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 64 [4.3].
50 Michael Chesterman, Janet Chan and Shelley Hampton,
Prejudicial Publicity—An Empirical Study of Criminal Jury Trials in New
South Wales
(Report, February 2001) 200 [504]; New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 74 [4.27].
51 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 180
52 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 77–80 [4.40]–[4.45].
53 The Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Report on Contempt of Court
(Report No 46, September 1994) 36.
DPP (NSW) v Wran
(1987) 7 NSWLR 616.
R v Hinch (No 1)
[2013] VSC 520
R v The Herald and Weekly Times
(2007) VR 248;
A-G (NSW) v Willesee
[1980] 2 NSWLR 143.
A-G (NSW) v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 368.
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15.
• interviews with witnesses59
• photographs or video footage of an accused where it is reasonably
probable that identification will be an issue at trial.60
7.32 However, the New South Wales Law Reform Commission (the NSW Commission)
noted that a prescriptive list, even if non-exhaustive,
may restrict freedom of
speech by identifying certain types of statement and information as prejudicial
when such statements may
not always have that effect.61 In addition, the NSW
Commission noted that such a list could also preclude some relevant categories,
thereby allowing the media to escape liability.62
Accordingly, the NSW Commission dismissed this approach on the basis it would
be inflexible and would potentially complicate and confuse
7.33 These concerns are particularly relevant to new media, whereby certain
publications may have a greater tendency to interfere
with proceedings based on
the way in which they are published and disseminated.64 As the New Zealand Law
Commission (NZ Commission)
identified:
the advent of the internet and the consequential durability and potential
reach of any publication now pose significant challenges
for the Court when
applying the “real risk” test. Some internet-based publications and
social media posts go viral. Consequently
they have much greater potential
impact than those with more limited circulation or dissemination.65
The definition of
‘publication’
7.34 In order for there to be sub judice contempt, an act of
‘publication’ must occur. The courts have held that the act
publication occurs when the information ‘is made available to the general
public’ or to ‘a section of the public
which is likely to comprise
those having a connection with the case’.66
7.35 This type of publication traditionally occurs when information is
published by print and broadcast media outlets, but also applies
publications such as a tweet or blog where there is a sufficiently wide
audience.67
7.36 Publication can also include actions such as giving a speech or an
interview to a journalist, where it is foreseeable that information
communicated to a wider audience.68
7.37 It is unclear whether a social media post communicated to an individual
or private group of people would satisfy the definition
of publication, as well
as whether new forms of media are captured, such as YouTube videos.69
Packer v Peacock
[1912] HCA 8
(1912) 13 CLR 577.
Ex parte Auld re Consolidated Press Ltd
(1936) SR (NSW) 594.
61 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 77–80 [4.40]–[4.45]. 62 Ibid 139
63 Ibid 80 [4.45].
64 Rachel Hews and Nicolas Suzor, ‘“Scum of the Earth”: An
Analysis of Prejudicial Twitter Conversations During
the Baden-Clay Murder
(2017) 40(4)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Jane Johnston et al,
Juries and Social Media: A Report Prepared for the
Victorian Department of Justice
(Report, 2013).
65 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 38 [2.13].
66 Des Butler and Sharon Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
Reuters, 5th ed, 2015) 373 [6.150], citing N Lowe and B Sufrin,
of Contempt
(Butterworths, 3rd ed, 1996) 85. See
Viner v Australian
Building Construction Employees’ and Builders Labourers Federation
(1963) 56 FLR 5
R v Hinch (No 1)
[2013] VSC 520
DPP (NSW) v Wran
(1987) 7 NSWLR 616
A-G (NSW) v TCN Channel
Nine Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 368.
69 See The (England and Wales) Law Commission’s consideration of these
issues in its review of its contempt legisation and the
definition of
‘other communication in whatever form’: Law Commission (England and
Contempt of Court (1): Juror Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013) 12 [2.24]. For a discussion of whether hyperlinks are
considered a ‘publication’ in the context
defamation law, see also Kim Gould, ‘Hyperlinking and Defamatory
Publication: A Question of “Trying to Fit a Square Archaic
Peg into the
Hexagonal Hole of Modernity”?’
Australian Bar Review
7.38 Traditionally, the act of publication of print or broadcast material is
taken to occur at the time70 and place the material was
first made available
to the public or a section of the public.71 By this definition,
publication is a single act which
occurs only when the material was first
made available.72
7.39 However, there is now support for the view that the publication of
information online is taken to occur for as long as the information
available, regardless of whether or not the material is accessed.73 By this
definition, ‘publication’ is a ‘continuing
act’ for as
long as the material is available.74
7.40 This view was stated in the 2010 Victorian Court of Appeal
Digital Media v Mokbel
) in which the nature of online
publications and their potential to prejudice legal proceedings were under
consideration.75
7.41 In this case, the court identified the unique characteristics of
online publications in that they are permanent,76
lack a specific location,77
are still easily accessible by searching once archived,78 and can be copied
and published on other
websites outside Victoria.79
7.42 The permanence of an online publication means that once published the
material continues to be available to a juror or potential
juror. Regardless
of whether or not a juror or potential juror has accessed it, the court process
is exposed to risk.80
7.43 This definition of ‘publication’ as a continuing act gives
rise to two issues for publishers:
• Online publishers could be liable for archived material published
before legal proceedings have commenced as well as
material published after
legal proceedings have concluded if the accused person is charged with another
crime or there is an appeal.
• Online publishers may become liable for material published which is
relevant to proceedings in another jurisdiction, a problem
that also applies to
broadcast or print publications made available in other jurisdictions.
7.44 The NSW Commission considered the definition of
‘publication’, and the issue of when ‘publication’ is
taken to occur. The NSW Commission, referring to the law as it was in 2003,
It would seem, as a matter of principle, that publication of material is
taken to occur at the time of original publication, rather
than regarded as a
continuing process. Otherwise, the sub judice rule would potentially operate too
harshly against publishers ...
Under the current law, every distribution of written or printed material and
every broadcast is treated as a separate act of
publication occurring at
the time of the relevant distribution or broadcast.81
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
(Dixon CJ, Fullagar, Kitto and Taylor JJ);
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
, 70 (Toohey J).
Viner v Australian Building Construction Employees’ and Builders
Labourers Federation
(1963) 56 FLR 5
, 22–3. See also New South Wales
Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000)
88 [3.15]–[3.16].
72 Des Butler and Sharon Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
Reuters, 5th ed, 2015) 377 [6.160].
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
, 265 [65]. The
Court of Appeal distinguished the definition of online publication in the
contempt context from the approach
taken in defamation law whereby publication
occurs when and where the material is accessed: see
Dow Jones v Gutnick
(2002) 210 CLR 575. The definition of online publications as a
‘continuing act’ was adopted from Lord Osborne’s
judgment in
the Scottish High Court case
HM Advocate v Beggs (No 2)
(2001) 4 SLT 139,
145. The New South Wales Court of Appeal supported the view that online
publication is a continuing act, but appeared
to also approve the definition in
whereby the information must be accessed to constitute
publication:
Fairfax Digital Australia and New Zealand Pty Ltd v Ibrahim
[2012] NSWCCA 125
(2012) 83 NSWLR 52.
R v Hinch (No 1)
[2013] VSC 520
[54], where the Victorian Supreme Court of Victoria accepted the definition of
online publications as a ‘continuing act’.
Fairfax Digital Australia and New Zealand Pty Ltd v Ibrahim
[2012] NSWCCA 125
83 NSWLR 52
, 65 [44] (Basten JA).
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248:
order requiring specific internet material be taken down from websites
was set aside because it lacked necessity
given the material was not
current and was unlikely to be accessed by potential jurors. The part
of the order restricting
the publications from putting up future material about
the accused was also set aside because the court should instead rely
on the media to not publish material that would be in contempt. The issues of
necessity and the futility of take-down orders
are considered in
Chapter 10.
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
(Warren CJ and Byrne AJA).
77 Ibid [77] (Warren CJ and Byrne AJA).
78 Ibid [78]–[83] (Warren CJ and Byrne AJA).
79 Ibid 270 [84] (Warren CJ and Byrne AJA).
80 Ibid 265 [65] (Warren CJ and Byrne AJA).
81 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000) 88 [3.15]–[3.16].
7.45 In light of the further development of online news and social media
since the NSW Commission’s report, it is arguable that
a change of view is
needed to accommodate the permanent and accessible nature of online archived
news, as reflected in
7.46 In this context, the Law Commission of England and Wales, in its 2012
review of sub judice contempt and its application to internet
publications,
considered the definition of online publications as a continuing act, noting the
significant burden this placed on
the media to monitor its contents.82 However,
the Commission recommended that the existing definition be maintained, but that
should only arise in circumstances where the publisher had been put on
notice by the Attorney General.83
7.47 The Law Commission of England and Wales also considered whether a
statutory definition of ‘place of publication’
was needed and
whether the reach of the law of sub judice contempt should be wide enough to
capture the ‘mischief’ of
material published abroad which causes
serious prejudice when it is accessed within the United Kingdom.84
7.48 The Law Commission of England and Wales did not form a conclusion on
this issue, but noted instead the complexity of these issues:
At its simplest, criminal content could be created in one country,
saved on servers in a second country, with accessibility
in both the first
and second countries and numerous other third countries as well.85
7.49 Even without the advent of new media, the complexity of this issue has
long been recognised by the courts.
7.50 In 1985 in the New South Wales case
Registrar of the Court of Appeal
, Justice Kirby also acknowledged the problem of jurisdictional
reach and the burden sub judice contempt creates for publishers:
In a large country, divided into many jurisdictions, it is impossible to
expect, and unreasonable to demand, that newspapers, broadcasters
alleged contemnors should be aware of every trial, civil and criminal, being
conducted throughout the country. To impose
upon them strict liability for
contempt of court for any chance utterance, either general or specific, which
might prejudice the
fair trial of a person before the courts would be oppressive
and unreasonable.86
7.51 Similarly, in 2003 the NSW Commission recognised that it would be
‘difficult or impossible’ to prosecute a publisher
who carries out
their business outside of the relevant state where proceedings are on
7.52 However, the reach and potential impact today of online
publications published outside Victoria may be more significant
the past. A recent example is the media coverage of the criminal trial of
George Pell which, despite a suppression
order, was widely covered by the
international media, and so was also accessible online from within
Victoria. While such
global media interest is rare for criminal trials in
Victoria, the case raises questions about the
enforceability of the law of sub judice contempt where a court’s
7.53 Liability of internet intermediaries and the challenges of enforcement
are considered in Chapter 10.
82 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court (1): Juror
Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013) 31 [2.101].
83 Ibid 42 [2.147].
84 Ibid 60 [2.209].
85 Ibid 59 [2.207]. See also: UK Government,
Online Harms White Paper
(Web Page, April 2019) <
www.gov.uk/government/consultations/
online-harms-white-paper>.
Registrar of the Court of Appeal v Willesee
(1985) 3 NSWLR 650
87 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 49–50 [3.11].
88 The DPP issued a motion against local media outlets for ‘aiding and
abetting’ international media outlets. Adam Cooper,
‘DPP Moves to
Jail Editors, Journalists’,
(Melbourne, 27 March 2019);
Richard Ackland, ‘The Media and Contempt of Court’
The Saturday
(Web Page, 6 April 2019) <
www.thesaturdaypaper.com.au/opinion/topic/2019/04/06/the-media-and-contempt-court/15544692007951
The UK Government has discussed the need for an ‘international
approach’ to harmful and illegal content online.
See UK Government,
Online Harms White Paper
(Web Page, April 2019) 66–7 <
www.gov.uk/government/consultations/online-harms-white-paper
definition of ‘pending’
7.54 Sub judice contempt only operates when legal proceedings are before the
courts. This time period is often referred to as ‘pending’.89
7.55 Criminal proceedings commence when a court has become seised of the case
and the criminal law has been ‘set in motion’.90
The courts have
held that criminal proceedings have commenced when:
• a warrant has been issued91
• a person has been arrested (with or without a warrant)92 or
• a person has been arrested and charged.93
7.56 The issue of whether sub judice operates when proceedings are
‘imminent’, for example, during a police manhunt,94
considered both in case law and other law reform reviews.95 The courts have
rejected this as a starting point because it
is imprecise and uncertain.96
7.57 Despite the statutory definition of when proceedings are
‘active’ in the United Kingdom’s
Contempt of Court Act
the media reported to the Law Commission of England and Wales that it
was still difficult to determine when the proceedings were active.
Reasons for
this included the lack of consistent communication from the police about
releasing the names of arrestees or that an
arrestee may be on bail for months
before charges are brought and a trial commences.97
7.58 The effect of this uncertainty is that journalists could be deterred
from reporting on police activities.98
7.59 Proceedings continue to be pending until all avenues of appeal have been
exhausted or an appeal judgment has been handed down.99
7.60 This definition of when proceedings have concluded also gives
rise to uncertainty, for example about whether or not
the law operates to
prevent publicity from impacting a judicial officer who may be delivering the
sentence after the verdict or presiding
over an appeal, well after any jury
involvement has ceased.
R v The Herald & Weekly Times
in 2006, the Victorian
Supreme Court considered whether an editorial published after a plea and before
sentencing was sub judice contempt.
The article included negative depictions of
the convicted man and his character and posed the question as to whether he
‘locked away with no parole’. Justice Harper, citing the
of Appeal,100 held that the editorial did not give rise to a ‘serious
risk that the court would appear by reason of this editorial
to be subject to
outside influence’.101
7.62 In 1987 the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) noted that on the
one hand judicial determination of a sentence may be subject
to preconceptions
and bias, thereby justifying the need for sub judice contempt to continue to
operate. On the other hand, if media
comment on sentencing were restricted, that
would ‘make significant inroads on freedom to discuss a topic of vital
public interest’.102
James v Robinson
[1963] HCA 32
(1963) 109 CLR 593
, 607 (Kitto, Taylor, Menzies
and Owen JJ).
90 Ibid 615–16 (Windeyer J). See also
R v The Herald and Weekly
(2007) VR 248, 271: Smith J considered whether the relevant
proceedings were ‘pending’, although the case was dismissed
Packer v Peacock
[1912] HCA 8
(1912) 13 CLR 577
, 586 (Griffith CJ);
[1963] HCA 32
(1963) 109 CLR 593
, 615 (Windeyer J).
James v Robinson
[1963] HCA 32
(1963) 109 CLR 593.
Packer v Peacock
[1912] HCA 8
(1912) 13 CLR 577
, 586 (Griffith CJ);
v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 368
James v Robinson
[1963] HCA 32
(1963) 109 CLR 593
, 605 (Kitto, Taylor, Menzies
and Owen JJ).
95 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 57.
A-G (NSW) v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 368
James v Robinson
[1963] HCA 32
(1963) 109 CLR 593
, 607. See New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003).
97 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising the
(Consultation Paper, 2012) 8 [2.15].
98 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003).
James v Robinson
[1963] HCA 32
(1963) 109 CLR 593
, 615 (Windeyer J). 100
Herald & Weekly Times Ltd v A-G (Vic)
[2001] VSCA 152.
R v The Herald & Weekly Times Pty Ltd
[2006] VSC 94
102 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 222
Law Commission of England and Wales more recently noted similar concerns about
the potential influence media reporting could
have on a sentencing judge.
However, the Commission also found that there was evidence of many reputable
publishers treating the
final verdict as the end of the ‘active’
period and questioned whether there was a need to bring the law into line with
practice.103
7.64 Further issues with the point at which proceedings are deemed to
conclude were identified by the Law Reform Commission of Western
Australia (WA
Commission):
• The chance of appeal is relatively rare.104
• The ability to extend the time limit for the lodging of an appeal
makes it difficult to determine whether or not all appeal
options have been
exhausted.105
7.65 However, the NSW Commission also noted the influence that media
publicity between the verdict and sentencing could have on parties,
witnesses called into sentencing proceedings or the accused who may be deciding
whether or not to appeal.106
7.66 Accordingly, both the WA and NSW Commissions recommended that
proceedings should be regarded as ending upon a conviction or acquittal
instance, and beginning again if a re-trial is ordered.107 The NSW Commission
added, however, that sub judice contempt should
operate post-verdict but only to
the extent necessary to protect parties (such as witnesses) from prejudicial
publicity.108
The strict liability standard
7.67 Liability for sub judice contempt falls on any person found to be
‘responsible’ for the contents, production, distribution
broadcasting of a publication regardless of their knowledge of the
material.109
7.68 No intention to interfere with the administration of justice is
required.110 However, the court may take culpability into
account when
deciding to exercise its summary jurisdiction and when considering
penalty.111
7.69 Persons who may be responsible for a print publication include
• editors112
• proprietors113
• reporters114
• printers115
• distributors.116
7.70 Persons who may be responsible for a broadcast publication include
• television or radio licensees117
• production companies118
• executive producers119
103 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court
(Consultation Paper, 2012) 10 [2.24].
104 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 32.
106 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 172–3 [7.63]–[7.68].
107 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 33; New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 175.
108 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 177.
A-G (NSW) v Willesee
[1980] 2 NSWLR 143
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
R v The Herald & Weekly Times Pty Ltd
[2008] VSC 251
R v David Syme & Co Ltd
[1982] VicRp 16
[1982] VR 173
R v Griffiths,
Ex parte A-G (UK)
[1957] 2 All ER 379
R v The Age Co Ltd
[2006] VSC 479
R v Spectator Staff
[1999] VSC 107.
James v Robinson
[1963] HCA 32
109 CLR 593
R v Spectator Staff
DPP (Vic) v Johnson & Yahoo!7
[2016] VSC 699
DPP (Vic) v
Johnson & Yahoo!7 (No 2)
[2017] VSC 45
R v Spectator Staff
R v David Syme & Co Ltd
[1982] VicRp 16
[1982] VR 173.
R v Collins
(1984) 15 A Crim R 148
R v Griffiths
All ER 379.
A-G (NSW) v Willesee
[1980] 2 NSWLR 143.
[1956] VicLawRp 40
[1956] VLR 544.
• editors120
• television stations.121
7.71 In the small number of cases that have come before the courts involving
online publications, media companies,122 journalists,123
website editors,124
bloggers125 or social media users have been held responsible.126
7.72 Given the criminal nature of contempt and the ‘extraordinary
procedures and punishments available’, it has been suggested
that strict
liability whereby no intention to prejudice is required, is inconsistent
with the approach taken in other criminal
offences127 and tilts the balance
away from freedom of expression.128
7.73 Accordingly, a number of alternatives to the current strict liability
approach have been proposed.129 These include:
• introducing an actual intention or recklessness element to the
test for liability130
• introducing a requirement to demonstrate negligence by the
defendant131
• creating a defence or defences to cover a situation where there is an
absence of fault and reasonable care has been taken.132
7.74 However, the purpose of sub judice contempt is to protect the
administration of justice and ensure a fair trial. Consequently,
there may be
justifications for the retention of the strict liability approach. In
addition, such an approach helps
to give organisations some incentive to
set up systems to prevent prejudicial publication133 and avoids some of the
of applying the requirement of an intention to a
corporation.134
7.75 The extent to which sub judice contempt liability applies, and can
apply, to those involved in online publications remains uncertain.
7.76 The United Kingdom Attorney-General’s Office noted in its 2019
report on the impact of social media, the uncertainty of
liability around social
media posts. In the scenario where members of the public post contemptuous
comments below a media organisation’s
news article on a social media site,
is the media organisation or the digital platform responsible for the
7.77 The liability of internet intermediaries who often do not have knowledge
of the content being published, or who publish outside
the jurisdiction, is
considered in Chapter 10.
R v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1983] TASRp 18
[1983] Tas R 161.
A-G (NSW) v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 368.
DPP (Vic) v Johnson & Yahoo!7 (No 2)
[2017] VSC 45.
R v The Age Co Ltd
[2006] VSC 479.
R v Hinch (No 1)
[2013] VSC 520.
127 President Kirby noted that the requirement at criminal law that an
intention be shown, should also apply to sub judice contempt:
of the Court of Appeal v Willesee
(1985) 3 NSWLR 650
128 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000) 172 [5.20]. 129 Ibid 174 [5.29].
130 This approach was rejected by the New South Wales, Australian and Ireland
law reform commissions, as it imposed too great a burden
on the prosecution to
prove the intention or recklessness: New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 102 [5.11]; The Law
Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 144 at [260]; Law Reform
Commission of Ireland,
Report on Contempt of Court
(Report No 46,
September 1994) [6.10].
131 Law Reform Commission of Canada,
Contempt of Court
(Report No 17,
1982) 55; Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Report on Contempt of Court
(Report No 46, September 1994) [6.10].
132 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 145
[262]; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 181–2; Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A Modern Statute
(Report No 140,
2017) 54 [2.93]; Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the
Law of Contempt
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 37–41. The
failure of a media organisation’s systems has been considered a factor
sentencing: see
R v Herald & Weekly Times Pty Ltd
[2008] VSC 251
DPP (Vic) v Yahoo!7
[2017] VSC 45
R v Spectator Staff
[1999] VSC 107
133 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 142
[259]; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000) 173 [5.22].
134 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 143
[2.59]; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000) 173 [5.23].
135 Attorney-General’s Office (UK),
Response to Call for Evidence on
the Impact of Social Media on the Administration of Justice
(March 2019)
8–9 [2.18].
public interest principle
7.78 Although a publication may be found to have a tendency to prejudice
legal proceedings, a contempt will not arise if the publication
was a fair and
accurate report of proceedings136 or the publication relates to a matter of
public interest.137 This part considers
the public interest principle, the
formulation and operation of which is uncertain.
7.79 The principle comes from the 1937 New South Wales case
Ex parte Bread
Manufacturers Ltd; Re Truth and Sportsman
where it was stated:
... if in the course of the ventilation of a question of public concern
matter is published which may prejudice a party in the conduct
of a law suit, it
does not follow that a contempt has been committed. The case may be one in which
as between competing matters of
public interest the possibility of prejudice to
a litigant may be required to yield to other and superior considerations.138
7.80 The High Court in
held that the principle was to
be applied by a balancing approach which considers whether the
administration of justice
is outweighed by the public’s interest in
the free discussion of public affairs.139 Little guidance exists, however,
as to what matters of public discussion would outweigh the administration of
justice but for a ‘major constitutional
‘imminent threat of nuclear disaster’
7.81 The balancing approach has been recognised as expanding the scope of the
defence to include publications which deal specifically
with legal proceedings,
rather than just those publications in which the discussion of the legal
proceedings arises as an ‘incidental
but not intended
by-product’.141
7.82 Despite this expansion, it is unclear whether the public interest
principle applies to publications where the ‘pith and
substance’142
of the report goes to the guilt or innocence of the accused.143 To date, the
courts have considered it unlikely
that the principle would apply in these
circumstances.144
7.83 The effect of this uncertainty around the scope and application of the
principle is that publishers may err on the side of caution
and not publish
material even if the subject is of significant public interest. Alternatively,
some other publishers may ‘dress
up’ the material as being in the
public interest, as a means of discussing specific legal proceedings.145
7.84 Law reform commissions have taken a range of approaches to the public
interest principle in an attempt to clarify the law and
to balance the relative
importance of a fair trial and freedom of expression:
• The ALRC recommended a narrower construction of the public interest
principle whereby the publisher should prove that the
publication was an
‘integral part of the discussion and that the discussion would suffer
significantly if the publication were
delayed until the risk of prejudice had
ceased’.146
136 A report is fair and accurate if it is ‘one which a person of
ordinary intelligence using reasonable care might reasonably
regard as giving a
fair summary of the proceedings’
: Ex parte Terrill; Re Consolidated
[1937] NSWStRp 23
(1937) 37 SR (NSW) 255
, 259 (Jordan CJ).
Ex parte Bread Manufacturers Ltd; Re Truth and Sportsman Ltd
[1937] NSWStRp 22
(1937) 37 SR (NSW) 242
, 249 (Jordan CJ). 138 Ibid.
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 22–8 (Mason CJ),
37–45 (Wilson J), 46–53 (Deane J), 68–9 (Toohey J), 83–7
(Gaudron J);
Victoria v Australian Building Construction Employees’ and
Builders’ Labourers’ Federation
[1982] HCA 31
(1982) 152 CLR 25
, 56 (Gibbs
CJ), 74–5 (Stephen J), 95–8 (Mason J),133–7 (Wilson J), 175
(Brennan J).
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 26 (Mason CJ).
141 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 187 [8.8]. 142
A-G (NSW) v X
[2000] NSWCA 199
(2000) 49 NSWLR
, 673 [100].
143 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publicatio
(Report No 100, 2003) 187 [8.10].
144 The Victorian Supreme Court stated that where the central matter of the
publication went to the guilt of the accused, it is unlikely
public’s interest in the administration of justice and a fair trial will
be outweighed by any other interest:
R v Hinch (No 1)
[2013] VSC 520
[120]. See earlier cases:
DPP (NSW) v Wran
(1987) 7 NSWLR 616
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 88 (Gaudron J).
145 Felicity Robinson, ‘ “No, No! Sentence First—Verdict
Afterwards”: Freedom of the Press and Contempt by
Publication in
Attorney-General for the State of New South Wales v X’
[2001] SydLawRw 11
Sydney Law Review
, 265; Sally Walker, ‘Freedom of Speech and
Contempt of Court: The English and Australian Approaches Compared’
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
146 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 195
NSW Commission proposed a legislative provision mirroring the balancing approach
, with more guidance on how the balancing of principles should
be carried out. The NSW Commission also recommended that the statutory
out how the public interest in the administration of justice and a fair trial
might be harmed, which it defined as ‘the
creation of a risk of influence
on those involved in a pending legal proceeding’.147
• In 1994 the Law Reform Commission of Ireland considered that a public
interest principle should not apply because a fair trial
should always be
prioritised. Instead, the Commission recommended that there should be a defence
of ‘necessity to publish’
which would allow the court to have
discretion as to whether certain publications were in the public interest and
could be protected.148
• In 2016 the Law Reform Commission of Ireland recognised that there
may be circumstances where publishers need to bring issues
to the attention of
the public and should be able to do so even when the publication has the
potential to prejudice legal proceedings.149
The summary procedure for sub judice
7.85 As discussed in Chapter 2, common law contempt proceedings in the
Supreme or County Court are commenced by way of summons or
originating motion
under Order 75 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(the General Civil
Procedure Rules). Contempt proceedings are heard summarily by a judge alone. The
proceedings may be commenced by
the Attorney-General, the DPP or the Court
itself may direct the Prothonotary in the Supreme Court or the Registrar in the
Court to initiate proceedings.150
7.86 Given the harsh penalties that can be imposed for sub judice contempt,
the appropriateness of and necessity for the summary procedure
for sub judice
contempt prosecutions have been questioned.
7.87 As stated by Chief Justice Dixon in the High Court case
John Fairfax
& Sons v McRae
, the summary procedure is only used in exceptional
this summary jurisdiction has always been regarded as one which is to be
exercised with great caution, and, in this particular
class of case, to
be exercised only if it is made quite clear to the court that the matter
published has, as a matter of
practical reality, a tendency to interfere
with the due course of justice in a particular case.151
7.88 The use of the summary procedure was justified in the New South Wales
Killen v Lane
The departure from ordinary safeguards necessarily involved in such cases, by
the court being both accuser and adjudicator, has
been regarded as only
justified, because of the overriding public interest in the safeguarding of
the administration of justice
from interference by swift deterrent action by
the court itself. 152
7.89 In that case the court also stated that if there were to be procedural
requirements, such as committal proceedings, they would
the court and interfere with the urgent need for the court to establish its
authority and conduct a trial
without interference.153
7.90 In considering the appropriateness of the summary procedure, law reform
commissions have noted the following in support of retaining
the procedure:
147 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 199. This proposal was made following
A-G (NSW) v X
[2000] NSWCA 199
(2000) 49 NSWLR 653
, where the majority supported the balancing approach and
held that a publication could still be in the public interest even though
went directly to the guilt of the accused.
148 Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Report on Contempt of Court
(Report No 46, September 1994) 62.
149 Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Contempt of Court and Other Offences
and Torts Involving the Administration of Justice
(Issues Paper, 2016) 62
[5.33]. This was in light of a decision which required sub judice contempt to
comply with the
European Charter of Human Rights
Article 10 which
provides for freedom of expression:
Sunday Times v UK
[1979] ECHR 1
(1979) 2 EHRR
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure Rules) 2015
75.06, 75.07;
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
75.06, 75.07.
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
Killen v Lane
[1983] 1 NSWLR 171
• Contempt by publication requires an immediate response and therefore
summary trial.154
• The unique nature of sub judice contempt, which ‘strikes
directly at the administration of justice’, requires
that the offence be
distinguished from other criminal offences and the court have the power to bring
proceedings summarily.155
• The elements of the offence have acquired technical meanings and
should be considered by the court and not a jury. The balancing
of principles
also requires an understanding of legal notions which are better dealt with by
the courts.156
• Juries are expensive, can return incorrect or risky verdicts and
their decisions would only add to the uncertainty of the
• The facts in a sub judice prosecution, such as
‘publication’ or the existence of pending proceedings, are often
uncontested and previous case law will have determined
what type of material is recognised as sub judice contempt. Therefore the
role of the court is confined to determining whether punishment
is necessary and
what that punishment should be.158
• Summary procedure has been used by the courts for such a long time
that it is now customary among the legal profession and
gives rise to few
practical difficulties.159
7.91 However, law reform commissions have also stated the following arguments
against the summary procedure:
• Although immediate proceedings may be necessary where a contempt has
been committed in the face of the court, contempt by
publication proceedings in
some jurisdictions are often adjourned and heard at the end of the related legal
proceedings.160
• There may be a need for a speedy response to a contempt, but not a
speedy trial. Once the relevant authorities have instituted
proceedings for
contempt to avoid a further publication, there is no reason why the subsequent
trial should not be dealt with like
any other serious offence.161
• If contempt proceedings are heard immediately, those proceedings
could add to the harm already caused by the original publication.162
• The facts and issues in sub judice contempt proceedings would be
better dealt with by a jury.163 The question of whether
there was a
substantial risk that the publication would become known to jurors, may be
appropriately dealt with by a jury.164
Other key issues such as intent,
knowledge and reasonable care are traditionally better dealt with by a
154 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 45.
155 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 300 [12.70]; The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 278 [474].
156 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 300–301 [12.71]; The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 277 [474].
157 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report 100, 2003) 301 [12.72]; The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 277–8 [474].
158 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 277
159 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 301 [12.73]. See also The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 277 [474].
160 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 297 [12.62]; The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 267 [437].
161 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 45.
162 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 297 [12.62].
163 Ibid 299 [12.66]; The Law Reform Commission,
35, 1987) 276 [473].
164 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 45.
165 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 277
for sub judice contempt
7.92 The fundamental aim for punishment of sub judice contempt was stated by
Justice Dixon in
To uphold and preserve the undisturbed and orderly administration of justice
in the courts according to law, in this case the right
of the accused persons in
criminal trials before an impartial jury. The principal sentencing
considerations are to effect specific
and general deterrence, and
denunciation.166
7.93 An individual can be fined or committed to prison or both167 and a
corporation can be fined or sequestered or both.168 There
are no upper limits to
a fine or imprisonment.169 The court may also impose a good behaviour bond170
and has the discretion not to
record a conviction.171
7.94 The fact that penalties for contempt are ‘at large’172 has a
unique impact in the context of sub judice contempt.
This was stated by the WA
Commission:
In practice, it means that the media and their employees have no way of
measuring their exposure when making decisions that require
a balancing of the
relevant interests. This might have a “chilling effect” as those
making the decisions err on the side
of caution, and too much information is
kept from the public. Not surprisingly, the introduction of maximum penalties is
widely regarded
as the most urgent reform needed to the law of contempt by
publication.173
7.95 The ALRC noted that unlimited penalties provided a strong deterrent
effect and prevented media organisations from being able
to ‘indulge
in a “cost-benefit exercise”, measuring the likely fine to be
imposed if they are prosecuted for
contempt against the advantages of increasing
their sales or ratings’.174
7.96 The ALRC also considered the need for the court to consider the
financial resources of the contemnor and have the flexibility
to set a fine
accordingly.175
7.97 Regardless, the ALRC recommended upper limits be imposed. The NSW
Commission and WA Commission also recommended upper limits
7.98 Imprisonment has been considered to be a harsh penalty, particularly
when there may be no fault on the part of the contemnor,177
sentence is unlimited.178 In Victoria, this penalty has only been imposed
once for sub judice contempt.179
The potential risk of imprisonment
still stands, however, and may be imposed in an appropriate case.180
7.99 Reasons for retaining imprisonment as a penalty option include:
• Imprisonment allows for the consideration that a fine is usually paid
by the employing corporation which undermines the deterrent
effect of the
penalty.181
DPP (Vic) v Johnson & Yahoo!7 (No 2)
[2017] VSC 45
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r. 75.11
(1). 168 Ibid r. 75.11 (2).
Smith v The Queen
(1991) 25 NSWLR 1
DPP (Vic) v Johnson & Yahoo!7 (No 2)
[2017] VSC 45.
R v The Herald & Weekly Times Pty Ltd
[2008] VSC 251.
Smith v The Queen
(1991) 25 NSWLR 1
Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
173 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, March 2002) (ii).
174 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 283
176 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003); New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003).
177 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 481
178 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 50.
179 Derryn Hinch was sentenced to six weeks imprisonment which was
reduced to 28 days by the Full Court of the
Supreme Court of
Victoria. The seriousness of Hinch’s conduct in continuing to broadcast
prejudicial information about
the accused Glennon despite being warned
not to and his experience as a journalist were said to justify the custodial
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] VicRp 62
[1987] VR 721
180 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 49.
181 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000), 425–6 [13.34].
• Imprisonment
may have a residual role in being available for journalists who had an intention
to interfere with the administration
of justice or with reckless
indifference.182
7.100 The ALRC and the NSW and WA Commissions recommended that imprisonment
remain a sentencing option but an upper limit should be
set to bring the offence
into line with other criminal offences which are subject to sentencing
restrictions.183
Sub judice contempt and the fair trial
7.101 The assumptions on which sub judice contempt is founded are that:
• Prejudicial publicity is capable of influencing a juror’s
impartiality despite directions from the judge.184
• The mass media are responsible for prejudicial publicity, the flow of
that information can be controlled and jurors can be
protected.185
7.102 The validity of these assumptions is being challenged by the
impact of the new media landscape and the changes
in how information is
accessed and consumed. In turn, this brings into question the adaptability
and necessity of sub judice
contempt, or at least, the way it
currently operates. These issues will be discussed below.
The influence on jurors
7.103 The law of sub judice contempt operates as a preventative means of
shielding jurors from publicity that is irrelevant or may
affect their
impartiality.186
7.104 However, modern courts are rejecting the assumption that jurors
are ‘exceptionally fragile and prone to prejudice’.187
the courts assume that juries can follow judicial directions and make
decisions based on the evidence presented and
tested in court, even if they may
have been exposed to irrelevant or prejudicial material.188
7.105 In this part, the judicial opinions contesting this view, the available
evidence and the way both of these inform the operation
of sub judice contempt
will be discussed.
The robustness of juries
7.106 There ar
e contradictory and inconsistent
views among the judiciary and in research about jurors’ decision-making
and comprehension abilities
and hence their robustness.
7.107 As stated above, there is a strong view from the judiciary that jurors
are competent decision makers. Some judicial officers
have observed that the
continued existence of the jury system depends upon the faith put in juries to
make decisions based on
the evidence.189 To hold otherwise would give
rise to serious questions about whether the community’s participation
the jury system could continue.190
182 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 282
[481]. 183 Ibid 282–3 [482].
184 Felicity Robinson, ‘“No, No! Sentence First—Verdict
Afterwards”: Freedom of the Press and Contempt by
Publication in
Attorney-General for the State of New South Wales v X’
[2001] SydLawRw 11
Sydney Law Review
, 263; Zak Rich, ‘The Past and Future of Sub
Judice Contempt:
A Historically Contingent Rhetoric, a Modern Age Threat, and the Lessons to
be Learned from the United States’ (2010) 15
Media and Arts Law
362; Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right
to a Fair Trial in the 21st Century—Has Trial by Jury
Been Caught in
the World Wide Web?’
Criminal Law Journal
108–9; Michael Chesterman, ‘OJ and the Dingo: How Media
Publicity Relating to Criminal Cases Tried by Jury is Dealt With in Australia
and America’
(1997) 45(1)
The American Journal of Comparative Law
, 139; The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
159–60 [280].
185 Michael Chesterman, ‘OJ and the Dingo: How Media Publicity Relating
to Criminal Cases Tried by Jury is Dealt With in Australia
and America’
(1997) 45(1)
The American Journal of Comparative Law
, 142; Roxanne
Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair Trial in the
21st Century—Has Trial by Jury
Been Caught in the World Wide Web?’
Criminal Law Journal
186 Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st Century
(The Federation
Press, 2012) 174.
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd v District Court of NSW
[2004] NSWCA 324
61 NSWLR 344
, 366 [103] (Spigelman CJ, Handley JA and Campbell AJA agreeing).
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
, 74 (Toohey J).
188 See, eg,
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
, 603 (Mason CJ and Toohey
General Television Corporation Pty Ltd v DPP
[2008] VSCA 49
(2008) 19 VR 68
(1993) 69 A Crim R 450
John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd v District Court of NSW
[2004] NSWCA 324
(2004) 61 NSWLR 344
, 366 [103]
(Spigelman CJ, Handley JA, Campbell AJA agreeing).
R v Dupas (No 2)
[2005] VSCA 212
(2005) 12 VR 601
, 627 [81] (Nettle JA) citing
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
, 614–5 (Brennan J);
Gilbert v R
(2000) 201 CLR 414
, 425 [31] (McHugh J).
190 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 123 [486]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
7.108 The shift in the way the courts have managed juries based on these
changing views and the reality of quarantining juries in
today’s media age
was described by the Honourable Frank Vincent in his review of the
Courts Act 2013
To reduce the risk of miscarriages of justice arising from this perceived
unreliability of juries, endeavours have been made over
the years to
quarantine certain kinds of information from them. Until relatively
recently, an attempt to avoid their exposure
to possible external influences,
at least during the trial itself, was made through the sequestering of
This no longer occurs and they are instructed not to undertake any internet
or social media searches themselves or to discuss the
case with anyone outside
the jury room.
A considerable level of claimed trust is reposed in them in this
respect. The extent to which jurors obey such instructions
is difficult to
establish. However, the inference can be reasonably drawn that for some there is
possibly little more likely to produce
the opposite result than to inform them
that there may be potentially probative information that, for
some usually unexplained reason, is to be denied to them. It would also be
naive to assume that discussion with families and friends
who are not bound by
any such restrictions does not occur, even if the jurors have been living in an
information vacuum themselves.191
7.109 Others have queried the foundations of the view that juries can be
trusted. Justice Lasry of the Supreme Court of Victoria stated
that judicial
assumptions that jurors are faithful to their oaths are ‘often based more
in hope than any identifiable objective
evidence’, describing his own
experience as ‘mixed’.192
7.110 Further, while there may be faith in juries, it has been emphasised
that the role of the courts in mitigating the exposure
of jurors to
prejudicial material should not be abandoned.193
7.111 Justice Lasry, in
, also noted that many of the
authorities that state juries are reliable and able to follow directions are
concerned with publicity
before the trial and before jurors are empanelled,
which can be expressly addressed and considered when giving directions. Justice
Lasry stated:
That circumstance is materially different from publication after
empanelment while the trial is running.194
7.112 As summarised by Jacqueline Horan, much of the research about juror
comprehension shows that jurors themselves believe they
comprehend contemporary
trials,195 but the ability to provide empirical evidence proving this is
limited.196 On the other hand, there
studies that demonstrate that jurors, to an extent, can misunderstand the law
as explained by judges.197
7.113 Some studies have also cast some doubt on the ability of jurors to
understand jury directions.198 However, research has also
indicated that despite
this, these misunderstandings do not always lead to widespread unfair decisions
due to a variety of other
safeguards such as the collective decision-making
process.199
7.114 A 2016 study into the likelihood of unfair prejudice towards an accused
in joint child sexual
191 Ibid 122–3 [485].
R v Rich (Ruling No 7)
[2008] VSC 437
[14] (Lasry J).
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
, 265 [73].
DPP (Vic) v Johnson & Yahoo!7
[2016] VSC 699
195 Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st Century
(The Federation
Press, 2012) 71. Horan summarises some of the following studies: Cheryl Thomas,
Are Juries Fair?
(Ministry of Justice, United Kingdom, 2010); James
Ogloff and V Gordon Rose, ‘The Comprehension of Judicial
Instructions’
in Neil Brewer & Kipling Williams (eds),
and Law: An Empirical Perspective
(Guilford Press, 2005).
196 Comprehension testing can be limited by the number of factors affecting
the process. Legal restrictions around the disclosure
of jury deliberations also
make this kind of research difficult: Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st
(The Federation Press, 2012) 71.
197 Ibid. See James Ogloff and V Gordon Rose, ‘The Comprehension of
Judicial Instructions’ in Neil Brewer & Kipling
Williams (eds),
Psychology and Law: An Empirical Perspective
(Guilford Press, 2005); Law
Commission (New Zealand),
Juries in Criminal Trials
, Report 69 (2001);
Cheryl Thomas,
Are Juries Fair?
(Ministry of Justice, United Kingdom,
198 Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st Century
(The Federation
Press, 2012) 73. For a summary of research on jury instructions in the context
of preventing impermissible use of
different types of evidence, see Jane
Goodman-Delahunty, Annie Cossins & Natalie Martschuk,
Jury Reasoning in
Joint and Separate Trials of Institutional Child Sexual Abuse: An Empirical
(Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse,
May 2016) 28, 63–4; see also Law Commission (New Zealand),
Criminal Trials
, Report 69 (2001); Cheryl Thomas,
Are Juries Fair?
(Ministry of Justice, United Kingdom, 2010).
199 Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st Century
(The Federation
Press, 2012) 73. See Law Commission (New Zealand),
Juries in Criminal Trials
Part Two—A Summary of the Research Findings
, Preliminary Paper (1999)
26, 55; Law Commission (New Zealand),
Juries in Criminal Trials
69 (2001) 146.
abuse trials significantly challenged the assumption that jurors are
‘fragile and prone to prejudice’. The study, involving
child-sex trials, found that no jurors carried out impermissible reasoning in a
joint trial, despite being exposed to evidence
relating to other victims,
accused persons or ‘tendency’ evidence (evidence about similar
assaults by the accused, but
uncharged). 200
7.115 Arguably, this type of exposure is analogous to external media
publicity, and although the above-mentioned types of evidence
are distinct from
publicity in that they can be predicted and addressed directly by the judicial
officer through directions, the
research does provide support for the view that
juries are robust and competent in their decision-making abilities.
7.116 Arguably, the operation of the rules of evidence themselves, which
ensure a case is decided beyond reasonable doubt based on
the material before
the court, demonstrate an ongoing need for sub judice contempt.
7.117 That is, sub judice contempt reinforces the rules of evidence by
preventing jurors from being exposed to information which has
not been tested by
the parties in court.201 Similarly, the NSW Commission stated:
what the sub judice rules seek to do is filter out the most damaging of
prejudicial effects so that views formed prior to
trial, or from
extrinsic sources during trial, are not held so strongly that they cannot
be displaced by the evidence which
is presented and tested in the courtroom, as
well as by judicial directions and instructions on the law, and arguments and
submissions
by counsel on that evidence.202
7.118 Accordingly, the key question is whether there are types of information
and preconceptions so prejudicial that they should not
be tolerated and
therefore need to be restricted by the law of sub judice contempt.
7.119 The research indicates that this depends on the timing, detail and
nature of the publication and also the amount of coverage.
For example:
• Research conducted in the 1990s in New South Wales and New Zealand
found that jurors were less likely to be influenced by
the specific details in
pre-trial publicity than had been originally thought.203
• Juror prejudice, for example with regard to terrorism, can
affect the juror’s verdict, as shown in an Australian
study.204 Horan
noted that the prejudice depends on the extent of the media coverage.205 Often
it is not specific publications
which contribute to this prejudice, but
generic media coverage about the issue, such as terrorism, that can
cumulatively
impact a potential juror.
200 Jane Goodman-Delahunty, Annie Cossins & Natalie Martschuk,
Reasoning in Joint and Separate Trials of Institutional Child Sexual Abuse: An
Empirical Study
(Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child
Sexual Abuse, May 2016). See also Joanne McCarthy, ‘Justice Peter
Says Study Raises Questions about Rules on Child Sex Trials’,
The Newcastle Herald
(Web Page, 25 May 2016)
www.theherald.com.au/story/3928516/worlds-largest-jury-behaviour-study-surprises/
201 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
161–2 [283].
202 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000) 44 [2.35].
203 Michael Chesterman, Janet Chan and Shelley Hampton,
Prejudicial Publicity—An Empirical Study of Criminal Jury Trials in New
South Wales
(February 2001) 69–73; Law Commission (New Zealand),
Juries in Criminal Trials Part Two—A Summary of the Research
, Preliminary Paper (1999) 26, 60–1. Horan noted that both
these studies were conducted at the beginning of the internet revolution
not account for the nature of online information today: Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st Century
(The Federation Press, 2012) 187.
204 David Tait, ‘Deliberating About Terrorism: Prejudice and Jury
Verdicts in a Mock Terrorism Trial’ (2011) 44(3)
Australian & New
Zealand Journal of Criminology
205 Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st Century
(The Federation
Press, 2012) 191.
• In the United Kingdom, research found that jurors were not likely to
recall pre-trial publicity and only recalled coverage
published during the
trial. This suggests the existence of a ‘fade factor’—that is,
jurors do not recall publications
from before a trial commences.206
• However, the United Kingdom and New South Wales research found
pre-trial publicity in high profile trials, or where the accused
‘household name’, was more likely to be recalled by jurors.207 The
New South Wales study also found that the effect
of pre- trial publicity is
intensified when the offence occurred near where the juror lived and the
publicity was encountered during
the trial.208
• Based on its survey of the research and its own findings, the ALRC
identified a list of the types of publicity that would
be most likely to
threaten the impartiality of a juror. These included allegations of specific
fact which were inadmissible and prejudicial
and ‘value-laden’
comment such as racial prejudice.209
Sub judice contempt proceedings compared to stay of proceedings
applications
7.120 The view of the courts as to the robustness of juries appears to vary
between when the court is considering whether there has
been a sub judice
contempt and when the court is considering an application for a stay of
proceedings on the basis of prejudicial
media publicity.
7.121 The courts’ view as to what material is considered to have a
requisite ‘tendency’ to influence jurors is illustrated
by recently
prosecuted and punished contempts in Victoria. For example:
• a graphic headed ‘Victims of Melbourne’s Gangland
Killings’ including an image of a victim and a caption
detailing how he
was killed. The graphic was published while a trial was proceeding against a man
accused of the murder. Any link
of the killing to ‘gangland wars’
or the way the newspaper had alleged the victim had been killed were not part of
• an online publication about a murder trial before the court at the
time of publication. The publication reported that the
accused had been violent
to the victim before the murder and referred to social media posts published by
the victim that had not
been put before the jury.211
• a print and online publication which linked the accused in a criminal
trial to prior convictions after being warned by the
Director of Public
Prosecutions to avoid publishing such material. It was found no harm actually
occurred, but the notoriety of the
accused person, the number of persons who had
accessed the online version of the publication and the longevity of an online
publication
contributed to the
harm done by the
publication.212
7.122 Conversely, in applications for stay proceedings on the basis of
prejudicial media publicity, the judiciary has shown a faith
in the ability of
the jury to follow directions to ignore coverage.213 Stay of proceedings
applications, following high-profile criminal
trials, have been refused even in
circumstances where a sub judice contempt was found and prosecuted in the
original trial.214
206 Cheryl Thomas,
Are Juries Fair?
(Ministry of Justice, United
Kingdom, 2010) 44.
207 Michael Chesterman, Janet Chan and Shelley Hampton,
Prejudicial Publicity—An Empirical Study of Criminal Jury Trials in New
South Wales
(February 2001) 200 [504]; Cheryl Thomas,
Are Juries Fair?
(Ministry of Justice, United Kingdom, 2010) 44.
208 Michael Chesterman, Janet Chan and Shelley Hampton,
Prejudicial Publicity—An Empirical Study of Criminal Jury Trials in New
South Wales
(February 2001) 200 [504].
209 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) [287]
R v The Herald & Weekly Times Pty Ltd
[2008] VSC 251.
DPP (Vic) v Johnson & Yahoo!7
[2016] VSC 699.
R v Nationwide News Pty Ltd
[2018] VSC 572
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
[2009] VSC 342
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94.
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
173 CLR 592.
7.123 Justice
Weinberg noted in
R v Dupas (No 3),
that if a stay of proceedings were
granted on the basis of prejudicial publicity, it would be near impossible for a
high-profile trial
to ever go ahead successfully.215
7.124 There is a disparity in the assumptions about juries’ behaviour
and decision making underlying sub judice contempt proceedings
and applications
for a stay of proceedings. These disparities may be explained by the different
purposes of both processes. Those
• Sub judice contempt is aimed at preventing prejudicial publicity,
regardless of the actual effect or intention. The purpose
of the punishment is
to deter other media and publishers.216
• Stay of proceedings is only granted where actual harm has been proven
and only in the most extreme case.217
7.125 This disparity in assumptions may also reflect distrust of the
media by the judiciary.218
7.126 Regardless of the reasons for these different approaches, the
diverging treatment of jurors as either fragile or robust
raises more
uncertainty and inconsistency around the question of whether jurors are
influenced by prejudicial publicity and
to what extent should they be
protected.219
Can jurors be protected from prejudicial
information in today’s media landscape?
7.127 Sub judice contempt is effective in controlling prejudicial media
coverage in the traditional media where issues of ‘publication’
liability are clear-cut and are well tested by the case law.
7.128 In 2001, academic Michael Chesterman stated:
The Australian law of sub judice presupposes that prohibitions focussing
predominantly on the mass media will be broadly effective
in preventing
potential members of a jury from acquiring certain sorts of information about
a trial, on the ground that it is
predominantly through the media that
information reaches the community.220
7.129 However, the media landscape and the way people consume and share
information is changing. These changes are disrupting traditional
assumptions,
suggesting that the law of sub judice contempt may not be translating well to
the modern age of journalism and online
communication.221
Changes to the media landscape
7.130 Today, the internet has caused significant change in the way news is
produced, disseminated and accessed, with enormous volumes
of material being
made available immediately and permanently. Consequently, there has been a
decline in the concentration and influence
of traditional media.222 For
R v Dupas (No 3)
[2009] VSCA 202
(2009) 28 VR 380
, 442 [251].
DPP (Vic) v Johnson & Yahoo!7 (No 2)
[2017] VSC 45
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
218 See Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
Review (2017) 66
[10.2.1]–[10.2.2]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>; Karin Derkley,
‘Suppression
Orders in the Open Courts Era’ (2019) Law Institute
Journal (Web Page) 93(4).
219 See The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
163–4 [285]; Andrew Dodd, ‘Media Files/Podcast: Pell Trial
Reporters, a Judge and a Media Lawyer
on why the Suppression Order Debate
is far from over’ (Podcast, 21 March 2019)
The Conversation
theconversation.com/podcast-pell-trial-reporters-a-judge-and-a-media-lawyer-on-why-the-suppression-order-debate-is-far-from-
over-111634>.
220 Michael Chesterman, Janet Chan and Shelley Hampton,
Prejudicial Publicity—An Empirical Study of Criminal Jury Trials in New
South Wales
(February 2001) 142.
221 Zak Rich, ‘The Past and Future of Sub Judice Contempt: A
Historically Contingent Rhetoric, a Modern Age Threat, and the
Lessons to be
Learned from the United States’ (2010) 15
Media and Arts Law Review
361; Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a
Fair Trial in the 21st Century—Has Trial by Jury
Been Caught in the World
Criminal Law Journal
Chesterman, ‘OJ and the Dingo: How Media Publicity Relating to Criminal
Cases Tried by Jury is Dealt With in Australia and America’
(1997) 45(1)
The American Journal of Comparative Law
222 Australian Competition & Consumer Commission,
Digital Platforms
(Preliminary Report, December 2018) 2–3.
• Print circulation of newspapers is declining, with more people
accessing their news online.223
• Although television still remains the most used source for news, the
younger demographic of 18–24 year olds is increasingly
using social media
platforms such as YouTube, WhatsApp, Instagram and Snapchat to access news.224
Podcasting is also becoming a major
source of news for 25–34 year
• Today, over 50 percent of traffic on Australian news media websites
comes from Google and Facebook.226
7.131 As a consequence of these changes, traditional media has been under
significant pressure to adopt new business models to adapt
to the shift in
revenue from print to online.227 This has resulted in a loss of experienced
journalists,228 a decline in traditional
such as court reporting,229 a decline in the quality of content230 and a
growing mistrust in the reliability of the media.231
7.132 In addition, and as a consequence of changes to Australian media
ownership laws, there has been a merging of different forms
of media232 blurring
the traditional distinctions between news types and different media forms.
7.133 All of these changes mean that traditional media outlets and
journalists are no longer the sole publishers responsible for potentially
prejudicial publications.233 Content can now be published and shared across
different media and platforms by a wider range of individuals
within and outside
the jurisdictions; public commentary on social media can cumulatively cause
prejudice to a trial; and companies
such as Google and Facebook now play a
significant role in the publishing process.234
Teacher’s Pet
podcast is one example of new media
challenging the traditional limits of sub judice contempt in shielding
jurors.235 The podcast,
which was published before charges were laid against the
accused, provided details of the victim’s death and the surrounding
circumstances. Despite charges being laid, the podcasts continued to be
available up until the New South Wales Director of Public
Prosecutions
requested the episodes be taken down, which they were on 5 April 2019.236 It
was reported that since the podcast’s
release, there had been 27 million
downloads with over a million within the week after the accused was
charged.237
223 Nielsen, ‘Australian News Media Total Audience Report December
(Web Page, December 2018) <
www.emma.com.au/
reports>; Zoe Samios,
‘ABCs: Newspaper Circulation Suffers Across the Board with Falls as Large
as 16%’ (17 August
<https://mumbrella.com.au/abcs-newspaper-circulation-suffers-across-the-board-with-falls-as-large-as-16-535665>.
224 Sora Park et al (eds),
Digital News Report: Australia 2018
& Media Research Centre, University of Canberra, 2018) 50.
226 Australian Competition & Consumer Commission,
Digital Platforms
(Preliminary Report, December 2018) 8.
227 Public Interest Journalism Committee, Parliament of Australia,
of Public Interest Journalism
(Final Report, February 2018, February 2018)
228 Public Interest Journalism Committee, Parliament of Australia,
of Public Interest Journalism
, Final Report (February 2018) 29 [2.21].
229 Ibid 38 [2.55]; Margaret Simons et al, ‘Understanding Civic Impact
Journalism’ (2017) 18(11)
Journalism Studies
230 Public Interest Journalism Committee, Parliament of Australia,
of Public Interest Journalism
, Final Report (February 2018) 39 [2.56].
231 Australian Competition & Consumer Commission,
Digital Platforms
(Preliminary Report, December 2018) 8.
232 ‘Government’s Media Ownership Law Changes Pass Senate with
(Web Page, 14 September
www.abc.net.au/news/2017-09-14/media-law-changes-bill-passes-senate/8946864
on 16 October 2017, the
Broadcasting Legislation Amendment (Broadcasting
Reform) Act 2017
(Cth) was enacted, abolishing the the 75% and ‘two in
three’ rules which had restricted ownership of media companies.
233 See Attorney-General’s Office (UK),
Response to Call for
Evidence on the Impact of Social Media on the Administration of Justice
(March 2019).
234 See, eg, Toby Manhire, ‘New Zealand Courts Banned Naming Grace
Millane’s Accused Killer. Google Just Emailed it Out.’,
(Web Page, 13 December 2018) <
www.theguardian.com/world/2018/dec/13/new-zealand-courts-banned-naming-grace-millanes-accused-
killer-google-just-emailed-it-out>; Sam Hurley, ‘Grace Millane Case:
Suppression Flouted by Google and Others, Prosecutions
to Follow?’,
New Zealand Herald
(Web Page, 14 December 2018); <
www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=12176432
The issue of Google auto-completing searches which were in themselves
prejudicial or published restricted identities was addressed
in Attorney-
General’s Office (UK),
Response to Call for Evidence on the Impact of
Social Media on the Administration of Justice
(March 2019). See also UK
Government,
Online Harms White Paper
(Web Page, April 2019) <
www.gov.uk/government/consultations/online-harms-white-paper
235 Hedley Thomas, ‘The Teacher’s Pet’,
The Australian
(Podcast, 5 December 2018) <
www.theaustralian.com.au/the-teachers-pet
236 Jerome Doraisamy, ‘Teacher’s Pet Podcast Now Raising
“Real Risk of Contempt”’,
Lawyers Weekly
(Web Page, 10
December 2018) <
lawyersweekly.com.au/politics/24619-teacher-s-pet-podcast-now-raising-real-risk-of-contempt>;
David Murray, ‘Teacher’s
Pet Podcast Series to be Temporarily
Unavailble in Australia’,
The Australian
(Web Page, 5 April 2019)
www.theaustralian.com.au/podcasts/teachers-
pet-podcast-series-to-be-temporarily-unavailable-in-australia/news-story/957300743da2878171631990510abd0b>.
237 Jerome Doraisamy, ‘Teacher’s Pet Podcast Now Raising
“Real Risk of Contempt”’,
Lawyers Weekly
(Web Page, 10
December 2018) <
lawyersweekly.com.au/politics/24619-teacher-s-pet-podcast-now-raising-real-risk-of-contempt>.
7.135 Another example of the impact of the new media landscape was the social
media commentary surrounding a high-profile murder trial
in the United Kingdom
which attracted significant local and national media attention. Throughout the
trial the public posted numerous
adverse comments on the otherwise fair and
accurate media reports of the
case which had been posted on social media. As a result of those comments,
the jury was discharged and a retrial ordered several months
different venue.238
7.136 Although this case was acknowledged to be an exceptional situation
rather than illustrative of a wider problem, it gave rise
to questions around
the impact of social media on the administration of justice and the adaptability
of sub judice contempt as a
tool to manage such prejudicial coverage.239
7.137 These examples demonstrate how restricting and controlling news about
legal proceedings has become more complicated and, in
some circumstances, such
control may be impossible.
7.138 The enforceability of sub judice contempt and other offences in this
context will be discussed in Chapter 10.
Changes to how people consume information
7.139 There are also changes in the way people understand, access and
interact with information which challenge the assumption that
jurors can be
protected from extraneous information.
7.140 In this context, Oscar Bartel-Wallace summarised a number of ways in
which the internet affects human cognition which may have
implications for how
jurors carry out their role. These include:
• Humans have more doubt of their own knowledge and therefore an
increased reliance on the internet.240
• There is a desire for instantaneous knowledge and people are less
accustomed to any delay in answers in the digital age.241
• The internet is used for everyday needs such as banking or
communication, which has decreased the barriers between jurors
and harmful
publicity.242
7.141 Recent data shows that people are increasingly accessing digital news,
instead of print news, through mobile phones or other
devices,243 while
newspaper circulation is declining.244 A University of Canberra study of digital
news found that in 2018, for the
first time in four years of conducting the
survey, participants’ use of digital platforms such as apps or social
media to access
news, surpassed their use of traditional platforms such as
television, radio or print.245
7.142 These changes to how people access and consume information affect how
jurors comprehend evidence and directions within the courtroom.
People who make
up juries today are accustomed to daily news, engaging footage, concise and
quick information and a level of control
over what information they
consume.246
7.143 Further, jurors themselves can easily access information and there have
been a number of
238 Attorney-General’s Office (UK),
Response to Call for Evidence on
the Impact of Social Media on the Administration of Justice
(March 2019) 3
[1.1] –[1.3].
Ex Parte British Broadcasting Corporation and others R v
F and another
[2016] EWCA Crim 12.
239 The case was an impetus for the UK Attorney General’s call for
evidence: Attorney-General’s Office (UK),
Response to Call for Evidence
on the Impact of Social Media on the Administration of Justice
240 Oscar Battell-Wallace, ‘No Search Results in Fairness: Addressing
Jurors’ Independent Research in the 21st Century’
Victoria University of Wellington Law Review
241 Ibid 93.
242 Ibid 94.
243 Nielsen, ‘Australian News Media Total Audience Report December
(Web Page, December 2018) <
www.emma.com.au/
reports>; R. Warwick
Blood, ‘Generational Shifts in News Consumption’ in Sora Park et al
Digital News Report: Australia 2018
(News & Media Research
Centre University of Canberra, 2018) 60.
244 Zoe Samios, ‘ABCs: Newspaper Circulation Suffers Across the Board
with Falls as Large as 16%’, (17 August 2018)
mumbrella.com.au/abcs-newspaper-circulation-suffers-across-the-board-with-falls-as-large-as-16-535665>.
245 R. Warwick Blood, ‘Generational Shifts in News Consumption’
in Sora Park et al (eds),
Digital News Report: Australia 2018
Media Research Centre University of Canberra, 2018) 60, 60.
246 Justice Kirby, ‘Delivering Justice in a Democracy III—the
Jury of the Future’
Australian Bar Review
; Jacqueline
Horan, ‘Communicating with Jurors in the Twenty-first Century’ (Pt
Australian Bar Review
where jurors have been found to carry out their own inquiries online.247 This
scenario has been referred to as the ‘Googling
juror’248 and is
discussed in Chapter 5.
7.144 Together, these changes suggest that not only is the task of protecting
jurors from prejudicial publicity becoming more complicated,
but also the
operation of the jury system and restrictions such as sub judice contempt may
not be adequately adapted to, or appropriate
for, the 21st century jury.
Suppression orders and take-down orders
7.145 Despite the growing recognition of the robustness of juries, there has
been a resistance to completely forgoing the court’s
role in safeguarding
a fair trial, particularly in the context of online publications. This was
stated by the Victorian Court of
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v
This confidence in the corporate integrity of juries, however, does not mean
that the law should abandon its traditional role of protecting
them from events
which put this integrity to the test. This role has relied upon the familiarity
of the media with the restraints
of the law of contempt and their respect of
these constraints. It has also relied upon the power of the court to make orders
restraining
publications which might breach these restraints.249
7.146 To ensure a fair trial and the proper administration of justice, the
courts have relied on statutory250 and inherent powers251
to make orders either
preventing the publication of prejudicial material or requiring already
published online material to be
taken down.
7.147 However, the practice of issuing pre-emptive suppression orders or
take-down orders has been criticised by academics and some
members of the
judiciary as undermining the law of sub judice contempt252 and potentially
exceeding what is necessary to ensure a
fair trial.253
7.148 Reasons for this practice may include:
• The decline in dedicated court reporters has led to a need to make
specific orders to ensure journalists and other publishers
are clear about what
they can and cannot publish.
• Technological developments may encourage the courts to take a
pre-emptive approach.254
• There had been a loss of confidence in the ‘efficacy of
alternatives to suppression such as the law of contempt’.255
7.149 However, Butler and Rodrick warn against overstating the suggestion
that suppression orders have taken over from sub judice
contempt.256
[2010] VSCA 153
(2010) 28 VR 579
Benbrika v R
[2010] VSCA 281
(2010) 29 VR
248 Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair
Trial in the 21st Century—Has Trial by Jury Been
Caught in the World
Criminal Law Journal
, 116; Oscar
Battell-Wallace, ‘No Search Results in Fairness: Addressing Jurors’
Independent Research in the 21st Century’
Victoria University
of Wellington Law Review
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
250 Jane Johnston et al,
Juries and Social Media: A Report Prepared for
the Victorian Department of Justice
(Report, 2013). The
Open Courts Act
provides for the statutory power to make proceeding
suppression orders.
Open Courts Act 2013
preserves the Supreme
Court’s inherent jurisdiction to make suppression orders restricting
specified material by publication.
252 Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair
Trial in the 21st Century—Has Trial by Jury Been
Caught in the World Wide
Web?’ (2012) 36
Criminal Law Journal
109; J J Spigelman, ‘The
Principle of Open Justice: A Comparative Perspective’
[2006] UNSWLawJl 19
(2006) 29(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
; the Hon. Philip Cummins,
‘Open Courts: Who Guards the Guardians?’ (Speech, Justice Open and
Shut: Suppression Orders
and Open Justice in Australia and the United Kingdom
Seminar, Sydney, 4 June 2014) 3.
253 Jason Bosland, ‘Restraining ‘Extraneous’ Prejudicial
Publicity: Victoria and New South Wales Compared’
[2018] UNSWLawJl 43
(2018) 41(4)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
254 Ibid 1267.
255 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
256 Des Butler and Sharon Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
Reuters, 5th ed, 2015) 435 [6.790].
7.150 Similarly,
the Courts of Appeal in Victoria257 and New South Wales258 have emphasised the
ongoing role of sub judice contempt
and acknowledged the limitations and
futility of controlling internet publications.
7.151 In a 2018 Victorian Court of Appeal case,259 the court rejected
an appeal by two accused persons facing terrorism-related
charges who
had applied for a suppression order on the jury’s verdict. The
applicants argued that publication of
the verdict would prejudice a second
trial. Among other factors, the court acknowledged that the contempt of court
laws should
operate to prevent prejudicial reporting of prior convictions and
that the media respondents in the case were aware of their
obligations
relating to contempt.260
7.152 Academics have questioned whether take-down orders are useful and
enforceable in the digital age.261 These issues are central
for the courts in
considering whether such orders should be issued or upheld, and are discussed in
Chapter 10.
Possible reforms to sub judice contempt
7.153 In Australia, the primary means of ensuring a fair trial and
protecting the administration of justice, with respect
to prejudicial
material, has traditionally been through the law of sub judice
contempt.262 However, as indicated by the
numerous reviews in Australia and
abroad, the current operation of the law of sub judice contempt is not
satisfactory.
7.154 There are two overlapping but distinct issues which give rise to these
• The uncertainties in the definitions and scope of the common law
caused by the complex balancing act between the principles
of fair trial, open
justice and freedom of expression, which make the law difficult to navigate.
• The compatibility of the law with the principles it intends to
serve. That is, is the departure from freedom of expression
justified by the aim
of ensuring a fair trial in the modern age when information is immediate,
permanent and increasingly accessible?
7.155 The options for reform discussed below include statutory reforms to
address uncertainties about the offence. Broader reform
options are also
considered which challenge the assumptions underpinning the way in which
criminal trials are carried out, in the
context of modern media and changing
understandings of juror decision making.
A statutory offence of sub judice contempt
7.156 The current uncertainty in the law of sub judice contempt may be having
a ‘chilling effect’ on the reporting of
the courts,263 but it also
gives rise to the risk of a fair trial being improperly influenced because those
publishing material are
ignorant of the law or do not understand it.264
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248.
Fairfax Digital Australia and New Zealand Pty Ltd v Ibrahim
[2012] NSWCCA 125
83 NSWLR 52
Chaarani v DPP (Cth)
[2018] VSCA 299.
260 Ibid [47]. The court also considered the fact that the first trial had
been extensively publicised and a Google search of the
applicants’ names
revealed material about the trial. Therefore the court said that in this case
‘the genie cannot be
put back in the bottle’ [45].
261 Isaac Frawley Buckley, ‘In defence of “take-down”
orders: Analysing the Alleged Futility of the Court-ordered
Removal of Archived
Online Prejudicial Publicity’
Journal of Judicial
Administration
; Brian Fitzgerald and Cheryl Foong, ‘Suppression
Orders After Fairfax Ibrahim: Implications for Internet Communications’
Australian Bar Review
; Paul Karp and Sophie Dawson,
‘Holding Back the Tide: King Canute Orders and Internet
Publications’
(2012) 30(4)
Communications Law Bulletin
Bosland, ‘Restraining ‘Extraneous’ Prejudicial Publicity:
Victoria and New South Wales Compared’
[2018] UNSWLawJl 43
(2018) 41(4)
University of New
South Wales Law Journal
262 Des Butler and Sharon Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
Reuters, 5th ed, 2015) 369.
263 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 17.
264 See Rachel Hews and Nicolas Suzor, ‘”Scum of the
Earth”: An Analysis of Prejudicial Twitter Conversations During
Baden-Clay Murder Trial’
(2017) 40(4)
University of New South Wales Law
, which showed the prejudicial nature of tweets about a trial
from the general public who are generally unaware of legal restrictions.
7.157 Retaining sub judice contempt, but in a legislative form, has been
recommended by numerous law reform commissions in Australia265
and elsewhere.266
Legislation was implemented in the United Kingdom in 1981 following an extensive
review on contempt in 1974.267
In Canada, a bill was put before parliament but
lapsed in 1984. Currently, New Zealand’s and Ireland’s parliaments
bills before them. The New Zealand Parliament’s Justice Committee has
handed down its report suggesting amendments to the proposed
7.158 The WA Commission stated that the statutory reform of the common law
would align the law with criminal law and process. The
Commission also stated
the reform would:
address the absence of any maximum sentence, the anomalous summary process by
which contempt is often tried, and the absence of effective
avenues for
7.159 The mai
n uncertainties of the law of sub
judice contempt which could be addressed by definitions and boundaries set out
in legislation include:
• the formulation of the tendency test
• the definition of publication
• the start and end point of the sub judice period
• whether or not a fault element should apply
• what is considered in the ‘public interest’ and the test
that determines whether or not it outweighs a fair
• the summary procedure
• the range of penalties that can be imposed.
7.160 The NZ Commission recommended the replacement of sub judice contempt
with a statutory offence to clarify some of the above-mentioned
supplemented by other powers addressing the implications of online publications.
These included an automatic prohibition
on the publication of an arrested
person’s previous convictions and concurrent charges and statutory powers
to postpone the
publication of other prejudicial material and to order online
content hosts to take down such material.270
7.161 However, a disadvantage of such legislative reform is the way in which
it would restrict the flexibility needed to deal with
new forms of contempt and
a varying range of circumstances. As the case law has shown, a range of factors
are considered when applying
the law to the facts such as the prominence of the
publisher, the type of publication, the accessibility of the article and the
publication
of other material about the proceedings.271 The balancing of the
principles of a fair trial, open justice and freedom of expression
may also be
difficult to reflect in legislation.272
265 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003); Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of Contempt
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003); The
Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987).
266 The Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong,
Contempt of Court
Topic No 4 (December 1986); Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Contempt of Court
(Report No 46, September 1994); Law Commission (New
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A Modern Statute
Report No 140 (May 2017). Proposed legislation is currently before parliament in
Ireland and New Zealand.
267 Committee on Contempt of Court (UK), Report of the Committee on Contempt
of Court (December 1974).
268 For the status of the New Zealand and Ireland Bills, see New
Zealand Parliament, ‘Administration of Justice
(Reform of Contempt
of Court) Bill’,
Bills and Laws
www.parliament.nz/en/pb/bills-and-laws/bills-proposed-laws/document/BILL_77664/administration-of-justice-reform-
of-contempt-of-court>; Justice Committee,
Final Report (Administration
of Justice (Reform of Contempt of Court) Bill
39-2 (Web Page,
April 2019) <
www.parliament.nz/en/pb/sc/reports/document/SCR_86592/administration-of-justice-reform-of-contempt-of-court
Houses of the Oireachtas, ‘Contempt of Court Bill 2017’,
Bills & Acts
(Web Page) <
www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2017/117/
269 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 17.
270 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 55–7. See the Justice
Committee’s suggested amendments to the proposed Bill: Justice
Final Report (Administration of Justice (Reform of
Contempt of Court) Bill
39-2 (Web Page, April 2019) <
www.parliament.nz/en/pb/sc/reports/document/SCR_86592/administration-of-justice-reform-
of-contempt-of-court>.
271 See paragraph [7.21].
272 See Zak Rich, ‘The Past and Future of Sub Judice Contempt: A
Historically Contingent Rhetoric, a Modern Age Threat, and
the Lessons to
be Learned from the United States’ (2010) 15
Media and Arts Law
361, 370–1. Rich suggested separating the offence from
the defence. The test for finding sub judice would be
a strict test
and the consideration of whether the publication was a matter of
public interest would become an isolated
defence which would allow for
discretion based on the facts.
Commission notes, however, that an approach may be that these relevant factors
could be listed non-exhaustively to be taken
into account by the court. For
example, the NZ Commission’s proposed bill included a provision which set
out how the court
determine whether a publication creates a real risk of prejudice to the
accused’s right to a fair trial, listing some of the
relevant factors to
be considered and types of publication which may be subject to the proposed
offence.273
7.163 The flexibility provided by the common law, while confusing, may also
be an advantage for the media, who make assessments about
when they can and
cannot publish based on the circumstances of each case.
7.164 Introducing a new legislative instrument may merely serve to further
confuse the already complex landscape with existing statutes
on suppression
orders, judicial proceedings and juries. The workability of such legislation and
how it interacts with existing statutes
also need to be carefully
considered.
7.165 The Commission also notes that despite the introduction of the
Contempt of Court Act 1981
in the United Kingdom in 1981, a number of
definitional and operational problems persist, as indicated by the Law
Commission of England
and Wales’ recent reviews of publication contempt.
Some of these problems included uncertainty about when proceedings are pending,
the meaning of ‘prejudice’, a lack of clarity around when contempt
proceedings are commenced, a lack of safeguards around
the contempt proceedings
and the difficulties that arise in prosecuting new types of publisher such as
citizen journalists.274
Other ways to manage jury behaviour
7.166 The assumption that jurors cannot be trusted to make decisions based
only on the admissible evidence and that they are influenced
by prejudicial
publicity underlies the operation of the law of sub judice contempt.275 As
discussed above at [7.106], researchers
and the judiciary have both begun to
question this assumption.
7.167 There is growing confidence in the robustness of juries and
the ability of jury members to follow directions
and to make decisions
based only on the evidence put before them in court.
7.168 This change in views and the questioning of traditional assumptions
open the possibility of other mechanisms to address the
problem of jury exposure
to prejudicial publicity, instead of simply attempting to quarantine jurors from
accessing such materials.276
7.169 Currently in Australia there is a range of other measures available
to manage prejudicial publicity and the jury.277 These
include jury
directions, postponing a trial, changing the trial venue, sequestering a jury
or having the trial heard by judge
7.170 However, in Australia, the courts’ reliance on these other
options is outweighed by their reliance on restricting and
punishing prejudicial
media coverage.279 In contrast, the courts in the United States rely heavily on
remedial options rather than
trying to prevent prejudicial publicity.280
273 Justice Committee,
Final Report (Administration of Justice (Reform of
Contempt of Court) Bill
39-2 (Web Page, April 2019) 12–13 <
parliament.nz/en/pb/sc/reports/document/SCR_86592/administration-of-justice-reform-of-contempt-of-court>.
274 As summarised in Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt by
Publication
, (Impact Assessment, 2012).
275 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 110 [441]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
276 Ibid; Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a
Fair Trial in the 21st Century—Has Trial by Jury
Been Caught in the World
Criminal Law Journal
277 Elizabeth Greene and Jodie O’Leary, ‘Ensuring a Fair Trial
for an Accused in a Digital Era: Lessons for Australia’
in Patrick Keyzer,
Jane Johnson and Mark Pearson (eds),
The Courts and the Media: Challenges
in the Era of Digital and Social Media
(Halstead Press, 2012)
278 Ibid 103–104. Trial by judge alone is an option in Queensland, New
South Wales and Western Australia:
Criminal Code 1899
(Qld) s 615;
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Act
279 Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair
Trial in the 21st Century—Has Trial by Jury Been
Caught in the World Wide
Criminal Law Journal
, 107; Michael Chesterman,
‘OJ and the Dingo: How Media Publicity Relating to Criminal Cases Tried by
Jury is Dealt With in
Australia and America’
(1997) 45(1)
The American
Journal of Comparative Law
280 For a comparison of the US and other jurisdictions to Australia, and
their use of remedial options, see Michael Chesterman, ‘OJ
Dingo: How Media Publicity Relating to Criminal Cases Tried by Jury is
Dealt With in Australia and America’
(1997) 45(1)
The American
Journal of Comparative Law
; Elizabeth Greene and Jodie O’Leary,
‘Ensuring a Fair Trial for an Accused in a Digital Era: Lessons
Australia’ in Patrick Keyzer, Jane Johnson and Mark Pearson
The Courts and the Media: Challenges in the Era of Digital and Social
(Halstead Press, 2012) 106; Zak Rich, ‘The Past and Future of
Sub Judice Contempt: A Historically Contingent Rhetoric, a Modern
Age Threat, and the Lessons to be Learned from the United States’
Media and Arts Law Review
361, 366–8. Other
remedial options in the United States include: sequestration of the jury
ie isolating them for
the duration of the trial or bringing in
jurors from different areas of the country where publicity has not been as
significant.
7.171 Acknowledging the different approaches taken in the two jurisdictions
to freedom of speech and the unfettered freedom of the
media in the United
States, academics have argued that the preventative approach of Australia may no
longer be effective in the 21st
century and that instead greater focus should be
placed on remedial options.281
7.172 This part therefore considers alternative mechanisms to manage the
jury. These include a greater focus on the role of jury directions
option of questioning jurors before they are empanelled about their exposure to
prejudicial media coverage.
Pre-trial questioning of jurors
7.173 Pre-trial questioning of jurors is conducted in the United States by a
voir dire process.282 A similar practice is available
in the United Kingdom,
where judges can issue questionnaires about prejudicial media coverage to
potential jurors in high-profile
cases.283 The purpose of such questioning
is to identify possible prejudice or bias in prospective jurors.
7.174 A more limited practice of questioning jurors is allowed for in
Queensland and New South Wales, where a potential juror can
be questioned about
exposure to prejudicial publicity.284
7.175 In Queensland such questioning is limited to where there are special
reasons surrounding a trial, including prejudicial publicity.285
scenario the parties can make an application for people selected to serve as
jurors to be questioned at the end of the jury
selection process.286 In New
South Wales, examination of jurors about prejudicial publicity is limited to
during the trial.287
7.176 The use of pre-trial questioning was considered by the Victoria Law
Reform Commission in its review of jury empanelment in 2014.
The Commission
concluded at that time that there was little support for adopting pre-trial
questioning in Victoria. 288
7.177 Instead, the Commission considered that the current excuse process,
whereby a juror can be excused from jury duty because of
a matter that affects
their impartiality,289 was an adequate means for identifying prospective jurors
who would not be able to fairly
try the issues.290 Further, the pre-trial
questioning method was stated to be:
time consuming and intrusive ... it would add no benefit to Victorian
jurisprudence on jury selection and if adopted would significantly
the Victorian culture on jury selection.291
7.178 In the context of sub judice contempt, the NSW Commission and the ALRC
rejected the use of pre-trial questioning on the grounds
that the process could
be ‘unconscionably’ long to carry out and counterproductive in
bringing the publicity to the attention
of the jurors.292
7.179 The NZ Commission similarly did not support the approach used in the
United States which involves a cross-examination of jurors.
Instead, the
Commission recommended that a more interactive approach be taken when
empanelling jurors, particularly in high-profile
cases. This would involve
clarifying whether potential jurors have been exposed to information about the
case to an extent that it
would affect their ability to make a decision based on
the evidence.293
281 Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair
Trial in the 21st Century—Has Trial by Jury Been
Caught in the World Wide
Criminal Law Journal
, 117–8; Zak Rich,
‘The Past and Future of Sub Judice Contempt: A Historically Contingent
Rhetoric, a Modern Age
Threat, and the Lessons to be Learned from the
United States’ (2010) 15
Media and Arts Law Review
282 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Empanelment
(Report No 27,
May 2014) 50 [3.221].
283 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court (1): Juror
Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013) 53 [2.184].
Jury Act 1995
In New South Wales, a judge may examine
a juror on oath about exposure to prejudicial material during a trial:
Jury Act 1995
286 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Empanelment
(Report No 27,
May 2014) 50 [3.221].
Jury Act 1977
288 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Empanelment
(Report No 27,
May 2014) 50 [3.221].
Juries Act 2000
290 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Jury Empanelment
(Report No 27,
May 2014) 50 [3.221]. 291 Ibid 49 [3.220].
292 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987)
200–1 [345]. See for a discussion of the disadvantages, such as cost and
time, of relying on remedial
options: New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 32–3.
293 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
(Report 140 2017) 78 [4.40].
Jury directions
7.180 As discussed in Chapter 5, jury directions are part of a suite of
mechanisms, including the juror’s oath294 and the
which are aimed at ensuring jurors understand their role and make
their decisions ‘faithfully and impartially’ according
admissible evidence.295
7.181 In addition, trial judges give juries directions to assist them to
reach fair and just verdicts.296 Jury directions are
frequently relied on to
manage prejudicial publicity and its impact on the jurors in criminal
7.182 As discussed above, applications for a stay of proceedings, on the
basis of prejudicial media coverage, have been rejected because
directions given to the jury at trial to ignore the publicity.297
7.183 In trials where pre-trial publicity has been particularly problematic,
such as terrorism trials, the judge will explain the
importance of empanelling a
group of jurors who can remain impartial in the face of the high levels of
publicity.298 Jurors are then
invited to be excused if they believe they would
not be able to discharge their obligation to try the case based only on the
evidence.299
7.184 As discussed above and in Chapter 5, there are, however, concerns
of directions to
the jury about media publicity and accessing the internet, research has
demonstrated that:
• Jurors do not always understand jury directions.300 For example,
research in the United Kingdom found 23 percent of jurors
were confused about
the rule on internet access.301
• Jurors are known to ignore judicial directions and carry out their
own research.302
• The internet and communicating electronically has become second
nature for people, and so jurors may come across information
unintentionally.303
• Jury directions may have a counter-productive ‘boomerang
effect’ by alerting jurors to publicity which they then
seek out.304
7.185 In light of the apparent shortcomings of jury directions and the
increased risk of jurors being exposed to or accessing prejudicial
online, law reform commissions have recommended proactive measures to manage
jurors including:
• informing jurors before and during service about what they can and
cannot do305
• providing educational material with specific details about why
it is important that jurors do not investigate or
undertake their own
research and why it poses a risk to a fair trial306
• updating the content of jury warnings and directions to take account
of technological developments and providing specific
examples 307
294 For the oath or affirmation of jurors on empanelment, see
(Vic) sch 3.
295 Juries Commissioner’s Office Victoria, Supreme Court of Victoria,
Juror’s Handbook
(2012). The Juror’s Handbook explains the
role of the jury, the standard of proof to be applied and the need for decisions
be based in the evidence heard or seen in court, amongst other things.
296 Victoria Law Reform Commission,
Jury Directions
, Final Report
(2009) 7. 297
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
298 Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st Century
(The Federation
Press, 2012) 186.
299 Ibid. See, eg, the High Court’s description in
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
, 246 [21] of the trial judge’s directions given
prior to the start of a murder trial.
300 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Juries in Criminal Trials Part
Two—A Summary of the Research Findings
, Preliminary Paper (1999)
[7.45]; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 29 [2.50]; Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st
(The Federation Press, 2012), 73, 186.
301 Cheryl Thomas, ‘Avoiding the Perfect Storm of Juror Contempt’
Criminal Law Review
Benbrika v R
[2010] VSCA 281
(2010) 29 VR 593
[2010] VSCA 153
(2010) 202 A Crim
303 Elizabeth Greene and Jodie O’Leary, ‘Ensuring a Fair Trial
for an Accused in a Digital Era: Lessons for Australia’
in Keyzer, Johnson
and Pearson (eds),
The Courts and the Media: Challenges in the Era of Digital
and Social Media
(Halstead Press, 2012), 116.
304 Ibid citing V Gordon Rose and James R P Ogloff, ‘Challenge
for Cause in Canadian Criminal Jury Trials: Legal
and Psychological
Perspectives’ (Pt Criminal Law Quarterly) (2002) 46
Criminal Law
305 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court (1): Juror
Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013)
306 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
(Report 140, 2017) 76 [4.32].
307 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court (1): Juror
Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013) 112–17.
• requiring
jurors to sign a written declaration that they have heard and understood
warnings given by the judge about conducting
their own research308
• giving jurors consistent and frequent directions explaining why their
decision should be made based only on the evidence presented
in court and the
risks of undertaking their own research.309
7.186 In a report prepared for the Victorian Department of Justice, Jane
Johnston and others also made recommendations about the content
dissemination of ‘don’t research’ jury directions.310
7.187 These included references to social media; that directions should be
written in plain language; and that they should clearly
explain the consequences
of failing to comply with the directions.311
7.188 However, according to research comparing the approach of different
Greene and Jodie
O’Leary stated that directions alone were inadequate to deal with the
impact of the internet. They observed
that judge-alone trials
are the most desirable option for ensuring a fair trial in the era of digital
and social media.312 Judge-alone trials are currently
under review by the
Victorian Government Department of Justice and Community.313
Legal education about social media and sub judice
7.189 Many individuals publishing on the internet, particularly on social
media, do not have the same level of training, expertise
and knowledge about
legal restrictions and professionalism that court reporters have attained. The
general public or freelance journalists
also do not have the benefit of
editorial input, fact checking and legal resources.314
7.190 In the context of a decline in traditional media and a rise in citizen
journalism and social media commentary, there may be
a need for expanding legal
education about sub judice contempt to the broader community.
7.191 This was one of the approaches implemented by the United Kingdom
government in 2019 following a ‘Call for Evidence on
the Impact of
Social Media on the Administration of Justice’.315
7.192 The report relied on evidence that showed the positive impact which
timely and comprehensible legal education for jurors could
have on reducing
risks of prejudice which could extend to the community.316 Further, there was
evidence that individuals using social
media may not have given much thought to
the consequences their social media posts might have and therefore, education
people understand the importance of an effective legal system and to
‘think before they post’.317
7.193 A dedicated webpage,
www.gov.uk/contempt-of-court,
set up to raise awareness of the risks and implications of using social media to
undermine the administration of justice. As at
the time of writing, the web page
included basic information about what contempt of court
309 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
, Report 140 (2017) 79 [4.50].
310 Jane Johnston et al,
Juries and Social Media: A Report Prepared for
the Victorian Department of Justice
(Report, 2013) 24 [5.2].
312 Elizabeth Greene and Jodie O’Leary, ‘Ensuring a Fair Trial
for an Accused in a Digital Era: Lessons for Australia’
in Keyzer, Johnson
and Pearson (eds),
The Courts and the Media: Challenges in the Era of Digital
and Social Media
(Halstead Press, 2012), 119.
313 Farrah Tomazin and Sumeyya Ilanbey, ‘Andrews Government Considers
“Judge-only” trials for Criminal Cases’,
Page, 13 December 2018) <
www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/andrews-government-considers-judge-only-trials-for-criminal-cases-20181213-
p50m5u.html>.
314 Sharon Rodrick, ‘Achieving the Aims of Open Justice? The
Relationship Between the Courts, the Media and the Public’
[2014] DeakinLawRw 4
(2014) 19(1)
Deakin Law Review
, 154; Rachel Hews and Nicolas Suzor,
‘“Scum of the Earth”: An Analysis of Prejudicial Twitter
Conversations During
the Baden-Clay Murder Trial’
(2017) 40(4)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
315 Attorney-General’s Office (UK),
Response to Call for Evidence on
the Impact of Social Media on the Administration of Justice
316 Ibid 5 [2.5]. The report referred to evidence submitted by academic
Professor Cheryl Thomas arising from her 10-year research
the jury system. The research led to the formulation of a revised juror notice,
‘Your Legal Responsibilities
as a Juror.’
317 Attorney-General’s Office (UK),
Response to Call for Evidence on
the Impact of Social Media on the Administration of Justice
is, what you should not publish about a court case, the legal consequences of
being found to be in contempt, as well as a hotline
to report a publication
‘that you think risks the fairness of a future or ongoing
7.194 The report also recommended comprehensive guidance on contempt
(particularly in the context of social media) for judges, advocates,
prosecutors
and the public.319 This was based on evidence that suggested the practitioners
often avoid contempt proceedings because
of their complexity.320
7.195 The United Kingdom Attorney-General’s Office stated that they are
now working with Facebook, Google and Twitter to address
contemptuous or
otherwise unlawful social media posts and create systems that will allow for the
platforms to be notified of such
content quickly, enabling them to mitigate a
risk to the administration of justice.321
7.196 There may also be a role for internet platforms in setting standards
for acceptable behaviour on their websites to ensure
jurors are not exposed to
prejudice online.322
27 Is there a need to retain the law of sub judice contempt?
28 If the law of sub judice contempt is to be retained, should the common
law be replaced by statutory provisions? If so:
(a) How should the law and its constituent elements be defined,
i. The ‘tendency’ test
ii. The definition of ‘publication’
iii. The beginning and end of the ‘pending’ period?
(b) Should fault be an element, or alternatively should there be a defence
to cover the absence of fault?
(c) Should the public interest test be expressly stated?
(d) Should upper limits for fines and imprisonment be set?
29 Is there a need for greater use of remedial options, for example jury
directions or trial postponement? If so:
(a) How should this be facilitated?
(b) Are other mechanisms, for example pre-trial questioning of jurors, also
30 Is there a need for education about the impact of social media on the
administration of justice and sub judice contempt to be targeted
to particular
groups, for example, judicial officers and jurors?
31 What other reforms should be made, if any, to this area of the law of
contempt of court?
318 UK Government, ‘Contempt of court’,
Your Rights and the
(Web Page) <
www.gov.uk/contempt-of-court
319 Attorney-General’s Office (UK),
Response to Call for Evidence on
the Impact of Social Media on the Administration of Justice
(March 2019)
320 Ibid 8 [2.17].
321 Ibid 12 [3.10].
322 Rachel Hews and Nicolas Suzor, ‘“Scum of the Earth”: An
Analysis of Prejudicial Twitter Conversations During
the Baden-Clay Murder
(2017) 40(4)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
1633. See the UK Government’s proposals for regulation of the digital
economy (encompassing online content, platforms and applications) including
the imposition of a duty of care on users, holding companies
accountable for
tackling online harms, including contempt of court: UK Government,
Harms White Paper
(Web Page, April, 2019)
www.gov.uk/government/consultations/online-harms-white-paper
Contempt by
publication (2)— scandalising the court
Introduction
116 Issues with the law of scandalising
121 Is the law of scandalising contempt
adaptable and relevant?
126 Possible reforms
to scandalising
by publication (2)— scandalising the court
Introduction
8.1 This chapter considers the manifestation of contempt which addresses acts
or publications calculated to impair the public’s
confidence in the
judiciary.1 This type of contempt is also known as ‘contempt by
scandalising the court’ and ‘scandalising
8.2 Scandalising contempt was justified by the High Court in
Gallagher v
Durack (Gallagher)
on the following basis:
The authority of the law rests on public confidence, and it is important to
the stability of society that the confidence of the public
should not be shaken
by baseless attacks on the integrity or impartiality of courts or judges.2
8.3 The offence is aimed at protecting the administration of justice as an
ongoing process, meaning the scope of this law is not limited
to publications
that comment on a specific trial.3 Rather, the offence covers publications
which comment on the courts and judges
generally. Such publications commonly
fall within the category of either ‘scurrilous abuse’4 or
accusations of partiality.5
8.4 Examples of comments that have been held to constitute scandalising
contempt include:
• calling a judge a ‘cretin’ in the presence of the
• suggesting that an individual or group of persons, such as a union,
can influence a judge’s decision7
• allegations that the judge was racist and that this influenced the
judge’s decision8
• allegations that judicial officers were biased and corrupt9
• reprimanding judicial decisions.10
8.5 The principles engaged by scandalising contempt were summarised by
Justice Cummins in the Victorian Supreme Court case
Anissa v Parsons
First, proceeding for contempt of court is not and must not be in diminution
of free speech. Second, proceeding for contempt of court
is to preserve the
administration of justice. Third, proceeding for contempt of court is not
to protect the individual person
of the judge.11
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
(1987) 62 OR (2d) 449.
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
, 243 (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson
and Brennan JJ).
R v Fletcher
[1935] HCA 1
(1935) 52 CLR 248
, 257 (Evatt J);
R v Dunbabin; Ex
Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
, 443 (Rich J).
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
[1972] 2 NSWLR 887
, 910 (Hope JA).
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
, 442 (Rich J).
A-G (Qld) v Lovitt
[2003] QSC 279.
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
[1972] 2 NSWLR 887.
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
[1972] 2 NSWLR 887.
R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd
[2001] VSC 443
Hoser & Kotabi
Pty Ltd v R
[2003] VSCA 194.
Tate v Duncan-Strelec
[2014] NSWSC 1125
Hoser & Kotabi Pty
[2003] VSCA 194
R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd
A-G (Qld) v Lovitt
[2003] QSC 279.
Anissa Pty Ltd v Parsons
[1999] VSC [19]. See also
Gallagher v
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
8.6 There are a number of uncertainties in the operation and application
of the offence, as well as in the assumption on which
based—that the judiciary requires special protection from attacks and
criticism in order to maintain the public’s
confidence in the
8.7 Not only is there a lack of empirical evidence behind this assumption,
but ‘public confidence’ is also a vague and
developing concept which
may be interpreted differently by the judiciary and may change over time,
creating uncertainty around the
scope of the law.13
8.8 Further, in today’s political and social environment, public debate
and freedom of expression are highly valued and considered
a necessary part of
democracy.14 The nature of criticism has also changed, as well as the technology
available to disseminate and
access information.15
8.9 In this context, the ongoing adaptability of and need for the law of
scandalising contempt and the assumptions on which it is
based are being
questioned.16
8.10 In the United Kingdom the law of scandalising contempt has been
abolished.17 Long before then, the courts in England had considered
scandalising
contempt ‘virtually obsolescent’.18 Similarly, in the United States
and Canada the law has been found to
be incompatible with their respective
constitutional rights to freedom of expression.19 Conversely, the New Zealand
Law Commission
(NZ Commission) has recommended that the law of scandalising
contempt be retained and replaced by statutory provisions.20
8.11 In Australia, the law of scandalising contempt continues to apply and to
be raised as an issue by the courts.21 In Victoria,
scandalising contempt was
raised in 2017 in relation to comments made by three federal ministers about the
approach of the Court
of Appeal in
DPP v Besim; DPP v MHK
considering the adequacy of a sentence for a person who had pleaded guilty to
terrorism charges.22 In 2019 members of the media
were also accused of
committing scandalising contempt when reporting on the Victorian County Court
criminal trial of George Pell.23
8.12 Given the purpose of the law is to protect the integrity and authority
of the court, unique issues arise in relation both to
the operation and scope of
the offence and to the broader assumptions and policies underlying the law.
Accordingly, this chapter
considers the following issues:
• the definition and scope of the law
• whether scandalising contempt is a necessary and relevant law in
today’s modern context
• the approach of different jurisdictions
• whether reform of the offence is required.
12 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 245
13 See Kathy Mack, Sharyn Roach Anleu and Jordan Tutton, ‘The Judiciary
and the Public: Judicial Perceptions’ (2018) 39
Adelaide Law
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
, 31 (Mason CJ),
The Commonwealth v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd.
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR
, 52 (Mason J).
15 Justice Michael Kirby, ‘Attacks on Judges—A Universal
Phenomenon’ (Speech, Winter Leadership Meeting, Hawaii,
5 January 1998);
Kathy Mack, Sharyn Roach Anleu and Jordan Tutton, ‘The Judiciary and the
Public: Judicial Perceptions’
[2018] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
16 The law of scandalising contempt has been described as
‘archaic’ and ‘antiquated’, see Committee on Contempt
Court (UK),
Report of the Committee on Contempt of Court
1974) 159; Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Report on Contempt of Court
(Report No 46, September 1994) [5.1]; Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A Modern Statute
(Report No 140,
2017) 109 [6.27].
17 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising the
, Report No 335 (2012) 26;
Crime and Courts Act 2013
(UK) s 33 ‘Abolishment of scandalising the judiciary as form of
contempt of court’.
McLeod v St Auyn
[1899] UKLawRpAC 33
[1899] AC 549
Secretary of State for
Defence v Guardian Newspapers Ltd
[1985] AC 339 (HC)
(1987) 62 OR (2d) 449
Bridges v California
[1941] USSC 148
20 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 116–17.
21 Kim Gould, ‘Scandalising Contempt in Australia: Dead? Dying? In Much
Danger? ...(Not!)...’
Media and Arts Law Review
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
[2017] VSCA 165.
Chapter 3 for a discussion of this case.
23 Amanda Meade, ‘Up to 100 Journalists Accused of Breaking Pell
Suppression Order Face Possible Jail Terms’,
The Guardian
26 February 2019 <
www.theguardian.com/media/2019/feb/26/dozens-of-journalists-accused-of-breaking-pell-trial-suppression-order-face-
possible-jail-terms?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>; Adam Cooper, ‘DPP Moves
to Jail Editors, Journalists’,
(Melbourne), 27 March
2019; Richard Ackland, ‘The Media and Contempt of Court’,
Saturday Paper
(online), 6–12 April 2019
<https://www.thesaturdaypaper.
com.au/opinion/topic/2019/04/06/the-media-and-contempt-court/15544692007951>.
with the law of scandalising contempt
The uncertain test
8.13 In 1935 the High Court stated in
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
that scandalising contempt was constituted by:
publications which tend to detract from the authority and influence of
judicial determinations; publications calculated to
impair the confidence
of the people in the Court’s judgments because the matter published
aims at lowering the
authority of the Court as a whole or that of its
Judges and excites misgivings as to the integrity, propriety and
impartiality
brought to the exercise of the judicial office.24
8.14 A number of cases have described this test as an ‘inherent
tendency’ to interfere with the administration of justice.25
case with other forms of contempt, the test does not require that the
administration of justice was in
fact undermined or discredited, but
rather that a risk existed. There is also no requirement that there be any
intention to
interfere on the part of the publisher26 but it appears that an
intention to publish is needed.27
8.15 There is some guidance from the courts as to the scope of the test. For
example, it has been stated that the act or publication
must pose a
‘real’ or ‘serious’ risk as opposed to a remote
possibility that the publication will undermine
public confidence in the
administration of justice.28
8.16 Similarly to sub judice contempt, however, the ‘inherent
tendency’ test has been criticised for being imprecise,
broad and as
setting a low threshold, thereby infringing on freedom of expression.29
8.17 In particular, ‘tendency’, ‘calculated to
impair’ and ‘public confidence’ are all vague and
concepts leaving room for doubt as to what would constitute a scandalising
8.18 In his dissenting judgment in
, Justice Murphy stated
that the offence is so ‘vague and general that it is an oppressive
limitation on free speech’.30
In light of this, he supported the
higher threshold test used in the United States, that the ‘substantive
evil be extremely
serious and the degree of imminence extremely high before
utterances can be punished’.31 It is noted, however, that the US
right to freedom of speech.32
8.19 The Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) also noted the vague and
abstract notion of ‘public confidence’.33 The
Commission stated that
there was a lack of evidence as to what the Australian public expects of judges
and the courts and instead
there was a reliance on the courts to guess what
those expectations might be.34
8.20 In addition, judicial attitudes, community expectations and the
political climate are always changing, meaning there can be a
consistency in determining what does or does not have an inherent tendency to
undermine the integrity and authority of the
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
, 442 (Rich
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
(Dixon CJ, Fullagar J, Kitto J, Taylor J);
A-G (Qld) v Lovitt
[58] (Chesterman J).
[1950] VicLawRp 17
[1950] VLR 226
, 231. See also
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
[1972] 2 NSWLR 887
, 911 (Hope J); Cf:
A-G (Qld) v Lovitt
[58] (Chesterman J).
Wade v Gilroy
[1986] FamCA 6
(1986) 83 FLR 14
R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd
[2001] VSC 443
& Weekly Times Ltd v A-G (Vic)
[2001] VSCA 152
R v Herald &
Weekly Times Ltd (No 2)
[2000] VSC 35.
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
, 248 (Murphy J); The Law
Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 248–9 [428]
32 Ibid 243.
33 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 251
35 Ibid 251–2 [434]. See
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
[1972] 2 NSWLR 887
908 (Hope JA); see also Kim Gould, ‘Scandalising Contempt in Australia:
Dead? Dying? In Much Danger? ...(Not!)...’
Media and Arts
, 68; Kathy Mack, Sharyn Roach Anleu and Jordan Tutton,
‘The Judiciary and the Public: Judicial Perceptions’
[2018] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
scandalising contempt and fair criticism
8.21 The court has stated that a comment about the courts or a judge may be
scandalising contempt if it is either ‘scurrilous
abuse’,36 or
‘excites misgivings as to the integrity, propriety and impartiality
brought to the exercise of judicial
8.22 However, it is well established that criticism, even if
‘colourful and vitriolic’,38 is not a contempt if
it is fair,
does not impute improper motives to a judge and is made in good faith.39
8.23 The courts have recognised that there is a delicate balance between
protecting the public’s confidence in the judiciary
and fair criticism
and that fair criticism is a necessary component of the administration of
8.24 It remains unclear, however, when allegations of partiality or
impropriety may be properly distinguished from fair or ‘intemperate,
permissible, criticism’.41 This problem was stated by Justice Hope in the
New South Wales case
A-G v Mundey
It is this qualification which must cause the greatest concern for any
would-be critic, for its application in particular circumstances
can give rise
to great difficulty; it is certainly not every such criticism that amounts
to contempt, and the boundary between
what is and what is not
contempt involves questions of degree, and therefore uncertainty.42
8.25 There have been some decisions which have distinguished a fair criticism
from an allegation of partiality or impropriety. For
example, the following
statements were held
to constitute scandalising contempt:
• suggesting that a ‘Judge may, in his approach to a problem be
influenced by his character and general outlook’43
• suggesting a judge or court has been influenced by a particular
matter, provided the comment is not scurrilous44
• commenting on a statement made by a judge which in itself impairs the
public’s confidence in the courts45
• suggesting improper motives if the judge in question is deserving of
that accusation.46
8.26 The changing boundaries of the law of scandalising contempt can make it
difficult to predict and adhere to.47
Truth as a defence
8.27 Truth as a defence ‘implicitly’48 arises from the aim of
scandalising contempt to prevent ‘baseless’,49
‘unwarrantable’50 and ‘unjustified’51 attacks on the
integrity of the courts. That is, if the criticism is
based on fact or is
justifiable, the offence of scandalising contempt may not be made out.
(1987) 62 OR (2d) 449
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
[1972] 2 NSWLR 887.
‘Scurrilous abuse’ is no longer commonly
used, but it is defined as ‘grossly or indecently abusive’:
Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 57 [6.6].
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
, 442 (Rich J);
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
[1972] 2 NSWLR 887
62 OR (2d) 449.
R v Nicholls
[1911] HCA 22
(1911) 12 CLR 280
, 286 (Griffith CJ).
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
, 39 (Brennan J);
R v Nicholls
[1911] HCA 22
(1911) 12 CLR 280
, 286 (Griffith CJ). See also
A-G (Trinidad & Tobago)
[1936] AC 322.
41 Des Butler and Sharon Rodrick,
Australian Media Law
Reuters, 5th ed, 2015) 446 [6.840]. 42
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
[1972] 2 NSWLR
[1950] VicLawRp 17
[1950] VLR 226
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
[1972] 2 NSWLR 887
R v Nicholls
[1911] HCA 22
(1911) 12 CLR 280
Ahnee v DPP
[1999] UKPC 11
[1999] 2 AC 294
47 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising the
(Consultation Paper, 2012) 5 [18].
48 See Oyiela Litaba, ‘Does the “Offence” of Contempt by
Scandalising the Court Have a Valid Place in the Law of
Australia?’
[2003] DeakinLawRw 6
(2003) 8(1)
Deakin Law Review
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
, 243 (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson
and Brennan JJ).
R v Fletcher
[1935] HCA 1
(1935) 52 CLR 248
, 257 (Evatt J);
Bell v Stewart
(1920) 28 CLR 419, 429 (Isaacs and Rich JJ).
R v Fletcher
[1935] HCA 1
(1935) 52 CLR 248
, 257 (Evatt J).
obiter comments of Justice Brennan in the High Court case of
Nationwide News
Pty Ltd v Wills
in 1992 appears to suggest that the truth is a defence to
scandalising contempt:
It is not necessary, even if it be possible, to chart the limits of contempt
scandalizing the court. It is sufficient to say that
the revelation of
truth—at all events when its revelation is for the public
benefit—and the making of a fair criticism
based on fact do not amount to
a contempt of court though the truth revealed or the criticism made is such as
to deprive the court
or judge of public confidence.52
8.29 However, it is unclear whether truth operates as a complete
defence as it does in defamation.53 Academic Oyiela
Litaba noted that, given
the severe punishment that can arise from the offence, there was still too much
unpredictability as to
how scandalising contempt could be proved and
defended.54
8.30 The ALRC noted that without a defence of truth:
[W]ell-founded allegations of judicial misconduct may be punished and, more
importantly, people in possession of sound evidence establishing
misconduct may be restrained from revealing it publicly out of fear of being
convicted of contempt. The public scrutiny
which is necessary to ensure the
proper functioning of any social institution of major importance will thus be
significantly hampered
in the case of the judiciary, and a dangerous tradition
of excessive deference to the judiciary may arise within the media and the
community at large.55
8.31 To clarify this aspect of the law of scandalising contempt, the ALRC
recommended that a defence of justification should be introduced.56
8.32 The Law Reform Commission of Western Australia recommended that the same
defences that apply to defamation, including truth and
fair comment, should
apply to the recommended statutory offence of scandalising contempt.57
8.33 The NZ Commission also recommended a statutory defence of truth similar
to the defence available in the jurisdiction’s
defamation legislation.58
The Commission stated:
The defence of truth exists in defamation law because an individual cannot
claim damage to a reputation that he or she does not have.
Similarly, a
defendant cannot be said to be responsible for undermining public confidence in
the judiciary where the allegations
made are in fact true.59
8.34 An identified problem with having a defence of truth, however, is that
it could have the effect of putting the judge on trial
and exposing the
judge’s conduct to external scrutiny.60
Prosecution of high-profile individuals
8.35 The relevance of the status and influence of an individual61 when
prosecuting for scandalising contempt has been criticised,
particularly when an
accused is prosecuted to the exclusion of the media outlets which published the
statement.62
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
53 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 119 [6.76]; LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
(online at 25 September 2018) 105
Contempt, ‘2 Criminal Contempt’ [105–230].
54 Oyiela Litaba, ‘Does the “Offence” of Contempt by
Scandalising the Court Have a Valid Place in the Law of Modern
Australia?’
[2003] DeakinLawRw 6
(2003) 8(1)
Deakin Law Review
55 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 255
57 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 116.
58 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 120 [6.78].
60 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Contempt in Modern New Zealand
Issues Paper (2014) 64 [6.62]; The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 254 [438].
61 For example, Lovitt, a barrister, was carrying out his duties to the court
at the time of stating to the media that the judge was
a ‘cretin’.
In finding the defendant guilty of scandalising contempt, the judge considered
the defendant’s status
as a barrister and that his criticisms would
therefore be considered knowledgeable by the public. Lovitt’s status was
to have contributed to the serious nature of the contempt:
A-G (Qld) v
[2003] QSC 279.
62 For example, it was held in
that the barrister’s
recklessness in making the statement in the presence of the media, ‘with
no basis for believing that
all of their news organisations would decline to
publish his remarks’, was enough to establish contempt of court. The
publicising
media were not prosecuted:
A-G (Qld) v Lovitt
8.36 Justice
Murphy in the High Court decision of
stated in his dissenting
The authority and standing of the Federal Court can only be lowered if it
allows itself to become the vehicle of unexplained selective
prosecutions for
contempt of itself.63
8.37 The ALRC also noted that the effect of selective prosecution of
influential speakers and writers is dangerous.
This concentration on public figures and the media may be justified on the
broad basis that power demands responsibility. But it has
its dangers. At worst,
the law of scandalising can become, or appear to be, an overt political weapon
used against prominent individuals
who ‘challenge the system’.64
8.38 The Court of Appeal’s decision to hold a hearing in relation to
potential charges of contempt against three federal ministers
is another more
recent example of high-profile individuals being the focus of potential contempt
proceedings.65 In these circumstances,
however, the publishing media outlet,
The Australian
, was also included as a party.
8.39 In the cases where the original speaker of the statement and the
publicising media have both been prosecuted and convicted, there
was a distinct
connection between the first speaker and publishing media.66
The appropriateness of the summary
8.40 The appropriateness of the summary procedure for scandalising contempt
cases has been repeatedly affirmed by the courts.67 Justice
Dixon stated the
justification for this procedure:
It is necessary for the purpose of maintaining public confidence in the
administration of law that there shall be some certain and
immediate method of
repressing imputations upon Courts of justice which, if continued, are likely to
impair their authority. But
it must be done by judicial remedies, and judicial
remedies are necessarily administered by the Courts themselves. The Court must,
therefore, undertake the task notwithstanding the
embarrassment of considering what it should do in relation to an attack upon
itself. There is no practicable alternative.68
8.41 The courts have also recognised that, given the broad purpose of
scandalising contempt—to protect the authority and integrity
court—the summary procedure should be invoked only in exceptional69 or
extremely serious70 circumstances and not to
protect judges from personal
8.42 Despite these acknowledgements of the need for judicial restraint in
exercising the summary procedure to punish for scandalising
contempt, the
process has been the subject of criticism.72
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
64 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 253
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
[2017] VSCA 165.
66 For example, in
the publishing company of a book (owned by
the original speaker) was also prosecuted:
R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty
[2001] VSC 443
Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd v R
[2003] VSCA 194
A-G (Qld) v Lovitt
[2003] QSC 279
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
2 NSWLR 887
R v The Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
[1999] VSC 432
R v Herald & Weekly Times Ltd (No 2)
[2000] VSC 35
& Weekly Times v A-G (Vic)
[2001] VSCA 152.
Re Colina; Ex Parte Torney
(1999) 200 CLR 386
, 393 (Gleeson CJ and
Gummow J) citing
DPP v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(1987) 7 NSWLR
, 595. See also
R v Fletcher
[1935] HCA 1
(1935) 52 CLR 248
, 259 (Evatt J).
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
Bell v Stewart
(1920) 28 CLR 419, 429 (Isaacs and Rich
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
, 240 (Gibbs CJ).
R v Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
, 442 (Rich
72 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 114 [6.53]; The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 279; Enid Campbell, ‘Contemptuous
Criticism of the Judiciary and the Judicial Process’
Australian Law Journal
See also Justice Kirby’s (dissenting)
discussion of
Constitution
, and its effect
of deeming scandalising contempt as an indictable offence that should have
the option of being heard by a jury:
Re Colina; Ex Parte Torney
200 CLR 386
, 422–427 (Kirby J); Justice Murphy (dissenting) also stated a
trial by jury should be restored:
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR
varying criticisms arise from the apparent contradiction that the
impartial and fair institution of the judiciary
should be responsible for
prosecuting its own critics and the risk that a judgment against a
critic could be perceived
as the courts protecting their own
interests.73
8.44 The Law Commission of England and Wales, in its review of scandalising
contempt, stated:
There is something inherently suspect about an offence both created and
enforced by judges which targets offensive remarks about judges.74
8.45 The ALRC, which recommended that a trial by jury be the appropriate mode
of procedure for scandalising contempt,75 summarised
a range of arguments
against the current summary procedure:
• The current procedure could possibly be seen as biased and any
sentencing that might result could be perceived as a ‘gut
of the court rather than a measured response.76
• A jury trial is not available for less serious crimes, so if it is
not available in the context of scandalising contempt,
then should a prosecution
be brought at all? 77
• Given the importance of the opinions of the ‘common
person’, would a jury trial not be more appropriate to counter
the risk of
a judge alone being out of touch with the community? 78
8.46 The NZ Commission also raised the question of whether the efficiency of
the summary procedure was necessary for scandalising
contempt, given the offence
is protecting not a particular trial but administration of justice as an ongoing
Apologies and retractions
8.47 As the courts have recognised, apologies can work to either prevent a
prosecution or mitigate a sentence in any case of contempt.
80 As the ALRC has
also recognised, this is particularly relevant to scandalising contempt because
avowedly concerned with the impairment of public confidence in the
administration of justice. It is anomalous that an apology to the
court itself
should be thought to have some effect in restoring such confidence—which
by hypothesis has been damaged, or at
least jeopardised, by the scandalising
remarks in question—while there is no explicit recognition that a
publicised apology
might be effective to do this.81
8.48 As discussed in Chapter 3, three federal ministers purged their alleged
scandalising contempt following an apology.82
8.49 However, as also discussed in Chapter 3, there is uncertainty around
when and how an apology should be made for an alleged contempt
and how it may
affect a prosecution or sentencing for scandalising contempt.
8.50 The ALRC noted that the concept of apologies and retractions in
defamation law could be a useful guide for how they should operate
scandalising contempt.83
8.51 In this context it is noted that the
Defamation Act 2005
provides that an apology made by the defendant to the plaintiff or the
publication of a correction can be considered in the
73 Justice Ronald Sackville, ‘How Fragile are the Courts? Freedom of
Speech and Criticism of the Judiciary’
[2005] MonashULawRw 8
(2005) 31(2)
Monash University
74 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising the
(Report No 335, 2012) 15 [63].
75 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 281 [479].
76 Ibid 279 [477].
77 Ibid 280 [477].
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
, 249–50 (Murphy J).
79 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A
Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 114 [6.53].
80 See, eg,
R v The Age Co Ltd
[2008] VSC 305
where an apology
mitigated the punishment imposed;
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
(2017) 52 VR 296
where an apology purged the contempt so that it was not
necessary to impose any penalty or to commence contempt proceedings.
81 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 259
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
[2017] VSCA 165
83 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 259
of damages.84
Is the law of scandalising contempt adaptable and
8.52 This part of the chapter considers the assumption that public
confidence in the judiciary must be maintained to ensure the
administration of justice.
8.53 The evidence behind this assumption is lacking and requires testing, as
was stated by former Chief Justice Sir Anthony Mason:
Judges associate public confidence in the administration of justice with the
independence of the judiciary and impartial enforcement
of the law. That may
well be right, though, in the absence of proof, it necessarily rests on that
assumption. Whether the public
appreciates the concept of judicial independence
and values it highly may be questionable.85
8.54 The ALRC summarised the ‘principal responses’ to the
argument that public confidence is needed to support the judicial
• There is no clear evidence that a lack of public confidence could
lead to the operation of the legal system being negatively
impacted.86
• It is short-sighted to expect that the public might ‘rise
up’ and destroy the system if public discussion, education
and criticism
were to be allowed instead of repressed.87
• Even if public confidence is perceived to be desirable, it should not
be an ‘absolute good’ pursued at all costs,
‘[i]n particular,
it should not override the need for public education as to the genuine flaws in
the system ...’.88
8.55 Further, judicial officers have acknowledged that they should be robust
in the face of criticism, and that being criticised is
part of the job of a
judicial officer.89 This is reflected in Lord Salmon’s statement in the
1980 United Kingdom case
I am and have always been satisfied that no judge would be influenced in his
judgment by what may be said by the media. If he were,
he would not be fit to be
8.56 The assumptions underlying scandalising contempt and the available
evidence testing these assumptions are considered in three
contexts. These
• the nature of criticism of the judiciary today in the context of new
and emerging issues, acceptance of greater scrutiny of
the courts and the impact
of online and social media
• the global shift towards freedom of speech and the impact of the
implied freedom of political communication
• alternative avenues for dealing with criticism of the court today and
whether they provide a more appropriate balance between
maintaining the
integrity and authority of the court and freedom of speech.
Defamation Act 2005
s 38(1)(a)(b).
85 Sir Anthony Mason, ‘The Courts and Public Opinion’ (Speech to
the National Institute of Government and Law, Parliament
House Canberra, 20
March 2002)
NSW Bar Association
News 11 (2002) 30, 31. See also Justice
Ronald Sackville, ‘How Fragile are the Courts? Freedom of Speech and
Criticism of the
[2005] MonashULawRw 8
(2005) 31(2)
Monash University Law Review
86 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 246
88 Ibid [425].
89 Kathy Mack, Sharyn Roach Anleu and Jordan Tutton, ‘The Judiciary and
the Public: Judicial Perceptions’
[2018] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
A-G (UK) v British Broadcasting Corporation
[1980] 3 All ER 161
of the judiciary
8.57 Judicial and community expectations as to what type of criticism may
‘shake the public’s confidence’ have changed
over time, as has
the nature of communication giving rise to new types of criticism.
8.58 The NZ Commission reflected on these changes and the fact that the
expression ‘scandalising’, ‘harks back to
a bygone era and no
longer reflects the nature of the harm caused by the offence or what the
punishment is meant to achieve’.91
8.59 Further, heightened public debate and discussion about the judiciary
have been acknowledged as a positive development and in
the public’s
interest.92 This is reflected in the courts’ consideration of ‘the
good sense of the community’
as a sufficient safeguard
against scandalising comments,93 and current ‘Australian
standards’,94 as well as the apparent acceptance of fair comment
as defences to scandalising contempt.95
8.60 However, new issues that have come before the court, such as terrorism96
and native title cases,97 and the consequent public
and media attention, have
given rise to a ‘climate of intense scrutiny and criticism’98 in the
form of sophisticated
and concerted campaigns against the judiciary.
8.61 Justice Kirby, speaking extra-curially about the public response to the
High Court decision in
Mabo v Queensland
) stated that there is concern
such an unrelenting barrage of criticism and denigration would, if unabated,
undermine the community’s confidence in the courts
and acceptance of court
decisions. Editorialists might declare that “robust political debate [is]
good for the country”.
But a lot of judges and lawyers, unused to such
unrelenting assaults, had their doubts.100
8.62 Justice Eames in R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd (
) noted the
modern challenges posed by criticism in the form of ‘concerted
campaigns’ such as that following the Mabo
decision. He stated that there
was a difference between criticism which can be ignored and sophisticated,
sustained campaigns that
require a response from the courts
8.63 The changing media landscape has also affected the nature and reach of
such criticism.102 Justice Eames, for example, noted that
past calls for the
judiciary to exercise caution before punishing contempt may need to be rethought
in the context of mass communication.103
8.64 An example of a campaign of this nature was the local,
international and social media response to the George Pell
trial. Not only
did much of the media coverage allegedly breach a suppression order which
was in place to prevent prejudice
to Pell’s second trial, but the
existence of the suppression order in the first place was implicitly criticised
outlets which published stories about the ‘Censored’
91 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Contempt in Modern New Zealand
Issues Paper (2014) 60 [6.29].
R v Police Commissioner of the Metropolis; Ex parte Blackburn (No 2)
(1968) 2 QB 150
R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd
[2001] VSC 443
(1987) 62 OR (2d) 449
A-G (NSW) v Mundey
Bell v Stewart
(1920) 28 CLR 419, 429 (Isaacs and Rich JJ);
Dunbabin; Ex Parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
[1935] 53 CLR 434
, 442–3 (Rich J);
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
, 243 (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and
Brennan JJ);
Mills v Townsville City Council (No 2)
[2003] QPELR 548.
Eames J stated, however, that the ‘good sense of the
community’ can only go so far in protecting against ‘hyperbole
fatuous argument’ compared to a published book with apparent credibility:
R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd
[2001] VSC 443
Anissa Pty Ltd v Parsons
[1999] VSC [22] (Cummins J).
R v Nicholls
[1911] HCA 22
(1911) 12 CLR 280
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
, 90–1 (Dawson J).
DPP (Cth) v Besim; DPP (Cth) v MHK (No 2)
[2017] VSCA 165.
Mabo v Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Wik Peoples v State
of Queensland
(1991) 187 CLR 1.
98 Kim Gould, ‘When the Judiciary is Defamed: Restraint Policy Under
Australian Law Journal
Mabo v Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1.
100 Justice Michael Kirby, ‘Attacks on Judges—A Universal
Phenomenon’ (Speech, Winter Leadership Meeting, Hawaii,
R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd
[2001] VSC 443
102 Kathy Mack, Sharyn Roach Anleu and Jordan Tutton, ‘The Judiciary
and the Public: Judicial Perceptions’
[2018] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd
[2001] VSC 443
[228]. See also
Chief Justice in Equity Bergin noted in the New South Wales Supreme Court
Tate v Duncan-Strelec
[2014] NSWSC 1125
[198]: ‘The fact that
there is more capacity to read other people’s opinions, comments and
allegations than in times
prior to the establishment of the internet does not
mean that the Court should be less vigilant in ensuring that there is no
interference
with the administration of justice and protecting the Court from
being scandalised.’
104 On Thursday, 13 December 2018, the day Pell’s verdict came down,
newspaper published on its front page the headline
‘CENSORED’, followed by ‘The world is reading a very important
story that is relevant to Victorians.
The Herald-Sun
is prevented from
publishing details of this significant news.’
8.65 International
media outlets also commented on the ‘gag order’ and that such orders
were ‘true anachronisms
in the digital age’.105 In March 2019, the
Director of Public Prosecutions commenced proceedings against 36 members of the
media for contempt of court, including publications which ‘had the effect
of scandalising the court’.106 A directions
hearing in this case took
place in the Supreme Court on 15 April 2019 and the matter has been set down
for a further directions
hearing on 26 June 2019. The matter is yet to be fixed
for hearing.
8.66 Social media has also provided a platform for highly critical,
malicious and personal comments to be published about
individual judges.107
Perspectives differ, however, as to whether this type of content is best
ignored, or its cumulative
effect is a cause for concern.
8.67 The NZ Commission identified a number of ‘unsavoury
websites’ with offensive material about judges, some of which
menacing tone and could appear to be ‘official’.108 The Commission
stated that the risks created by social
media should not be ignored and may
justify retaining scandalising contempt.
With the internet being a permanent repository of information and with the
potential for posts to go viral, we can no longer dismiss
attacks on judges on
the ground that today’s newspaper is tomorrow’s fire lighter.109
8.68 Academics Marilyn Bromberg and Andrew Ekert identified a gap in the
current discourse as to how the judiciary should respond
to critical or
malicious comments on social media.110
8.69 The ability to filter, police and respond to such comments, however, has
been identified as impossible.111
8.70 The Law Commission of England and Wales on the other hand has noted that
extreme abuse of judges, mostly online, ‘does
not appear to be doing any
harm. The very extremity of the language prevents most readers from taking it
seriously.’112
Scandalising contempt and freedom of
8.71 Other jurisdictions have found scandalising contempt to be incompatible
with their respective constitutional rights to freedom
of expression, with the
United Kingdom abolishing the offence,113 bringing them into line with
Canada114 and the United States115
offence has been found to be incompatible with their constitutional rights to
freedom of expression.116
105 Margaret Sullivan, ‘A Top Cardinal’s Sex-Abuse Conviction is
Huge News in Australia. But the Media Can’t Report
Washington Post
(Web Page, 12 December 2018) <
www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/a-top-cardinals-sex-abuse-conviction-
is-huge-news-in-australia-but-the-media-cant-report-it-there/2018/12/12/49c0eb68-fe27-11e8-83c0-b06139e540e5_story.
html?utm_term=.7a635aecd36a>. For a discussion of the media’s
reporting of the Pell verdict, see Margaret Simons, ‘Suppression
Aren’t Perfect but Journalistic Hubris Won’t Fix the Problem’,
The Guardian
(Web Page, 27 February 2019) <
www.theguardian.com/
commentisfree/2019/feb/27/suppression-orders-arent-perfect-but-journalistic-hubris-wont-fix-the-problem>;
for a brief discussion
the international coverage of the Pell case, see Justice François
Kunc, ‘Current Issues—Victorian Suppression
Orders and the
International Media’
Australian Law Journal
106 Adam Cooper, ‘DPP Moves to Jail Editors, Journalists’,
(Melbourne), 27 March 2019. See also Richard Ackland, ‘The Media
and Contempt of Court’,
The Saturday Paper
(Web Page, 6–12
April 2019) <
www.thesaturdaypaper.com.au/opinion/topic/2019/04/06/the-
media-and-contempt-court/15544692007951>.
107 Marilyn Bromberg and Andrew Eckert , ‘Haters Gonna Hate: When the
Public Uses Social Media to Comment Critically or Maliciously
Officers’ (2017) 24
Journal of Judicial Administration
142–5; Kathy Mack, Sharyn Roach Anleu and Jordan Tutton, ‘The
Judiciary and the Public: Judicial Perceptions’
[2018] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law
, 14. See also Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of
Court: Scandalising the Court
(Report No 335, 2012) 19 [71].
108 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Contempt in Modern New Zealand
Issues Paper (2014) 64 [6.58].
109 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 113 [6.47].
110 Marilyn Bromberg and Andrew Eckert, ‘Haters Gonna Hate: When the
Public Uses Social Media to Comment Critically or Maliciously
Officers’ (2017) 24
Journal of Judicial Administration
111 Kathy Mack, Sharyn Roach Anleu and Jordan Tutton, ‘The Judiciary
and the Public: Judicial Perceptions’
[2018] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
112 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising
(Report No 335, 2012) 9 [33].
Crime and Courts Act 2013
(UK); Law Commission (England and
Scandalising the Court: Summary of Conclusions
(Final Report No
335, 2012).
(1987) 62 OR (2d) 449.
Bridges v California
[1941] USSC 148
116 See Cory JA’s discussion of the position of different jurisdictions
in the Canadian case
(1987) 62 OR (2d) 449.
See also: Oyiela
Litaba, ‘Does the “Offence” of Contempt by Scandalising the
Court Have a Valid Place in the Law
of Modern Day Australia?’
[2003] DeakinLawRw 6
(2003) 8(1)
Deakin Law Review
8.72 Despite
not having a constitutional right to freedom of expression in Australia, the
common law has afforded protection of freedom
of speech.117 In light of this,
Justice Murphy (dissenting) noted in
The absence of a constitutional guarantee does not mean that
Australia should accept judicial inroads upon freedom of
speech which are not
found necessary or desirable in other countries. At stake is not merely the
freedom of one person; it is
the freedom of everyone to comment rightly
or wrongly on the decisions of the courts in a way that does not
a clear and present danger to the administration of justice.118
8.73 The Australian
Constitution
does, however, provide for the protection of
freedom of communication about government or political matters.119 In 1997 in
Lange v ABC,
the High Court held that courts must determine whether laws
that restrict this freedom are justified.120
8.74 The compatibility of the implied freedom with scandalising contempt
appears to be uncertain. On the one hand, Justice Eames stated
that scandalising contempt did not detract from the principles in
and the common law of scandalising contempt already appropriately
accommodated freedom of expression.121 Further, in a defamation
case concerning
criticism of a magistrate, it was stated that criticisms of a judicial officer
are not considered to be discussion
of government and political matters.122
8.75 However, there have been expressions to the contrary where it
has been suggested, or at least questioned, that
criticism of the courts
could be argued to be about ‘government or political matters’
or relevant to the actions
of ‘elected representatives’ or
‘public officials’ and thereby protected by the implied
freedom.123
8.76 For example, criticisms related to the appointment of or removal of
judges may be considered discussion of government or political
matters because
such discussion ‘concerns, expressly or inferentially, acts or omissions
of the legislature or the Executive
Government’.124
8.77 Justice Sackville, writing extra-curially, suggested that if the freedom
of political communication was to apply to criticism
of judicial officers, a
much higher threshold would consequently be set for scandalising contempt,
aligning the protections afforded
to the judiciary with the protections afforded
to other ‘elected representatives or public officials’.125
Alternatives to scandalising contempt
8.78 Alternative legal mechanisms for dealing with abusive behaviour towards
the judiciary have been identified. These include defamation
law and other
criminal offences that deal with assaults or threats. The ALRC stated:
... if the offence of scandalising were to be wholly eliminated from the law
of contempt, such criticism would still be subject to
a substantial degree of
legal regulation.126
117 See Michael Chesterman,
Freedom of Speech in Australian Law: A
Delicate Plant
(Ashgate Publishing Company, 2000) 7–13.
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
560 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ);
Peter Hanks, Frances Gordon and Graeme Hill,
Constitutional Law in Australia
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 4th ed, 2018) 696 [10.237].
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
560 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ).
R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd
[2001] VSC 443
The Herald & Weekly Times Ltd v Popovic
[2003] VSCA 161
(2003) 9 VR 1
8–10 (Winneke ACJ).
123 The Victorian Court of Appeal asked whether comments on the judiciary
qualified as ‘communication about government or political
the issue was unresolved:
Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd v R
[2003] VSCA
124 This possibility was noted by Justice McHugh but the suggestion
was qualified: ‘Courts and judges and the
exercise of judicial
power are not themselves subjects that are involved in representative or
responsible’ government
in the constitutional sense:
APLA Ltd v Legal
Services Commissioner (NSW)
[2005] HCA 44
(2005) 224 CLR 322
125 Justice Ronald Sackville, ‘How Fragile are the Courts? Freedom of
Speech and Criticism of the Judiciary’
[2005] MonashULawRw 8
(2005) 31(2)
Monash University
, 211. The enactment of the
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic) which confers a right to a freedom of
expression has not been considered at all by the courts in the context of
scandalising
126 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 242
8.79 Examples of criminal offences under the
Crimes Act 1958
which may address abusive acts or publications aimed at the court include:
• threats to kill,
• threats to inflict serious injury,
• assaults or threats of assault,
• threats to destroy or damage property,
section 198.
8.80 It is also an offence under the
Criminal Code Act 1995
use an online service in a way that reasonable persons would regard as being
menacing, harassing or offensive.127
8.81 Defamation may also be an alternative when dealing with publications
both in Victoria and
other jurisdictions indicate
a willingness on the part of the courts to use the law of defamation in
situations where the publication in question may have also
been prosecuted for
scandalising contempt.128 Academic Kim Gould noted that the Australian
judiciary’s use of defamation proceedings
may be a sign that traditional
‘judicial restraint’ towards taking such a course may be
changing.129
8.82 However, a defamation action, which is aimed at protecting an
individual’s reputation, would not address the damage
done to the
reputation of the administration of justice.130 Justice Eames noted in
that there is a need to treat the trend of using defamation
proceedings with caution:
The costly, time consuming and distracting pursuit of defamation proceedings
... makes the pursuit of such proceedings entirely
unattractive, for a
judge or magistrate who may have no interest in gaining financial benefit
but is simply wanting to defend
the institution of the court against
unfounded or damaging attack.131
8.83 Scandalising contempt has also been seen to supplement other types of
contempt and without it, there may be situations where
acts or publications fall
outside the other categories of contempt or the law of defamation and so escape
legal consequences.132
8.84 Alternatively, the judiciary has been making increasing use of non-legal
avenues to address criticisms of the court and to explain
the workings of the
legal system. This trend contrasts with the traditional view that the judiciary
should not reply to criticisms
or enter public controversy.133
8.85 The changing media landscape, including the rise of social media and
decline in journalists reporting on court cases, has been
identified as a force
behind the courts engaging more directly with the community.134
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth), s 474.17 ‘Using a carriage
service to menace, harass or cause offence.’
The Herald & Weekly Times Ltd v Popovic
[2003] VSCA 161
(2003) 9 VR 1
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd v O’Shane
[2005] NSWCA 291
Mann v O’Neill
(1997) 191 CLR; Kim Gould, ‘When the Judiciary is Defamed: Restraint
Policy Under Challenge’
Australian Law Journal
129 Justice Ronald Sackville, ‘How Fragile are the Courts? Freedom of
Speech and Criticism of the Judiciary’
[2005] MonashULawRw 8
(2005) 31(2)
Monash University
; see also Kim Gould, ‘When the Judiciary is Defamed:
Restraint Policy Under Challenge’
Australian Law Journal
130 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Contempt in Modern New Zealand
Issues Paper (2014) 285 [6.65].
R v Hoser & Kotabi Pty Ltd
[2001] VSC 443
. See also Kirby J in
Mann v O’Neill
191 CLR, 271–2.
132 For example, scandalising contempt supplemented contempt in the face of
the court where a defendant filed an affidavit in which
he had included
allegations of corruption by the court. As the defendant’s affidavit was
read into evidence by the prosecution,
it was not a contempt in the face of the
court. However, a prosecution did proceed on the basis of scandalising contempt.
The defendant
was found guilty of contempt and sentenced to a good behaviour
Martin v Trustrum (No 3)
[2003] TASSC 80
(2003) 12 Tas R 131.
Herald & Weekly Times v A-G (Vic)
[2001] VSCA 152
R v Herald &
Weekly Times Ltd (No 2)
[2000] VSC 35
R v The Herald & Weekly Times
[1999] VSC 432:
scandalising contempt may be a supplement for sub
judice contempt where a publication is relating to pending proceedings, but
the case is being heard by a judge alone and therefore the risk of influencing a
jury is not present. Discussed in Kim Gould, ‘Scandalising
Contempt in
Australia: Dead? Dying? In Much Danger? ...(Not!)...’
and Arts Law Review
R v Police Commissioner of the Metropolis; Ex parte Blackburn (No 2)
(1968) 2 QB 150
, 155 (Denning MR).
134 Chief Justice Marilyn Warren, ‘Open Justice in the Technological
[2014] MonashULawRw 5
(2014) 40(1)
Monash University Law Review
8.86 Examples
of direct engagement with the public include making comments in the media,135 at
conferences and in speeches;136 the
introduction of court media-liaison
officers,137 court social media pages138 and podcasts;139 and the availability
of judgments online
as a means of defending and explaining judicial decisions
and conduct.140
8.87 The broadcasting of Chief Judge Peter Kidd’s sentencing of George
Pell is another example of developments in relation to
the courts’
communication and engagement with the community.141 Chief Judge Kidd stated in
his sentencing remarks that the
decision to broadcast the judgment was made in
accordance with ‘transparent and open justice and an accessible
communication
of the work of the court’.142
Possible reforms to scandalising contempt
8.88 The central question when considering the future of scandalising
contempt is whether judicial officers should be subject to special
This in turn depends on the validity of the assumption that certain types of
criticism are capable of shaking the public’s
confidence in the judiciary
in today’s modern context.
8.89 Scandalising contempt cases, although infrequent, continue to arise
in Australia, suggesting there is a view that this
contempt power needs to be
retained in some form.143 This stands in contrast to the position taken in other
the offence has been abolished or has fallen into disuse
because of its incompatibility with freedom of expression.
8.90 Accordingly, this part sets out a number of criticisms of the
law of scandalising contempt, as well as some justifications
retention of the law and the introduction of a statutory offence. A number of
questions are then posed.
Abolition of scandalising contempt
8.91 The law of scandalising contempt has been criticised for treating the
judiciary as a ‘specially favoured institution where
public criticism is
concerned’144 and for being self-serving in purpose.145
8.92 Scandalising contempt has also been criticised as an
‘untenable’ imposition on freedom of expression.146 Similarly
sub judice contempt, the uncertain and inconsistent nature of
the law of scandalising contempt has been criticised for creating a
‘chilling effect’ by which comments about the judiciary
censored.147
8.93 In light of these criticisms, and following recommendations by the Law
Commission of England and Wales, scandalising contempt
was abolished in the
United Kingdom in 2013.148
135 See, eg, ‘Chief County Court Judge Criticises
“Denigrating” Media Coverage of Court Appeal’, on
with Jon Faine
(Web Page, 22 May 2018) <
www.abc.net.au/radio/melbourne/programs/mornings/peter-kidd/9786720
136 See Justice Michael Kirby, ‘Attacks on Judges—A Universal
Phenomenon’ (Speech, Winter Leadership Meeting, Hawaii,
5 January 1998);
Sir Anthony Mason, ‘The Courts and Public Opinion’ (Speech, National
Institute of Government and Law,
Parliament House Canberra, 20 March
2002); the Hon Philip Cummins, ‘Open Courts: Who Guards the
Guardians?’ (Paper
presented at the
Justice Open and Shut: Suppression
Orders and Open Justice in Australia and the United Kingdom
Seminar, Sydney,
4 June 2014).
137 Oyiela Litaba, ‘Does the “Offence” of Contempt by
Scandalising the Court Have a Valid Place in the Law of Modern
Australia?’
[2003] DeakinLawRw 6
(2003) 8(1)
Deakin Law Review
, 128; Jane
Johnston, ‘Public Relations in the Courts’
(2001) 28(1)
Australian Journal of Communication
138 Chief Justice Marilyn Warren, ‘Open Justice in the Technological
[2014] MonashULawRw 5
(2014) 40(1)
Monash University Law Review
139 Supreme Court of Victoria, ‘Gertie’s Law Podcast’,
(Podcast, March 2019) <
www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/podcast
140 Oyiela Litaba, ‘Does the “Offence” of Contempt by
Scandalising the Court Have a Valid Place in the Law of Modern
Australia?’
[2003] DeakinLawRw 6
(2003) 8(1)
Deakin Law Review
141 Jerome Doraisamy, ‘Why Chief Judge Kidd Broadcast the Pell
Lawyers Weekly
(Web Page, 15 March 2019) <
lawyersweekly.com.au/wig-chamber/25247-why-kidd-cj-broadcast-the-pell-sentence>.
142 County Court of Victoria, ‘Sentencing Remarks in DPP v George
Pell’ (Web Page, 19 March 2019) <
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/news-and-
media/news-listing/2019-03-13-sentencing-remarks-dpp-v-george-pell>;
Pell (Sentence)
[2019] VCC 260
(13 March 2019).
143 Kim Gould, ‘Scandalising Contempt in Australia: Dead? Dying? In
Much Danger? ...(Not!)...’
Media and Arts Law Review
144 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 264
145 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising
(Report No 335, 2012) 6 [18]. 146 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Contempt in Modern New Zealand
(Issues Paper, 2014) 64 [6.62].
147 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising
(Report No 335, 2012) 9 [31].
Crime and Courts Act 2013
(UK) s 33; Law Commission (England and
Scandalising the Court: Summary of Conclusions
(Final Report No
335, 2012).
addition, it has been noted that:
• Scandalising contempt is not well-known to the public and has a
limited symbolic value.149
• Prosecutions for scandalising contempt can have negative
consequences, re- publicising offending material and putting the
conduct of the
judge on trial.150
• Prosecutions for scandalising contempt are not necessary to
uphold the administration of justice.151
• The law of scandalising contempt does not align with current public
attitudes and expectations of the judiciary.152
• There are legal alternatives available to address false accusations
of misconduct.153
8.95 However, in contrast it has also been recognised that:
• The law of scandalising contempt helps to maintain public confidence
in the judiciary and to ensure the proper functioning
of the court system, and
that any undermining of the judiciary could lead to non-compliance with court
orders or the system being
ignored.154
• Public confidence will not be maintained unless there is a criminal
offence to prevent the making of statements which have
a tendency to impair that
confidence.155
• The law of scandalising contempt helps to protect the reputation of
judges which is essential to the community’s acceptance
• The court requires a quick and effective means of dealing with a
damaging statement and making sure it is not repeated; the
law of scandalising
contempt provides that means.157
• The judiciary are restricted by their position from pursuing other
avenues to respond to criticism,158 and have no forum in
which they can do so;
the law of scandalising contempt provides a mechanism to deal with these
• Other legal avenues such as defamation do not provide for the
protection of the administration of justice and the preservation
confidence in the courts and the judiciary.160
Redefining scandalising contempt
8.96 If the purpose and assumptions underlying scandalising contempt are
considered still to be valid and necessary in today’s
modern context, it
may be that the law does not need to be abolished. Instead, it may be sufficient
for the law to be retained, replaced
by statutory provisions and defined so as
to remove any uncertainties.161
8.97 In contrast with the approach of the Law Commission of England and Wales
discussed above, this has been the approach proposed
by other law reform
commissions.162
149 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising
(Report No 335, 2012) 5 [18]. 150 Ibid 6 [18].
152 Ibid 18 [66]–[71].
153 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising
(Report No 335, 2012) 6 [18]. 154 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 244 [422].
156 Ibid 264 [457].
157 Ibid 244 [422].
158 Ibid 264 [457]; Committee on Contempt of Court (UK),
Report of the
Committee on Contempt of Court
(December 1974) 69 [162].
159 Committee on Contempt of Court (UK),
Report of the Committee on
Contempt of Court
(December 1974) 69 [162].
161 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising
(Report No 335, 2012) 14 [51].
162 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 266
[460]; Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 116; Law Commission (New
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court: A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 118–21.
8.98 For example, the ALRC recommended the introduction of a limited offence
to publish an allegation imputing misconduct to a judge
or magistrate in
circumstances where publication is likely to cause serious harm to the
reputation to the judge or magistrate in
his or her official capacity.163 This
recommendation was also subsequently supported by the Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia.164
8.99 More recently, the NZ Commission recommended:
• the introduction of a statutory offence for publications which make
untrue allegations or accusations against a judge or court
where there is a real
risk the publication would undermine ‘public confidence in the
independence, integrity or impartiality
of the judiciary as an
institution’165
• the prescription of defences which exclude the prosecution of
comments based on fact or that are ‘legitimate criticisms’166
• the High Court having a statutory power to make orders requiring
publications to be taken down from the internet or the publication
correction or apology.167
8.100 The introduction of a statutory offence would have the benefit of:
• clarifying the requisite knowledge and intention of the person who
made or published the statement168
• clearly defining the other elements of the offence and the procedures
for hearing and determining the charge
• identifying who would be responsible for investigating complaints or
bringing the proceedings169
• providing a remedy in situations where other legal avenues may not be
appropriate or available.170
8.101 However, the uncertainty that exists at common law may have a practical
advantage. That is, the broad nature of the offence
and the concept of public
confidence in the administration of justice ‘does not call for detailed
proof of what in many instances
will be unprovable’.171
8.102 In addition, a number of problems with a statutory offence have also
been identified:
• A statutory offence may not address cumulative allegations against
the judiciary as it may be difficult to prove or disprove
the falsity of a
‘collective accusation’.172
• How would the offence cover situations where the person making the
statement believed their allegations were true?173
• There may be negative implications in narrowing the scope of the
offence to deliberate lying, which may also be difficult
to prove.174
• The distinction between what kind of abuse or criticism is acceptable
and what kind is not changes with time and may be difficult
to define in
statute.175
163 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 266
164 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Review of the Law of
(Report, Project No 93, June 2003) 116.
165 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 118 [6.72]. 166 Ibid 117 [6.67].
167 Ibid 121–2 [6.83]–[6.85].
168 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 118 [6.71–[6.72]; Law Reform
Commission of Ireland,
Report on Contempt of Court
(Report No 46,
September 1994) [5.17].
169 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 116–7 [6.65]–[6.66].
170 The Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 35, 1987) 266
[458]. 171 Ibid 247 [427].
172 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court: Scandalising
(Report No 335, 2012) 21 [77].
173 Ibid [78].
175 Ibid 7 [24].
32 Is there a need to retain the law of scandalising contempt?
33 If the law of scandalising contempt is to be retained, should the common
law be replaced by statutory provisions? If so:
(a) How should the law and its constituent elements be described,
i. The ‘tendency’ test
ii. What constitutes ‘fair comment’?
(b) Should truth be a defence?
(c) What fault elements, if any, should be required?
(d) What weight, if any, should be given to an apology?
34 In stakeholders’ experience, is criticism of the judiciary on
social media a problem that should be dealt with by a law such
as scandalising
contempt or is it best managed outside of the law?
35 What other reforms, if any, should be made to this area of law?
JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS REPORTS ACT
Prohibitions on
publication under the
Introduction
A principles-based approach
Indecent matters and public morals
Divorce and related proceedings
Directions hearings and sentence
indications
138 Victims of sexual offences
141 A victim’s ability to
145 Temporary restrictions—sex offences
and family violence
Prohibitions
on publication under the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Introduction
9.1 This chapter considers the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) which restricts the publication of material in relation to judicial
proceedings.1 It contains four statutory prohibitions, which
apply automatically
without the need for a court order:
• a prohibition on publishing indecent matter calculated to injure
public morals2
• a prohibition restricting the details that can be published about
divorce or related proceedings3
• a prohibition restricting the details that can be published about
criminal directions hearings and sentence indication hearings
in the County
Court and Supreme Court4
• a prohibition on identifying a person against whom a sexual offence
is alleged to have been committed.5
9.2 Contravention of any of the prohibitions is a summary criminal offence.6
A prosecution for breach can only be commenced with the
consent of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (DPP).7 Prosecutions are rare, with annual reports
indicating that the Director has
only given consent to prosecute an offence
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
four times since June 2000.8
9.3 The Annual Reports do not disclose which particular provision the
consents relate to, nor whether the Director received, but refused,
requests to consent to prosecutions of other alleged contraventions of the
9.4 In reviewing the publication prohibitions, this chapter:
• outlines the scope of each prohibition
• outlines how the prohibitions operate today, including how
frequently public reference is made to the prohibitions
by the courts or by
those reporting on the courts
• poses a number of questions about whether any or all of the
prohibitions should be reformed, repealed, or relocated to
legislation.
1 The prohibition in section 4(1A) on identifying a person against whom a
sexual offence is alleged to have been committed operates
more broadly than
the other provisions. It restricts the publication of material likely to lead to
the identification of a victim,
whether or not the identifying material arises
from, or is related to, a judicial proceeding.
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(2). For a person, the maximum penalty is a fine of not more
than 20 penalty units and/or not more than four months imprisonment;
corporation, the maximum penalty is a fine of not more than 50 penalty
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
8 Office of Public Prosecutions,
Annual Report
2002–2003 (2003)
12; Office of Public Prosecutions,
Annual Report
2009–2010 (2010)
70. All other Annual Reports for the period 2000 to 2018 record that there were
no consents to prosecute offences
Judicial Proceedings Reports
specifically required by the terms of reference, this chapter also
considers and poses questions about whether a
further statutory prohibition is
required to temporarily restrict the publication of sensitive information upon
the laying of charges
in relation to sexual and family violence criminal
9.6 Finally, this chapter also considers and poses questions about how
statutory prohibitions which are designed to protect the anonymity
can afford appropriate agency and choice to those victims who wish to speak
A principles-based approach
9.7 Each of the prohibitions in the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
as an automatic departure from the principle of open justice and as a limitation
on the right to freedom of expression recognised
section 15(2)
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
9.8 Therefore, in reviewing whether and how these statutory prohibitions
should be reformed, the following matters need to be considered:
• What is the public interest that the statutory prohibition is
designed to protect?
• Does that public interest continue to justify a departure from the
principle of open justice and a limitation on freedom of
expression?
• Is a mandatory, automatic statutory prohibition required to
protect the identified public interest or would a discretionary
power vested
in the courts allow for a better balancing of competing principles and
• Should the court have an overriding discretion to permit publication
where the interests of justice otherwise require it?
• Should the person for whose benefit the prohibition operates have the
power to waive the protection the statutory provision
9.9 This chapter considers each of the provisions of the
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act
within that framework. Given the nature of some of the prohibitions,
particularly the prohibition in
section 4(1A)
which protects of the privacy of
victims of sexual assault, the chapter focuses on the rights and interests of
victims in the criminal
trial process.
9.10 As discussed in the Commission’s report
The Role of Victims of
Crime in the Criminal Trial Process,
victims have a right to be protected
from unnecessary trauma, intimidation and distress, and unjustified interference
with their privacy.9
Recognising and respecting the rights and interests of
victims in the criminal trial process is a critical element of the
requirement
to uphold the principles of a fair trial.10 The
Victims Charters Act 2006
(Vic) provides that a victim’s personal information is not to be
disclosed by any person except in accordance with the
Protection Act 2014
(Vic).11 Further, the
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic) provides generally that a person
has the right not to have their privacy unlawfully or arbitrarily
interfered with
or their reputation unlawfully attacked.12 Child victims or
witnesses in particular have the right to such protection as is in their
interests and is needed by them by reason of being a child.13 In that
context, this chapter considers whether and how
the interests and rights of
victims might give rise to exceptional circumstances requiring a departure
from the principles of
open justice.
9 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 32. 10 Ibid
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
matters and public morals
Section 3(1)(a)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
provides that in
relation to any judicial proceedings it is not lawful to print or publish, or to
cause or procure to be printed
or published:
any indecent matter or indecent medical surgical or physiological details
being matter or details the publication of which would
be calculated to
injure public morals.
9.12 This prohibition applies to reporting on any judicial proceedings,
whether those proceedings have taken place in Victoria or
elsewhere.14 The terms
‘indecent matter’, ‘indecent medical, surgical or
physiological details’ and ‘public
morals’ are not
9.13 The prohibition in
section 3(1)(a)
is in the same terms as when it was
originally enacted in 1929.15 It is modelled on an identical provision in
English legislation—which
today also remains in force without substantive
amendment.16
9.14 In reviewing the operation of the prohibition, the Commission was unable
to find any record of a prosecution for contravention
section 3(1)(a)
any reference to, or consideration of, the provision in reported judgments more
9.15 The prohibition was reviewed in 1958 by the Statute Law Revision
Committee. Without making any specific comment on its operation,
the Committee
did ‘not recommend any change’ to the section.17
9.16 Dr Stephen Cretney, writing in 1997 in relation to the identical English
provision, concluded ‘it is clear that the prohibition
on publication of
indecent matter added little to the law and has, in the context of press
reporting, been effectively a dead letter’.18
The option of repeal
section 3(1)(a)
was enacted, there were statutory provisions in
force which specifically empowered Victorian courts to close proceedings to the
or to restrict reporting of proceedings on public decency and morality
grounds.19 These provisions have since been repealed and do
contemporary counterparts.20
9.18 In this changed statutory context, it is suggested that the prohibition
on reporting indecent matters in
section 3(1)(a)
may be an outdated anomaly.
9.19 Some ninety years have now passed since the prohibition in
was first enacted. Community attitudes and regulatory approaches to
restricting publication have altered significantly over
that time. The
section is directed towards safeguarding public morals rather than any purpose
associated with the administration
of justice or the protection of the rights
and interests of parties, victims or witnesses.21 It is a mandatory
prohibition
which applies without consideration for whether any restriction is
necessitated by the circumstances of the particular proceedings.
context it is suggested that
section 3(1)(a)
sits uneasily with the
principle, adopted in the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic), that our system
of justice must be open to public scrutiny and assessment to the maximum
extent possible.
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Judicial Proceedings (Regulation of Reports) Act 1929
Judicial Proceedings (Regulation of Reports) Act 1926
Geo 5, c 61, s 1(1)(a).
17 Statute Law Revision Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Regulation of
Reports of Judicial Proceedings
, Parliamentary Report (30 October 1958), 5
18 Stephen Cretney, ‘Disgusted, Buckingham Palace—The Judicial
Proceedings (Regulation of Reports) Act 1926’ (1997)
Child and Family
Law Quarterly
19 See, eg,
Supreme Court Act 1928
(Vic) s 29;
County Court Act
(Vic) ss 89, 90;
Justices Act 1958
(Vic) ss 213, 214;
Supreme Court Act 1958
(Vic) s 29;
Magistrates’ Court Act 1971
(Vic) s 48 (all Acts repealed);
Supreme Court Act 1986
County Court Act 1958
(Vic) s 81 (all sections
20 Jason Bosland, ‘Two Years of Suppression Under the
Open Courts
[2017] SydLawRw 2
Sydney Law Review
21 See, eg, Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 14
August 1929, vol 179, 827–8, 830 (Ian Macfarlan, Attorney-General);
Rapisarda v Colladon
[2014] EWFC 1406
(8 December 2014)
9.20 Accordingly,
the question arises whether
section 3(1)(a)
should be repealed, with the
filtering of reporting on court proceedings, to the extent that it might involve
indecent, obscene or
distressing material, left to be regulated by laws and
standards of general application to all publications and broadcasts.
36 Should the prohibition in
section 3(1)(a)
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act 1958
(Vic) on the publication of indecent matter and indecent
medical, surgical or physiological details in relation to any judicial
proceedings
be repealed?
Divorce and related proceedings
Section 3(1)(b)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
provides that,
in relation to any judicial proceedings for dissolution of marriage, for nullity
of marriage, for judicial separation,
for restitution of conjugal rights, it is unlawful to print or publish or
cause or procure to be printed or published any particulars
limited, specified details.22
9.22 The laws regulating separation and divorce in Australia have
significantly changed since this prohibition on publishing the details
divorce and related proceedings was first enacted in 1929.23 Jurisdiction over
family law matters in Victoria, including divorce,
is now exercised by courts
applying Commonwealth law, primarily the
Family Law Act 1975
9.23 Under the
Family Law Act
, two of the types of proceedings referred to in
section 3(1)(b)
, proceedings for judicial separation and for restitution of
conjugal rights, have been abolished.24
9.24 In relation to other family law proceedings, section 121 of the
provides that it is an offence to publish or disseminate an account of
the proceeding that could identify a party, witness or other
person associated
with the proceeding. However, section 121 of the
Family Law Act
otherwise restrict the publication of detailed accounts of family law
proceedings. This reflects a statutory intention that
the family law courts
should be as open to scrutiny and media comment as any other court, except to
the extent that protecting the
The option of repeal
Section 3(1)(b)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
reporting on four types of family law proceeding, two of which have since been
abolished by Commonwealth statute. Publication
of reports on the two remaining
Section 3(1)(b)
is inconsistent with that Commonwealth provision.
Therefore, to a large extent
section 3(1)(b)
Judicial Proceedings Reports
has no operative effect26and is effectively a dead letter.27
22 Those permissible details are: the names, addresses and occupations of the
parties and witnesses; a concise statement of the charges,
defences and
counter-charges in support of which evidence has been given; submissions on any
point of law arising in the course of
the proceedings and the decision of the
court or judge on them; and the summing-up of the judge and the finding of the
jury (if any)
and the judgment of the court and observations made by the judge
in giving judgment.
Judicial Proceedings (Regulation of Reports) Act 1929
Family Law Act 1975
25 See discussion of the history of section 121 in Sharon Rodrick and Adiva
Sifris, ‘100 Years of Open Justice in Family Law
Proceedings in
Australia’ (2016) 16(2)
Legal History
13, 39. See also Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Review of the Family Law System
(Discussion Paper
No 86, 2018) 304–9.
Constitution
27 Justice Barry expressed the view that
section 3(1)(b)
had been superseded
by a provision of the Commonwealth predecessor to the
Family Law Act
Matrimonial Causes Act 1959
(Cth), as far back as 1961:
[1961] VicRp 47
[1961] VR 304
, 305. However, in a recent Victorian Supreme Court
matter, Justice Richards indicated that section 3(1)(b) may have some operation
by restricting the publication of material obtained from historical divorce
proceeding files held by the Victorian Supreme Court:
Re Proceeding No. 449
[2019] VSC 286
37 Should the prohibition in
section 3(1)(b)
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) on the publication of the details of
divorce and related proceedings be repealed?
Directions hearings and sentence
indications
Section 3(1)(c)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
restricts the
matters that may be printed or published about a directions hearing held under
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) or a sentence
indication hearing held under
of that Act.
9.27 The information which may be lawfully published about proceedings under
Part 5.5 and Part
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
is limited to:
• the names of the court, judge and legal practitioners28
• the names, addresses, ages and occupations of the accused and
witnesses29
• certain business information relating to the accused30
• the offence(s) charged or a summary of it or them31
• the date and place to which the proceedings are adjourned32
• any bail arrangements that have been made.33
9.28 The statutory prohibition imposed by
section 3(1)(c)
is qualified in two
important ways:
• The prohibition on publication is temporary and only remains in place
until the conclusion of the trial of the person charged,
or of the last of the
persons charged.34
• On application by an accused person, the court may order that the
prohibition does not apply.35
9.29 The Commission has been unable to find any reference to
section 3(1)(c)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
in Victorian case law.
9.30 An introductory guide for journalists published by the County
Court to assist journalists covering the courts urges
general caution in
reporting on pre-trial hearings but does not refer specifically to the
restriction in
section 3(1)(c)
and the narrow list of matters which may be
lawfully reported on.36
9.31 An empirical analysis of all suppression orders made in the Victorian
courts from 2008 to 2012 records that one order was
in that time.37
9.32 One purpose of directions hearings under
Criminal Procedure Act
is to narrow the matters in issue at trial and
to resolve, by court order or through agreement, what evidence will
presented to the jury and the manner in which it will be presented. If potential
jurors were to become aware, through media
reporting, of the matters
identified and discussed at directions hearings but not later admitted into
evidence at the trial,
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
s 3(c)(ii).
s 3(c)(iii).
The relevant buisness information is set out in
s 3(c)(iv).
s 3(c)(vi).
s 3(c)(vi).
36 County Court of Victoria,
Covering the Courts—A Q&A Guide for
Journalists
(Information Sheet, 2016) <
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/files/
documents/2018-09/covering-courts.pdf>.
37 Jason Bosland and Ashleigh Bagnall, ‘An Empirical Analysis of
Suppression Orders in the Victorian Courts: 2008–12’
[2013] SydLawRw 27
Sydney Law Review
, 680 n 70. As
section 3(1)(c)
contains an automatic
statutory prohibition, it is possible that the order referred to was an order
made on the application of an
accused under
section 3(1B).
An order can be made
under that section that the restrictions in
section 3(1)(c)
do not apply.
purpose may be frustrated. There is a risk that an accused’s fair trial
rights may be compromised by potential jurors reaching
their verdict other than
according to the law and evidence presented to them in the courtroom.
9.33 The purpose of sentence indication hearings under
Criminal Procedure Act
is to allow offenders to obtain a broad indication of the
sentence that they would likely face if they pleaded guilty to the offence(s)
charged. If hearings held under
are publicly and contemporaneously
reported on, potential jurors may be exposed to information that an accused was
contemplating
a guilty plea, requested a sentence indication and/or was informed
that they would face imprisonment if convicted.
9.34 Given that proceedings under
occur close to trial, the
memory and impact on potential jurors of reporting on those proceedings will
have limited time to fade.38
9.35 By restricting what can be published about directions hearings and
sentence indications, the prohibitions in
section 3(1)(c)
are intended to
protect the fair trial rights of the accused. The restrictions are only
temporary and cease to operate at the end
of the trial.39
9.36 However, the prohibition in
section 3(1)(c)
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act
is somewhat of an anomaly, as there are no automatic statutory
restrictions which specifically prohibit or limit reporting on other
proceedings in Victoria such as committals, bail hearings or sentence
indications in the Magistrate’s Court.40
Possible reforms to prohibitions on reporting
directions hearings and sentence indications
9.37 Through
section 3(1)(c)
, the legislature has struck a balance in
relation to criminal directions hearings and sentence indications held in the
County Court
and Supreme Court. The legislature has determined, for all hearings
of this type, the degree to which the principle of open justice
must be departed
from in order to ensure a fair trial. The statutory approach adopted allows
directions hearings and sentence indications
to be held in open court and
attended by the public41 without requiring:
• the parties to be diligent in identifying and anticipating what
potentially prejudicial information might be reported from
the proceedings and
to seek a suppression order accordingly
• the presiding judicial officer to evaluate the potentially
prejudicial effect of matters discussed and the necessity of suppression
9.38 The result of the restrictions, however, is that only the most
rudimentary contemporaneous reporting on directions hearings or
indications is allowed. The restrictions potentially go beyond the restrictions
that sub judice contempt would impose.
9.39 Important matters of public interest may be raised and discussed
at directions hearings. These include issues that relate
more broadly to the
administration of the criminal justice system in Victoria and in particular to
the resourcing and efficacy
of the courts, the DPP and Victoria Legal Aid.
For example, if there are delays in a matter proceeding to trial after
the causes of such delay are likely to be discussed at a
directions hearings.
The restrictions in
section 3(1)(c)
potentially prohibit the timely
publication of information which might better allow the public to understand and
scrutinise how resourcing
and other practical matters might affect whether, when
and how a matter is brought to trial.
9.40 The restrictions in
section 3(1)(c)
are also unusual in that there are
no equivalent default
38 See, eg, New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 258 [11.50]–[11.51] for discussion of the
impact that the passage of time may have on risk of prejudice.
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Section 3(1)(c)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
and the supporting
provisions in 3(1A)–(1E) are based on, and closely mirror, section 11 of
Criminal Justice Act 1987
(UK). In the United Kingdom, there are a
number of automatic statutory restrictions on reporting on preliminary,
pre-trial proceedings.
See, eg, Crown Prosecution Service (UK),
Contempt of
Court, Reporting Restrictions and Restrictions of Public Access to
Hearings—Legal Guidance
(Web Page, 11 May 2018) The Code for Crown
Prosecutors <
www.cps.gov.uk/legal-guidance/
contempt-court-reporting-restrictions-and-restrictions-public-access-hearings>.
41 The importance of sentence indication hearings being held in open court
for the transparency of the process is discussed in Sentence
Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council Sentence Indication and Specified Sentence
Discounts: Final Report
(2007) 74–5.
prohibitions in Victoria in relation to other preliminary hearings, such
as bail or committal proceedings. Regulation
of what can or cannot be published
proceedings is left to the law of sub judice contempt or the discretion of
the presiding judicial officer exercising powers conferred
under legislation
Bail Act 1977
9.41 In consultations for the
Open Courts Act
lawyers consulted through the Law Institute of Victoria and the DPP
‘supported broader use of statutory restrictions
on publication of
certain categories of information rather than primary reliance on a regime of
suppression orders made by courts
and tribunals’.42 This suggests that
there is likely support for restrictions of the type contained in
9.42 Importantly, in the
Open Courts Act
consultations, the DPP
also ‘warned that the efficacy of a statutory scheme depended upon the
media and members of the public
being made aware of the subject of the statutory
prohibitions’.43 The Commission’s preliminary research suggests that
awareness of
section 3(1)(c)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
is limited.
For that reason, if the section is retained, consideration should be given to
whether relocating it to another statute
may increase awareness of the
38 Are the statutory prohibitions in
section 3(1)(c)
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) on the reporting of criminal directions
hearings and sentence indication hearings necessary? If so:
(a) What should be the scope of such prohibitions?
(b) Where should such prohibitions be located to optimise awareness of
their existence and operation?
(c) Should other pre-trial hearings, such as bail hearings or committal
proceedings also be subject to statutory reporting restrictions?
Victims of sexual offences
Section 4(1A)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
prohibits the
publication of any matter that contains any particulars likely to lead to the
identification of a person against whom
a sexual offence is alleged to have been
committed. For the purposes of the provision, a ‘sexual offence’ is
as one of a list of specified offences in the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), and includes an attempt to commit any such offence or an assault with
an attempt to commit a listed offence.44
9.44 The prohibition in section 4(1A) is not restricted to reporting on
judicial proceedings. It applies before proceedings commence
and continues after
proceedings have concluded.45 However, it is a defence to a charge under section
4(1A) to prove that at the time
the material was published, no proceedings were
pending in a court in respect of the alleged offence and one of the following
42 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 65 [250]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
listed are those in subdivisions (8A), (8B), (8C), (8D), (8E), (8F) or
(8FA) of Division 1 of
Crimes Act 1958
Hinch v DPP (Vic); Television and Telecasters (Melbourne) Pty Ltd v DPP
[1996] VICSC 1
[1996] 1 VR 683
, 689. However, in
Nixon v Random House Australia Pty Ltd
[2000] VSC 405
(2000) 2 VR 523
, Justice Hedigan indicated that the prohibition may not
apply indefinitely and that whether anonymity should be kept must be judged
case-by-case basis.
• no complaint had yet been made about the alleged offence to a police
• the matter was published with the permission of the Supreme Court,
the County Court or the Magistrates’ Court, granted
on an application by a
• the matter was published with the permission of the person against
whom the offence is alleged to have been committed.48
9.45 If proceedings were pending in relation to the alleged offence at the
time of publication, it is a defence to a charge under
section 4(1A) to prove
that permission to publish the relevant matter was obtained from the court
before which the proceedings were
9.46 Although there are variations in their scope and operation, every state
and territory in Australia has a statutory provision
to protect the anonymity of
the complainant in sexual offence cases.50
9.47 Unlike the other provisions in the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
discussed above, there appears to be wider awareness of the prohibition in
section 4(1A).51
9.48 Reported cases indicate that people have been successfully prosecuted
for breach of the prohibition,52 although such prosecutions
are rare. As noted
above, Annual Reports published by the Office of Public Prosecutions indicate
that the DPP has given only four
consents to prosecute breaches of the
Proceedings Reports Act
in the last 17 years.53
9.49 Case law also reveals that the courts are mindful of the implications
of the section in relation to:
• the release of or access to documents on the court file54
• the identification of parties and witnesses in civil
proceedings55
• the publication of court judgments, which are routinely redacted or
employ pseudonyms in order to be consistent with the public
policy of the
provision.56
Is the prohibition necessary to protect victims?
Section 4(1A)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
is a departure
from the principle of open justice. It restricts what can be published about
proceedings in cases where the accused
is charged with a sexual offence. More
section 4(1A)
is also a limitation on freedom of expression in that it
restricts the publication of identifying information irrespective of whether
is it derived from or relates to judicial proceedings. However, the provision is
a partial departure from the principle of open justice and only a partial
limitation on freedom of expression. Except to the extent
that the reporting
would likely lead to the identification of the victim,
section 4(1A)
prevent the public and media from attending proceedings, or from reporting on
proceedings and sexual assault allegations
and investigations more
generally.57
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
s 4(1B)(a).
4(1B)(b)(i).
s 4(1B)(b)(ii).
On 2 May 2019, the Parliament of Victoria passed the
Courts and Other Acts Amendment Act 2019
(Vic), which introduced a new
defence to a charge under
section 4(1A)
Judicial Proceedings Reports
. This amendment is discussed below at paragraph [9.70] to
50 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) Appendix 2, 140
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
51 For example, a County Court guide for journalists refers specifically to
section 4(1A):
County Court of Victoria,
Covering the Courts—A
Q&A Guide for Journalists
(Information Sheet, 2016) <
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/files/documents/2018-09/covering-courts.pdf
likewise, the
Open Courts Bench Book
, prepared by the Judicial College of
Victoria for the guidance of judicial officers, includes a sub- chapter on the
scope and operation
Judicial College of Victoria,
Open Courts
(Web Page, 6 February 2019) [3.9]
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au
Hinch v DPP (Vic); Television and Telecasters (Melbourne) Pty Ltd v DPP
[1996] VICSC 1
[1996] 1 VR 683
Doe v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(3 April 2007);
Bailey v Hinch
[1989] VicRp 9
[1989] VR 78.
53 Office of Public Prosecutions, Annual Report (Annual Reports,
54 See, eg,
DPP v Theophanous
(2009) 27 VR 295
Stephensen v
Salesian Society Inc; Easton v Salesian Society Inc (No 2)
55 See, eg,
TTT & JJJ v State of Victoria
[2013] VSC 162
April 2013) [26].
56 See, eg,
DPP (Vic) v Goillon
[2017] VCC 1220
DPP (Vic) v
[2017] VCC 87
DPP (Vic) v Ivanov (a pseudonym)
(6 June 2018); Supreme Court of Victoria,
Appeal—Anonymisation Protocol for Criminal Applications and Appeals
Doe v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[2007] VCC 281
2007) [48].
incursion into the principle of open justice has been justified on the grounds
that the proper and effective administration
of justice requires
restrictions on publication:
• to ensure a fair trial for the victim, where a fair trial requires
that the victim is not subjected to undue distress or
humiliation or invasion
• to encourage reporting and prosecution of sexual offences.58
9.52 The basis for this differential treatment of victims of sexual assault
stems from acknowledgment that significant distress,
shame, embarrassment
and social stigma are still experienced by many sexual assault
victims.59 Further, the nature
of the evidence in such cases can cover
sensitive and acutely personal matters. Where an accused is charged with sexual
ensuring a fair trial for all participants requires particular
vigilance to
safeguard the privacy rights of the victim and to ensure that the justice
ultimately delivered by the courts is not undermined
by the trauma endured
to achieve it.
9.53 However, it does not necessarily follow that any prohibition on
identifying sexual assault victims should operate automatically
statutory prohibition. The imposition of mandatory anonymity on sexual assault
victims could potentially remove a victim’s
agency and affirm and
perpetuate the stigma it is designed to address.
9.54 On the other hand, any alternative which relies on victims
being sufficiently informed and empowered to proactively
suppression order from the court, might equally be characterised as
unfairly placing the burden on the victim
to secure what should be a
guaranteed protection. A departure from the current default anonymity
position could also undermine awareness of and compliance with
the prohibition
on identifying sexual assault victims.
The scope of the prohibition
9.55 The prohibition in
section 4(1A)
is not limited to listed particulars
identification’
of the person against whom the offence is alleged to have
been committed. This means that the precise scope of the material captured
the prohibition cannot be easily defined. The
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
does not contain, by way of guidance, a non-exhaustive list of potentially
identifying particulars similar to the list contained
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(Vic),60 the
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic)61 and the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth).62 Whether or not any
published particular is likely to lead to the identification of the victim is a
question of fact which
is dependent on context, such as the size of the
victim’s community or the notoriety of other facts surrounding the
circumstances
of the case.63
Possible reforms to prohibitions against
identifying victims
9.56 The prohibition on identifying victims in
section 4(1A)
Proceedings Reports Act
operates as a mandatory, default statutory prohibition.
The prohibition applies to any particulars likely to lead to the identification
of a person against whom a sexual offence is alleged to have been committed.
Whether a publication breaches the provision is a question
of fact which is very
dependent on context.
9.57 The Commission seeks the views of the community, including victims,
media, and those responsible for monitoring and enforcing
compliance with the
provision, on whether greater clarity on the scope of the prohibition is
necessary. If so, the Commission seeks
the views of those affected on how this
should be achieved.
58 See, eg, Law Reform Commission of Victoria,
Rape and Allied Offences:
Procedure and Evidence
, Report No 13 (1988) 30 –1.
59 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 131 [520]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>; Law Reform Commission
of Victoria,
Rape and Allied Offences: Procedure and Evidence
, Report No
13 (1988) 31–2; Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
Protecting the Anonymity
of Victims of Sexual Crimes
(Final Report No 19, 2013) 1,7.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
section 13 of the
Open Courts and Other Acts Amendment Act 2019
amends section 534(4) to clarify and reduce the number of identifying
particulars listed.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) s 121(3).
Bailey v Hinch
[1989] VicRp 9
[1989] VR 78
, 93–4; see also
Howe v Harvey
[2008] VSCA 181
(2008) 20 VR 638.
the effectiveness of the prohibition in protecting the privacy of victims
depends on public and media awareness of the section,
the Commission also
seeks comment on whether the prohibition should remain in the
Proceedings Reports Act
or whether the prohibition is more appropriately
located in other legislation.
39 Should the statutory prohibition on identifying victims of sexual
offences under
section 4(1A)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) continue to apply automatically from the time of complaint,
throughout proceedings and after proceedings have concluded?
(a) What further legislative guidance should be provided about the scope of
the prohibition?
(b) Should the prohibition continue to be located in the
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) or is the provision more appropriately
located in other legislation?
A victim’s ability to speak
Consent to publication
section 4(1B)(b)(ii)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
is a defence to a charge of publishing identifying information about a victim to
prove that at the time of the publication:
• no proceeding in respect of the alleged offence was pending, and
• the matter was published in accordance with the permission of the
person against whom the offence is alleged to have been
committed.64
Child victims
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
does not differentiate between
adult and child victims. The Victorian Supreme Court has held that, where the
victim is still a child,
they can give permission for publication only if they
have the capacity to comprehend what it means to identify themselves as a victim
of a sexual offence and to comprehend the consequence of losing the anonymity
otherwise afforded by
section 4(1A).65
Parents cannot give consent on behalf of
their child.66
Proceedings pending
9.61 There is no specific guidance in the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
considered pending.67
9.62 It is not clear why the defence of consent to publication is only
available if there are no proceedings pending at the time of
publication. Where
proceedings in respect of the alleged offence are pending, permission to publish
the identifying information must
be obtained from the court before which the
proceedings are pending.68 This indicates that the court’s supervision is
to ensure that the publication does not interfere with or prejudice
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
s 4(1B)(b)(ii).
Hinch v DPP (Vic); Television and Telecasters (Melbourne) Pty Ltd v DPP
[1996] VICSC 1
[1996] 1 VR 683
, 695. 66 Ibid 691–3.
67 See Ibid 686. In that case, material identifying the victim was published
after the offender was convicted and sentenced but before
relevant appeal
periods had expired. There was no appeal on foot at time of publication. The
Supreme Court stated, in those circumstances,
that no proceedings were pending
in any court at the time of publication.
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
the ongoing proceedings. However, the purpose of
section 4(1A)
is to protect
the victim’s privacy, rather than to safeguard the accused’s fair
trial rights. Therefore the rationale
for requiring the court’s
involvement and approval for the removal of the protection is not certain.
Transference of protection to the accused
9.63 The anonymity of a person accused of committing a sexual offence is not
protected by the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
. However, sometimes the
relationship between the accused and the victim is such that publishing the
identity of the accused would
likely lead to the identification of the
9.64 In these circumstances, the accused also benefits from the protection of
section 4(1A)
and does not have to endure the publicity of criminal proceedings
and, where relevant, conviction, in the ordinary way. The
Open Court Act
The injustice of this transference of protection is increasingly appreciated
by victims and the wider society. They object to the
ability of the perpetrator
of life-changing offences against their victims to hide from public
accountability and become the principal
beneficiary of measures designed for
victim protection.69
9.65 This transference of protection is often an unavoidable consequence of
the operation of section 4(1A). However, it has underlined
the importance of
ensuring that victims who do not seek the protection of anonymity, particularly
at the cost of the perpetrator
avoiding public scrutiny, must be given clear
avenues to consent to the publication of information which may potentially
Victim’s voices and public awareness
9.66 Given that the purpose of the prohibition in
section 4(1A)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
is to protect the victim, it follows that a
victim who does not seek or perceive the need for this protection should be
to authorise publication of their identity.70
9.67 If the prohibition applies contrary to a victim’s wishes, then the
justification for the departure from the principle
of open justice and the
limitation on freedom of expression is harder
to sustain. In those circumstances, the prohibition may serve the purpose of
protecting the victim from embarrassment or humiliation
that they are assumed
to be feeling,
notwithstanding that they do not feel burdened in that way or do not seek
that protection.
9.68 Increased public awareness and discussion around sexual offences is also
likely to encourage reporting of offences and to slowly
erode the stigma and
prejudice that might otherwise lead to under-reporting. However, if victims are
prevented from speaking openly
offence and the subsequent institutional responses, public debate and discussion
resonates with the community. For this reason, regardless
of its intended
purpose, a prohibition on identifying victims which does not sufficiently allow
them to waive anonymity and publicly
tell their stories, may in practice
undermine the proper and effective administration of justice.
9.69 This view was reflected in the judgment of a New South Wales District
Court Judge who received an application to revoke, with
the victim’s
consent, a suppression order identifying the victim of a sexual offence. Judge
Berman stated:
There is a public interest in overcoming what remains of community attitudes
which suggest that people in Ms Loiterton’s [the
victim’s] position
should be ashamed. I am satisfied that far from this being a case where
publication is not in the public
I make a positive finding that it
is in the public interest for a victim of sexual assault who consents to her
name being published
having her name being published.
Ms Loiterton should
69 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 131 [521]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
70 Ibid 131–3
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
implication, be forced to hide away, embarrassed about what has happened to
her. She is entitled to hold her head up high and identify
herself as a
blameless victim of sexual assault. [Emphasis added.]71
Recent amendments
Open Courts Act
considered the issue of victims
consenting to the disclosure of their identity. The Review observed that:
An increasing number of victims reject the absurd notion that they have been
in any way diminished by the commission of criminal acts
committed against them
by another and are prepared to have their identities disclosed. There seems to
be no good reason why a person
who adopts this view, or an adult who has
previously suffered abuse as a child, and makes an informed decision to do so
be entitled to opt for disclosure and to have that publicly recorded
upon the conviction of the perpetrator.72
Open Courts Act
did not specifically consider the
operation or effectiveness of
section 4(1B)(b)(ii)
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act
. However, Recommendation 15 of the
Open Courts Act
stated that adult victims of sexual assault or family violence, or child
victims who are now adults, should be able to opt for disclosure
on the conviction of the offender.73 The Review further recommended that, in
situations where there is more than one victim, the court
should be required to
refuse an application or impose conditions on publication, to secure the
anonymity of any non-consenting victim.74
9.72 This recommendation contemplates that only victims who are now adults
may give consent to disclosure and that this may only occur
if the offender is
convicted. In contrast,
section 4(1B)(b)(ii)
appears to allow a victim to give
permission to the disclosure of their identity regardless of whether a criminal
prosecution was
commenced or how it was resolved, as long as there are no
proceedings currently pending in respect of the alleged offence.
9.73 In response to the
Open Courts Act
Open Courts and
Other Acts Amendment Act 2019
(Vic) was passed by the Parliament of Victoria
on 2 May 2019. The amendments made by the new Act are not yet in operation.75
does not amend existing section 4(1B)(b). Instead, it inserts new
sections 4(1CA) and 4(1CB) into the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
section 4(1CA)
creates a defence to a charge under
section 4(1A)
• the accused has been convicted of the relevant offence, and
• the Magistrates Court, County Court or Supreme Court has given
permission for the publication on application or on its own
motion, and
• if the person against whom the sexual offence was committed is 18
years of age or over, they have also given permission.76
9.74 The new
section 4(1CB)
requires the court to withhold its permission
• there were sexual offences against multiple victims dealt with in the
same proceeding and disclosure of the identity of the
consenting victim would
identify a non- consenting victim or a child victim, or
• disclosure is not appropriate in all the circumstances.77
R v Md Kowser ALI
[2008] NSWDC 318
72 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 131 [522]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
73 Ibid 133.
74 Ibid 133, Recommendation 15.
75 Section 2 of the
Open Courts and Other Acts Amendment Act 2019
(Vic) provides that the Act will come into operation on a day or days to
be proclaimed, or if a provision of the Act does not come
into operation before
7 February 2020, it comes into operation on that day. As at 7 May 2019, the
Act had received assent but
a commencement date had not been proclaimed.
Open Courts and Other Acts Amendment Act 2019
(Vic) s 15.
intended purpose of the amendments is to aid victims who want to tell their
stories,78 but the interaction of the proposed
new sections with existing
section 4(1B)(b)(ii)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
is ambiguous.
9.76 Relevant to the issue of victims’ agency and consent, the Open
Courts and Other Acts Amendment Act also amends section
15 of the Open Courts
Act.79 The amendments allow for victims who do not seek anonymity to apply for a
variation to or revocation
of a suppression order which was made to protect
their identity.80
Possible reforms—greater autonomy for
Open Courts Act
has highlighted the need to ensure
that statutory provisions which are designed to protect victims of sexual
offences do not also
deny them the ability to talk about their
experiences. In that context, the Commission is seeking the views of the
on whether and how the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
amended to allow victims greater autonomy and agency in electing to waive the
anonymity currently afforded them by
section 4(1A).
9.78 In particular, the Commission is seeking the views of the
community on what if any role the court should play
in authorising the
giving of consent to identification. For example, is it necessary for the court
to supervise whether:
• any consent to identification by the victim is informed and
freely given
• any consent to identification by one victim will not lead to the
identification of other non-consenting victims or child
• any publication of information identifying the victim will not
interfere with ongoing proceedings?
9.79 The Commission also seeks the views of the community on whether a
victim’s permission to publish their identity should
be sufficient,
without the need for a court order and irrespective of whether proceedings are
40 How should the law accommodate a victim’s ability to speak?
41 When should a victim be able to consent to publication of identifying
(a) Should the court’s supervision and permission also be
(b) What, if any, special provision should be made for child victims?
78 Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 20 February
2019, 425 (Jill Hennessy, Attorney-General).
Open Courts and Other Acts Amendment Act 2019
(Vic) s 10.
80 Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 20 February
2019, 425 (Jill Hennessy, Attorney-General).
restrictions—sex offences and family violence
9.80 As part of its review of the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Commission has been asked to consider whether a further statutory prohibition on
publication should be introduced which would
temporarily restrict the
publication of sensitive information in relation to alleged sexual and family
violence criminal matters
upon the laying of charges.
9.81 This aspect of the reference has its genesis in Recommendation 17 of the
Open Courts Act
which provided as follows:
That it becomes mandatory at initial bail hearings consequent upon the laying
of charges in relation to alleged sexual or family violence
criminal offences
for an interim suppression order to be issued, confining publication of reports
to the laying of the charges and
the fact and date of the hearing. This order
would remain in effect for five working days.
Alternatively, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
should be amended to the
same effect.81
9.82 The recommendation was made after consultation with affected
stakeholders revealed that if adequate attention was not given to
protecting the
information may be exposed resulting in
repeated trauma and humiliation.82
Concern was expressed in the Review that this might act as a deterrent to
reporting crimes and
seeking justice.83
9.83 There are a number of statutory provisions which may be relied upon to
protect the identity, safety and wellbeing of alleged
victims of sexual or
family violence at the early stages of criminal proceedings.84 However, the
Open Courts Act
indicates that the combined protection for victims
provided by these statutory provisions may be inadequate. The Review noted
A problem of the absence of consideration of the possible necessity for a
suppression order to protect victims has emerged in
relation to initial bail
hearings.85
Open Courts Act
found that, according to anecdotal
evidence, victims have little knowledge of the statutory prohibitions on
publication or grounds
for suppression orders under the Open Courts
Act.86 The Review further found that, at the stressful point at which a
matter first comes before the court, victims of sexual and family violence
offences will not necessarily be in a position to
properly consider the
need for a suppression order, nor to make an application or ask for one of
their behalf.87 The Review
observed that by the time a proper assessment is made
of whether an order is necessary and an appropriate application made it may
too late, with the damaging information already reported in the public
9.85 Accordingly, to address these concerns Recommendation 17 of the
proposed that a temporary publication restriction should
commence ‘at an initial bail hearing consequent upon the laying of
Defining relevant cases
9.86 Where an automatic statutory publication prohibition applies, the
circumstances in which it applies must be clearly
defined. This is
because criminal sanction will potential result from breach of the
prohibition. The Commission has been
asked to consider a temporary publication
restriction which would apply in cases of ‘alleged sexual or family
criminal offences’.
81 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>. 82 Ibid 8, 71,
84 See, eg,
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Bail Act 1977
Open Courts Act 2013
85 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 133 [528]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>. 86 Ibid 70 [268], 72
[274], 133 [529].
87 Ibid 71 [273], 134 [529].
88 Ibid 71 [273], 133 [528].
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
defines the application of the prohibition in
section 4(1A)
by reference to cases where a ‘sexual offence’ is
alleged to have been committed. The captured offences are defined by
to a list of offence provisions in the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic).89 However,
a ‘family violence criminal offence’ is more difficult to
9.88 For example, the definition used in the
Open Courts Act
extends beyond
conduct which is in breach of an existing intervention order to include conduct
which ‘if established, constitutes
family violence within the meaning of
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
by the accused against the
complainant or alleged victim and the conduct could reasonably have justified
the making of a family violence
intervention order ...’.90 The definition
of family violence in the
Family Violence Protection Act
is very broad91 and
turns on establishing a ‘family member’92 relationship between
victim and perpetrator.
9.89 Therefore a family violence offence is not defined by offence type but
instead is contingent on the context of the offending
and the relationship
between victim and perpetrator. The context-dependent nature of the definition
means that it may not always
be clear or agreed at the early stages of
proceedings whether an offence is a family violence criminal offence.
Defining sensitive information
9.90 The prohibition on temporary publication which the Commission has been
asked to consider would restrict the publication of ‘sensitive
information’ in relation to alleged sexual or family violence
9.91 ‘Sensitive information’ is a subjective term and if it is
to be used as the touchstone for a statutory prohibition
and offence
provision, it is suggested that further definition will be required.
Definitions of this term are provided
in other statutory contexts. For
example, ‘sensitive information’ is defined in Schedule 1 of
(Vic). However, that
definition is not directly transferable to the present context and
9.92 If a definition is not included, a list of permissible publishable
details may assist in providing certainty to those reporting
on relevant
proceedings. Recommendation 17 of the
Open Courts Act
that the temporary restriction should confine publication of reports to the
laying of the charges and the fact and date of
the hearing.93
Public awareness
9.93 There is a significant public interest in raising awareness about the
frequency, nature and circumstances of both sexual and
family violence in the
community. This must be balanced against the level of caution employed to ensure
that existing protections
for victims’ privacy and dignity operate
effectively. If the media cannot report on sexual and family violence
offences in a timely way or if the restrictions around reporting are
regarded as too legally complex, the amount of coverage these
receive may be reduced.
Possible reforms to restrictions in cases of sexual
and family violence
Open Courts Act
has identified a potential gap in the
the earliest stages
of proceedings. There are a number of ways that this could
be addressed.
9.95 More information could be provided to victims about the orders the court
is empowered to make and more support could be provided
to assist them to make
a timely application for a suppression order or to request that one be made on
their behalf. Measures of
this type were also canvassed in the
Open Courts
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Open Courts Act 2013
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
93 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>. 94 Ibid 72 [274], 134
9.96 Statutory amendments could be made to reverse the default position in
so that, unless an order was made permitting
publication of a report of the bail
proceedings, publication of the details of those proceedings would be
restricted.95 This would ensure that specific consideration
was given to the
need for a suppression order at this early stage of the process or that, in the
absence of such consideration, the
opportunity to apply for a suppression order
later was not lost. This could apply to all initial bail proceedings or
specifically
to cases where an accused has been charged with a sexual and family
violence criminal offence.
9.97 A temporary statutory prohibition could be imposed on publishing
sensitive material in cases where an accused was charged
with a sexual or
family violence criminal offence for a specified period. The term
‘sensitive material’ could be
defined. Alternatively, the
provision could include an exhaustive list of matters that may permissibly be
reported. The court
could have discretion to order that the temporary
prohibition does not apply, on application by the victim or on the
court’s own motion. This statutory prohibition could be included in the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
or other subject-specific legislation.
42 Is a statutory prohibition required to temporarily restrict reporting in
cases where an accused has been charged with a sexual
or family violence
criminal offence? If so:
(a) What information should be permitted to be published—should the
court have discretion to order that additional or less information
(b) When should the temporary prohibition apply?
(c) Should the temporary prohibition only apply to cases where the accused
has been charged with a sexual or family violence criminal
95 See, eg,
Justices Act 1959
which prohibits publication
of an account of bail proceedings, except an account giving the fact of the
application and stating that
an order has been made in respect of it.
ENFORCEMENT
Enforcing laws that restrict publication
Introduction
Open Courts Act
Review—recommendations
Data about enforcement
155 Definitions of
‘publication’
161 Jurisdiction
164 Awareness of prohibitions and
restrictions
Responsibility for instituting
proceedings
Fault elements to prove breach of
prohibitions
172 Defences and exceptions
175 Penalties and remedies
180 Legacy suppression orders
laws that restrict publication
Introduction
10.1 This chapter considers the underlying principles for enforcement of
prohibitions and restrictions on the publication of information,
with reference
to the law relating to contempt, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) and the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic). This chapter discusses
whether procedural, administrative and legislative changes are required, and can
be implemented, to
ensure these laws are effectively, consistently and fairly
10.2 This chapter focuses on the enforcement of laws that prohibit and
restrict publication, including:
• definitions of ‘publication’ and features of online
publication
• enforcement of Victorian laws outside of Victoria
• awareness of the laws and notification of court orders
• monitoring compliance
• responsibility for proceedings for breach
• fault elements that must be proven to establish breach
• existing penalties
• defences to alleged breaches
• enforcement of suppression orders with no end date that were made
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic) commenced.
10.3 In 2017, the Hon. Frank Vincent AO QC reviewed the scope, operation and
underlying principles of the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic).1 The Commission
has been asked to consider these recommendations of the
Open Courts Act
, which are discussed below.
10.4 Open justice is a common law principle that requires the
administration of justice to occur in public.2 Broadly speaking,
requires that courts are open to members of the public who wish to
attend and that those who attend may report what
they see and hear there,
including the names of parties and witnesses and details about the evidence.3
The media has an important role in keeping the public
informed about the courts
by fairly and accurately reporting on cases.4
1 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
Scott v Scott
[1913] AC 417, 435 (Viscount Haldane LC);
(1913) 17 CLR 51, 51 (Barton ACJ; Isaacs, Gavan Duffy, Powers
and Rich JJ agreeing); see also
Russell v Russell
(1976) 134 CLR 495
(Barwick CJ), 520 (Gibbs J), 532–3 (Stephen J);
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR 506
, 530 [20] (French CJ); see also
Charter of Human
Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Raybos Australia Pty Ltd v Jones
(1985) 2 NSWLR 47
, 55 (Kirby P);
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR 506
, 532 [22] (French CJ).
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
(Warren CJ and Byrne AJA).
justice can be limited by statutory and common law prohibitions and
restrictions on publishing information about cases
that are necessary to secure
the proper administration of justice.5
10.6 The law of contempt, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
prohibit and restrict the publication of information about cases in
Victoria. As these laws sanction departures from the open justice
this principle must be considered when assessing their application and
enforcement.
10.7 Courts apply and enforce prohibitions and restrictions on publication
for a range of reasons, including protecting the identities
of people involved
in cases, such as child witnesses, or shielding jurors from prejudicial material
on trial. Effective enforcement is critical to
securing fair trials for parties, witnesses, victims and the community.
10.8 The internet and other modern technologies challenge the courts’
ability to enforce prohibitions and restrictions on publication.
If prohibitions
and restrictions are rendered futile, there may be significant implications for
the maintenance of fair trials and
public confidence in the court system.
10.9 The key prohibitions and restrictions examined in this reference
• statutory prohibitions and restrictions that apply automatically,
without the need for a court order, such as provisions
under the Judicial
Proceedings Reports Act6
• proceeding suppression orders, interim orders and broad suppression
orders made by courts using their statutory powers under
Open Courts Act
• common law suppression orders made by the Supreme Court of Victoria
in its inherent jurisdiction and the County Court of Victoria
exercising aspects
of the Supreme Court’s inherent jurisdiction8
• pseudonym orders made by courts under the common law9
• the common law of sub judice contempt.
Open Courts Act
Review—recommendations
10.10 The purpose of the
Open Courts Act
, which recommended the
Commission’s current review, was to consider whether the
Open Courts Act
striking the right balance between the need for open and transparent justice,
and the need to protect the legitimate interests of
victims, witnesses and
accused persons, and to preserve the proper administration of justice.10
Open Courts Act
made several recommendations that are
particularly relevant to the enforcement of prohibitions and restrictions on
publication, including:
• Recommendation 4: that the Victorian Law Reform Commission report on
possible reform of the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
codification of the law of contempt of court, including the legal framework and
processes for enforcement, to ensure a consistent
approach to principle and
practice for suppression orders and related areas
Scott v Scott
[1913] AC 417, 437 (Viscount Haldane LC),
445–6 (Earl Loreburn), 482–3 (Lord Shaw of Dunfermline);
(1976) 134 CLR 495
, 520 (Gibbs J);
Hogan v Hinch
, 531–2 [21] (French CJ);
Raybos Australia Pty Ltd v Jones
(1985) 2 NSWLR 47
, 54 (Kirby P).
6 There are other statutory prohibitions and restrictions that apply
automatically in Victoria, but they are not a focus of this review:
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Open Courts Act 2013
(definitions of ‘court or
tribunal’, ‘suppression order’), 17–8, 20,
8 The inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Victoria is not
limited or otherwise affected by the
Open Courts Act 2013
Open Courts Act
preserves the courts’ common law powers to
conceal a person’s identity by restricting how they are referred to in
open court and/or court documents, often by giving them a pseudonym. These are
often called ‘pseudonym orders’:
Open Courts Act 2013
10 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review> 12 [18].
• Recommendation
5: that harmonisation of the law and practice among the states and territories
relating to suppression orders
be referred to the Council of Attorneys- General
for further consideration. Whether or not this referral occurs, the
recommended that the Council of Attorneys-General be asked
to consider the desirability of developing a system for interstate and
recognition and enforcement of suppression orders.
• Recommendation 7: that there be established a central, publicly
accessible register of suppression orders made by all Victorian
tribunals containing details of their terms and duration and, to the extent
reasonably possible in the circumstances,
the reasons for them
• Recommendation 18(4): that the Public Interest Monitor report
annually to the Attorney-General for Victoria on the operation
Courts Act 2013
(Vic) provided it receives additional funding and resources
to do so, among other additional powers.11
Implementation of recommendations
10.12 Legislative amendments to the
Open Courts Act
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) that fully or
partially implement
Recommendations 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 13, and 15 of the
Open Courts Act
were recently passed by the Parliament of Victoria.12
10.13 The Victorian Government supported Recommendations 4, 5 and 7 in its
response to the
Open Courts Act
but Recommendation 18 was ‘subject to
further consideration’.13
Open Courts Act
considered that broad adoption of its
recommendations would improve monitoring and enforcement of suppression orders
and help to identify
systemic issues.14 The recommendations are discussed at
various points in this chapter.
Data about enforcement
Orders under the Open Courts Act
10.15 The enforcement of legal prohibitions and restrictions on publication
is a contentious topic in Victoria among government
officials, courts,
legal practitioners and the media.15
10.16 The Commission’s further examination of enforcement processes
would be enhanced by an understanding of the volume of prohibitions
restrictions made by courts, current enforcement processes and the extent to
which prohibitions and restrictions are monitored
and enforced.
10.17 Reviews and studies provide publicly available statistics about the
enforcement of prohibitions and restrictions on publication,
particularly orders
made under the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic). Some studies have acknowledged
gaps in their data.
11 Ibid 9–11.
Open Courts and Other Acts Amendment Act 2019
(Vic); Explanatory
Memorandum,
Open Courts and Other Acts Amendment Bill 2019
(Vic) 1. See
generally Victoria, Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly, 20 February
2019, 423–6 (Jill Hennessy, Attorney-General).
13 Victorian Government,
Open Courts Act
Review—table of
Recommendations
14 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 6–7 [14] –
15 See, eg, Michael Douglas and Jason Bosland, ‘We Knew George Pell Was
Guilty of Child Sex Abuse. Why Couldn’t We Say
it Until Now?’
(26 February 2019)
The Conversation
<https://theconversation.com/we-knew-george-pell-was-guilty-of-child-sex-abuse-why-couldnt-we-
say-it-until-now-112521>; Richard
Ackland, ‘The Media and Contempt of
The Saturday Paper
(Web Page, 6–12 April 2019) <
thesaturdaypaper.com.au/opinion/topic/2019/04/06/the-media-and-contempt-court/15544692007951>;
Sumeyya Ilanbey, ‘Andrews
Vows to Implement Suppression Order Overhaul
this Term’,
(Web Page, 13 December 2018) <
www.theage.com.au/national/
victoria/andrews-vows-to-implement-suppression-order-overhaul-this-term-20181213-p50lz7.html>.
data analysis in the
Open Courts Act
focuses on suppression orders
issued between 1 January 2014 and 31 December 2016. During that period, under
Open Courts Act
• The Supreme Court, including the Court of Appeal, made 173
suppression orders.
• The County Court made 377 suppression orders.
• The Magistrates’ Court made 430 suppression orders.16
Open Courts Act
also recorded that the Supreme Court
made 13 orders and the County Court made one order in their inherent
2014 and 31 December 2016.17
10.20 Jason Bosland, Deputy Director of the Centre for Media and
Communications Law at Melbourne Law School, published a study on
suppression
orders made under the
Open Courts Act
in the first two years of its operation
and the Supreme Court’s common law powers. The study found that between 1
2013 and 30 November 2015:
• The Supreme Court made 66 suppression orders.
• The County Court made 230 suppression orders.
• The Magistrates’ Court made 190 suppression orders.18
10.21 At this stage, the Commission is unable to access data about the number
of prosecutions for breaches of orders under the
Open Courts Act
outcomes of any such prosecutions.
Consent to prosecute under the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
10.22 A prosecution for breach of the prohibitions and restrictions under the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
can be commenced only with the consent of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP).19
10.23 Since June 2000, the DPP has consented to four prosecutions for breach
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
20 Annual reports of the Office
of Public Prosecutions do not record whether there were requests for consent to
prosecute that the
DPP refused.
16 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 86–100,
149–53, app 3.
17 Ibid item 11.
18 Jason Bosland, ‘Two Years of Suppression under the
Open Courts
[2017] SydLawRw 2
Sydney Law Review
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
20 Office of Public Prosecutions,
Annual Report
(Annual Reports,
Prosecutions
10.24 The two most recent annual reports of the Office of Public Prosecutions
do not provide statistics about contempt prosecutions.
Annual reports from 2000
and 2018 reported the following statistics regarding the number of contempt
proceedings commenced by the
Number of contempt proceedings
Access to data
10.25 There are gaps in the publicly available data about:
• the number of proceedings for contempt of court for alleged breaches
of common law suppression orders made in Victorian courts
• the number of prosecutions for alleged breaches of orders made under
Open Courts Act
in Victorian courts
• the number of requests to the DPP for consent to prosecute alleged
breaches of the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
• the number of proceedings for sub judice contempt in Victorian
• the parties against whom proceedings for breaches of prohibitions and
restrictions on publication are brought
• the processes which courts and other agencies use to monitor and
address potential breaches of the law of contempt, the
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act
and the Open Courts Ac
• the outcomes of proceedings for contempt of court for breaches of
common law suppression orders, breaches of orders under
Open Courts Act
breaches of the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
and proceedings for sub judice
21 Office of Public Prosecutions,
Annual Report
Reports, 2000–18).
Definitions
of ‘publication’
10.26 Prohibited and restricted information about court cases must have been
‘published’ for liability to arise under
the law of sub judice
contempt, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
nature of ‘publication’ and its current definition under these laws
must therefore be examined in order to properly
consider reforms to enforcement
10.27 Definitions of ‘publication’ can include or refer to:
• how information is made available, such as the distribution of a book
or provision of access to archived material
• the media through which information is published, such as a book,
newspaper, radio or television broadcast or website
• where information is published, such as a publication by a newspaper
based in Victoria or on the website of a media organisation
based outside
• the identities of individuals and entities publishing information,
such as media organisations, journalists and members of
• the identities of individuals and entities receiving information,
such as the public in general, or a section of the public,
such as jurors.
10.28 This chapter discusses these issues as they arise in the enforcement of
prohibitions and restrictions on online publications.
Online publication
10.29 The law has always needed to adapt to developments in society,
technology and communication. In 1974, the Committee on Contempt
of Court in
England described television as a new form of communication with a
‘powerful impact on the public’.22
10.30 In 2002, a majority of the High Court of Australia stated in the
defamation case
Dow Jones & Co Inc v Gutnick
In the course of argument much emphasis was given to the fact that the advent
of the World Wide Web is a considerable technological
advance. So it is. But the
problem of widely disseminated communications is much older than the internet
and the World Wide Web.
The law has had to grapple with such cases ever since
newspapers and magazines came to be distributed to large numbers of people
wide geographic areas. Radio and television presented the same kind of problem
as was presented by widespread
dissemination of printed material, although international transmission of
material was made easier by the advent of electronic means
communication.23
10.31 Though technological developments are not new, each development creates
new challenges for existing laws and the courts enforcing
10.32 Chief Justice Warren and Acting Justice of Appeal Byrne of the
Victorian Court of Appeal have described online information as
having four
unique characteristics:
• it is permanent,
• it lacks a specific location,
• it is easily accessible,
• it can be copied and published on other websites outside
Victoria.24
22 Committee on Contempt of Court (UK),
Report of the Committee on
Contempt of Court
(December 1974) 5.
Dow Jones & Co Inc v Gutnick
(2002) 210 CLR 575, 605 [38]
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
[75]–[84] (Warren CJ and Byrne AJA).
10.33 Prohibited
and restricted information can be published online by different individuals and
entities in a range of ways. In
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
, the suppressed material was published through the original
publication of the suppression order by Wikileaks, republications of
and various ‘articles, tweets and blogs which refer in some way’ to
the order, including by reposting the order,
naming people mentioned in the
order or linking to the order on Wikileaks.25
10.34 Online publication of information raises legal and practical issues for
courts seeking to enforce prohibitions and restrictions
on publication under the
law of contempt, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
These issues include:
• how to define ‘publication’
• the courts’ power to enforce Victorian laws in other Australian
states and territories and in foreign countries
• identifying the original publisher of information posted online when
the information has been republished multiple times or
was originally published
anonymously
• how courts determine the liability of online intermediaries, such as
internet service providers and social media companies
• how courts approach enforcement when prohibitions or restrictions on
publication are rendered futile by subsequent events,
such as the posting,
sharing and discussion of suppressed information on social media networks like
Facebook, Twitterand Instagram.
Definitions of ‘publication’
10.35 There are different definitions of, and references to,
‘publication’ in the law of contempt, the
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act
Open Courts Act
. There are also definitions of
‘publication’ in other areas of the law which are not the subject of
this review, such
as defamation and copyright.
10.36 Under the
Open Courts Act
, ‘publish’ means disseminate or
provide access to the public, or a section of the public, by any means,
• publication in a book, newspaper, magazine or other written
publication
• broadcast by radio or television
• public exhibition or broadcast
• electronic communication.26
10.37 The word publication must be construed according to this
definition.27
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
has the same
definition of publish as the
Open Courts Act
, but it does not expressly require
that publication be construed according to the definition of publish. 28
10.39 Publication under
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
permitted ‘for a purpose connected with a judicial proceeding’.29 In
Hinch v Director of Public Prosecutions
, the Victorian Court of Appeal
considered when a matter would be considered to be published ‘for a
purpose connected with a
judicial proceeding’. The Court of Appeal held
that the words may ‘have to be narrowly construed in order to preserve
operation of the prohibition in
section 4(1A)
’, and that the phrase
‘will save only a publishing that is
for a purpose having a real and direct link with the furtherance or conduct
of a judicial proceeding’. The phrase would not
encompass public criticism
of a judicial proceeding,
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions v Brady
[2015] VSC 246
Open Courts Act 2013
(definition of
‘publish’).
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(definition of
‘publish’).
legitimate or not, nor any campaign designed to gather support for judicial
proceedings to be commenced.30
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
has no definition of
‘publish’ or ‘publication’ but makes several references
to publication.31
10.41 Under the
Open Courts Act
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
definition of ‘publish’ is broad and inclusive. Most online
communications would likely be an ‘electronic communication’
another ‘means’ of dissemination or provision of access.
10.42 Under the law of sub judice contempt, publications can include
newspapers,32 online news,33 radio broadcasts,34 television,35
and statements
to the media.36 To be published, material must be made available to the public,
or to a section of the public likely
to include those connected with a case.37
The definition of publication under the law of sub judice contempt is discussed
in Chapter 7.
10.43 A key issue in this reference is whether the law of sub judice contempt
requires restatment in statute, including the definition
of publication to
clarify the scope and application of the law.
Definitions of ‘public’ and ‘a
section of the public’
10.44 It is unclear when people and organisations, including online
intermediaries, are considered to have disseminated, or
provided access,
‘to the public’ or ‘a section of the public’.
If a person posts suppressed
information about a case on their Facebook
• Has the person disseminated it or provided access to it to the public
or to a section of the public?
• To what section of the public must a person have disseminated the
information or provided access to it for it to be a
publication?
10.45 For example, does sending a private message to a group of friends
on social media or a private email satisfy the requirement
that the material
is made available to a section of the public?38
Duration of publication
10.46 Existing definitions of publication may impact harshly on certain
online publishers. In a sub judice contempt case, a majority
of the Court of
Appeal found that the publication of online material occurs for as long as the
material is available online.39
10.47 This definition is particularly problematic for publishers or
managers of archived online material. For instance, a
publisher who posts an
article online about a person convicted of criminal offences may become liable
for sub judice contempt if
the convicted person is later put on trial for
further criminal offences while the article remains accessible.
Hinch v DPP (Vic); Television and Telecasters (Melbourne) Pty Ltd v DPP
[1996] VICSC 1
[1996] 1 VR 683
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Bell v Stewart
(1920) 28 CLR 419;
DPP (NSW) v Wran
Monis v the Queen; Droudis v the Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 92.
DPP v Johnson & Yahoo!7
[2016] VSC 699
DPP v Johnson &
Yahoo!7 (No 2)
[2017] VSC 45.
Hinch v A-G (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
A-G (NSW) v Willesee
[1980] 2 NSWLR 143
A-G (NSW) v TCN Channel
Nine Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 368
General Television Corporation Pty
Ltd v DPP (Vic)
[2008] VSCA 49
(2008) 19 VR 68.
DPP (NSW) v Wran
(1987) 7 NSWLR 616.
Viner v Australian Building Construction Employees’ and Builders
Labourers Federation
(1963) 56 FLR 5
, 22–3; Des Butler and Sharon
Australian Media Law
(Thomson Reuters, 5th ed, 2015) 373
[6.150], citing N Lowe and B Sufrin,
The Law of Contempt
(Butterworths,
3rd ed, 1996) 85.
38 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court (1): Juror
Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013) 15 [2.33].
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
[63]–[65] (Warren CJ and Byrne AJA). The majority of the Court of Appeal
also considered the High Court’s
approach in
Dow Jones v Gutnick
(2002) 210 CLR 575, a defamation case in which publication was taken to
be at the place and time it was downloaded. See also
R v Hinch (No 1)
[2013] VSC 520
[54], citing
Fairfax Digital Australia and New Zealand Pty
Ltd v Ibrahim
[2012] NSWCCA 125
(2012) 83 NSWLR 52
, 64–5 [43] (Basten JA, Bathurst CJ
and Whealy JA agreeing).
of online intermediaries
10.48 The Australian Law Reform Commission has defined an intermediary
An entity that provides services that enable online content to be provided to
the public and includes content platforms, application
service providers, host
providers and internet access providers.40
10.49 Different types of intermediary can enable and restrict access to
information online, including:
• telecommunications providers, such as Telstra
• internet service providers
• content hosts
• search engines, such as Google
• social media platforms, such as Facebook and Twitter
• e-commerce and payment providers, such as PayPal.41
10.50 The liability of online intermediaries for the actions of third
parties, such as the liability of Facebook for a person’s
post, is ‘confusing’, ‘largely incoherent’ and
developed separately in different areas of Australian law, according to Kylie
Pappalardo and Nicolas Suzor.42 The issue has not yet
been considered by
Australian courts in a case of sub judice contempt.43 The liability of
intermediaries for automated search results,
emails and notifications that
give rise to publications is also a critical question in this area of the
10.51 There are two main issues with assessing the liability of
intermediaries:
• Many internet intermediaries do not have control over the content of
the information that goes through their systems, though
they may be able to
include or exclude certain information.45 Given the volume of material published
online, liability for the content
of such publications may be an unfair burden
on an intermediary that had no knowledge of, or control over, a publication.
• There may not always be a local distributor to hold liable when
content is published from foreign jurisdictions.46 An online
distributor may be
anonymous47 or outside the jurisdiction.48 Enforcement of prohibitions and
restrictions on publication outside
of Victoria is discussed later in this
10.52 Under Commonwealth law, statutory provisions regulate the liability of
certain online intermediaries for ‘internet content’.49
Clause 91 of
Schedule 5 of the
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) provides that a
state or territory law, or a rule of common law or equity, has no effect to the
extent to which it:
• subjects, or would have the effect (whether direct or indirect) of
subjecting, an internet content host to liability (whether
criminal or civil) in
respect of hosting particular internet content in a case where the host was not
aware of the nature of the
internet content; or
40 Australian Law Reform Commission,
Classification—Content
Regulation and Convergent Media
(Report No 118, March 2012) 398.
41 Kylie Pappalardo and Nicolas Suzor, ‘The Liability of
Australian Online Intermediaries’
[2018] SydLawRw 19
(2018) 40 (4)
43 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 38 [2.63].
Trkulja v Google
(2018) 356 ALR 178;
Google v ACCC
(2013) 249 CLR 435; Sam Hurley, ‘Grace Millane case: Suppression
Flouted by Google and Others, Prosecutions to Follow?’,
New Zealand
(Web Page, 14 December 2018) <
www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.
cfm?c_id=1&objectid=12176432>; Toby Manhire, ‘New Zealand
Courts Banned Naming Grace Millane’s Accused
Killer. Google just
Emailed it Out.’,
The Guardian
(Web Page, 13 December 2018) <
www.theguardian.com/world/2018/dec/13/new-zealand-courts-banned-
naming-grace-millanes-accused-killer-google-just-emailed-it-out>. The
liability of platforms such as Google, Facebook and Twitter
has been questioned
in New Zealand where despite a suppression order on the name of an accused,
Google published the details in an
email sent to subscribers.
45 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 33 [2.63].
46 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000) 74 [2.97]; Jane Johnston et al,
Juries and Social
Media: A Report Prepared for the Victorian Department of Justice
47 Jane Johnston et al,
Juries and Social Media: A Report Prepared for the
Victorian Department of Justice
(Report, 2013) 5–6 [2.4]..
48 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000) 74 [2.97].
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) sch 5
cl 3 (definition of
‘internet content’; definition of ‘information’;
definition of ‘ordinary email’).
• requires,
or would have the effect (whether direct or indirect) of requiring, an internet
content host to monitor, make inquiries
content hosted by the host; or
• subjects, or would have the effect (whether direct or indirect) of
subjecting, an internet service provider to liability (whether
criminal or
civil) in respect of carrying particular internet content in a case where the
service provider was not aware of the nature
of the internet content; or
• requires, or would have the effect (whether direct or indirect) of
requiring, an internet service provider to monitor, make
inquiries about, or
keep records of, internet content carried by the provider.50
10.53 Under the
Broadcasting Services Act
• Clause 90 declares that the schedule is not intended to exclude a
state or territory law, including a Victorian law, to
the extent to
which that law can operate concurrently with Schedule 5.
• A state or territory law, or rule of common law or equity, can be
exempted from the operation of clause 91.51
10.54 An aim of the
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online Services) Act
(Cth), which introduced clause 91, was to prevent intermediaries being
unfairly burdened with monitoring or enquiring about content
and to encourage
the development of internet technologies.52
10.55 These provisions are important to consider when assessing proposed
reforms that seek to address the liability of online intermediaries.
Possible reforms—laws concerning
publication
Clarifying and harmonising definitions
10.56 One reform option is a revised and harmonised definition of
‘publication’ in the
Open Courts Act
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act
, which would specify when a person or organisation has disseminated
or provided access to the public or a section of the public.
10.57 Such amendments may also more precisely define what material,
particularly online material, is a publication under these
laws, through
expanded definitions or the inclusion of examples in the statute.
10.58 Alternatively, a revised and harmonised definition of publication could
include an exemption for private communications,53 such
as a personal email
between two individuals.
10.59 If the law of sub judice contempt were wholly or partially restated in
statute, this reform may include harmonising the definition
in the law of sub
judice contempt with other definitions of publication in statutes such as the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
. This is discussed in
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) sch 5
‘Internet content host’ and ‘internet carriage service’
are defined under cl 3 of the schedule. ‘Internet
service provider’
is defined under cl 8 of the schedule.
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) sch 5
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online Services) Act 1999
sch 1 cl 4. The
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online Services) Act 1999
(Cth) was introduced to regulate offensive content on the internet.
53 The Australian Law Reform Commission made this recommendation in its
review of section 121 of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which contains
provisions restricting the publication of family law proceedings to the public:
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the Family Law System
(Discussion Paper No 86, 2018) 307–8 [12.73]–[12.78].
10.60 Given the volume and reach of online communications, it is important to
consider whether alterations to definitions of publication
would create
practical impediments to enforcement, such as placing an unrealistic burden on
particular agencies to monitor online
Clarifying the liability of online intermediaries
10.61 Another reform option is the enactment of new statutory provisions,
or the amendment of existing provisions, to clarify
aspects of the liability
of online intermediaries and their responsibility for monitoring, making
enquiries and removing prohibited
and restricted information published on their
platforms. This is also a relevant consideration for any legislative
restatement
of the law of sub judice contempt.
10.62 Reform options in this area need to take account of:
• the existing regulation of internet content hosts and internet
service providers under Commonwealth law, particularly the
Broadcasting Services
• provisions in the
Broadcasting Services Act
that limit the
application of Victorian statutes and the common law to the regulation of
internet content hosts and internet service
10.63 The New South Wales Law Reform Commission supported the aims of the
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online Services) Act
, which introduced clause
91 of the Broadcasting Services Act.54 The NSW Commission recommended, however,
that internet content hosts
and service providers that become aware they are
carrying or hosting a contemptuous publication should be obliged to take steps
their means to prevent it from continuing to be published, in line with
their obligation to remove content after formal notification
by the Australian
Broadcasting Authority.55
10.64 One reform option is that any such statutory provisions may specify
which online intermediaries are liable for the
publication of prohibited
or restricted information, such as by amending definitions or providing
examples in the legislation
that refer to particular intermediaries.
43 Should the terms ‘publish’ and ‘publication’ be
defined consistently? If so, how should these terms be
44 Are there any other issues arising out of the definitions of
‘publish’ and ‘publication’ that should also
45 To what extent are potential reforms to the definition of the terms
‘publish’ and ‘publication’ affected
or limited by
Commonwealth law?
46 What reforms, if any, should be made to address the liability of online
intermediaries for the publication of prohibited and restricted
information?
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online Services) Act 1999
sch 1 cl 10.
55 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 34 [2.65], citing
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) sch 5
Enforcement in Victoria
10.65 Victorian courts can enforce prohibitions and restrictions on
information that is published within Victoria, whether
the information is
published in print, by broadcast, online or through any other medium.
10.66 Information posted online is available to anyone who can access the
internet, without geographic limitations.56 Courts can struggle
prohibitions and restrictions on publication when the relevant information is
published by individuals and entities who
are not bound by Victorian laws and
court orders.
Enforcement in Australia
10.67 Prohibitions and restrictions on publication of information vary in
their applicability to jurisdictions outside Victoria.
10.68 Under the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic), proceeding suppression orders and
interim orders apply to the publication or disclosure of information in a place
in the order.57 Broad suppression orders made in the
Magistrates’ Court only apply to the publication of material in a place
specified in the order.58 These orders can apply anywhere in Australia, but an
order cannot apply outside Victoria unless the court
is satisfied it is
necessary for an order to apply outside Victoria in order to achieve the purpose
for which the order was made.59
Section 3(2)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
states that it is
not lawful to:
sell distribute or give away or cause or procure to be sold distributed or
given away or to have in possession for sale distribution
or giving away any
newspaper or document
(whether printed or published in Victoria or elsewhere) containing or
purporting to contain any matter or details or particulars
the printing or
publication of which would if the newspaper or document were printed or
published in Victoria be a contravention
of the provisions of this
Section 3(2)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
does not, however,
empower Victorian courts to exercise their jurisdiction outside of Victoria.
Rather, it prohibits the sale and
distribution of publications which are
prohibited or restricted in Victoria, but published ‘elsewhere’ and
brought into
was originally enacted in 1929, when newspapers
were the primary focus of publication provisions.61
Enforcement in foreign jurisdictions
10.71 The online publication of prohibited or restricted information about a
court case may render the prohibition or restriction
10.72 In June 2014, Justice Hollingworth of the Supreme Court issued a
suppression order sought by the Commonwealth Department of
Foreign Affairs and
Trade (DFAT) in a high-profile case alleging corruption involving foreign
public officials. Some of the terms
of the order could not published without
disclosing the suppressed information. WikiLeaks published the order online in
and many Australian and foreign media organisations and bloggers
republished it.62 Most republications of the suppression order after
the initial
publication by Wikileaks were in Asia, but they were available for download in
Australia.63 At that time,
Dow Jones & Co Inc v Gutnick
(2002) 210 CLR 575, 605 [39]
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
Open Courts Act 2013
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Judicial Proceedings (Regulation of Reports) Act 1929
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions v Brady
[2015] VSC 246
[1]–[4], [31]–[32]. 63 Ibid [42].
Wikileaks’ server was hosted in Sweden and there were reportedly other
servers located in other jurisdictions, but none
in Australia.64
10.73 In revoking the order, Justice Hollingworth found:
The widespread on-line dissemination that has already occurred cannot now
be undone. Whilst the court has power to make orders
which have effect
within Australia (including orders requiring the removal of material already
published in this country),
it cannot make orders controlling publication of
the DFAT order outside Australia. And, unlike the case with most
suppression
orders, it is the publication overseas that has the capacity to
cause the greatest harm. ... There is no rule that
automatically
prevents suppression orders from being made or continued, in respect of
information that has already been published.
However, the court’s ability
to enforce its order, and protect against the threatened harm, are likely
to be highly
relevant.65
10.74 In his analysis of
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions v
, Jason Bosland commented that it would be a ‘perverse
result’ if courts attempted to garner respect for their authority
promote compliance with orders by insisting that orders continue when they are
no longer useful.66 In agreeing with Justice Hollingworth’s
decision to
revoke the order, Bosland argued that courts cannot allow futile orders to
continue because the making and continuation
of orders is subject to a strict
test of necessity and a futile order cannot be considered necessary.67
10.75 Enforcing prohibitions and restrictions on publication against the
local distributor of a publication, or local office of a
company, is one
approach to enforcement where the publication is online. For instance, in 1957,
the United Kingdom distributors of
an American magazine were found liable for
the prejudicial content it contained.68 The Queen’s Bench stated:
We shall impose a fine (albeit of a nominal amount) and we do so to
emphasise the risk which is run by dealing in foreign
publications imported
here but which have no responsible editor or manager in this country. The
distributors are the only persons
who can in these circumstances be made
amenable in the courts of this country.69
10.76 There are difficulties with this approach when material is published
online. An online distributor may be outside the jurisdiction,70
and there may
not be a local distributor to hold liable.71 An online distributor may also be
anonymous,72 making it difficult for
courts to identify the original source of
the publication so as to determine liability.
10.77 Recently, the DPP initiated proceedings for contempt in the Supreme
Court of Victoria against 36 organisations and individuals
in the media for
allegedly breaching a suppression order restricting publication of information
George Pell for child sex offences.
International media organisations had published stories reporting on
Pell’s conviction.
In court documents, the DPP alleges, in part, that the
organisations and
individuals ‘aided and abetted overseas media’s
contempt’.73 A directions hearing in this case took place in the
Court on 15 April 2019 and the matter has been set down for a further directions
hearing on 26 June 2019. The matter is yet
to be fixed for hearing.
64 Jason Bosland, ‘Wikileaks and the Not-so-super Injunction: The
Suppression Order in
DPP (Cth) v Brady
(2016) 21(1)
Arts Law Review
65 A suppression order may still be maintained after a breach, but each case
needs to be assessed on its facts:
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions v Brady
[2015] VSC 246
[75]–[76], [80].
66 Jason Bosland, ‘Wikileaks and the Not-so-super Injunction: The
Suppression Order in
DPP (Cth) v Brady
(2016) 21(1)
Arts Law Review
Hogan v Australian Crime Commission
[2010] HCA 21
(2010) 240 CLR 651
R v Griffiths, Ex parte A-G (UK)
[1957] 2 All Er 379.
69 Ibid 383.
70 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Discussion Paper, 2000) 74 [2.97].
71 Ibid; Jane Johnston et al,
Juries and Social Media: A Report Prepared
for the Victorian Department of Justice
(Report, 2013) 5–6 [2.4].
72 Jane Johnston et al,
Juries and Social Media: A Report Prepared for the
Victorian Department of Justice
(Report, 2013) 5–6 [2.4].
73 Adam Cooper, ‘DPP Moves to Jail Dozens of Editors, Journalists Over
Reports after Pell Verdict’,
(Web Page, 26 March 2019)
www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/dpp-moves-to-jail-dozens-of-editors-journalists-over-reports-after-pell-verdict-20190326-p517qf.
reforms—enforcement outside Victoria
Statutory provisions with extraterritorial application in Australia
10.78 The Victorian Parliament can enact provisions in Victorian legislation
which purport to have extraterritorial application if
a sufficient connection
with Victoria can be demonstrated. There are a number of these provisions in the
Crimes Act 1958
10.79 A reform option is the enactment of criminal offence provisions in the
Open Courts Act
or another statute, that permit Victorian
authorities to prosecute breaches of prohibitions and restrictions on
publication that
occur outside Victoria, but which may affect legal proceedings
within Victoria.
Interstate and territory recognition and enforcement of orders
10.80 One reform option is the further development of a system for the mutual
recognition and enforcement of Victorian orders in other
states and territories
in Australia.
10.81 This option is reflected in the
Open Courts Act
recommended that the Council of Attorneys-General be asked to consider the
desirability of developing a system for interstate
and territory recognition and
enforcement of suppression orders.75
10.82 In its response to the
Open Courts Act
, the Victorian
Government supported this recommendation and stated that at the Council of
Attorneys-General meeting on 1 December
2017, jurisdictions had agreed that the
Commonwealth Government would
undertake a stocktake of the suppression order regimes operating across
Australia.76 This was noted in the Council of Attorneys-General
communiqué from December 2017.77 The Council of Attorneys-General
communiqué from November 2018 provided an update:
Participants noted that the Australian Attorney-General’s Department
has undertaken a review of the suppression order regimes
operating at the
federal and state and territory levels. Participants also noted that the review
has highlighted that the implementation
of the former Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General’s (SCAG) model legislation in respect of suppression
orders varies across
10.83 The current status of this stocktake and any resulting developments is
unclear. Reform options would need to take account of
the work of the Council of
Attorneys-General in this area, and other developments at the federal, state and
territory level to advance
interstate and territory recognition and enforcement
International recognition of prohibitions and restrictions
10.84 A key concern for the enforcement of prohibitions and
restrictions is the effect of breaches and the courts’
inability to
properly enforce orders on the proper administration of justice and public
confidence in the courts.
10.85 Current and proposed approaches to identifying, preventing and
addressing breaches of prohibitions and restrictions by publications
Victoria are an important consideration in this review.
10.86 A further reform option is the creation of a recognition and
enforcement regime for Victorian or Australian orders in
establishing such a system, including:
• costs of establishing and maintaining the system
• logistical complexities of working with other jurisdictions
74 See, eg,
Crimes Act 1958
75 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
76 Victorian Government,
Open Courts Act
Review—Recommendations
(2018) <https://engage.vic.gov.au/download_file/8086/822>.
77 Council of Attorneys-General, ‘Communiqué—Council of
Attorneys-General’ (1 December 2017) 2.
78 Council of Attorneys-General, ‘Communiqué—Council of
Attorneys-General’ (23 November 2018) 4.
• responsibility
for establishing and maintaining the system
• the potential for the law and the courts to be brought into disrepute
by the creation and operation of an ineffective regime.
47 Should the law seek to enforce prohibitions and restrictions on
publication:
(a) in other Australian states and territories?
(b) in foreign jurisdictions?
If so, how should this be achieved?
Awareness of prohibitions and restrictions
10.87 For the purposes of the offences under the
Open Courts Act
person will be considered aware that a proceeding suppression order,
interim order or broad suppression order is
in force if a court or
tribunal has ‘electronically transmitted notice’ of it to them,
in the absence of evidence
to the contrary.79 There is no equivalent
provision in the
Open Courts Act
for common law orders made under the
courts’ inherent jurisdiction.
10.88 The prohibitions and restrictions on publication under the
Proceedings Reports Act
apply automatically, without the need for a court order,
so there are no procedures for notifying people of their application.
10.89 The common law of sub judice contempt applies automatically. There is
no issuing of a court order or formal notification process
that alerts a person
that proceedings are pending for the purposes of sub judice contempt. The
question of when proceedings are considered
pending for the purposes of sub
judice contempt is uncertain. This issue is discussed in Chapter 7.
Court notification process
10.90 There is a central, internal database of suppression orders, which
collates suppression orders made by Victorian courts. The
Supreme Court provides
some information about its notification process in a practice note.80 The
Open Courts Act
described the process of notification generally
across the courts:
Briefly, each court either directly notified media organisations that had
already expressed an interest in the proceeding in question
or communicated the
terms of orders through an email system to the email addresses of news media
organisations that had registered
with the court that they would like to receive
such notices.81
10.91 Currently, there are no statistical records of notifications of
10.92 There are numerous issues with this process, including:
• People cannot independently check whether a suppression order exists
in a particular case.
• There are time delays between the making of an order in court and the
uploading of the order to the database.
Open Courts Act 2013
80 Supreme Court of Victoria,
Practice Note No 9 of 2017: Notifications
Open Courts Act 2013
, 30 January 2017.
81 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
[291]–[292] <https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
staff may not have the time or resources to promptly upload orders to the
• Court staff who are tasked with uploading or distributing orders may
• It is unclear how courts determine who is permitted to access
suppression orders.
• It is difficult to track who has been notified of orders and other
10.93 A lack of clarity in notification processes can also challenge
authorities seeking to prosecute people for alleged breaches
of orders. The DPP
has commented on the difficulty of establishing that a person had the knowledge
or recklessness required to prove
an offence under
sections 23
Open Courts Act
, when a person is not on the courts’ email distribution
list by which media representatives are notified of suppression orders.83
Open Courts Act
noted that while this approach appeared to have
worked reasonably well for major media organisations, an ‘increasing
of individuals and organisations are not covered by this
10.94 Media organisations have described the timeliness of notifications as
poor.85 Michael Bachelard, Investigations Editor of
and foreign
Sydney Morning Herald
, noted that the
courts’ email distribution process was ‘problematic because the text
of suppression orders were not easily
of the email attaching a suppression order misspelt critical details’.86
Mr Bachelard
also said it was difficult to keep track of limits on publication
in individual cases because a number of suppression orders were
received each
day from the courts, with multiple communications issued where orders were
Possible reforms—notifying the
10.95 One reform option is the establishment of a searchable and/or public
Open Courts Act
recommended the creation of a:
central, publicly accessible register of suppression orders made by
all Victorian courts and tribunals containing details
of their terms and
duration and, to the extent reasonably possible in the circumstances the reasons
for them ...88
10.96 Public access to a register of suppression orders is currently
available in South Australia.89 The Supreme Court of Tasmania
has a public
includes all suppression orders issued
in Tasmania.
10.97 At the time of writing, some suppression orders on the Supreme Court of
Tasmania’s database cannot be downloaded, either
because there is no link
to the order or a note saying ‘refer to Registrar’. The website
includes the date when orders
were rescinded.91
10.98 In submissions and consultations for the
Open Courts Act
Mr Bachelard, the Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance, barrister Haroon
Hassan and academic Jason Bosland called for a searchable
notification
system.92 Mr Hassan commented that if transparency was an important value,
courts need to transition to a more
public notification system instead
of emailing orders to undisclosed media groups.93 Australia’s
83 Ibid 70 [267].
84 Ibid 117 [470].
85 Ibid 76 [288].
86 Ibid 77 [291].
87 Ibid 77 [291].
88 Ibid 10.
Evidence Act 1929
90 Supreme Court of Tasmania, ‘Suppression Orders’ (Web Page, 20
March 2019) <
www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/for_the_media/
suppression_orders>.
92 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 77 [291]–[292]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>. 93 Ibid 77
Right to Know Coalition recommended a searchable database in its 2008 report
on suppression orders and media access to court documents
and information.94
10.99 The Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance also asked that
consideration be given to making notifications quicker once orders
10.100 Key questions that would need to be addressed in the design and
operation of any database include:
• Who should be responsible for designing, developing and maintaining
the database?
• Should the database be public?
• Should the database be searchable?
• Should the database be digital?
• Should the database be online?
• If the database is searchable, how should it secure sensitive
information in orders, such as the identity of police informers?
• If the database is searchable and sensitive information database is
anonymised, how could people searching the database seek
proper notification of
• If the database is not public, what processes should be in place to
determine who is granted access, and why?
Open Courts Act
suggested that a potential body to
operate a central, publicly accessible register of suppression orders was Court
Services Victoria.96
10.102 A further issue is how to define ‘the media’ for the
purposes of providing access to orders. The
Open Courts Act
defines ‘news
media organisation’, but that definition does not determine who would be
permitted to access a database
of orders that is not publicly available. A news
media organisation is defined under the
Open Courts Act
• a commercial enterprise that engages in the business of broadcasting
or publishing news
• a public broadcasting service that engages in the dissemination of
news through a public news medium.97
10.103 This definition does not sufficiently cover all interested parties
who may seek access to suppression orders. Examples
of other parties who may
be interested in accessing suppression orders include:
• an author writing a book
• an academic researcher
• a film or television production company.
Public versions of orders
10.104 Australia’s Right to Know Coalition recommended in 2008 that
courts could consider drafting a brief, public version of
the order to prevent
the publication of sensitive information, such as the identity of a police
informer. There would then be two
• ‘a neutral order for public display to the effect that
a suppression order has been made and details are
available from the
judge’s associate or the court registry or other appropriate
94 Prue Innes, Australia’s Right to Know Coalition,
Suppression Orders and the Media’s Access to Court Documents and
Information
(13 November 2008) 91.
95 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 77 [292]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>. 96 Ibid 117 [469] n
Open Courts Act 2013
(definition of ‘news media
organisation’).
detailed order stating what is prohibited, which should be prepared for the
10.105 A limitation of this approach is the burden it places on judicial
officers and court staff of drafting and uploading two orders
prohibition and restriction on publication.
Reminders of automatic prohibitions
10.106 A possible reform may be for courts to issue reminders to the media
of what information can and cannot generally be published
such as the automatic prohibitions under
Proceedings Reports Act
10.107 In a 2008 report, Australia’s Right to Know Coalition noted that
it relied on emails of the details from suppression
orders distributed to the
media by the New South Wales Supreme Court’s media office, which often
included judges’ reminders
emails ensured the media were aware of statutory prohibitions or that matters
in the absence of the jury could not be reported, without requiring
formal orders.99 Australia’s Right to Know Coalition felt
that judges
reminding the media of legal prohibitions without making orders was helpful, and
appeared to be used in New South Wales
and Queensland.100
48 What processes should be in place for notifying or reminding the media
and the wider community of the existence of prohibitions
and restrictions on
publication, including court orders and the operation of automatic statutory
provisions?
Monitoring compliance with prohibitions and
restrictions
10.108 Law enforcement agencies often become aware of alleged offences
through reports to police or other agencies by the victims
offending, prompting investigations and potential criminal charges which are
then pursued through the courts. By contrast,
an alleged breach of a suppression
order may have no direct victim whose complaint will trigger an
investigation.
10.109 The Commission has limited information about how compliance with
prohibitions and restrictions on publication is currently
monitored by courts
and other agencies. There appear to be no clear procedures for monitoring
compliance.
10.110 Monitoring compliance with court-ordered prohibitions and restrictions
on publication is challenging because there is a lack
• clarity around who is responsible for monitoring publications to
ensure they are compliant
• public awareness of prohibitions and restrictions
• clear processes for monitoring compliance.
10.111 These issues contribute to an accountability gap and may result in the
burden for monitoring compliance unduly falling on
the people who are
mostly directly affected by their breach, such as victims of crime.
98 Prue Innes, Australia’s Right to Know Coalition,
Suppression Orders and the Media’s Access to Court Documents and
Information
(13 November 2008) 90.
99 Ibid 87.
100 Ibid 91–2.
10.112 In the
Open Courts Act
, the parents of a child
complainant in a sexual assault case reported that:
no information on legislation or processes relevant to the desirability of
a suppression order was provided to them to protect
their child at the initial
stages, including the bail hearing of the persons charged. The consequent
publication of unnecessary
and extremely distressing detail not only
resulted in the identification of the child in the area but added
substantially
to the extreme trauma already being experienced by the young
person. It was not until they made their own inquiries as to what could
done that any action was taken by the Office of Public Prosecutions. By
then, it was too late to be of any real assistance
to the child. ...
They said that they had been expected to assume the burden of monitoring
breaches of suppression orders, as the DPP [Director of
Public Prosecutions]
did not take a proactive role in ensuring that suppression orders were
obeyed. This added to their suffering.101
10.113 The DPP acknowledged that most victims lacked prior knowledge about
statutory prohibitions on publication and suppression orders,
and the Office of
Public Prosecutions provided information to victims on a ‘case by case
Possible reforms—monitoring compliance
10.114 One reform option is to specify a process for monitoring compliance
with prohibitions and restrictions on publication and to
identify those
responsible for monitoring compliance, which may be an existing or new body.
10.115 This could include, for example, the DPP undertaking internet searches
to identify any prejudicial publications that could
affect a trial, and then
requesting the information be taken down until the trial is complete.103
However, as recognised by the Victorian
Court of Appeal, such strategies would
depend on requests being complied with and the removal of the material being
10.116 In addition, such monitoring processes may impose a
significant administrative burden, and there are also questions
whose responsibility it should be. Academic Jacqueline
Horan has suggested that lawyers should be proactively screening the internet
for prejudicial pre-trial publicity about their clients,
noting that the costs
of a potential aborted trial should motivate this proactive approach.105 In this
context, Horan has suggested
that a more cost- effective approach would be for
the creation of an independent monitoring role in Australian jurisdictions to
routine screening of online material, which could then be dealt with
appropriately by the courts.106
10.117 However, tThe DPP may not have the resources to conduct such
monitoring, or be the appropriate agency, as its core functions
prosecution rather than investigation or monitoring.
10.118 In developing reforms in this area, the roles and resources of
existing courts and agencies are critical to assessing whether
a monitoring role
would be appropriate and feasible. It is also important to consider how a
responsible agency would monitor
publications about cases online, given
the nature and volume of online publication.
101 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 71–2 [273]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>. 102 Ibid 72 [274].
103 Virginia Bell, ‘How to Preserve the Integrity of Jury Trials in a
Mass Media Age’
Judicial Review
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
105 Jacqueline Horan,
Juries in the 21st Century
(The Federation
Press, 2012) 192. 106 Ibid 193–4.
49 Should there be a system for monitoring compliance with prohibitions and
restrictions on publication? If so:
(a) How should such compliance be monitored?
(b) Who should be responsible for monitoring such compliance?
Responsibility for instituting proceedings
10.119 The responsibility for instituting proceedings for breaches of
prohibitions and restrictions on publication varies across the
law of contempt,
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
10.120 Prosecutions for breach of orders made under the
Open Courts Act
indictable offences that are triable summarily,107 and charges are filed by
Victoria Police.
10.121 A prosecution for breach of the statutory prohibitions under the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
can only be commenced with the consent of the
DPP.108 Contravention of a prohibition under the
Judicial Proceedings Reports
is a summary criminal offence,109 with charges filed by Victoria Police.
10.122 Proceedings for common law contempt are instituted by way of summons
or originating motion in either the Supreme Court110 or
the County Court,111
including for sub judice contempt. Depending on the type of contempt, the
summons or originating motion may
be filed by:
• the Attorney-General112
• the DPP113
• the Court, which may direct the Prothonotary in the Supreme Court or
the Registrar in the County Court to initiate proceedings.114
The ‘prosecutorial gap’
10.123 In the
Open Courts Act
, former Chief Justice of Victoria
Marilyn Warren expressed concern about a ‘seeming reluctance to prosecute
of statutory prohibitions or suppression orders, even where the
courts have referred them.115 Criminal defence lawyers consulted
through the Law
Institute of Victoria agreed there was a ‘prosecutorial gap’.116
10.124 The DPP noted complexities with proving breaches of prohibitions and
restrictions, particularly where it was unclear whether
an accused knew of the
existence or scope of a prohibition. The DPP also commented on the difficulty of
meeting the required standard
of proof for contempt and the complexity of
contempt proceedings.117
10.125 This ‘prosecutorial gap’ may be related to a lack of
clarity around who is responsible for monitoring
compliance with
prohibitions and restrictions on publication and the processes for doing so, as
discussed earlier in this paper.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.06.
R v Metal Trades Employers’ Association; Ex parte Amalgamated
Engineering Union (Australian Section)
[1951] HCA 3
(1951) 82 CLR 208.
Public Prosecutions Act 1994
s 22(1)(ba)(iii).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.07;
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.07.
115 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 70 [266]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
117 Ibid 70 [267].
reforms—instituting proceedings
10.126 A reform option is the specification of a process for monitoring
compliance with prohibitions and restrictions on publication,
identification of those responsible for monitoring compliance. This issue and
relevant reform options are discussed earlier
in this paper.
10.127 Another reform option is the removal of the requirement to seek the
consent of the DPP to prosecute breaches of the statutory
prohibitions and
restrictions under the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
10.128 This option may simplify proceedings for a breach of statutory
prohibitions in the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
, which could then be
directly instituted by Victoria Police filing a criminal charge in the
Magistrates’ Court.
10.129 There are currently different authorities that can institute
proceedings for contempt, including the Attorney-General, the
DPP and the
Supreme and County courts. It is not always clear when individuals can institute
proceedings for contempt.
10.130 One reform option is the potential restatement of the law of contempt
in statute. Provisions in a contempt statute may specify
who can institute
proceedings for different manifestations of contempt.
50 Who should be responsible for instituting proceedings for breach of
prohibitions and restrictions on publication?
51 Should the ‘DPP consent’ requirements under the
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) be retained?
Fault elements to prove breach of
prohibitions
10.131 The terms of reference ask the Commission to consider the
appropriateness of fault elements that must be proved to establish
breaches of
prohibitions and restrictions on publication under the law of contempt, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
. These elements vary
across the different laws considered in this chapter.
10.132 The extent to which members of the public and the media are
informed, or should be informed, about prohibitions and
restrictions on
publication is relevant to establishing fault for breaches of these laws.
Awareness of prohibitions and restrictions
on publication is discussed
earlier in this chapter.
10.133 Under the
Open Courts Act
, a person must not contravene a proceeding
suppression order, interim order or broad suppression order if they know the
in force, or are reckless as to whether the order is in
10.134 The statutory prohibitions and restrictions under the
Proceedings Reports Act
do not specify a required fault element, such as
knowledge or recklessness, requiring only that the prohibited information be
10.135 The fault elements in the law of sub judice contempt, including
whether sub judice contempt is a strict liability offence,
are discussed in
detail in Chapter 7.
Open Courts Act 2013
10.136 Contempt
proceedings may be initiated where a person has breached an order issued by the
Supreme Court in its inherent jurisdiction
or a common law pseudonym order. The
fault elements for disobedience contempt are discussed in Chapter 6 of this
Proving fault elements
10.137 The DPP has described the complexities with proving the fault elements
of the various prohibitions and restrictions on publication,
• where it was unclear whether a person accused of breaching a
prohibition or restriction had knowledge about its existence
• difficulties with establishing knowledge and recklessness under
sections 23
Open Courts Act
where a person was not on the email
distribution list by which suppression orders are circulated to the media,
as noted by
the DPP in the
Open Courts Act
• difficulties with meeting the standard of proof in contempt
proceedings
• the complexity of contempt proceedings, particularly civil
proceedings.120
Notification processes
10.138 Under the
Open Courts Act
, a person is taken to be aware
that a proceeding suppression order or broad suppression order is in force if
tribunal has electronically transmitted notice of the order to
them, in the absence of evidence to the contrary.121
10.139 The courts’ existing notification procedures for certain orders,
such as orders under the
Open Courts Act
, may make it more likely that a
journalist or media organisation would be aware of prohibitions and restrictions
on publication.
A member of the public is unlikely to have notice of these
orders unless they are on the courts’ email list for notification,
happen to be in court when orders are issued.
10.140 There are no notification procedures for the application of automatic
statutory prohibitions and restrictions like those under
Proceedings Reports Act
10.141 An important consideration is whether members of the public who
publish information about a case but have no knowledge of,
or access to,
information about prohibitions and restrictions on publication, should be liable
for breach of those orders or provisions.
Additionally, there are questions about whether notification procedures can
be improved to ensure better awareness of prohibitions
and restrictions, and to
monitor when a person or organisation has been notified.
Possible reforms—fault elements
Clarification of fault elements in statute
10.142 One reform option is the specification of required fault elements for
each offence in statute. The
Open Courts Act
currently specifies knowledge or
recklessness as fault elements required to establish an offence under that
statute.122
10.143 Alternatively, statutory provisions could be created that expressly
state whether offences are absolute or strict liability
119 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 70 [267]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
Open Courts Act 2013
(2). 122 Ibid
strict liability offence is a criminal offence which does not require any
proof of mens rea (a guilty mind), but
to which the common law defence of
honest and reasonable mistake of
fact applies.123 An absolute liability offence is a criminal offence that
does not require proof of any mental element or intention
on the part of the
accused.124
10.145 Neither the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
expressly state that the offences under those statutes are strict or absolute
liability offences.
10.146 One reform option is the restatement in statute of whether certain
offences are strict or absolute liability. Such a reform
would help to
• what intent a person must have had in publishing information, to have
committed an offence
• whether a person who committed an offence may argue as a defence that
they made an honest and reasonable mistake of fact,
which is discussed later in
this chapter.
10.147 Another reform option is the restatement in statute of the law of sub
judice contempt. A key consideration is whether any
such statute should
include a provision expressly stating whether sub judice contempt is a
strict or absolute liability offence.
Harmonisation
10.148 A further reform option is whether fault elements for prohibitions and
restrictions on publication can or should be defined
Open Courts Act
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
, or a general statute to clarify and unify
fault elements across the different areas of the law of contempt.
Amendments to notification processes
10.149 There are a number of issues with current notification processes and
potential options for reform that are discussed earlier
in this chapter.
52 Should liability arise where there is a lack of awareness of the
relevant prohibition or restriction on publication?
Defences and exceptions
10.150 The Commission is asked to consider defences which may be available to
a person who has allegedly breached prohibitions or
restrictions on publication
under the law of sub judice contempt, a common law order, the
Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
Statutory defences and exceptions
10.151 Under the
Open Courts Act
, there are no specified defences
to breach of a suppression order. The defences currently available under the
judice contempt and the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
described in Chapters 7 and 9, respectively.
123 LexisNexis,
Encyclopaedic Australian Legal Dictionary
(definition
of ‘strict liability offence’).
124 Ibid (definition of ‘absolute liability offence’).
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
contain provisions that
exempt certain agencies and individuals from liability for offences under those
10.153 Under the
Open Courts Act
, a proceeding suppression order, interim
order or broad suppression order does not prevent a person from disclosing
information if
the disclosure is in the course of performing functions or duties
or exercising powers in a public official capacity:
• in connection with the conduct of any proceeding or the recovery or
enforcement of any penalty imposed in a proceeding, or
• in compliance with any procedure adopted by a court or tribunal for
informing a person of the existence and content of a proceeding
suppression
order, interim order or broad suppression order.125
10.154 The prohibitions in
section 3(1)
Judicial Proceedings Reports
do not apply to the:
• printing or distribution of documents for use in connection with any
judicial proceedings or to persons concerned in the proceedings
• printing or publishing of any notice or report pursuant to a
direction of the court
• publication of material in a bona fide series of law reports or any
publication of a technical character intended for circulation
among members of
the legal or medical professions.126
Section 4(1D)
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
provides that
the prohibition in
section 4(1A)
does not operate to prohibit a disclosure of
information to a prescribed person or body for the purpose of enabling the
body to perform a prescribed statutory function.127
10.156 Appropriate information sharing is a critical issue, given the
sensitive nature of some information connected with court cases.
There is a need
to ensure that the privacy of members of the community engaged in court
proceedings is respected and people are not
subjected to undue trauma or
embarrassment by poor information-sharing processes.
Defence of honest and reasonable mistake of
10.157 If an offence is a strict liability offence, an accused person may be
able to argue the common law defence of honest and reasonable
10.158 The defence of honest and reasonable mistake of fact provides that an
accused will not be guilty of the offence if they ‘acted
under an honest
and reasonable mistake as to the existence of facts which, if true, would have
made [the] act innocent’.128
Possible reforms—defences and
Publication by a victim, or with a victim’s consent
10.159 A reform option is the creation of defences and exceptions to
publication where a victim has published, or has consented to
the publication
of, information that would otherwise constitute a breach of a prohibition or
restriction on publication. There have
been recent amendments to other Victorian
laws, which have provided some scope for adult victims to consent to
publications which
would otherwise have been unlawful.129 This issue is
discussed in Chapter 9.
Online intermediaries
10.160 A further reform option is the creation of statutory defences for
online intermediaries to be available where they had no control
over prohibited
or restricted information published on their platforms.
Open Courts Act 2013
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
He Kaw Teh v R
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
, 532–3 (Gibbs CJ).
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
10.161 In its report on the law of contempt by publication, the New South
Wales Law Reform Commission recommended establishing a defence
for internet
service providers and content hosts charged with sub judice contempt to escape
... if they can establish that they had no control over the content placed on
the Internet which contained the prejudicial material
and that they either did
not know the content contained the material or, having become aware of this,
took all reasonable steps to
prevent it being published.130
10.162 As noted earlier in this chapter, reform options regarding
online intermediaries need to consider the existing
regulation of internet
content hosts and internet service providers under Commonwealth law,
particularly the
Broadcasting Services Act
Exception for information-sharing agencies
10.163 Another reform option is the creation of exceptions for certain
agencies and individuals that are required to share information
in a manner
which might otherwise constitute a breach of a prohibition or restriction on
publication.
10.164 Such exceptions already exist under the
Judicial Proceedings Reports
Open Courts Act
Open Courts Act
provides that a proceeding
suppression order or interim order does not prevent a person from disclosing
information if the disclosure
is in the course of performing functions or
duties, or exercising powers, in a public official capacity.131
10.165 If certain types of common law contempt are restated in
statute, a key consideration is whether a provision like
those in the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
should be included in the
new provisions to facilitate necessary information sharing between relevant
10.166 Reforms in this area require careful consideration of which agencies
and individuals should be permitted to share information
and how such
information should be shared.
Clarification of absolute or strict liability offences
10.167 Neither the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
Open Courts Act
expressly state that the offences under those statutes are strict or absolute
liability offences.
10.168 A reform option is the restatement in statute of whether certain
offences for breach of a prohibition or restriction on publication
are strict or
absolute liability offences. This would help to clarify whether a person alleged
to have committed an offence may argue
as a defence that they made an honest
and reasonable mistake of fact.
10.169 A key consideration is whether any restatement of the law of contempt
should include the creation of a provision that expressly
states whether
contempt is a strict or absolute liability offence. Strict and absolute
liability offences and the defence of
honest and reasonable mistake of
fact are described earlier in this chapter.
130 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
(Report No 100, 2003) 34 [2.65].
Open Courts Act 2013
53 Are the existing exceptions for information-sharing agencies
appropriate? Alternatively, do they inhibit information-sharing? If
should these barriers be addressed?
54 What defences, if any, should be available to people who have published
information which is prohibited or restricted?
Penalties and remedies
10.170 The Commission is asked to consider the adequacy of existing penalties
for breaches of orders prohibiting or restricting the
publication of information
• fines and imprisonment for breaches of orders made under the
• fines and imprisonment for breaches of statutory prohibitions in the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act
• penalties and remedies for contempt for breach of common law orders
made by the Supreme Court exercising its inherent jurisdiction132
• penalties and remedies for contempt for breach of an injunction made
by the County Court exercising the Supreme Court’s
inherent jurisdiction
to grant an injunction in a criminal proceeding restraining a person from
publishing any material, or doing
any other thing, in order to ensure the fair
and proper conduct of the proceeding133
• penalties and remedies for contempt for breach of common law
pseudonym orders134
• apologies to the court for alleged contempts of court.
Appendix E provides a comparative table illustrating the fragmented nature of
contempt- related offences, penalties and prosecution
procedures by reference to
some of the more frequently used and major related statutory offences. Many
other statutes also contain
contempt-related offences. However for the purposes
of this consultation paper the Appendix is limited to the most major and
10.171 An individual who knowingly or recklessly breaches a proceeding
suppression order, interim order, or an order prohibiting publication
specified material made under the
Open Courts Act
, is liable for 600 penalty
units or up to five years’ imprisonment, or both, while a corporation is
liable for 3000 penalty
10.172 A contravention of the prohibitions under the
Judicial Proceedings
Reports Act
is a summary criminal offence.136 For an individual, the maximum
penalty is a fine of not more than 20 penalty units, and/or not
more than four
months imprisonment. For a corporation the maximum penalty is a fine of not more
than 50 penalty units.137
10.173 Those who breach a suppression order made by the Supreme Court, or the
County Court exercising the Supreme Court’s inherent
prosecuted for an offence under sections 23 or 27 of the Open Courts Act.138
Similarly, breach of a pseudonym
order is dealt with under the common law.
Courts retain their common law powers to deal with such a breach as a contempt
of court,139
including contempt by disobedience of a court order.
133 Ibid s 25.
134 Ibid s 7(d)(i). These are referred to in the
Open Courts Act
as an order
or decision that ‘conceals the identity of a person by restricting the
way the person is referred to in open
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Open Courts Act 2013
10.174 In prescribing
available penalties for contempt, the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure)
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
not distinguish between types of contempt. The Rules afford the court
considerable discretion to determine whether a punishment
should be imposed for
contempt and what form it should take.140 For example:
• Where the court finds a person guilty of contempt of court, the court
may punish the contempt by committal to prison or fine
or both.141
• Where the contemnor is a corporation, the court may punish for
contempt by sequestration or fine or both.142
• Where the court imposes a fine, it may commit, or further commit, the
contemnor to prison until the fine is paid.143
• The court may make an order for punishment on terms, including a
suspension of punishment.144
• Where a person has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment for
contempt, the court retains the discretion to order their
discharge before
the end of the term.145
10.175 The role of apologies in contempt and the application of the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) to findings of contempt are important issues
relating to penalties and remedies, which are discussed in Chapter 3 of this
Injunctions
10.176 The court has an inherent power to grant a quia timet injunction, an
equitable remedy which restrains threatened or imminent
wrongful acts.146 This
injunction is an available remedy to prevent prejudicial publication or provide
for the retrieval of already
published material.147
10.177 The threatened publication must, as a matter of practical reality,
have a tendency to prejudice or embarrass particular legal
proceedings.148 Chief
Justice Warren and Acting Justice of Appeal Byrne noted that such injunctions
are rarely issued, citing the
United Kingdom case
P v Liverpool Daily Post and Echo Newspapers plc
it is the wise and settled practice of the courts not to grant injunctions
restraining the commission of a criminal act (and contempt
of court is a
criminal or quasi-criminal act) unless the penalties available under the
criminal law have proved to be inadequate
to deter commission of the
offences.149
section 320
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), which does not
specify a maximum term of imprisonment for the common law offence of
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(1).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(2).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(3).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.11(4);
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.11(4).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.12; see
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
146 Judicial College of Victoria, ‘Broad Suppression Orders’,
Open Courts Bench Book
(Web Page, 1 December 2013) 6.3
<www.judicialcollege. vic.edu.au>.
Victoria v Australian Building Construction Employees’ and
Builders’ Labourers’ Federation
[1982] HCA 31
(1982) 152 CLR 25
, 42 (Gibbs
General Television Corporation Pty Ltd v DPP (Vic)
[2008] VSCA 49
(2008) 19 VR 68
General Television Corporation Pty Ltd v DPP (Vic)
[2008] VSCA 49
(2008) 19 VR
, 79 [36]. For a discussion of Victoria’s use of general and
proceedings suppression orders and general precautionary
orders, see Jason
Bosland, ‘Restraining “Extraneous” Prejudicial Publicity:
Victoria and New South Wales
[2018] UNSWLawJl 43
(2018) 41(4)
University of
New South Wales Law Journal
, 1279–1290. See the Court
of Appeal’s discussion of quia timet injunctions:
News Digital Media
Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
, 261–3 [48]–[56] (Warren CJ
and Byrne AJA).
P v Liverpool Daily Post and Echo Newspapers plc
[1991] 2 AC 370
381–2, cited in
Attorney-General v Random House Group Ltd
EMLR 233 [28].
10.178 The Victorian Court of Appeal has likened a suppression order made in
the court’s inherent jurisdiction to a quia timet
injunction in that they
both prevent a threatened contempt.150 However, a suppression order is not
subject to the same procedural
restraints and instead is made when the court is
satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that an order is necessary to
protect the court’s own process from risk.151
10.179 Jason Bosland reported that in Victoria, there are no publicly
available cases where injunctions have been granted in equity
circumstances.152 Bosland noted that since 2004 the Supreme Court has instead
relied on its inherent jurisdiction, and the
County and Magistrates’
Courts rely on their statutory powers, to grant broad suppression orders to
achieve the same purpose
as an injunction to restrain a threatened
contempt.153
Take-down orders
10.180 Victorian courts can order the removal of prohibited or restricted
material that is published within Australia,154 including
material published
online before a trial. These orders are commonly called ‘internet
orders’ or ‘take-down orders’.
The Commission uses the term
‘take-down orders’.
10.181 Take-down orders have been considered an effective option to ensure
the courts are doing all that they can to ensure a fair
trial.155 On the other
hand, they are criticised as being futile, incapable of holding back the
‘tide of publications’,156
and that the court should not slip into
the role of ‘King Canute.’157
10.182 Take-down orders are usually directed to a particular website and
offending content.158
The power to make take-down orders was expressed by Justice Kaye in
Mokbel (Ruling No 3)
In the course of argument, I postulated to Mr Houghton an example of
a case where a person erects a sign on the person’s
private property
which would have the potential to prejudice the fair trial of an accused
person. Mr Houghton submitted
that this court would not have the power to
prevent the continued publication of that sign by making an order that it
removed. In my view, he was unable to advance, when challenged, any adequate
reason why the court’s power would not extend
in a necessary case thus
far. Indeed, in my view, it would make a mockery of the inherent jurisdiction
of this court, to protect
the right of an accused person to a fair trial, if
this court did not have the power, not only to prevent anticipatory breaches
the right of a fair trial, but indeed continuing and ongoing such
breaches.159
10.183 Take-down orders are relatively new, as traditional media publications
were fleeting and accessing archived print material,
such as at a library, was
more difficult than searching for an article published online.160
10.184 The law surrounding the making of take-down orders is developing, but
has been considered in Victoria and New South Wales.
The courts’
considerations when determining whether to make a take-down order include:
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
(Warren CJ and Byrne AJA), citing
General Television Corporation Pty Ltd v
[2008] VSCA 49
(2008) 19 VR 68
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
(Warren CJ and Byrne AJA);
General Television Corporation Pty Ltd v DPP (Vic)
[2008] VSCA 49
(2008) 19 VR 68
DPP (Vic) v Williams
[2004] VSC 209
(2004) 10 VR 348
152 Jason Bosland, ‘Restraining “Extraneous” Prejudicial
Publicity: Victoria and New South Wales Compared’
[2018] UNSWLawJl 43
(2018) 41(4)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions v Brady
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
156 Sophie Dawson and Paul Karp, ‘Holding Back the Tide: King Canute
Orders and Internet Publications’
(2012) 30(4)
Communications Law
East Sussex County Council v Stedman
[2010] 1 FCR(UK) 567, [92];
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248 (Warren
CJ and Byrne AJA), 270–1 [87].
R v Rich (Ruling No 7)
[2008] VSC 437
News Digital Media Pty
Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248.
R v Mokbel (Ruling No 3)
[2009] VSC 653
News Digital Media
Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
160 Sophie Dawson and Paul Karp, ‘Holding Back the Tide: King Canute
Orders and Internet Publications’
(2012) 30(4)
Communications Law
• when the original publication was published and the currency of the
• whether the article is forced upon a visitor to the website
• the permanency of the publication and whether a cached version would
remain available even if taken down
• if the material is taken down from a more reliable website subject to
the take-down order, whether more obscure publications
may be given
greater prominence in a search result
• the likelihood that jurors, subject to criminal sanction, will not
undertake research about the trial and comply with jury
• the impossibility of identifying all websites which might have
published the material, some of which would be unidentifiable
or controlled from
overseas.161
10.185 A majority of the Victorian Court of Appeal overturned a take-down
order because:
• The articles in question were not current
• The articles were not forced upon a visitor
• The articles were unlikely to be accessed inadvertently
• Jurors were unlikely to ignore jury directions
• The articles would remain cached even if taken down.162
R v Rich (Ruling No 7)
, Justice Lasry refused an application
for a take-down order because the article in question was not current and there
was no surrounding
publicity at the time, potential jurors would be unlikely to
come across the articles and potential jurors would be unlikely to ignore
directions not to make their own enquiries about cases.163
Possible reforms—penalties and remedies Restatement in statute and
harmonisation of penalties
Open Courts Act
noted that if the enforcement of
prohibitions and restrictions
on publication is to possess credibility, attention must be directed to
developing a consistent approach to sanctions for non-compliance
across related
areas of the law.164
10.188 A key question for this reference is whether penalties for breach of
orders prohibiting and restricting publication can and
should be defined in the
Open Courts Act
, or a general statute, to clarify and unify them.
Power to make take-down orders
10.189 The Victorian Court of Appeal and New South Wales Court of Appeal have
acknowledged the futility of attempting to control internet
publications and
have emphasised the ongoing role of sub judice contempt.165
10.190 The Law Commission of England and Wales, in its consideration of
whether courts should have a temporary removal power, noted
arguments raised in
consultation, including that the power:
• would create an impractical burden for online publishers to find and
take down archived material related to a case and then
reinstate it, as well as
issues with cached pages
• would be ineffective because of the global reach of the media
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
Digital Australia and New Zealand Pty Ltd v Ibrahim
[2012] NSWCCA 125
(2012) 83 NSWLR 52
R v Rich (Ruling No 7)
[2008] VSC 437.
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
[93–4]. The take-down order was made in the context of intense media
publicity around the accused, Tony Mokbel. A Google
accused’s name generated 522,000 results: 268 [79]. The take-down order
was also drafted so as to prevent the
media outlets from publishing any future
material about the accused.
R v Rich (Ruling No 7)
[2008] VSC 437
164 Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 111 [450]
<https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-act-review>.
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
Digital Australia and New Zealand Pty Ltd v Ibrahim
[2012] NSWCCA 125
(2012) 83 NSWLR 52
• could be costly for the media, who would have to be represented in
court when applications for an order are made
• could extend the length of proceedings and delay the trial
• ignores the important social, historical and research value of
historic online material and prevents members of the public
from accessing the
information
• is incompatible with the right to freedom of expression under Article
European Convention on Human Rights
10.191 The argument that take-down orders are futile rests on the judicial
view that jurors should be trusted to carry out their duties
and decide a case
based only on the evidence before them.167 If the opposite view were taken, a
successful criminal trial in a high-profile
case would be near
impossible.168
10.192 An aspect of making take-down orders is the monitoring and
identification of prejudicial publications. The Honourable Justice
Bell, writing extra-curially, suggested steps that could be taken before a
trial, including:169
• The DPP might carry out internet searches to identify any prejudicial
publications that could affect a trial, and then request
that they be taken
down from local websites until the trial is complete.
• The Court Information Officer could make a request to the local
website.170
10.193 The above strategies depend on the requests being complied with and
there being utility in taking down the material.171 The
issues with identifying
and monitoring compliance with prohibitions and restrictions on publication are
discussed earlier in this
10.194 Other jurisdictions have considered the role of suppression orders and
take-down orders in preventing and taking down online
publications.
• The New Zealand Law Commission (NZ Commission) recommended new
statutory provisions for the court to make both temporary suppression
prohibiting publication of information leading up to and during the trial, and
take-down orders to apply to information already
publicly available which
breaches those suppression orders.172
• The NZ Commission suggested the burden should lie on Crown
prosecutors to make enquiries about what material is in the public
• The NZ Commission also noted that take-down orders alone are not a
complete solution but go some way towards ‘minimising
the impact of an
offending publication’ by deterring users and preventing the material from
being lawfully disseminated within
the jurisdiction.174
• Conversely, in Ireland, the High Court held that there is no duty on
the Director of Public Prosecutions to monitor the internet
for prejudicial
publications, and that juries should be trusted to exclude prejudicial
publications from their minds.175
• In considering a temporary power to order that material published
before legal proceedings were pending be taken down, the
Law Commission of
England and Wales recommended that:
166 For full list of arguments against the power, see Law Commission (England
and Wales),
Contempt of Court (1): Juror Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report, 2013) 32–4 [2.107].
167 This was the approach of the Court in
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
, 266 [68]. 168
R v Dupas (No 3)
[2009] VSCA 202
(2009) 198 A
Gilbert v R
(2000) 201 CLR 414.
169 Virginia Bell, ‘How to Preserve the Integrity of Jury Trials in a
Mass Media Age’
Judicial Review
170 This was done in
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd v District Court of
[2004] NSWCA 324
(2004) 61 NSWLR 344.
News Digital Media Pty Ltd v Mokbel
[2010] VSCA 51
(2010) 30 VR 248
172 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Contempt in Modern New Zealand
Issues Paper No 36 (May 2014) 34–6.
173 Law Commission (New Zealand),
Reforming the Law of Contempt of Court:
A Modern Statute
(Report No 140, 2017) 54 [2.90].
175 Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Contempt of Court and Other Offences
and Torts Involving the Administration of Justice
(Issues Paper No 10, 2016)
Byrne v DPP
[2010] 2 IR 461 [37].
Attorney-General must put the publication on notice of the offending content
2) the procedure to do so be formalised in legislation
3) an option for appealing such an order be available.176
55 Are the existing penalties and remedies for breaches of prohibitions and
restrictions on publication appropriate? If not, what
penalties and remedies
should be provided?
56 Should penalties for breaches of common law suppression orders and
pseudonym orders be set out in statutory provisions?
57 Should a court be able to issue an order for internet materials to be
taken down (‘take-down order’)? If so:
(a) Should the process for seeking and making such orders be embodied in
legislation?
(b) Who should be responsible for monitoring the internet (and social
media) for potential ‘take-down’ material?
(c) Who should be responsible for making applications for take-down
(d) Should such applications be conducted on an adversarial or ex parte
Legacy suppression orders
10.195 The terms of reference include a request for the Commission to review
and make recommendations about existing suppression orders
made before the
commencement of the
Open Courts Act
which do not contain an end date. In this
reference, these orders are called ‘legacy suppression orders’.
Open Courts Act
came into effect on 1 December 2013.177 Orders
made under the new statute are required to be of limited or specified duration.
reference considers legacy suppression orders made prior to the
Open Courts
• provisions in the courts’ statutes that have since been
repealed178
• the common law.179
10.197 Suppression orders made under the repealed provisions continue to
apply if the orders were in force when those sections
were repealed.180
Open Courts Act
was required to review various
aspects of the Act and it therefore did not make recommendations regarding
legacy suppression orders.
176 Law Commission (England and Wales),
Contempt of Court (1): Juror
Misconduct and Internet Publications
(Report No 340, 2013) [2.152], [2.166],
Open Courts Act 2013
Supreme Court Act 1986
(Vic) ss 18, 19;
County Court Act
(Vic) ss 80–80AA;
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
s 126 was repealed by the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic) s 51. While the amending provisions in
Open Courts Act
were repealed by section 67 of the same Act one year
after the Act’s commencement, they remain operative.
179 For a summary of common law orders, see Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act
(2017) 30–36. <https://engage.vic.gov.au/open-courts-
act-review>.
Supreme Court Act 1986
County Court Act 1958
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(Vic) sch 8 cl
52(2). Suppression orders made under section 126 of the
Magistrates’
can be set aside or varied in accordance with that section as if it
had not been repealed.
10.199 A process for
reviewing and rescinding legacy suppression orders is necessary to
address the legal and practical
difficulties these orders can cause to courts,
the media and other interested parties. To permit the ongoing existence of
suppression
orders which no longer fulfil a legitimate purpose tends to
breach the principle of open justice.
10.200 Suppression orders which are valid ‘until further order’
can remain in force indefinitely and long after the need
for suppression has
passed, causing difficulties for journalists who
unwittingly breach an order by mentioning a case years after the order was
made.181 Media organisations, publishers and members of
the public may also
unknowingly breach orders because they are unaware of their existence.
10.201 Additionally, it is unclear if and when people are considered to have
been notified of legacy suppression orders, how people
find out whether such
orders exist and how to seek their revocation.
10.202 For example, the publisher of a book on a high-profile court case
that occurred 12 years earlier may seek to ensure
that publication does
not breach an order. It appears that currently a publisher would need to
separately contact each
court to ask if such orders were still in
force or, if such an order had been made previously, whether another
order was subsequently made to revoke it. It may be difficult for courts to
locate such orders, for instance, if an order predates
the digitisation of
orders and is only available in hard copy.
There may also be no clear process for assessing whether the order is still
necessary or should be revoked.
Access to data
10.203 Studies have examined legacy suppression orders, but the data
available is incomplete, methodologies for collecting and analysing
the data are
unclear or vary across studies, and some studies provide data only on the number
of orders, but not their duration.
The data therefore does not provide a clear
picture of how many legacy suppression orders are in force today.
10.204 Australia’s Right to Know Coalition found that between 2006 and
• The Victorian Court of Appeal made 13 suppression orders. Of the four
suppression orders made in 2006, three remained active
and one had been revoked.
The number of active and revoked orders between 2007 and June 2008 were
unavailable.
• The Supreme Court of Victoria made 177 suppression orders, of which
126 remained active and 51 had been revoked.
• The County Court of Victoria made 240 suppression orders, of which
199 remained active and 41 had been revoked.
• The Magistrates’ Court of Victoria made 219 suppression
10.205 Australia’s Right to Know Coalition analysed 141 suppression
orders and revocations of suppression orders, identifying
one of the main
problems as orders with ‘no clear duration, or the use of the term
“until further order”, without
review or revocation’.183
Australia’s Right to Know Coalition felt there was a large number of
Victorian orders mainly
because of suppression orders drafted to remain in force
‘until further order’, which could be years old and were rarely
lifted.184 It is unclear how many of the suppression orders examined had no end
181 Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance,
Kicking at the Cornerstone of
Democracy: The State of Press Freedom in Australia
182 Prue Innes, Australia’s Right to Know Coalition,
Suppression Orders and the Media’s Access to Court Documents and
Information
(13 November 2008) 35–9.
183 Ibid 35.
184 Ibid 86.
185 The report said ‘hundreds of old orders worded “until further
order” would be counted in those figures [of suppression
orders made in
Victoria] as they remained current’, but did not provide more precise
numbers: ibid 88.
2010, the Hon. Philip Cummins stated in a speech that from 2005 to August
• The Supreme Court of Victoria (Trial Division) made 344 suppression
• The County Court of Victoria made 604 suppression orders.
• The Magistrates’ Court of Victoria made 501 suppression
10.207 The Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance reported in 2012 that 1077
suppression orders were granted in Australia in 2011,
644 of them in Victoria,
citing research by Australia’s Right to Know Coalition.187
10.208 Jason Bosland and Ashleigh Bagnall analysed all suppression orders
made by the Supreme, County and Magistrates’ Courts
that were distributed
to the media via email between 25 February 2008 and the end of 2012.188 Bosland
and Bagnall reported that
during this period:
• The Supreme Court of Victoria made 247 suppression orders under the
common law and
Supreme Court Act 1986
(Vic), of which 174 had no time
limit or were made to continue ‘until further order’.
• The County Court of Victoria made 432 suppression orders under the
common law and
County Court Act 1958
(Vic), of which 275 had no time
limit or were made to continue ‘until further order’.
• The Magistrates’ Court of Victoria made 547 suppression orders
under the common law and
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
which 398 had no time limit or were made to continue ‘until further
10.209 Bosland and Bagnall did not ascertain how many orders without a time
limit or made to continue ‘until further order’
had been revoked,
but their study obtained figures on
revocation orders sent to the media and the number of orders revoked by those
revocation orders.190 Bosland and Bagnall observed that
revocation orders appear to have been made by the courts’ and ‘many
orders appear to remain active when
they are no longer necessary’.191
10.210 The identification of legacy suppression orders made by Victorian
courts is key to assessing reform options for dealing
with these orders.
Need for clarity in notification and
10.211 From 1993 up to the passage of the
Open Courts Act
, the media was
routinely notified of all suppression orders.192 Suppression orders and
orders revoking suppression orders were
logged on a central database, scanned
and sent to journalists and legal representatives
of media organisations via email.193 In 2005, the Supreme Court of Victoria
established an electronic database of suppression orders
from all Victorian
courts and the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal.194
186 P D Cummins, ‘Justice and the Media’ (Speech, Melbourne Press
Club, 17 August 2010) 3.
187 Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance,
Kicking at the Cornerstone of
Democracy: The State of Press Freedom in Australia
(2012) 58, 62.
188 Jason Bosland and Ashleigh Bagnall, ‘An Empirical Analysis of
Suppression Orders in the Victorian Courts: 2008–12’
[2013] SydLawRw 27
Sydney Law Review
Open Courts Act
Review focused on orders
issued under the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic), but compared those orders
and orders discussed in the Bosland and Bagnall study: Frank Vincent,
(2017) 100–5.
189 Jason Bosland and Ashleigh Bagnall, ‘An Empirical Analysis of
Suppression Orders in the Victorian Courts: 2008–12’
[2013] SydLawRw 27
Sydney Law Review
, 681, 691.
190 Ibid 692.
192 Prue Innes, Australia’s Right to Know Coalition,
Suppression Orders and the Media’s Access to Court Documents and
Information
(13 November 2008) 34.
193 Ibid. The report states that ‘statistics on the number of
suppression orders from each court were provided to the review
by the strategic
communications adviser at the Supreme Court in Victoria’: 35.
194 Ibid 35.
10.212 Despite
this database, notification and distribution processes appear to have varied
across courts. To take the Supreme Court
as an example, judges’ associates
sent some orders to the media via email and fax and orders were generally posted
on courtroom
doors, with trial judges giving the media notice of an application
for a suppression order in ‘some long-
running trials’. Media organisations and journalists could also ring
the Communications Office during the day to check the status
of an order or
whether any order had been made relating to a particular individual. The court
registry did not keep suppression orders
on file, but the media could search
civil files.195
10.213 The only reported problem with the distribution of suppression orders
via email was delays in the relevant court officer transmitting
notice of the
order to the central database.196
10.214 In a 2008 study by Australia’s Right to Know Coalition, a
Melbourne-based television reporter commented:
Most orders aren’t revoked or don’t have sunset clauses, so by
the time a case gets to a plea hearing or trial, often
(journalists) alerting the court about suppressions. We often find the judge or
magistrates didn’t realise there
was suppression still in place. This
leads to more difficulties because often the judge or magistrate will
have no idea
why the previous judge or magistrate made the order in the
first place. Once I was in a magistrate’s case where the media
the court there was a suppression on a defendant’s identity,
and we applied for the order to be lifted. The fact there was a suppression
was news to the magistrate and the defence, and the prosecution
recall why it had been made. The court was stood down while the magistrate tried
to find the magistrate who made the
original order. He wanted to find out the
reason the order was made before he changed it. It’s not a sophisticated
10.215 It is unclear whether people are considered to remain on notice of
these orders indefinitely if they have no end date.
Lack of provision for legacy suppression
Open Courts Act
introduced provisions aimed at ensuring that
orders made under that Act did not operate indefinitely.
10.217 Under the
Open Courts Act
, courts must ensure a suppression order
operates for no longer than reasonably necessary to achieve the purpose for
it is made.198 Courts must specify the duration of suppression orders,
except interim orders, by reference to:
• a fixed or ascertainable period
• the occurrence of a specified future event, such as the conclusion of
proceedings, exhaustion of appeal rights or death of
a person involved in
proceedings.199
10.218 If there is a possibility that the ‘specified future
event’ in a suppression order may not occur, the order
specify a period of up to five years from the date of the order, at the end
of which the order expires unless it is
sooner revoked.200
10.219 As legacy suppression orders were not addressed in the
Open Courts
, a critical question for this reference is how best to address the
application and enforcement of legacy suppression orders to ensure
exist if they are necessary and do not operate indefinitely.
196 Ibid 34–5.
197 Ibid 39.
Open Courts Act 2013
–(2); Explanatory Memorandum,
Open Courts Bill 2013
Open Courts Act 2013
reforms—legacy suppression orders
Audit and revocation
10.220 The data about legacy suppression orders is incomplete, and orders are
not available either publicly or on a searchable
10.221 A reform option may be for Victorian courts to audit suppression
orders issued prior to the
Open Courts Act
to identify the number of
legacy suppression orders and the bases on which they were made. Such a
reform would need
to address who would be responsible for an audit and
how an audit would be conducted.
Revocation of unnecessary orders
10.222 One reform option is that legacy suppression orders which have no
limits on their duration could be revoked by court order
when they are no
longer necessary, with orders only operating in perpetuity in
exceptional cases.201
Statutory reforms
10.223 An alternative reform option is the insertion of statutory provisions
Open Courts Act
to outline a process for:
• deeming legacy orders to expire by default on a specified future
date, subject to applications for such orders either to
continue or to be
revoked earlier
• specifying the duration of orders to ensure orders that are no longer
necessary do not apply indefinitely
• notification of legacy suppression orders to the media, lawyers and
other interested parties
• allowing the media, lawyers and other interested parties to apply for
continuation or revocation of the order.
58 How many legacy suppression orders with no end date issued by the
Supreme, County and Magistrates’ Courts are currently in
59 Should there be provisions in the
Open Courts Act 2013
another statute, which specify the duration of legacy suppression orders? If
(a) Should there be be a deeming provision in the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic), or another statute, which provides that legacy suppression orders are
deemed to have been revoked from a particular date, subject
only to applications
from interested parties to:
i. vary the order?
ii. continue the order for a further specified time?
iii. revoke the order at an earlier date?
(b) Should there be provisions in the
Open Courts Act 2013
another statute, which specify procedures for notification of legacy suppression
orders and applications for continuation
or revocation of such orders?
201 Jason Bosland and Ashleigh Bagnall, ‘An Empirical Analysis of
Suppression Orders in the Victorian Courts: 2008–12’
[2013] SydLawRw 27
Sydney Law Review
11.1 This consultation paper discusses a range of issues to assist the
Victorian Law Reform Commission in considering whether
and how the law of
contempt of court, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
and the legal framework for enforcement of prohibitions or restrictions
on the publication of information should be reformed
to ensure the proper
administration of justice in the modern internet era.
11.2 This consultation paper sets out options for reform and poses questions
for consideration.
11.3 This consultation paper does not represent concluded views on the
matters raised by the terms of reference. Those conclusions
will be stated in
the Commission’s report, to be delivered to the Attorney-General by 31
December 2019.
11.4 The Commission welcomes submissions from all parts of the community. It
particularly invites submissions from victims of crime,
persons affected,
professionals, other stakeholders and members of the community who have had
direct experience of the law of contempt
of court, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) and the
legal framework for enforcement of prohibitions or restrictions on the
publication of information.
11.5 You can provide input into the Commission’s review by
responding to the specific questions posed throughout the
paper. These
questions are also included at the front of this paper. You may choose to
answer some, but not all questions. Alternatively,
you may wish to provide
a response that does not address individual questions posed throughout the
paper, but nonetheless relates to the issues outlined in
the terms of
11.6 To allow the Commission time to consider your views before deciding on
final recommendations,
submissions are due by 28 June 2019.
11.7 Your responses to these questions will assist the Commission in
determining what changes are required to the law to
improve its operation and
to better ensure the proper administration of justice.
Appendix A:
Advisory committee members
Appendix B: Summary of other reviews of
the law of contempt of court
Appendix C: Recommendations of
the Open Courts Act Review
202 Appendix D: Jurisdiction and powers of the courts to deal with
contempt of court
Appendix E: Common law contempt
A: Advisory committee members
1 Ms Marita Altman, Partner, Lethbridges Barristers & Solicitors, Member
of the LIV Criminal Law Executive Committee
2 Mr Peter Bartlett, Partner, MinterEllison
3 Associate Professor Jason Bosland, Deputy Director, Centre for Media and
Communications Law, Director of Studies, Communications
Law, Melbourne Law
School, University of Melbourne
4 Dr Matthew Collins QC, President, Victorian Bar Council
5 Mr Ross H Gillies QC, Chairman, Common Law Bar Association
6 Ms Abbey Hogan, Manager Policy and Specialised Legal Division, Office of
Public Prosecutions
7 Ms Kerri Judd QC, Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public
Prosecutions
8 Ms Julia Kretzenbacher, Barrister, Victorian Bar, Liberty Victoria
representative
9 Professor James Ogloff AM, Foundation Professor of Forensic Behavioural
Science & Director, Centre for Forensic Behavioural
Science, Swinburne
University of Technology, Executive Director of Psychological Services &
Research, Forensicare
10 Dr Suzie O’Toole, Lecturer, Law School, La Trobe University
11 Mr Justin Quill, Principal Lawyer, Macpherson Kelley Lawyers, Chair, Media
Committee, Law Council of Australia
12 Professor David Rolph, Professor of Law Sydney Law School, The University
13 Ms Rae Sharp, Barrister, Victorian Bar, Criminal Bar Association of
Victoria representative
14 Ms Belinda Thompson, Partner, Allens
15 Ms Melinda Walker, Accredited criminal law specialist, Co-chair LIV
Criminal Law Section Executive Committee
Appendix B: Summary of other reviews of the law of contempt of
Appendix B Tables appear on following page
Contempt in the face of the court
(Disruptive behaviour in court/ interference with
proceedings)
Publication contempt
Juror contempt
Disobedience contempt (Non- compliance with court
orders—civil contempt)
Contempt through interference
Other key matters addressed
Contempt by publi- cation
Scandal- ising
New Zealand (2017)
Inherent jurisdiction
Ireland (2016)
Distinction between civil and criminal contempt
Yes (court reporting)
misconduct)
Suppression orders; access to and reporting on court documents;
penalties and remedies; payment for costs of aborted trials
Distinction between civil and criminal contempt; bringing the
administration of justice into disrepute
Ireland (1994)
Common- wealth (1987)
Yes—influence on juries
and other participants
Inherent jurisdiction;
Constitutional considerations; suppression orders
Hong Kong (1986)
Distinction between civil and criminal contempt
Canada (1982)
Yes—various
A summary of the scope of each of the key reviews on the law of contempt of
court. With the exception of the 2016 Irish review, all
references are to the
final reports. Please note the 2017 Senate review is omitted, as no report
addressing the terms of reference
was published.
Scope/ Terms of Reference
Key recommendations (summary)
Outcome/ implementation status
Zealand—Law Commission Report 140: Reforming the Law of Contempt
of Court: A Modern Statute
First principles review of the law of contempt and to make recommendations
to ensure the law was appropriate for New Zealand
Asked in particular to consider whether the common law of contempt should
be amended or replaced by statutory provisions
The law should be brought up to date in one statute. In particular, we
recommend the abolition
of various old common law contempts of court and their replacement with new
statutory offence provisions that are easier to understand
and apply. We also
propose new provisions specifically empowering courts to make
take-down orders for material on the internet and social media
platforms that is liable to affect the administration of justice adversely.
At the same time we recommend the High Court should
retain its inherent
new statute.
Administration of Justice (Reform of Contempt of Court) Bill 2018
(Member’s bill—Hon Christopher Finlayson) Introduced 22 May
2018 and adopted by the Government.
The Bill was referred to the Justice Committee which recommended the Bill
be passed with amendments: Justice Committee,
Administration of Justice
(Reform of Contempt of Court) Bill
(Final Report, 5 April 2019). As at the
time of writing, the Bill is at the Second Reading stage.
The bill has three principal purposes:
• to ‘promote and facilitate the administration of justice and
uphold the rule of law’
• to ‘maintain and enhance’ public confidence in the
judicial system’
• to ‘reform the law of contempt of the court’ (
1, clause 3(1)
For these purposes, the proposed legislation would enable courts to
make certain orders and impose certain sanctions so that:
• civil and criminal proceedings are heard and determined fairly by
independent and impartial judges
• jury verdicts are based only on facts admitted or proved by
properly adduced evidence after free, frank and confidential discussions,
the finality of verdicts will be protected
• individual cases are heard and determined in a manner that is
expeditious, efficient and consistent with the principles of
justice and the
rule of law
• except in proceedings where the law restricts access to the court
or restricts the reporting of proceedings (such as proceedings
in the Family
Court or the Youth Court) or in unusual circumstances, proceedings are open to
the public and news media
• orders made by the courts are enforceable
• the independence, integrity and impartiality of the judiciary are
protected (
Part 1, clause 3(2)
Scope/ Terms of Reference
Key recommendations (summary)
Outcome/ implementation status
The Bill proposes to abolish the common law contempts of:
• contempt in the face of the court
• publishing information that interferes with a fair trial
• jurors researching information relevant to the trial
• disclosing juror deliberations
• disobeying court orders
• scandalising the court.
The Bill expressly retains the High Court’s inherent jurisdiction in
circumstances where the bill does not apply.
• limits publication of trial-related information
• prohibits publication of certain criminal trial information
• deals with disruptive behaviour in court
• includes offences for juror to investigate or research case or to
disclose jury deliberations
• provides for enforcement of certain court orders
• prohibits publication of untrue allegations or accusations against
judges or courts.
Commonwealth— Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Law of Contempt
The Senate Committee was asked to examine:
a. the recommendations of the 1987 ALRC report on contempt and, in
particular, the recommendation that the common law principles of
contempt be
abolished and replaced by statutory provisions
b. the recommendations of the 2003 New South Wales Law Reform Commission on
contempt by publication and the need to achieve clarity
and precision in the
operation of the law on sub- judice contempt
c. the development and operation of statutory provisions in Australia and
overseas that codify common law principles of contempt
That the submissions received to this inquiry be referred to any
future Senate inquiry into contempt (Recommendation 1).
Not implemented.
Scope/ Terms of Reference
Key recommendations (summary)
Outcome/ implementation status
d. the importance of balancing principles, including freedom of speech and
expression, the right of fair trial by an impartial tribunal,
public scrutiny of
the operations of the court system and the protection of the authority,
reputation and due process of the courts
e. any other related matters.
2016 Ireland— Law Reform Commission Issues
Paper on Contempt of Court
Examines 7 issues—including, relevantly:
• some general questions concerning contempt of court and asks if
legislation should be introduced to address those areas (Issue
• the distinction between civil and criminal contempt and asks
whether that distinction should be maintained or abolished (Issue
• the law concerning contempt in the face of the court (Issue
• the law concerning scandalising the court (Issue 4)
• the law concerning contempt in connection with pending proceedings,
sub judice contempt (Issue 5).
No final report or recommendations.
Review seems to have lapsed— this may be because of the
introduction of a private members Bill into the Irish Parliament
concerning the law of contempt.
Contempt of Court Bill 2017
An Act to codify the law on contempt of court and to provide for related
Bill covers criminal contempt, civil contempt, recording of court
proceedings, publication, and court powers in relation to online
publications on
a summary basis, subject to certain restrictions. These powers include the power
to direct that
posts be removed or not posted by way of suppression or take- down orders.
Court orders may also be made to social media providers
and provide for
consequential repercussions where orders not complied with.
Status: Presented to the House on 24 October 2017. Bill unopposed. Still
before the House.
2014 United Kingdom—Law Commission Contempt of Court (2): Court
Concerned with one particular aspect of contempt by publication, namely the
issue of reporting restrictions ordering the postponement
of contemporary court
Looks at the accurate contemporary reporting of the content of legal
proceedings taking place in public in criminal courts. Focuses
on the power of
the Crown Court to order that such reporting be postponed to avoid prejudice to
court proceedings.
The report recommends that all court reporting postponement orders be
posted on a single publicly accessible website. A further restricted
would also be available where, for a charge, registered users could find out the
detail of the reporting restriction and
could sign up for automated email alerts
of new orders. This would reduce the
risk of contempt for publishers, from large media organisations to
individual bloggers, and enable them to comply with the court’s
restrictions or report proceedings to the public with confidence.
As at January 2017 it was noted that the Government supports proposals
encouraging transparency and openness in the Criminal Justice
system, and
welcomes these recommendations. It will consider how an online reporting
restriction database could be taken forward
as existing technology is replaced
and updated, and will respond formally when the Criminal Justice System Common
Platform is implemented.
Scope/ Terms of Reference
Key recommendations (summary)
Outcome/ implementation status
2013 United Kingdom—Law Commission Contempt of Court (1): Juror
Misconduct and Internet Publications
Considered:
• contempt by publication and the impact of the modern media
• contempt committed by jurors (1.13).
Rationale: these [two] areas represent the two sides of the same most
pressing issue, namely, how to maintain public confidence
that jury trials are,
and continue to be, conducted on the evidence in the case and not by
consideration of extraneous material,
particularly material available on the
internet. (1.14).
Made recommendations to reform the law of strict liability contempt
relating to archived online material and to modernise the way
in which juror
misconduct is handled, including by creating offences of jurors researching
their cases, and to provide limited exceptions
to the prohibition on jurors
disclosing deliberations, for example, in order to uncover miscarriage of
Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015
Recommendations largely incorporated in the Criminal Justice and Courts
Bill introduced in February 2014 but the strict liability
provisions were later
dropped. The remaining provisions relating to juror misconduct remained in the
Bill which received Royal Assent
on 12 February 2015. The juror misconduct
provisions came into force on 13 April 2015.
2012 United Kingdom—Law Commission Contempt of Court: Scandalising
Considered whether the offence of scandalising the court should be
retained, abolished, replaced or modified.
Recommends that scandalising the court should cease to exist as an offence
or as a form of contempt in the law of England
and Wales. This recommendation does not affect contempt in the face of the
court, or liability for publications that may interfere
with proceedings before
Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015
The Law Commission’s report from its contempt review recommending
abolition of the offence of scandalising the court was a major
factor in the
Government’s decision to support an amendment to the Crime and Courts Bill
to repeal the offence. The Bill received
Royal Assent on 25 April 2013 and the
offence of scandalising the court was abolished two months later on 25 June
Scope/ Terms of Reference
Key recommendations (summary)
Outcome/ implementation status
South Wales— Law Reform
Commission Report 100: Contempt by Publication
To inquire into, and report on, whether the law and procedures relating to
contempt by publication are adequate and appropriate, including
whether and in
what circumstances, a person against whom a charge of contempt is found proven
should be liable to pay, in addition
to any criminal penalty, the costs (of the
government and of the parties) of a criminal trial aborted as a result of the
The Commission noted in its report that its review was primarily concerned
with sub judice contempt but also covered the power
of courts to
restrict the reporting of legal proceedings and the rules determining whether
media representatives or other members
of the public should be entitled to have
court documents.
Recommendations aimed to ‘achieve clarity and precision in the
operation of the law on sub judice contempt, with only
such restrictions on freedom of discussion as are necessary.’
‘To codify only one aspect of contempt, leaving the common law to
regulate the remaining areas, may lead to confusion and
uncertainty for legal
practitioners and the media. This has been the experience in the UK where the
Contempt of Court Act 1981
(UK) purports, among other things
to codify sub judice contempt but allows the rest of the law of contempt to
be embodied in common law principles.’
Recommended some legislative reforms to make the law ‘clearer and
fairer’, while allowing the common law to continue to
Proposed 2 draft bills:
• Draft Contempt of Court by Publication Bill 2003
• Draft Legal Proceedings (Access to Documents and Reporting) Bill
Court Information Act 2010
Makes provision for access to information held by courts
Scope/ Terms of Reference
Key recommendations (summary)
Outcome/ implementation status
2003 Western Australia— Law Reform
Commission Report on Review on the Law of Contempt (Project No
To inquire into and report upon the principles, practices and procedures
relating to:
• contempt by publication;
• contempt in the face of the court; and
• contempt by disobedience to the orders of the court
and whether the law pertaining thereto should be reformed and, if so, in
what manner.
The law of contempt of court in Western Australia, other than as applicable
Family Court Act 1997
(WA), should be codified and the
procedures for prosecution made uniform. Upon codification of the law of
contempt, s 7 of the
Criminal Code Act Compilation
(WA), which retains the authority of courts of record to
punish a person summarily for the offence commonly known as ‘contempt
court’, should be repealed. (Recommendation 1)
Not implemented.
1994 Ireland— Law Reform
Commission Report on Contempt of Court
The Commission was asked to examine the laws of defamation and contempt of
court. This report contains proposals on the second branch
of the Attorney
General’s request, that is, contempt of court.
The report notes: ‘The essential questions to be considered are
whether it is (a) possible and (b) necessary to replace the
existing common law
structure of contempt of court with a new statutory scheme which would abolish
the present concepts of criminal
and civil contempt and replace them with a
number of specific statutory offences. There may well be aspects of the law of
which could be reformed or clarified so as to render the law more
“acceptable” in modern circumstances, but if the power
to attach a
person for contempt is an inherent power of the courts can one remove, curtail
or vary that power or should one enact
parallel legislation?’
The report made a number of recommendations for reform of the law in this
area, including that some statutory offences should be introduced
to replace the
existing common law of contempt.
Notably, the Commission was divided on the issue of the inherent
out any interference with the inherent powers of the courts to attach summarily
for contempt and others wishing to clarify
and delimit such powers in
legislation or remove them entirely, as being unnecessary.
Not implemented.
Scope/ Terms of Reference
Key recommendations (summary)
Outcome/ implementation status
Commonwealth— Australian
Law Reform Commission Report No 35: Contempt
The Commission was asked to examine:
• whether the law and procedures relating to contempt of court
applied by Federal Courts and courts of the Territories, and
by State courts in
relation to the exercise of Federal jurisdiction, are adequate and
appropriate;
• whether the laws and procedures relating to contempt of Tribunals
and Commissions created by or under laws of the Commonwealth
are adequate and
appropriate;
• the appropriate legislative means of reforming those laws and
procedures, having regard to any constitutional limitations
on Commonwealth
• any related matter.
The ALRC was to have regard to:
a. the existing law of contempt;
b. the provisions of Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, that everyone shall have the right to
expression;
c. the provisions of Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, that everyone shall, in the determination
of any judicial
proceedings, be entitled to a fair trial;
d. the need to ensure that judicial proceedings are conducted in an orderly
fashion; and
e. the need to ensure that courts, tribunals and their officers are not
unjustifiably brought into disrepute.
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
was the impetus for the
reference being given to the ALRC.
Recommended the common law principles of contempt be abolished and replaced
statutory provisions governing all Federal Courts except the High
Recommendation 1.
Approach to reform
. Reform of the law of contempt
should proceed as follows:
• The common law of contempt of court including the procedure at
common law for dealing with contempt, should be abolished and
replaced by
statutory provisions governing both substance and procedure.
• The principles of criminal contempt, except for contempt in the
face of the court, should be recast as criminal offences,
to the extent that
they do not already overlap with criminal law. Normal procedures for the trial
of criminal offences should apply
instead of summary contempt procedures.
• Contempt in the face of the court should be replaced by a series of
criminal offences, but the mode of trial should
continue to be a summary one.
The accused person should be entitled to elect, however, to be tried by a
member or members of the court other than the member presiding
the time of the alleged offence.
Except in relation to the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), recommendations
not implemented
Scope/ Terms of Reference
Key recommendations (summary)
Outcome/ implementation status
• The law of civil contempt should be replaced by a statutory regime
of ‘non- compliance proceedings’, in which
the party entitled to the
benefit of an order or undertaking allegedly
disobeyed should be able to obtain sanctions to coerce the other party
into obeying a subsisting order or to punish him or her for
disobedience.
‘Contempt’ in relation to commissions and tribunals should
continue to take the form of specific statutory offences.
1986 Hong Kong— The Law Reform Commission Report on Contempt of
The Commission was asked to consider whether the present law and practice
relating to contempt of court in Hong Kong should be changed
and, if so, in
Recommended a comprehensive Contempt of Court Ordinance including the
(a) a clear statement of the principles by which ‘contempt of
court’ is defined
(b) clear procedures establishing how contempts are to be dealt with in
specific situations, including procedural controls to limit
the potential for
(c) clear guidelines to allow the media to understand at what time
publication can constitute contempt
(d) clear limits on the penalties which may be imposed for contempt of
(e) clear rules as to who may commence and discontinue contempt
proceedings.
Not implemented
Scope/ Terms of Reference
Key recommendations (summary)
Outcome/ implementation status
1982 Canada— Law Reform Commission of Canada Report on Contempt of
The report examines criminal contempt, and does not consider civil
Recommended codifying the law of criminal contempt, and proposed draft
legislation to this end.
A Bill designed to incorporate the law of criminal contempt into
provisions of the Canadian
Criminal Code
was put to the Canadian
parliament in 1984 but lapsed.
1974 United Kingdom— Committee on Contempt of Court Report
(Phillimore Review)
The Committee was asked to consider whether any changes were required to
the law relating to
contempt. (Note:
Administration of Justice Act 1960
(UK) makes some
provision for the law of contempt of court)
Recommendations aimed to achieve greater clarity and certainty in the law
of contempt, especially with respect to the media. In relation
to sub judice
contempt, the recommendations sought
to clarify and limit the scope of liability so as to ensure greater freedom
of expression for the media.
Contempt of Court Act 1981
Amends the law of contempt to introduce a strict liability rule for any
publication which creates a substantial risk that the
course of justice in the
proceedings in question will be seriously impeded or prejudiced. For the Act to
apply, the relevant proceedings
must be active at the time of publication. The
Act also deals with the confidentiality of jury deliberations, use of tape
sources of information, publication of matters exempted from
disclosure in court and offences of contempt of magistrates’ courts.
The Act was introduced in response to the ruling of the
European Court of Human Rights in
Sunday Times v United
[1979] ECHR 1
(1979) 2 EHRR 245
, where it held that the English
law of sub judice contempt violated the right to freedom of
expression enshrined in Article 10 of the European Convention
on Human Rights.
Law Reform Commission Contempt of Court: Consultation Paper
Appendix C: Recommendations of the
Open Courts Act
Recommendation of
Open Courts Act
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic) be amended to
make clear that orders made under the Act constitute exceptions, based on
necessity in the circumstances, to the
of the principle of open justice rather than it being a matter of the
operation of a presumption in favour of transparency.
Open Courts Act
be amended to include a new preamble emphasising the
fundamental importance of transparency in our legal system.
Open Courts Act
be amended to restrict the power to make suppression
orders to situations not otherwise encompassed by statutory provisions
prohibiting
or limiting publication.
In order to ensure consistency of approach to principle and practice in
relation to suppression orders and related areas, the Victorian
Commission be requested to report on the possible reform of the
Proceedings Reports Act 1958
(Vic) and the codifying of the law relating to
contempt of court, including the legal framework and processes for
enforcement.
1 The harmonisation of the law and practice relating to suppression orders
be referred to the Council of Attorneys-General for further
consideration.
2 Whether or not this recommendation is accepted, the Council of
Attorneys-General be requested to consider the desirability of the
development
of a system for interstate and territory recognition and enforcement of
suppression orders.
In each matter in which a suppression order is made, the court or tribunal
be required to prepare a written statement of its reasons
for the order,
including the justification for its terms and duration. Save for restrictions
and redactions reasonably required to
effect the purpose and efficacy of the
order, these reasons should be publicly available.
A central, publicly accessible register of suppression orders made by
all Victorian courts and tribunals containing details
of their terms and
duration and, to the extent reasonably possible in the circumstances the
reasons for them, be established.
All suppression orders should be treated as interim for a period of five
days to enable interested parties to present submissions
as to their necessity
or terms. In the absence of any such challenge, the orders would continue in
effect for the period and terms
In the event of an appeal being lodged against the outcome of proceedings
in which a suppression order was made, the order would continue
in effect until
the determination of the appeal or it is discharged or varied on application to
the court or tribunal hearing the
Open Courts Act
be simplified by removing the unnecessary distinction
between broad and proceeding suppression orders.
The Judicial College of Victoria be approached with a view to establishing
programs and materials to improve the level of understanding
judiciary concerning the operation of the
Open Courts Act
and other legislation
restricting the public dissemination of information relating to legal
proceedings.
A formal relationship be developed through the Department of Justice and
Regulation between the media, the courts and legal practitioners
purpose of addressing the issues presented in effecting an appropriate
balance between openness and the suppression
of information in our court and
tribunal processes.
Recommendation of
Open Courts Act
Consideration be given to statutory reform to enable the discretionary
disclosure of the relevant convictions of juvenile offenders
in cases of their
continuing and entrenched propensity to engage in serious offending as
Section 184 should be amended to restrict the making of suppression orders
concealing the identity or whereabouts of persons subject
to supervision under
Serious Sex Offenders
(Detention and Supervision) Act 2009
(Vic). In so restricting the
making of suppression orders, the Act should continue to have regard to the
ramifications of disclosure,
including the personal safety of individuals.
Adult victims of sexual assault or family violence or who as children have
been so subjected should, on the conviction of the offender,
be able to opt
for disclosure of their identity. In situations
where there is more than one victim, the court would be required to refuse
an application where disclosure of the identity of a victim
or perpetrator would
result in that of a non-consenting victim or impose any conditions required in
the circumstances to secure the
anonymity of a non- consenting victim.
Section 534
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
amended to enable adult victims who are also witnesses to disclose their own
identities, provided that to do so does not
breach any other of the requirements
of the section.
It becomes mandatory at initial bail hearings consequent upon the laying of
charges in relation to alleged sexual or family violence
criminal offences for
an interim suppression order to be issued. This order would remain in effect
for five working days.
Alternatively, the
Judicial Proceedings Reports
should be amended to the same effect.
Provided the Public Interest Monitor receives the additional funding and
resources necessary to perform the following functions:
1. The Monitor should be empowered, if requested by the judge to appear as
contradictor, to make submissions and ask questions when
the judge is
determining whether orders should be made under the
Open Courts Act
grounds and the framing of their scope.
2. Orders, once made, can be referred to the Monitor for consideration by
interested parties to enable the independent consideration
of the need, terms
and duration of the order while
maintaining the security of the underlying information. The Monitor’s
decision whether or not to pursue the review of an order
3. If it is considered necessary in the public interest to intervene, the
Monitor should be able to seek the review of the order by
the judge or prosecute
4. The Monitor would report annually to the Attorney General on the
operation of the
Open Courts Act
Supreme Court of Victoria
County Court of Victoria
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
Children’s Court of Victoria
Coroners Court of Victoria
Court of Record
Superior Court of Record with unlimited jurisdiction -
Constitution
Court of record—
County Court Act 1958
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(Vic) is silent on whether the
Magistrates’ Court is a Court of Record.
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) is silent on whether
Children’s Court is a Court of Record.1
Coroners Act 2008
(Vic) is silent on whether the Coroners Court
is a Court of Record.2
Inherent jurisdiction to punish criminal contempt
Unlimited inherent jurisdiction—can punish contempts of court
wherever they occur.3
Constitution
No inherent jurisdiction to punish for contempt.4
As a Court of Record, may have implied jurisdiction to punish for contempt
in the face of the court.
No inherent jurisdiction to punish for contempt.
May have implied jurisdiction to punish for contempt in the face of the
No inherent jurisdiction to punish for contempt, may have implied
No inherent jurisdiction to punish for contempt, may have implied
Supervisory/ protective jurisdiction
As a superior court, the Supreme Court is empowered to deal
summarily with contempts of inferior courts—to protect the rights of
litigants and to ensure that justice is done.6
† Note whilst not a court, both the Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal and the Victims of Crime Assistance Tribunal
have power conferred by statute to deal with conduct that would otherwise be
contempt. See
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
1 The Report of the Protecting Victoria’s Vulnerable Children Inquiry
recommended that the
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) should
be amended to confirm the status of the Children’s Court as a court of
record, suggesting that it may already have
that status, but that it was
unclear. See: Report of the Protecting Victoria’s Vulnerable Children
Inquiry, (Department of
Premier and Cabinet, 2012) Recommendation 65.
Annetts v McCann
(1990) 170 CLR 596
R v Metal Trades Employers’ Association: Ex parte Amalgamated
Engineering Union (Australian Section)
[1951] HCA 3
(1951) 82 CLR 208
, 241 (Latham CJ),
254 (Dixon J);
R v Taylor; Ex parte Roach
[1951] HCA 22
(1951) 82 CLR 587
, 598 (Dixon,
Webb, Fullagar and Kitto JJ).
Morgan v State of Victoria
[2008] VSCA 267
(2008) 22 VR 237
, 269; Judicial
College of Victoria, Victorian Criminal Proceedings Manual (26 February 2018),
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/VCPM/index.
htm#27318.htm>.
Magistrates’ Court of Prahran v Murphy
[1997] 2 VR 186
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
(1955) 93 CLR 351;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
75.05(1)(c).
Supreme Court of Victoria
County Court of Victoria
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
Children’s Court of Victoria
Coroners Court of Victoria
Procedure for exercise of
County Court Act 1958
Magistrates’ Court Act
Children, Youth and
Coroners Act 2008
Supreme Court’s inherent jurisdiction is prescribed
—Court has the same jurisdiction, and may
(Vic) s 133—
Magistrates’ Court has
Families Act 2005
(Vic) s 528(3)—Court has, and
103—Coroners Court has power to deal summarily
Supreme Court
exercise the same powers
power to deal summarily
may exercise in relation
with contempts of the
(General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.
and authority, in respect of any contempt of the court as the Supreme Court
and may exercise in respect
of any contempt of the Supreme Court.
Procedure for exercise of the County Court’s jurisdiction to punish
for contempt is prescribed
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.
with contempt in the face of the court.
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
- Magistrates’ Court has power to deal summarily with certain
contempts committed by witnesses.
Magistrates Court Act 1989
Magistrates’ Court has
limited power to fine or
to all matters over which it has jurisdiction, all the powers and
authorities that the Magistrates’
Court has in relation to the matters over which it has jurisdiction.
Coroners Court.
imprison a person while in
default of an order.
Law Reform Commission Contempt of Court: Consultation Paper
Appendix E: Common law contempt of court1
Appendix E Table appears on following page
1 This table is not a comprehensive or exhaustive summary of all contempt
related offences. It is intended for illustrative purposes
and thus refers only
to the more major related statutory and other common law offences.
Classification of offence
Initiation of proceedings
Triable by whom
Contempt of court, including:
- disobedience contempt
- sub judice contempt
- scandalising contempt
- juror contempt
- interference contempt
Common law offence triable summarily by the Supreme or County Court under
their Civil Procedure Rules.
Historically capable of being punished upon indictment or
presentment. However, no instance in modern times of indictment being
brought. Summary procedure has wholly superseded trial by jury—now
regarded as obsolete.2
Not all disobedience contempts are criminal offences.3
At large—there is no maximum penalty for common law contempt in
section 320
Crimes Act 1958
Summons or originating motion in the Supreme or County Court.4
Depending on the type of contempt, an application may be made by:
- a party in a civil contempt case.5
- Attorney-General.6
- Director of Public Prosecutions.7
- Prothonotary in the Supreme Court,
or Registrar in the County Court, directed by a Supreme or County court
Supreme or County Court judge
For example, contempt can be found where there has been a:
- breach of a common law suppression order made by the Supreme Court in its
inherent jurisdiction.9
- breach of an injunction made by the County Court exercising the inherent
- breach of a common law pseudonym order.11
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
3 Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union v Boral Resources (Vic)
[2015] HCA 21
(2015) 256 CLR 375
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.06;
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.06.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
The Broken Hill Proprietary Company Ltd v Dagi
[1996] VicRp 62
[1996] 2 VR 117
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
, 562. While the Victorian Court of
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Boral Resources
(Vic) Pty Ltd
accepted that the Attorney-General has the power to commence
proceedings for criminal contempts, it stated that it was ‘at least
seriously arguable’ that the Attorney- General also has such a power in in
respect of civil contempts, however it found was
not necessary to decide the
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Boral Resources
(Vic) Pty Ltd
[2013] VSCA 378
(13 December 2013) [11], [14].
Public Prosecutions Act 1994
s 22(1)(ba)(iii).
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.07(1);
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.07(1).
Open Courts Act 2013
Open Courts Act 2013
Open Courts Act 2013
Classification of offence
Initiation of proceedings
Triable by whom
Contempt in the face of the court
Common law offence triable summarily by the Supreme or County
At large—there is no maximum penalty for common law contempt in
A Supreme or County Court Judge may punish the contempt
Supreme or County Court judge.
Court or under their Civil
section 320 of the
directly and summarily,
Procedure Rules.
without a separate,
formal proceeding being
commenced by summons
or originating motion.12
As with other contempts,
a separate proceeding
to punish the contempt
may be commenced by
summons or originating
motion in the Supreme or
County Court.13
Contempt in the face of the Magistrates’ Court
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Summary offence14
Individual: up to six months’ imprisonment or up to 25 penalty
The Magistrate may punish the contempt directly and summarily
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
The Children’s Court has the same powers to punish for contempt as
the Magistrates’ Court but a person under the
age of 18 cannot be
committed to prison
for contempt. They
may be committed to
a youth justice or a
youth residential centre
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
75.02–75.04;
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
75.02–75.04.
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 75.06;
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
(Vic) r 75.06.
Sentencing Act 1991
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Classification of offence
Initiation of proceedings
Triable by whom
Contempt by witness failing to appear, be sworn, or answer questions in the
Magistrates’ Court etc
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Summary offence17
Individual: up to one months’ imprisonment or up to five penalty
The Magistrate may punish the contempt directly and summarily
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
The Children’s Court has the same powers to punish for contempt as
the Magistrates’ Court but a person under the age of
18 cannot be
committed to prison for contempt, but may be committed to a youth justice or a
youth residential centre instead.19
Contempt of the Coroners Court
Coroners Act 2008
Summary Offence
Individual: Up to 12 months imprisonment or 120 penalty units.
Corporation up to 600 penalty units20
The Coroner may punish the contempt directly and summarily.
Coroners Court of Victoria
Publishing a prohibited report of a judicial proceedings
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Summary offence21
Individual: up to four months’ imprisonment or up to 20 penalty
units, or both.
Corporation: up to 50 penalty units.
Director of Public Prosecutions must consent to a prosecution.
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria.
Publishing identifying details about an alleged victim of sexual
Judicial Proceedings Reports Act 1958
Summary offence22
Individual: up to four months’ imprisonment or up to 20 penalty
units, or both.
Corporation: up to 50 penalty units.
Director of Public Prosecutions must consent to a prosecution.
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria.
Sentencing Act 1991
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Coroners Act 2008
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Act 1991
Classification of offence
Initiation of proceedings
Triable by whom
Breaching a:
- proceeding suppression order
- interim order
Open Courts Act 2013
Indictable offence that is triable summarily.23
Individual: up to 5 years’ imprisonment or 600 penalty units, or
Corporation: 3000 penalty units.
If tried summarily: up to 2
Police charge.
Tried summarily by a magistrate in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, or by judge and jury in the County or
Supreme court.
Director of Public Prosecutions may provide prior advice, but this is not
years’ imprisonment or up
to 500 penalty units.24
Breaching a broad suppression order made by the Magistrates’
Open Courts Act 2013
Indictable offence that is triable summarily.25
Individual: up to 5 years’ imprisonment or 600 penalty units, or
Corporation: 3000 penalty units.
If tried summarily: up to 2
Police charge.
Tried summarily by a magistrate in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, or by judge and jury in the County or
Supreme court.
Director of Public Prosecutions may provide prior advice, but this is not
years’ imprisonment or up
to 500 penalty units.26
Publishing, soliciting or
Indictable offence that is
Individual, or anyone else:
Director of Public
Tried summarily by
There are other offences
obtaining disclosure of jury deliberations
triable summarily.27
Imprisonment for 5 years or 600 penalty units.
Corporation: 3000 penalty units.
If tried summarily: up to 2 years’ imprisonment or up
Prosecutions, or a person authorised by the DPP, must consent in writing to
a prosecution.29
Police charge.
a magistrate in the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, or by judge and
jury in the County or Supreme court.
sections 65
3, including summary offences, indictable offences and offences that a
court may deal with ‘in a summary way’.
to 500 penalty units.28
Sentencing Act 1991
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Act 1991
Criminal Procedure Act
Sentencing Act 1991
Juries Act 2000
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
, sch 2 cl 18. 28
Sentencing Act 1991
Juries Act 2000
Classification of offence
Initiation of proceedings
Triable by whom
Juror or former juror
Indictable offence that is
Imprisonment for 5 years
Director of Public
Tried summarily by
There are other offences
disclosing deliberations with reason to believe it is likely to be, or will
be, published
triable summarily.30
or 600 penalty units.
If tried summarily: up to 2 years’ imprisonment or up to 500 penalty
Prosecutions, or a person authorised by the DPP, must consent in writing to
a prosecution.32
Police charge.
a magistrate in the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, or by judge and
jury in the County or Supreme court.
sections 65
3, including summary offences, indictable offences and offences that a
court may deal with ‘in a summary way’.
Registered medical
Indictable offence that is
Imprisonment for 5 years
Director of Public
Tried summarily by
There are other offences
practitioner or registered psychologist disclosing deliberations by a
former juror disclosed in the course of treatment for issues
arising out of jury
triable summarily.33
or 600 penalty units.
If tried summarily: up to 2 years’ imprisonment or up to 500 penalty
Prosecutions, or a person authorised by the DPP, must consent in writing to
a prosecution.35
Police charge.
a magistrate in the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, or by judge and
jury in the County or Supreme court.
sections 65
3, including summary offences, indictable offences and offences that a
court may deal with ‘in a summary way’.
Jury panel member or juror making improper enquiries about a case
Juries Act 2000
Summary offence.36
120 penalty units.
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
There are other offences in
sections 65
3, including summary
offences, indictable
offences and offences
that a court may deal
with ‘in a summary way’.
Juries Act 2000
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
, sch 2 cl 18. 31
Sentencing Act 1991
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 2000
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
, sch 2 cl 18. 34
Sentencing Act 1991
Juries Act 2000
Sentencing Act 1991
Classification of offence
Initiation of proceedings
Triable by whom
Intimidating, or causing or procuring physical harm or detriment to
a person because of their involvement in a criminal investigation or
proceeding, including a
Crimes Act 1958
Indictable offence that is triable summarily.38
Up to 10 years’ imprisonment.
If tried summarily: up to 2 years’ imprisonment or up to 500 penalty
Police charge.
Tried summarily by a magistrate in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, or by judge and jury in the County or
Supreme court.
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
witness, victim or juror37
Threats to kill
Crimes Act 1958
Indictable offence that is triable summarily.40
Up to 10 years’ imprisonment.
If tried summarily: up to 2 years’ imprisonment or up to 500 penalty
Police charge.
Tried summarily by a magistrate in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, or by judge and jury in the County or
Supreme court.
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
Threats to inflict serious injury
Crimes Act 1958
Indictable offence that is triable summarily.42
Up to 5 years’ imprisonment.
If tried summarily: up to 2 years’ imprisonment or up to 500 penalty
Police charge.
Tried summarily by a magistrate in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, or by judge and jury in the County or
Supreme court.
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
Extortion with threat to kill
Crimes Act 1958
Indictable offence that is triable summarily.44
Up to 15 years’ imprisonment.
If tried summarily: up to 2 years’ imprisonment or up to 500 penalty
Police charge.
Tried summarily by a magistrate in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, or by judge and jury in the County or
Supreme court.
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
Crimes Act 1958
for the meanings of
‘detriment’, involvement in a criminal investigation, and
involvement in a criminal proceeding.
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Sentencing Act 1991
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Sentencing Act 1991
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Sentencing Act 1991
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
, sch 2 cl 4.2.
Sentencing Act 1991
Classification of offence
Initiation of proceedings
Triable by whom
Crimes Act 1958
Indictable offence that is triable summarily.46
Up to 15 years’ imprisonment.
If tried summarily: up to 2 years’ imprisonment or up to 500 penalty
Police charge.
Tried summarily by a magistrate in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, or by judge and jury in the County or
Supreme court.
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
Section 314(1)
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) encompasses common law
perjury and sub-sections
(2) and (3)
Indictable offence.
At large. There is no maximum penalty for common law perjury in
section 320
Crimes Act 1958
Police charge.
A judge may direct that a person may be tried for perjury in certain
circumstances, pursuant to
sections 5(c)
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Judge and jury in the County or Supreme court.
At common law, a person commits perjury by giving false evidence on
in a judicial proceeding. This is an offence both at common law and under
Crimes Act 1958
circumstances
Wilful destruction or damage of property
Summary Offences Act 1966
Summary offence
25 penalty units or six months’ imprisonment.
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances
common law contempt might also apply.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
, sch 2 cl 4.26.
Sentencing Act 1991
48 Ian Freckelton and Kerryn Cockroft,
Indictable Offences in Victoria
(Thomson Reuters, 6th ed, 2016) 788.
49 Ian Freckelton and Kerryn Cockroft,
Indictable Offences in Victoria
(Thomson Reuters, 6th ed, 2016) 788.
Classification of offence
Initiation of proceedings
Triable by whom
Using profane, indecent or obscene language or threatening, abusive or
insulting words.
Summary Offences Act 1966
Summary offence
10 penalty units or two months’ imprisonment.
For a second offence—15 penalty units or three months’
imprisonment.
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
For a third or subsequent
offence—25 penalty
units or six months’
imprisonment.
Behaving in a riotous, indecent, offensive or insulting manner, including
by exposing oneself.
Summary Offences Act 1966
Summary offence
10 penalty units or two months’ imprisonment.
For a second offence—15 penalty units or three months’
imprisonment.
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
For a third or subsequent
offence—25 penalty
units or six months’
imprisonment.
Behaving in a disorderly manner.
Summary Offences Act 1966
Summary offence
Up to 10 penalty units.
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances
common law contempt might also apply.
Classification of offence
Initiation of proceedings
Triable by whom
Common assault – unlawfully assaulting or beating another
Summary Offences Act 1966
Summary offence
15 penalty units or three months’ imprisonment.
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
Harassing a person because that person has taken part, is
Summary Offences Act 1966
Summary offence
120 penalty units or 12 months’ imprisonment.
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances
proceeding in any court
common law contempt might also apply.
as a witness or in any
other capacity.
Refusing to comply with a reasonable direction from an ‘authorized
officer’ to do or not do
Court Security Act 1980
Summary offence50
10 penalty units.
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
Directions that an authorized officer may give are specified in
‘Authorised
officer’ is defined in
section 2(1).
This offence is included
because it could apply
in circumstances where
common law contempt
might also apply.
Making a recording of proceedings where not authorised by the
Security Act 1980
Court Security Act 1980
Summary offence51
20 penalty units
Police charge.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Act 1991
Classification of offence
Initiation of proceedings
Triable by whom
Attempting to pervert the course of justice
Common law.
Recognised in
section 320
Crimes Act 1958
Indictable offence.
Up to 25 years’ imprisonment.
Police charge.
Judge and jury in the County or Supreme court.
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
Perverting the course of justice
Common law.
Recognised in
section 320
Crimes Act 1958
Indictable offence.
Up to 25 years’ imprisonment.
Police charge.
Judge and jury in the County or Supreme court.
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
Common law.
Recognised in
Juries Act 2000
Indictable offence.
Up to 15 years’ imprisonment.
Police charge.
Judge and jury in the County or Supreme court.
This offence is included because it could apply in circumstances where
common law contempt might also apply.
section 320
Victorian Law Reform Commission Contempt of Court: Consultation Paper
Contempt of Court
consultation paper
GPO Box 4637
Melbourne Victoria 3001 Australia
333 Queen Street Melbourne Victoria 3000 Australia
+61 3 8608 7800
1300 666 555
(within Victoria)
+61 3 8608 7888
law.reform@lawreform.vic.gov.au
www.lawreform.vic.gov.au
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.25 MB)
PDF format (1.93 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter