URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCDP/2006/71.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:32:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Review of Sedition Laws [2006] ALRCDP 71
PDF version
is also available for viewing and download.
Discussion Paper 71
Sedition Laws
Table of Contents
Making a Submission
Terms of Reference
List of Participants
List of Proposals
Introduction to the Inquiry
to the Inquiry
Terms of Reference
Federal criminal law
and practice
Law reform processes
Organisation of
Discussion Paper 71
Written submissions
2. Overview of Proposed Reforms
Introduction
Do we need the
concept of ‘sedition’?
Offences against
political liberty and public order
Unlawful associations
Review of old
Ancillary matters
Net effect of the
proposed changes
3. Origins and History of
Sedition Law
Introduction
The origins and
evolution of common law sedition
Sedition in Australia
Reform trends:
modernise or abolish?
4. Australian Sedition Laws
and Related Provisions
Introduction
New sedition offences
in the Criminal Code
Related federal
legislation
State and territory
sedition laws
5. International Framework
Introduction
international law
International law and
International human
rights law: article 19 of the ICCPR
6. Sedition Laws in Other
Introduction
United Kingdom
United States of
Other countries
7. Sedition and Freedom of
Introduction
Freedom of expression
and the Constitution
Sedition and
domestic protection of human rights
Risk of unfair or
discriminatory application of sedition laws
Absence of bills of
rights in Australia
Sedition and freedom
of expression generally
Journalism and the
8. Offences Against Political
Introduction
Incitement and the
sedition offences
Fault elements
Other drafting issues
Urging the overthrow
of the Constitution or Government
Urging interference
in Parliamentary elections
Urging a person to
assist the enemy
Extraterritorial
application
Requirement of
Attorney-General’s consent
9. Urging Inter-Group Violence
Introduction
Legislating against
the incitement of hatred and violence
Sedition and
inter-group violence
Criticisms of
section 80.2(5)
ALRC’s view
10. Defences and Penalties
Introduction
The good faith
11. Unlawful Associations
Introduction
associations provisions
Other offences
under Part IIA
Appendix 1. Existing Criminal
Code Provisions
2. Proposed Division 80 of the Criminal Code
Appendix 3. List of Submissions
Appendix 4. List of Consultations
Appendix 5. List of Abbreviations
© Commonwealth of Australia 2006
This work is copyright. You may download, display, print and
reproduce this
material in whole or part, subject to acknowledgement
of the source,
personal, non-commercial use or use within your organisation. Apart
from any use
as permitted under the
all other rights are
reserved. Requests for further authorisation should be directed by
letter to the
Commonwealth Copyright
Administration, Copyright Law Branch,
Attorney-General’s Department, Robert Garran Offices,
National Circuit,
Barton ACT 2600
or electronically via www.ag.gov.au/cca.
ISBN 0-9758213-4-2
Commission Reference: DP 71
The Australian Law Reform Commission was established on
1 January 1975
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
reconstituted by the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
The office of the ALRC
is at Level 25, 135 King Street, Sydney, NSW, 2000, Australia.
All ALRC publications can be made available in a range of
accessible formats
for people with disabilities. If you require assistance,
please contact
within Australia
(02) 8238 6333
International
+61 2 8238 6333
(02) 8238 6379
within Australia
(02) 8238 6363
International
+61 2 8238 6363
info@alrc.gov.au
ALRC homepage:
www.alrc.gov.au
Printed by Bigprint Pty Ltd
Any public contribution to an inquiry is called a submission
and these are
actively sought by the ALRC from a broad cross-section
community, as well
as those with a special interest in the inquiry.
Submissions are usually written, but there is no set format
and they need not
be formal documents. Where possible, submissions in
electronic format
It would be helpful if comments addressed specific proposals
or numbered
paragraphs in this paper.
inquiry policy
In the interests of informed public debate, the ALRC is
committed to open
access to information. As submissions provide important
evidence to
inquiry, it is common for the ALRC to draw upon the contents of
submissions and
quote from them or refer to them
in publications. As part of ALRC
non-confidential submissions are made available to any person or
organisation
upon request
after completion of an inquiry, and also may be published
ALRC website. For the purposes of this policy, an inquiry is considered
been completed when the final report has been tabled in Parliament.
However, the ALRC also accepts submissions made in confidence.
Confidential
submissions may include personal experiences where there
is a wish to
commercial-in-confidence
material). Any request for access to
a confidential submission is
determined in
accordance with the federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
provisions designed to protect sensitive information given in
confidence.
In the absence of a clear indication that a
submission is intended to be
confidential, the ALRC will treat the submission as non-confidential.
Submissions should be sent to:
The Executive Director
Australian Law Reform
GPO Box 3708
SYDNEY NSW 2001
sedition@alrc.gov.au
Submissions may also be made using the on-line form on the
www.alrc.gov.au
The closing date for submissions in response to
DP 71 is Monday 3
Terms of Reference
REVIEW OF SEDITION LAWS
I, Philip Ruddock, Attorney-General of Australia, having regard to:
• the circumstances in which individuals or organisations intentionally
urge others to use force or violence against any group
within the community,
against Australians overseas, against Australia’s forces overseas or in
support of an enemy at war with
Australia; and
• the practical difficulties involved in proving a specific intention to
urge violence or acts of terrorism;
refer to the Australian Law Reform Commission (‘the Commission’)
for inquiry and report, pursuant to
subsection 20(1)
Australian Law
Reform Commission Act 1996
, the operation of Schedule 7 of the
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2) 2005
1. In performing its functions in relation to this reference, the Commission
will consider:
(a) whether the amendments in Schedule 7 of the
Anti-Terrorism Act
, including the sedition offence and defences in
sections 80.2 and 80.3 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
, effectively address
the problem of urging the use of force or violence;
(b) whether ‘sedition’ is the appropriate term to identify this
(c) whether Part IIA of the
Crimes Act 1914
, as amended, is
effective to address the problem of organisations that advocate or encourage the
use of force or violence to achieve
political objectives; and
(d) any related matter.
2. The Commission will identify and consult with relevant stakeholders.
3. The Commission is to report no later than 30 May 2006.
Dated 1st March 2006
Philip Ruddock
Attorney-General
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
Senior Legal Officers
Legal Officers
Research Manager
Project Assistants
Legal Interns
Advisory Committee Members
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
The Division of the ALRC constituted under the
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
(Cth) for the purposes of this Inquiry comprises the
Professor David Weisbrot (President)
Mr Brian Opeskin (Deputy
Associate Professor Les McCrimmon (Commissioner)
Justice Susan
Kenny (part-time Commissioner)
Justice Susan Kiefel (part-time
Commissioner)
Senior Legal Officers
Bruce Alston
Kate Connors
Isabella Cosenza (from May 2006)
Legal Officers
Althea Gibson (from May 2006)
Melissa Lewis (until April 2006)
Research Manager
Jonathan Dobinson (until April 2006)
Lani Blackman (from April 2006)
Carolyn Kearney
Project Assistants
Alayne Harland
Tina O’Brien
Legal Interns
Justin Carter
Michelle Tse
Laura Thomas
[back to top]
Advisory Committee Members
David Bernie, New South Wales Council of Civil Liberties
David Brown, Law School, University of New South Wales
Damian Bugg QC,
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Emeritus Professor Michael
Chesterman, Administrative Decisions Tribunal (NSW)
Kate Eastman, New South
Dr David Neal SC, Victorian Bar
Mark Polden, John Fairfax
Holdings Ltd
Padma Raman, Equal Opportunity Commission of Victoria
Judge Michael Rozenes, County Court of Victoria
Michael Sexton QC,
Solicitor-General for New South Wales
Hon John von Doussa, President, Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Bret Walker SC, New South Wales
Neil Williams SC, New South Wales Bar
List of Proposals
2. Overview of Proposed Reforms
4. Australian Sedition Laws and Related Provisions
6. Sedition Laws in Other Countries
8. Offences Against Political Liberty
9. Urging Inter-Group Violence
10. Defences and Penalties
11. Unlawful Associations
List of Proposals
The relevant sections of the Criminal Code, amended consistently with
the proposals, are set out in full in Appendix 2.
2. Overview of Proposed Reforms
2–1 The Australian Government should remove the term
‘sedition’ from federal criminal law. To this end, the headings
Part 5.1 and Division 80 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) should be
changed to ‘Treason and offences against political liberty’, and the
heading of s 80.2 should be changed
to ‘Offences against political
liberty and public order’.
2–2 The Australian Government should initiate a process through the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General to remove the term
‘sedition’ from state and territory laws and to modernise and
harmonise the relevant laws in keeping with the proposed
changes to federal
4. Australian Sedition Laws and Related
4–1 The Australian Government should initiate a review of the remaining
offences contained in Part II of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) to determine
which offences merit retention, modernisation and relocation to the
(Cth), and which offences should be abolished. This review should
include the offences in ss 24AA, 24AB and 25–29 of the
6. Sedition Laws in Other Countries
6–1 There is no need to introduce into federal law an offence of
‘encouragement or glorification of terrorism’,
along the lines of
that in s 1 of the
Terrorism Act 2006
8. Offences Against Political Liberty
Section 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
) should be amended to provide that, for a person to be
guilty of any of the offences under s 80.2, the person must intend that the
urged force or violence will occur.
The heading of s 80.2(1) of the
Criminal Code
should be changed to refer to urging the overthrow by ‘force or
violence’ of the
Constitution
or Government.
8–3 The word ‘intentionally’ should be inserted in
s 80.2(1) of the
Criminal Code
before the word ‘urges’
to clarify the fault element applicable to urging the use of force or
8–4 Section 30C of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), concerning
‘advocating or inciting to crime’, should be repealed.
8–5 The heading of s 80.2(3) of the
Criminal Code
changed to refer to urging interference in Parliamentary elections by
‘force or violence’.
Section 80.2(3) of the
Criminal Code
amended to:
• insert the word ‘intentionally’ before the word
‘urges’, to clarify the fault element applicable
to urging the use
of force or violence; and
• apply to interference with the lawful processes for a referendum on a
proposed law for the alteration of the
Constitution
8–7 As a consequence of Proposal 8–6, s 80.2(4) of the
Criminal Code
should be amended to apply recklessness to the element of
the offence under s 80.2(3) that it is lawful processes for a referendum
a proposed law for the alteration of the
Constitution
that a person urges
another to interfere with.
8–8 Sections 80.2(7), (8) and (9) of the
Criminal Code
concerning the offences of urging a person to assist the enemy and urging a
person to assist those engaged in armed hostilities
against the Australian
Defence Force, should be repealed.
8–9 The treason offences in s 80.1(1)(e)–(f) should be
amended to:
• remove the words ‘by any means whatever’;
• provide that conduct must ‘materially’ assist an enemy,
making it clear that mere rhetoric or expressions of
dissent are not sufficient;
• provide that assistance must enable an enemy ‘to engage in
war’ with Australia or a country or organisation ‘to
engage in armed
hostilities’ against the Australian Defence Force.
8–10 The Australian Government should review the treason offences in
s 80.1 of the
Criminal Code
Section 80.1 of the
Criminal Code
amended to require that, at the time of the alleged offence, the person is an
Australian citizen or resident.
8–12 Section 80.5 of the
Criminal Code
regarding the
requirement of the Attorney-General’s written consent to a prosecution
should be repealed.
9. Urging Inter-Group Violence
The heading of s 80.2(5) of the
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
) should be changed to refer to urging
‘inter-group force or violence’.
9–2 Section 80.2(5) of the
Criminal Code
should be amended
• insert the word ‘intentionally’ before the word
‘urges’, to clarify the fault element applicable
to urging the use
of force or violence; and
• add ‘national origin’ to the distinguishing features of a
group for the purposes of the offence.
9–3 As a consequence of Proposal 9–2, s 80.2(6) of the
Criminal Code
should be amended to apply recklessness to the element of
the offence under s 80.2(5) that it is a group distinguished by national
origin that a person urges another to use force or violence against.
9–4 The Australian Government should continue to pursue other
strategies, such as educational programs, to promote inter-communal
harmony and
understanding.
10. Defences and Penalties
10–1 Section 80.3 of the
Criminal Code
), concerning the defence of ‘good faith’, should be
10–2 Section 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
should be amended to
provide that in considering whether a person intends that the urged force or
violence will occur, the trier
of fact must take into account whether the
conduct was done (i) in the performance, exhibition or distribution of an
artistic work;
or (ii) in the course of any statement, publication, discussion
or debate made or held for any genuine academic, artistic or scientific
or any other genuine purpose in the public interest; or (iii) in connection with
an industrial dispute or an industrial matter;
or (iv) in publishing a report or
commentary about a matter of public interest; and may have regard to any
relevant matter.
10–3 A note should be inserted after each of the offences in
s 80.2(1), (3) and (5) of the
Criminal Code
drawing attention to the
proposed new provisions regarding proof of intention that the force or violence
urged will occur.
11. Unlawful Associations
Sections 30A, 30AA, 30AB, 30B, 30D, 30E, 30F, 30FA, 30FC,
30FD, 30G, 30H and 30R of Part IIA of the
Crimes Act 1914
concerning unlawful associations, should be repealed.
The Australian Government should include
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) in the larger review of the
called for in Proposal 4–1.
1. Introduction to the
Background to the Inquiry
The Crimes Act provisions on sedition
The Gibbs Committee report 1991
11 September 2001 and beyond
Special COAG meeting in September 2005
The Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Schedule 7: the new sedition offences
Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee report
Terms of Reference
Federal criminal law and practice
The reach of federal criminal jurisdiction
The development of a Criminal Code (Cth)
Other features of the federal criminal justice system
Law reform processes
Matters outside this Inquiry
Advisory Committee
Issues Paper 30
Community consultation
Organisation of Discussion Paper 71
Written submissions
1. Introduction to the
to the Inquiry
provisions on sedition
1.1 As described in detail in Chapter 3, the criminal offence of sedition
developed in England in the 17th and 18th centuries, emerging
out of the laws
against treason and libel, and aimed at shielding the Crown (and its
institutions and officers) from criticism that
might lessen its standing and
authority among its subjects.
1.2 Sedition provisions were found in state criminal law from an earlier date,
but the offence entered the federal statute book when
ss 24A–24F were
inserted into the
Crimes Act 1914
Section 24A(1)
originally defined ‘seditious intention’ as an intention to effect
any of the following purposes:
(a) to bring the Sovereign into hatred or contempt;
(b) to excite disaffection against the Sovereign or the Government or
Constitution
of the United Kingdom or against either House of Parliament of the
United Kingdom;
(c) to excite disaffection against the Government or
Constitution
of any of the
King’s Dominions;
(d) to excite disaffection against the Government or
Constitution
Commonwealth or against either House of the Parliament of the Commonwealth;
(e) to excite disaffection against the connexion of the King’s Dominions
under the Crown;
(f) to excite His Majesty’s subjects to attempt to procure the alteration,
otherwise than by lawful means, of any matter in
the Commonwealth established by
law of the Commonwealth; or
(g) to promote feelings of ill-will and hostility between different classes of
His Majesty’s subjects so as to endanger the
peace, order or good
government of the Commonwealth.
1.3 Sections 24C and 24D created offences for various acts done with a
seditious intention, with a maximum penalty of imprisonment
for three years.
Section 24F created a number of specific defences for acts done in ‘good
1.4 In 1986, following the recommendations of the Hope Royal Commission, the
Intelligence and Security (Consequential Amendments) Act 1986
amended the sedition provisions in the
: (1) to make clear that
that the prosecution carried the burden of proving that an accused had a
‘seditious intention’
in relation to the offences in
ss 24C–24D; and (2) to delete ss 24A(b), (c) and (e), which
referred to exciting disaffection
in the United Kingdom or the King’s
The Gibbs Committee
report 1991
1.5 In 1991, the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law chaired by
former Chief Justice Sir Harry Gibbs (the Gibbs Committee)
considered the
sedition provisions in ss 24A–24F of the
In a preceding discussion
paper, the Gibbs Committee expressed the view that those provisions were couched
in archaic language and
required modernisation and simplification—but
should then be retained in the
1.6 In its Fifth Interim Report, the Gibbs Committee confirmed this criticism,
noting that the definition of ‘seditious intention’
‘expressed in archaic terms and [was] misleadingly
However, the Gibbs
Committee confirmed its view that Commonwealth law must continue to make it an
offence to incite the overthrow
or supplanting by force or violence of the
government or the
Constitution
1.7 The Gibbs Committee also recognised Australia’s international
obligations under art 20 of the
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights 1966
and art 4 of the
International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 1966
to prohibit
incitement to national, racial and religious hatred (see Chapters 5 and
1.8 Consequently, the Gibbs Committee’s final recommendation was that it
be made an offence, punishable by a maximum of seven
imprisonment:
to incite by any form of communication:
(a) the overthrow or supplanting by force or violence of the
Constitution
established Government of the Commonwealth or the lawful authority of that
Government in respect of the whole or part of its
(b) the interference by force or violence with the lawful processes for
Parliamentary elections; or
(c) the use of force or violence by groups within the community, whether
distinguished by nationality, race or religion, against
other such groups or
members thereof.
11 September 2001 and
1.9 Although many textbooks and commentaries on Australian law had pronounced
the crime of sedition (and related variations) to be
‘archaic’ and
‘defunct’, more recent concerns about the national and international
security environment have
literally put the matter back on the front
page—particularly in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on New York
and Washington
on 11 September 2001, and the Bali (12 October 2002),
Madrid (11 March 2004) and London (7 July 2005) bombings. The latter
introduced a new dimension to debates about counter-terrorism: the
possible presence in western countries of ‘home grown’
and suicide bombers, and the degree to which this might warrant increased
domestic surveillance and police powers, as
well as criminal offences
specifically tailored to cover this area.
Special COAG meeting
in September 2005
1.10 At the Special Meeting of the Council of Australian Governments (COAG)
convened on 27 September 2005 by the Prime Minister,
the Hon John Howard
MP, the participants were briefed on the international and national security
environment by the Directors-General
of the Office of National Assessments and
the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO). After further
discussion and
a consideration of the risks of a terrorist attack occurring in
Australia, the federal, state and territory leaders agreed in principle
cooperate in matters of counter-terrorism and to introduce a common package of
legislative measures.
1.11 At the end of the meeting a communiqué was issued setting out the
agreed outcomes of the discussions.
These included: (a) the development of a National Emergency Protocol; (b)
continued high priority to be given to the security of
mass passenger transport;
(c) the development of a national approach to the use of closed circuit
television (CCTV) in support of
counter-terrorism arrangements; (d) the
development of a National Action Plan to combat intolerance and communal
violence; (e) improvements
to aviation security; (f) the development of a
national identity security strategy to combat identity fraud and theft; (g)
improvements
to private security arrangements, particularly where these impact
on Australia’s counter-terrorism arrangements; (h) revision
of the first
National Counter-Terrorism Plan
(2003), which sets out the collaborative
arrangements in place for preventing, preparing for and responding to terrorist
within Australia; (i) emphasising the importance of Australia’s
current regime of regular counter-terrorism exercises at the
national, state and
territory levels; (j) promoting public understanding of, and confidence in, the
national counter-terrorism arrangements
and putting in place arrangements to
provide the community, business and the media with timely information during a
crisis; and (k)
development of a national chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear security strategy focused on prevention, preparedness, response
1.12 Another key aspect of the Special Meeting was the discussion about the
adequacy of existing counter-terrorism laws. COAG noted
‘the evolving
security environment in the context of the terrorist attacks in London in July
2005’ and agreed there was
‘a clear case for Australia’s
counter-terrorism laws to be strengthened’, with the proviso that:
any strengthened counter-terrorism laws must be necessary, effective against
terrorism and contain appropriate safeguards against
abuse, such as
parliamentary and judicial review, and be exercised in a way that is
evidence-based, intelligence-led and proportionate.
1.13 State and territory leaders agreed with the Commonwealth that the
Criminal Code
(Cth) should be amended in a number of respects, including
amendments to provide for:
• ‘control orders’ and ‘preventative detention’
for up to 48 hours, to restrict the movement of those
thought to pose a
terrorist risk to the community;
• the expansion the Commonwealth’s ability to proscribe terrorist
organisations that advocate terrorism; and
• ‘other improvements ... including to the financing of terrorism
1.14 State and territory leaders also noted that they would be consulted by the
Commonwealth in relation to:
• proposed amendments to Part IIIAAA of the
Defence Act 1903
to enhance and clarify the arrangements for calling-out the Australian Defence
Force to assist civilian authorities; and
• the possible enactment of laws to prevent the use of non-profit or
charitable organisations for the ulterior purpose of financing
activities.
1.15 Apart from the inherent desirability of developing an integrated, national
approach to counter-terrorism, one of the underlying
reasons for convening the
Special Meeting of COAG was that inter-jurisdictional cooperation was needed
because most aspects of criminal
law and police powers fall to the states and
territories under the
Constitution
. For example, because of
constitutional constraints, the Commonwealth could not itself enact such
measures as: (a) preventative detention
of suspected terrorists; and (b) stop,
question and search powers in areas such as transport hubs and places of mass
gatherings.
1.16 Commonwealth, state and territory leaders also agreed that these new laws
would be reviewed after five years, and that the legislation
would include 10
year ‘sunset clauses’.
The Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(Cth) was introduced into the
Australian Parliament on 3 November 2005. Key features of the Bill
• expansion of the grounds for the proscription of terrorist organisations
to include organisations that ‘advocate’
(Schedule 1);
• a new offence of financing terrorism (Schedule 3) and increased
financial transaction reporting obligations on individuals
and businesses
(Schedule 9);
• a new regime to allow for the imposition of ‘control orders’
(subject to review after a period of up to one year)
that place restrictions on
the movements and associations of a person suspected of involvement in terrorist
activity and authorise
their close monitoring (Schedule 4);
• a new preventative detention regime to allow police to detain a person
without charge for the purposes of interrogation by
ASIO, to prevent a terrorist
act or to preserve evidence of such an act—with limited ability to
disclose such detention, and
severe penalties for unlawful disclosure
(Schedule 4);
• expanded police powers for warrantless searches and seizures in
‘Commonwealth places’ and in ‘prescribed
security zones’
(Schedule 5);
• police powers to compel disclosure of commercial and personal
information (Schedule 6);
• further expansion of information and intelligence gathering powers
available to police forces and to ASIO (Schedules 8 and
• modernisation of the old sedition offences, as recommended by the Gibbs
Committee a decade earlier, by replacing them with
a suite of five offences
built around the basic concept of prohibiting a person from ‘urging’
others to use ‘force
or violence’ in a number of prescribed
contexts—and with a specific defence of ‘good faith’
(Schedule 7).
Schedule 7: the new
sedition offences
1.18 The recommendations of the Gibbs Committee were expressly acknowledged as
influencing the drafting of the new sedition offences
in late 2005. The
Explanatory Memorandum accompanying the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
noted that:
The inclusion of sedition in the
Criminal Code
is consistent with the
general policy of moving serious offences to the new
Criminal Code
they are updated. These offences have been update[d] in line with a number of
recommendations of Sir Harry Gibbs in the Review
of Commonwealth Criminal Law,
Fifth Interim Report, June 1991 (the Gibbs
1.19 Similarly, in his Second Reading Speech, the Attorney-General, the Hon
Philip Ruddock MP, noted that ‘the sedition amendments
are modernising the
language of the provisions and are not a wholesale revision of the sedition
1.20 The Attorney-General also stated that the provisions were the product of
extensive consultation with national leaders and senior
government officers at
all levels through the COAG process, and were needed
to ensure that we have the toughest laws possible to prosecute those responsible
should a terrorist attack occur.
Second and of equal importance, the bill ensures we are in the strongest
position possible to prevent new and emerging threats, to
stop terrorists
carrying out their intended
1.21 In relation to the sedition provisions in particular, the Attorney-General
further noted that:
The bill also addresses those in our community who incite terrorist acts.
It does this by expanding upon the Australian government’s ability to
proscribe terrorist organisations that advocate terrorism
and also updates the
sedition offence.
The updated sedition offence will address problems with those who incite
directly against other groups within our
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Legislation Committee report
1.22 On 3 November 2005, the Senate referred the provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
to the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Legislation Committee (the Senate Committee inquiry) for inquiry and report by
28 November
1.23 The Senate Committee inquiry, chaired by Senator Marise Payne, held three
days of public hearings in Sydney in mid-November
2005 and—indicative of
the high level of public interest—received nearly 300 written
submissions.
1.24 In relation to the security environment, the Senate Committee inquiry noted
that it had been advised by the Director-General
of ASIO, Mr Paul
O’Sullivan, that:
It is a matter of public record that Australian interests are at threat from
terrorists. It is also a matter of public record that
ASIO has assessed that a
terrorist attack in Australia is feasible and could well occur. ... [T]he threat
has not abated and we need
to continue the work of identifying people intent on
doing harm, whether they are already in our community, seeking to come here
overseas or seeking to attack Australian interests overseas. I would also point
out that the nature of the threat we face is
not static. Just as terrorist
organisations and groups learn from past experience and adapt to counter the
measures that governments
implement, so also do we need to continually revise
the way we go about the business of countering terrorist threats. Part of that
process involves ensuring that the legislative framework under which we operate
is commensurate with the threat we
1.25 Similarly, the Australian Federal Police argued before the Senate Committee
inquiry that the clandestine nature of terrorism
activity and its catastrophic
consequences mandated enhanced powers and new tools for police and intelligence
Together, the proposals for control orders, preventative detention and stop,
for police to deal with
situations that are not covered by the existing legal framework. Since the
events of 2001, the AFP and other
agencies have been in constant dialogue with
the government on the appropriateness of the legal framework for preventing and
investigating
terrorism as our understanding of the terrorist environment has
developed. ... The proposals in the bill ... address limitations
framework which have become apparent recently, in particular the need for the
AFP to be able to protect the community where
there is not enough evidence to
arrest and charge suspected terrorists but law enforcement has a reasonable
suspicion that terrorist
activities may be imminent or where an act has
1.26 The Committee’s report defined its role in the following terms:
No witnesses questioned the responsibility of the government to evaluate
national security information and to make a judgment about
the actual level of
threat to Australia. However, many questioned whether the obligation to protect
the community justifies creating
a separate system to deal with ‘terrorist
suspects’ who may otherwise be dealt with by the criminal justice system.
[Submissions] and witnesses urged the committee to consider: whether the
current Bill is necessary to combat terrorism; whether existing
offences are sufficient to deal with acts of terrorism and related activity; and
whether the removal of traditional safeguards
is a proportionate
1.27 The report made 51 recommendations for amendment to the Bill, with a final
recommendation to pass the Bill if the Committee’s
recommendations were
taken up by the Government.
recommendations had substantial cross-party support, although a dissenting
report was filed by Greens Senators Bob Brown and
additional comments were
supplied by Labor Senator Linda
and additional comments
and a partial dissent were supplied by Australian Democrats Senator Natasha
Stott Despoja.
1.28 In relation to Schedule 7, dealing with sedition laws, the Committee made
these four recommendations:
Recommendation 27.
The committee recommends that Schedule 7 be removed
from the Bill in its
Recommendation 28.
The committee recommends that the Australian Law
Reform Commission conduct a public inquiry into the appropriate legislative
for addressing the issue of incitement to terrorism. This review should
examine, among other matters, the need for sedition provisions
such as those
contained in Schedule 7, as well as the existing offences against the government
Constitution
Recommendation 29.
If the above
recommendation to remove
Schedule 7 from the Bill is not accepted, the committee recommends that:
• proposed subsections 80.2(7) and 80.2(8) in Schedule 7 be amended
to require a link to force or violence and to remove the
phrase ‘by any
means whatever’;
• all offences in proposed section 80.2 in Schedule 7 be amended to
expressly require intentional urging; and
• proposed section 80.3 (the defence for acts done ‘in good
faith’) in Schedule 7 be amended to remove the words
faith’ and extend the defence to include statements for journalistic,
educational, artistic, scientific, religious
or public interest purposes (along
the lines of the defence in
section 18D
Racial Discrimination Act
Recommendation 30.
The committee recommends that the amendments in
Schedule 1 of the Bill, relating to advocacy of terrorism, be included in
the proposed
review by the Australian Law Reform Commission as recommended above
in relation to Schedule 7.
1.29 The Government accepted a significant proportion of the recommendations in
the Committee’s report, and these were reflected
in the final version of
the Bill. The Act was passed into law on 6 December 2005—with only
Green and Australian Democrat Senators
voting against it—and entered into
force on 11 January 2006.
1.30 The Government did not accept Recommendation 27, to remove
Schedule 7 from the Bill in its entirety. Instead, some recommended
were made to the wording of the offences and the defence in Schedule 7 (see
Chapter 4), and the Attorney-General confirmed
his earlier undertakings
that, ‘given the considerable interest in the provisions’, they
would be subject to a review.
Ultimately, the Attorney-General decided that this independent public inquiry
should be conducted by the ALRC.
[back to top]
of Reference
1.31 On 1 March 2006, the Attorney-General, the Hon Philip Ruddock MP,
signed Terms of Reference asking the ALRC to conduct a review
of the operation
of Schedule 7 of the
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2) 2005
, with respect to the recently amended
provisions dealing with the offence of sedition and related matters, and to
report by 30 May
2006. The Attorney-General announced the review on 2 March
1.32 The Terms of Reference, which are reproduced at the front of this
publication, direct the ALRC to consider:
• the circumstances in which individuals or organisations intentionally
urge others to use force or violence against any group
within the community,
against Australians overseas, against Australia’s forces overseas or in
support of an enemy at war with
Australia; and
• the practical difficulties involved in proving a specific intention to
urge violence or acts of terrorism.
1.33 In performing its functions in relation to this reference, the ALRC is
asked to have particular regard to:
(a) whether the amendments in Schedule 7 of the
Anti-Terrorism Act
(No 2) 2005
, including the sedition offence and defences in sections
80.2 and 80.3 of the
Criminal Code
, effectively address the problem of
urging the use of force or violence;
(b) whether ‘sedition’ is the appropriate term to identify this
(c) whether Part IIA of the
, as amended, is effective to
address the problem of organisations that advocate or encourage the use of force
or violence to achieve
political objectives; and
(d) any related matter.
[back to top]
criminal law and practice
reach of federal criminal jurisdiction
1.34 Given the constitutional constraints in Australia, criminal law and
procedure is largely, but not entirely, a matter for the
territories.
The great bulk of
‘standard criminal law’—that is, the matters that most members
of the community think of as ‘crime’:
homicide, assault, sexual
assault, robbery, break and enter, and so on—is dealt with by state and
territory courts applying
state and territory law.
1.35 Federal legislative activity in this field generally must be underpinned by
one of the specific heads of power provided to the
Commonwealth under the
Constitution
—for example, the incidental power or the
external affairs power. Put simply, federal criminal law tends to: (a) be
with harm to Australian government property or officials, or to the
revenue (eg, taxation or social security frauds); (b) have a
clear interstate or
international dimension (eg, postal and telegraphic offences; or
importing/exporting prohibited goods or substances);
or (c) fulfil an
obligation pursuant to an international treaty to which Australia is a party
(eg, prohibitions on slavery, war crimes
and genocide).
1.36 Some areas of activity will give rise to overlapping federal and state or
territory jurisdiction. For example, all states and
territories have laws
prohibiting aspects of the manufacture, possession or distribution of illegal
drugs, while there are federal
laws prohibiting the import and export of illegal
drugs. In this area it is not unusual for there to be joint federal and state
investigations leading to a single trial, with indictments for beach of
both federal and state law.
1.37 As becomes evident in Chapter 4, there are substantial intersections
between federal law and state and territory criminal laws
in the area covered by
the new sedition offences in s 80.2. In particular cases there may be a
direct overlap of federal, state or
territory sedition laws, or there may be an
indirect overlap—for example, where the same facts would satisfy the
elements of
a federal sedition offence and also would constitute a breach of a
state or territory criminal law, such as assault, riot or affray.
1.38 Every jurisdiction except South Australia and the ACT has a law prohibiting
sedition, and all jurisdictions have laws against
treason. Section 80.6 of
Criminal Code
expressly provides that it is not the intention of the
Division 80, covering treason and sedition, to exclude state or territory
development of a
Criminal Code
The Gibbs Committee and MCCOC
(Cth) served for a long time as the
principal piece of legislation dealing with federal criminal law. Many other
federal statutes
also proscribe certain conduct and specify a criminal
penalty—for example, as discussed in Chapter 8, the
Commonwealth
Electoral Act
prohibits a person from hindering
or interfering with the free exercise of any political right or duty relevant to
a parliamentary
election. As a general rule, the
contained the
more serious and general offences, while the other federal offences created in
specific pieces of legislation tended
to be incidental to the regulation of a
particular field (such as customs, environmental protection, corporate
compliance and revenue
collection). Most, but not all, of the latter offences
may be heard summarily, and carry smaller maximum penalties (generally, under
months imprisonment).
1.40 In 1987, a Committee of Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law was
established, chaired by retired Chief Justice Sir Harry Gibbs
(and widely known
as ‘the Gibbs Committee’). The Gibbs Committee produced five interim
reports on a range of matters,
including: computer crime (1988); detention
before charge (1989); general principles of criminal responsibility (1990);
against the administration of justice and property crime (1990); and
arrest, sentencing, forgery and offences relating to the security
and defence of
the Commonwealth (1991). A final report was delivered in late 1991. The Gibbs
Committee was successful in producing
a number of amendments to the
, including those dealing with computer crime and police powers of
investigation.
1.41 As noted above, the Fifth Interim Report of the Gibbs Committee considered
and made recommendations for reform of the
provisions dealing
with treason, sedition and unlawful
associations.
1.42 In July 1990, the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General (SCAG)
established the Model Criminal Code Officers Committee (MCCOC),
with a brief to
modernise and harmonise criminal law across Australia through the development of
a Model Criminal Code. The MCCOC
process produced a series of discussion papers,
final reports and recommended Model Criminal Code chapters over the next decade.
More recently, MCCOC considered the question of double jeopardy.
1.43 Although the MCCOC process has not produced a uniform, national Criminal
Code (such as applies in the Canadian federation),
all Australian states and
territories have enacted parts of the Model
The Criminal Code
Criminal Code
was introduced into federal law (and applicable to
external territories) as a Schedule to the
Criminal Code Act 1995
which entered into force on 1 January 1997.
1.45 The basic policy of the Australian Government now is that the
is the principal piece of federal legislation containing serious
criminal offences. Substantive criminal provisions contained in
other, older
pieces of law—including, or perhaps especially, the
—progressively should be reviewed, and either
‘modernised’ and ‘migrated’ to the
Criminal Code
or repealed. Ultimately, the
will be left covering matters of
police powers (such as arrest, detention, search and seizure, forensic
procedures) and criminal
1.46 Underlying this process is the desire to keep the federal criminal statute
book ‘fresh’—utilising modern drafting
techniques, providing
greater uniformity of language and concepts, and ensuring that the law keeps
abreast of contemporary circumstances,
attitudes and concerns.
1.47 This background is important for the current Inquiry because treason was
‘modernised and migrated’ to the
Criminal Code
in 2002, and
sedition in 2005. A comprehensive set of provisions governing ‘terrorist
organisations’ was inserted into
Criminal Code
in 2002, leaving
behind the rarely used Part IIA of the
‘unlawful associations’. In essence, the technical side of this
Inquiry is to examine the effectiveness of these
efforts at modernising these
old areas of the criminal law.
Criminal responsibility under the
1.48 Another feature of the
Criminal Code
of particular importance for
this Inquiry is that Chapter 2 of the Code provides a set of general
principles of criminal responsibility
that permeate the rest of the
Code—and, indeed, must be read together with the criminal provisions in
any other piece of federal
legislation.
1.49 For example, Chapter 2, Division 5 standardises and defines the
fault elements (
in common law crime) to be applied to any
offence—intention, knowledge, recklessness or negligence. The definition
of ‘recklessness’
in s 5.4, for the purposes of determining
criminal liability, gives the term a meaning closer to ‘intention’
‘negligence’, requiring that the actor: (a) must be aware
there is a substantial risk his or her conduct will bring about
the prohibited
result, and (b) it is unjustifiable to take that risk in the circumstances.
1.50 As discussed in Chapter 8 of this Discussion Paper, a large number of
the submissions to the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry—and
to a significant
but lesser extent to the present Inquiry—strongly, but incorrectly as a
technical matter, objected to the
use of a ‘recklessness’ element in
the new sedition offences in the
The concern commonly
expressed was that a person should not be liable to be convicted of such a
serious offence by blundering into
such activities. However, the Code definition
makes plain that this could not be the case.
1.51 Chapter 2, Divisions 7–10 of the
Criminal Code
the circumstances in which criminal responsibility should
attributed,
and Division 11
covers extensions to criminal responsibility, such as attempt (s 11.1),
complicity and common purpose (s 11.2), incitement
(s 11.4) and
conspiracy (s 11.5). Division 13 reinforces the common law position
that the prosecution bears the onus of proving every
element of an offence
beyond reasonable doubt.
features of the federal criminal justice system
1.52 A number of other features of the federal criminal justice system are worth
highlighting. As noted above, state and territory
courts deal with the
overwhelming majority of federal criminal matters (whether summarily or upon
indictment), and in so doing they
normally apply their own practices and
procedures. As there are no federal prisons, federal offenders sentenced to a
term of imprisonment
serve their time in a state or territory-administered
custodial institution.
1.53 Section 80 of the
Constitution
provides that:
The trial on indictment of any offence against any law of the Commonwealth
shall be by jury
, and every such trial shall be held in the State where the
offence was committed, and if the offence was not committed within any
trial shall be held at such place or places as the Parliament prescribes.
[Emphasis added]
has two important consequences for persons charged with a
federal offence. First, every trial for an indictable offence must be conducted
before a jury—whereas the state and territory law often provides for the
waiver of a jury trial in certain circumstances, with
the trial proceeding
before a judge alone. Secondly, as interpreted,
requires that the jury
reach a unanimous verdict
federal criminal trial—whereas some states and territories allow for a
majority verdict in certain circumstances—and
that jurors should not be
pressured to reach unanimous
1.55 The discretion about whether to prosecute serious criminal charges is
exercised by the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
(DPP). The DPP is
a statutory officeholder, with a very high degree of independence afforded to
that office by statute
legal culture and tradition. In the normal course of things, the investigating
authority (such as the Australian Federal Police)
will provide the DPP with a
brief of evidence, upon which the DPP will determine—according to its
—whether there
is sufficient probative evidence to proceed, and whether launching a prosecution
would be in the public interest.
1.56 Although the law
that the Attorney-General may, after proper consultation, issue a guideline or
direction to the DPP—which must be
tabled in Parliament and published in
the Gazette—this never happens in
1.57 Finally, the DPP has the power to take over any criminal proceeding
(summary or indictable) instituted by another person, and
decline to carry it on
Thus, there is
very little risk in practice of a private prosecution for treason or
sedition—if the allegations have substance,
the DPP would take over and
proceed; if the action is without foundation, is contrary to the public
interest, or was instituted to
harass or intimidate an accused, then the DPP
could be expected to take over promptly and terminate the proceedings.
[back to top]
1.58 Most ALRC inquiries take one or more years to complete. In the current
inquiry, the ALRC has been asked to report within three
months. This presents
some obvious challenges for the ALRC to manage—mainly in terms of ensuring
adequate time for consultation
and for conducting the necessary research and
writing in-house.
1.59 Notwithstanding the tight timeframe, the ALRC determined to adopt its
standard processes, which have been developed over time
and build in mechanisms
to encourage widespread community engagement with the law reform process and
allow for the careful development
of public policy. This normally involves the
production of two community consultation documents (an Issues Paper and a
Paper) before proceeding to a final report with recommendations for
1.60 The ALRC respects the Australian Government’s expressed desire for
prompt advice on the effectiveness (or otherwise) of
the current sedition laws,
and has endeavoured to move as quickly as possible. The issues in question here,
although difficult and
important, are narrower than is the case with most ALRC
inquiries. Further, the ALRC has had the benefit of the report of the 2005
Senate Committee inquiry—and the nearly 300 submissions made to that
inquiry—which has reduced the typical learning curve.
1.61 Nevertheless, accommodating the need for widespread and meaningful
consultation on matters of public interest has resulted in
the ALRC producing
this Discussion Paper at the three-month mark. Allowing appropriate time for
written submissions and other feedback
to be submitted, and then considered,
means that the final report and recommendations likely will be completed in late
outside this Inquiry
1.62 The scope of the ALRC’s inquiry is limited both by its formal Terms
of Reference and by the practical necessity of demarcating
a work program that
is coherent and achievable in the limited time available.
1.63 The ALRC is not examining a range of issues that arise in discussions about
the contemporary legislative and policy response
to matters of national and
international security. For the avoidance of doubt, issues not included within
the current Terms of Reference
• the recent increases in the powers of ASIO and other intelligence and
law enforcement authorities to detain suspects and others
for questioning in
connection with the planning or execution of terrorist activity;
• the powers of intelligence and law enforcement
authorities to conduct electronic surveillance or interception, with appropriate
• the new powers to make preventative detention and control orders;
• the handling of classified and security sensitive information by
Australian courts and tribunals;
• the use of executive authority to refuse, withdraw or cancel passports
or visas, based upon security concerns.
1.64 It is standard operating procedure for the ALRC to establish a broad based
Advisory Committee, or ‘reference group’,
to assist with the
development of its inquiries.
1.65 Advisory Committees provide advice and assistance to the ALRC, and have
particular value in helping the ALRC to identify the
key issues and determine
priorities, providing quality assurance in the research, writing and
consultation effort, and assisting
with the development of proposals and
recommendations for reform as the inquiry progresses. Ultimate responsibility
for the final
report and recommendations, of course, remains with the
Commissioners of the ALRC.
1.66 The membership of the Advisory Committee for this inquiry is drawn from the
Bench, the Bar, the academy, media organisations,
civil liberties groups, human
rights and equal opportunity commissioners, and includes a current and former
Commonwealth Director
of Public Prosecutions. The full membership is detailed in
the List of Participants at the front of this publication. The Advisory
Committee had its first meeting on 11 May 2006, to consider the proposals
contained in this document. It is expected that a second
(and final) meeting
will be held before the completion of the final report, to consider the draft
recommendations for reform.
Review of Sedition Laws
(ALRC Issues Paper 30, 2006)
(IP 30) was released electronically on 20 March 2006 (and about a week
later in hard copy format), in
order to commence the community consultation
process on an informed basis.
1.68 IP 30 was organised into seven chapters. It included a significant
amount of background and historical material, and outlined
the current state of
the federal law on sedition and unlawful associations following the amendments
in late 2005, as well as related
federal laws and relevant state and territory
legislation.
1.69 IP 30 surveyed the relevant international law in this area, including
United Nations conventions, declarations and resolutions,
and also provided some
comparative perspectives from the laws in a number of other
countries—especially common law countries
with similar systems and
traditions, and the European Union, which has developed jurisprudence in this
1.70 IP 30 set out 24 key questions that the ALRC identified as arising out
of the Terms of Reference, and which required comment
before the ALRC could
formulate the proposals for reform contained in this Discussion
Paper—which are now presented for further
community debate and
discussion.
consultation
1.71 The Terms of Reference indicate that the ALRC ‘will identify and
consult with relevant stakeholders’. Under the
provisions of the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
(Cth), the ALRC ‘may
inform itself in any way it thinks fit’ for the purposes of reviewing or
considering anything that
is the subject of an
1.72 One of the most important features of ALRC inquiries is the commitment to
widespread community
consultation.
The nature and
extent of this engagement normally will be determined by the subject matter of
the reference—particularly whether
the topic is regarded as a technical
one, of interest largely to specialists in the field, or is a matter of interest
and concern
to the broader community. The ALRC regards this particular inquiry
as clearly falling in the latter category.
1.73 The ALRC has developed a broad consultation strategy for this inquiry, so
far as time permits, which encourages participation
from a wide spectrum of
stakeholders, including: community groups; prosecution and law enforcement
agencies; criminal defence lawyers;
judges; government lawyers and officials;
media organisations and peak associations; legal professional associations;
human rights
and civil liberties groups; academics; and others.
1.74 To date, the ALRC has received 64 written submissions and conducted
19 consultation meetings (many of them multi-party). Lists
submissions and consultations are set out in Appendices 3 and 4,
respectively.
[back to top]
Organisation
of Discussion Paper 71
1.75 This Discussion Paper is organised into 11 chapters—although
proposals for reform are not spread evenly throughout. Some
chapters provide
mainly contextual material, while others are more focused on the ‘nuts and
bolts’ of the elements of
1.76 In order to clarify the current and proposed state of the law,
Appendix 1 sets out the existing provisions in Division 80 of
Criminal Code
on treason and sedition, which are under consideration.
Appendix 2 shows how those provisions would look if the Government were to
adopt the ALRC’s proposals for reform. As noted above, Appendices 3
and 4 document the public consultation effort to date,
including meetings
and written submissions. Appendix 5 provides a list of the common
abbreviations used in this Discussion Paper.
1.77 Chapter 2 effectively serves as the ‘executive summary’
for this document, but also makes a number of proposals
central to the
ALRC’s handling of this Inquiry. The chapter considers the case for reform
of the law of sedition generally—including
the proposed abolition of the
term ‘sedition’ from the Australian statute book—and explains
the principles and
assumptions that underlie the pattern of proposals for reform
of the substantive offences against political liberty and public order.
1.78 Chapter 3 provides a history of the law of sedition and related
offences, as it evolved from its early origins in England many
centuries ago,
through to its inclusion in the
in 1920, and then to more
modern formulations and variations.
1.79 Chapter 4 outlines the current state of the law on sedition and
unlawful associations in Australia, following the amendments
made in November
2005. The chapter also describes related aspects of federal law and highlights
some of the gaps and overlaps between
sedition and other relevant offences (such
as treason, treachery and incitement to crime), as well as considering related
territory laws.
1.80 Chapter 5 provides the international framework—highlighting
Australia’s international human rights obligations under
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966
relevant United Nations conventions, declarations and resolutions; and
considering the extent to which these influence
Australian domestic law.
Chapter 6 offers a comparative view, surveying contemporary sedition laws
in a number of other countries—especially
common law countries with
similar systems and traditions, and the European Union.
1.81 Chapter 7 considers the important matter of the protection of freedom
of expression in Australian law, ranging from implied
constitutional rights to
free political speech in a democratic society, to statutes and cases that bear
directly on individual and
press freedoms.
1.82 Chapter 8 sets out the details of the ALRC’s proposed scheme for
reframing the two ‘urging force or violence’
offences in
s 80.2(1) and (3) of the
Criminal Code
, and restructuring the two
‘assisting the enemy’ offences in s 80.2(7) and (8) of the
Code—by including those offences,
in a modified form, into the offence of
treason in s 80.1. In all cases, the fault elements of the offences have
been clarified to
accord with the serious nature of the crimes and to minimise
any impact on freedom of expression. Chapter 8 also considers such
matters as the extra-territorial application of these offences, and
the existing requirement to obtain the Attorney-General’s
written consent
to proceed with a prosecution.
1.83 Chapter 9 sets out the ALRC’s proposed scheme for reframing the
offence of urging inter-group violence, contained in s
80.2(5) of the
Criminal Code
. The chapter also considers other federal, state and
territory laws dealing with concepts of racial hatred and racial or religious
vilification.
1.84 Chapter 10 looks at the ‘good faith defence’ to charges of
treason and sedition currently provided by s 80.3 of
, as well as considering alternative models and concepts, and also
examines the penalties for the various offences in Division 80.
1.85 Finally, Chapter 11 considers the case for reform in relation to the
‘unlawful associations’ provisions contained
in Part IIA of the
, which have not been used for decades and appear to have been
superseded by the more recent provisions on ‘terrorist
organisations’
contained in Part 5.3 of the
Criminal Code
[back to top]
submissions
1.86 The ALRC strongly encourages interested persons and organisations to make
written submissions at the earliest opportunity to
1.87 With the release of this Discussion Paper, the ALRC invites individuals and
organisations to make submissions in response to
the specific proposals, or to
any of the background material and analysis provided. There is no specified
format for submissions.
The ALRC will accept gratefully anything from
handwritten notes or a few emailed dot-points, to detailed and comprehensive
analyses. Although not essential, the ALRC prefers electronic
communications.
1.88 If there are passages in this Discussion Paper that seem to imply that
conclusions already have been drawn about the ultimate
findings and
recommendations, then this is unintended and is not meant to inhibit the full
and open discussion of policy choices
before the ALRC’s program of
research and consultation is completed.
1.89 Upon completion, the ALRC’s final report and recommendations will be
presented to the Attorney-General for tabling in
the Australian Parliament, at
which point the report becomes a public
1.90 ALRC reports are not self-executing documents. The ALRC is an advisory body
and provides recommendations about the best way
to proceed—but
implementation is always a matter for
1.91 In recent times, the ALRC’s approach to law reform has involved a mix
of strategies including: legislation and subordinate
regulations, official
standards and codes of practice, industry and professional guidelines, education
and training programs, and
so on. Although the final report is presented to the
Attorney-General, it may be that some of recommendations will be directed to
other government and non-government agencies, associations and institutions for
action or consideration.
In order to ensure consideration in the
forthcoming final report,
submissions addressing the proposals in this
Discussion Paper must reach the ALRC no later than Monday,
3 July 2006
. Details about how to make a submission are set out at
the front of this publication.
War Precautions Repeal Act 1920
(Cth) s 12. These provisions mirrored those in the
Criminal Code
(Qld), which were themselves based on the British common law as
outlined in
Digest of the Criminal Law
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 23
November 1920, 6851 (L Groom), 6851. See Ch 3 for further
discussion.
The High Court upheld the
validity of these provisions in
R v Sharkey
[1949] HCA 46
(1949) 79 CLR 121
Dixon J dissenting in relation to
s 24A(1)(g).
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Offences Relating to the Security and
Defence of the Commonwealth
, Discussion Paper No 8 (1988),
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
Council of Australian Governments
Council of Australian Government’s Communique—Special
Meeting on Counter-Terrorism
http://www.coag.gov.au/meetings/270905/
January 2006.
Explanatory Memorandum,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 3 November 2005, 102
(P Ruddock—Attorney-General),
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
Including in his Second
Reading Speech on the Bill: Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
Representatives, 3 November 2005, 102 (P Ruddock—Attorney-General),
The ALRC is also currently
inquiring into the sentencing and administration of federal offenders; see
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
(1991), chapters 31, 32 and 38,
respectively.
The influence of the
Model Code has been most marked in the Commonwealth, New South Wales, the ACT,
and South Australia; the Model
Code has been less influential in the
Griffith’s late
19th century model—Queensland, Western
Australia and Tasmania.
The ALRC has
proposed that all matters relating to sentencing also be removed from the
, and collected in a dedicated federal Sentencing Act: see
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
Discussion Paper 70 (2005)
Proposal 2–1.
Criminal Code
s 80.2(2), (4) and
Such as in the case of a young
child (s 7.1); or a person suffering from a serious mental impairment
(s 7.3); or where a person is
acting in self-defence (s 10.4), under
duress (s 10.2), in response to a sudden and extraordinary emergency
(s 10.3), under a claim
of right to property (s 9.5) or is exercising
lawful authority (s 10.5).
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
(ALRC Discussion Paper 70,
Cheatle v The Queen
[1993] HCA 44
(1993) 177 CLR 541
[1993] HCA 71
(1993) 179 CLR 44.
Director of Public Prosecutions Act
Commonwealth Director
of Public Prosecutions,
The Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
<www.cdpp.gov.au/Prosecutions/Policy/Default.aspx> at 11 March
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1983
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions, Consultation, Canberra, 26 April 2006.
Director of Public Prosecutions Act
was covered in Australian Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The
Protection of Classified and Security Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
which the Australian Government has substantially
implemented.
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
B Opeskin, ‘Engaging
the Public: Community Participation in the Genetic Information Inquiry’
Attorney-General must table the Report within 15 sitting days of receiving it:
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
The ALRC has a strong record
of having its advice followed. About 59 per cent of the ALRC’s
previous reports have been substantially
implemented; 27 per cent have been
partially implemented; three per cent are currently under consideration; and
11 per cent have
not been implemented: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Annual Report 2004–05
, ALRC 101 (2005), 24.
2. Overview of Proposed
Introduction
Do we need the concept of ‘sedition’?
‘Glorification’ of terrorism
Offences against political liberty and public order
Urging force or violence
Assisting the enemy and treason
Unlawful associations
Review of old
Ancillary matters
Extraterritorial application
Requirement of Attorney-General’s consent
Net effect of the proposed changes
2. Overview of Proposed
Introduction
2.1 This Discussion Paper details the changes that the ALRC proposes to the
existing sedition offences (which are described and analysed
in Chapter 4,
and set out in full in Appendix 1) and related matters. The purpose of this
chapter is to explain the principles and
assumptions that underlie the pattern
of law reform proposals. In effect, this chapter serves as an executive summary,
but it also
contains a number of proposals that set the scene for the rest of
the Discussion Paper.
[back to top]
2.2 As discussed in detail in the following chapter, sedition law has its roots
in the suppression of political dissent, prohibiting
criticism that would
‘bring into hatred or contempt, or to excite disaffection against the
person of His Majesty, his heirs
or successors, or the government or
constitution ... or the administration of justice’, or ‘to raise
discontent or disaffection
among His Majesty’s subjects, or to promote
feelings of ill-will and hostility between different classes’. In some
law jurisdictions—including New South Wales—the related
offence of treason still applies (in law, if not in policy or
prosecutorial
practice) to those who would even ‘compass or imagine’ the death of
the King, Queen or eldest son and heir;
or ‘violate the King’s
companion, or eldest unmarried daughter, or the wife of the eldest son and
2.3 Australian states and territories ‘inherited’ their sedition
laws from the United Kingdom, whether through the common
law or by enactment of
parallel statutory provisions, but the precise formulations vary somewhat (see
Chapter 4). South Australia
and the ACT have no legislation prohibiting
sedition, and both abolished the common law offence (in 1992 and 1996,
respectively)
in an effort to remove ‘outdated common law rules’.
2.4 Sedition was a relatively late entrant to federal law, with s 24A of
(Cth) added in 1920, replacing transitional provisions
introduced by the
War Precautions Act 1914
(Cth), which were aimed at
suppressing criticism of the aims and alliances, and conscription policy and
practice, of the First World
2.5 Perhaps to a greater extent than any other offence except treason, sedition
is a quintessentially ‘political’ crime,
punishing speech that is
critical of the established order.
2.6 The legislation passed in the Australian Parliament in late 2005 repealed
the old sedition offence in s 24A of the
and replaced it
with five new offences, now found in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth). As detailed in Chapter 4, the new offences attempt to shift the
focus away from ‘mere speech’ towards ‘urging’
persons to use ‘force or violence’ in a number of specified
contexts—which arguably is closer conceptually
to the criminal laws of
incitement and riot than it is to common law sedition.
2.7 Nevertheless, given the history and the factual circumstances in which the
new offences are likely to be applied and prosecuted,
there are concerns held by
members of the community, and politicians across party lines, that there is
potential for the law to over-reach,
and to inhibit free speech and free
association.
2.8 Australians place a very high premium on free speech and on the importance
of robust political debate and commentary. The free
exchange of
ideas—however unpopular or radical—is generally healthier for a
society than the suppression and festering
of such ideas.
2.9 At the same time, all liberal democratic societies place some limits on the
exercise of free speech—as authorised under
all international human rights
conventions (see Chapter 5)—for example, through civil defamation
laws and prohibitions on obscenity,
serious racial vilification or incitement to
commit a crime. In the famous dictum of United States Supreme Court Justice
Oliver Wendell
Holmes Jr, ‘the most stringent protection of free speech
would not protect a man in falsely shouting “fire” in
a theatre and
causing a panic’.
2.10 Under the Terms of Reference, the central questions for this Inquiry are
whether the new regime (taking together the new offences
in s 80.2 and the
‘good faith’ defence provided in s 80.3): (a) is
well-articulated, as a matter of criminal law; and
(b) strikes an acceptable
balance in a tolerant society (or is ‘reasonably justifiable in a
democratic society’, to use
the term of art employed in international
human rights law).
[back to top]
Do we need the
concept of ‘sedition’?
2.11 Although the contributions made to the debate and analysis through the
consultation process are considered at length in the
remainder of this
Discussion Paper, two general points about the tenor of the public feedback are
worth making. First, there is little
doubt that, on any dispassionate analysis,
the new sedition laws introduced in 2005 are ‘better’ than the old
replaced—whether from a technical or a human rights and civil
liberties perspective.
2.12 The new offences contained in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
the emphasis from speech that is critical of the established order to
exhortations to use force or violence against the established
authority, voters
or particular groups within the community. It is very difficult to understand
why exhortations to use force or
violence should
be prohibited by
federal law—so long as the offences are properly framed. Further, the
defence contained in s 80.3, which was
modified after the Bill stage as a
consequence of feedback and recommendations from the Senate Committee,
represents an advance on
earlier law in expressly recognising the social
interest in permitting media reports and commentary on matters of public
2.13 Nevertheless, it is clear from the ALRC’s community consultation
process—as it was during the Senate Committee’s
process—that
there is palpable public concern about the effects of the new laws on freedom of
speech and freedom of association,
both directly (that is, fear of conviction
and punishment) and even more so through the so-called ‘chilling
effect’—that
is, self-censorship to avoid being charged in the first
place. A significant proportion of the requested consultation meetings and
written submissions have come from individuals or organisations in Australia
associated with the print and broadcast media, writers,
visual artists, theatre
groups and filmmakers.
2.14 It is an interesting phenomenon observed in law reform from time to time
that the codification or ‘modernisation’
of old laws creates new and
greater concerns, even where these efforts bring some objective improvement and
increased certainty to
the law. The chilling effect of laws that are outdated
and unlikely to be used seems to be greatly outweighed by the chilling effect
modernised laws upon which public attention has been focused—and which may
be more likely to be enforced. Thus, the far
more draconian state and territory
laws on sedition and treason apparently have not occasioned a similar
chill—because no one
knows about them.
2.15 Where such concerns are simply misconceived, as a matter of law and
practice, the best remedy is education rather than legislative
change. Where
such concerns are justifiable—in a liberal democratic society that places
a very high premium on freedom of speech
and freedom of association—then
proper law reform will require both education and legislative change.
2.16 Some of the concern expressed by stakeholders and commentators clearly
stems from the context in which the new laws emerged.
Although the changes made
in 2005 largely track the 1991 recommendations of the Gibbs Committee, sedition
laws were not modernised
as part of a general ‘tidy up’ of federal
criminal law. Rather, the new sedition offences were contained in the
Anti-Terrorism Act 2005
(Cth), which also introduced into the
a range of extraordinary new powers, mechanisms and offences—such
as control orders (Div 104) and preventative detention orders
(Div 105)—that required a constitutional referral of powers from the
2.17 Thus the view—of opponents of the legislation as well as
proponents—was that while sedition offences may have been
regarded as a
‘dead letter’ in western countries in recent decades, they were
being modernised in November 2005 in order
to be used.
2.18 As indicated above, the sedition offences were revised at that time to
place the focus squarely on urging the use of force or
violence, rather than on
expressions of dissent. Nevertheless, a great deal of the debate and media
coverage continued to argue—incorrectly—that
a person could fall
foul of the new laws by saying that ‘the Government was wrong to send
troops to Iraq’, or ‘Australia
needs to cut its ties with the
British Crown’, or that a university lecturer would be in trouble for
asking students of politics
or rhetoric to ‘study the speeches of
2.19 The ALRC considers that governments have a perfect right, and in many cases
a duty, to legislate to protect the institutions
of democracy (responsible
government, independent courts, free elections) from attack by force or
violence; and similarly to protect
the personal integrity of citizens
(especially vulnerable or unpopular groups) from attack by force or violence.
2.20 This remains the case even though there may be other federal, state and
territory laws that might be transgressed along the
way to committing one of
these new ‘sedition’ offences; for example, riot, affray, assault,
malicious damage to property
or hindering public officials. It would be a
curious result, indeed, if the Australian Government could not legislate to
itself and the fundamental institutions of democracy from violent
attack, but had to rely on the legislatures of the states and territories
this for it.
2.21 Much of the concern about the new offences in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
is triggered by the fact that they are still referred to as
‘sedition’ offences. It is not clear why, after modifying
offences substantially, the Australian Government chose to retain the term
‘sedition’ to describe the new offences—especially
of the new offences deals with urging inter-group violence rather than with the
security of the Commonwealth. The Gibbs
Committee criticised the old
definition of ‘seditious intention’ for being
‘expressed in archaic terms and ... misleadingly
and while the new
offences in s 80.2 are modelled on those recommended by the Gibbs
Committee, the Committee was silent on the matter
2.22 Nevertheless,
and Division 80 of the
Criminal Code
are now headed ‘Treason and sedition’, and s 80.2 is headed
‘Sedition’. No reference is made to ‘sedition’
any of the offences; in the ‘defence’ contained in s 80.3; in
any of the related evidentiary or procedural provisions;
or anywhere else in the
Criminal Code
2.23 There are two consequences to the retention of the term
‘sedition’ in the
Criminal Code
. First, under
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(1) The headings of the
Parts Divisions
and Subdivisions into which any Act is
divided shall be deemed to be part of the Act. ...
(3) No marginal note, footnote or endnote to an Act, and no heading to a section
of an Act, shall be taken to be part of the Act.
2.24 As a technical matter, the reference to sedition in the headings of
Part 5.1 and Division 80 has consequences for the interpretation
the provisions in that Part; however, the heading of s 80.2 does not form
part of the Act.
2.25 As a practical matter, this may not make a great deal of difference. A
court faced with interpreting the provisions in Part
5.1 will focus
primarily on the plain meaning of the words. The court will have regard to the
purpose of the legislation
utilise relevant extrinsic material—such as Second Reading Speeches,
Explanatory Memoranda and the reports of parliamentary
committee and law reform
commissions—if this aids
interpretation.
Further, federal
statutes must be construed subject to the
Constitution
—which, as interpreted, contains an implied freedom of
political speech
is a strong tradition in the common law that provisions imposing criminal
liability must be narrowly construed by
the courts.
2.26 The second consequence goes more to the broad social understanding of the
law than to its technical construction. As discussed
above, the sedition
provisions were subject to intense criticism in the media and in most of the
roughly 300 submissions to the 2005
Senate Committee inquiry into the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
. In the face of this high emotion, the
Senate Committee recommended, with bipartisan support, that Schedule 7
(containing the sedition
provisions) ‘be removed from the Bill in its
entirety’ and referred to the ALRC for public
The Government accepted
some of the Senate Committee’s suggested amendments in this
but chose to pass the
legislation and then to refer it to the ALRC for review.
2.27 In this Discussion Paper (and summarised below), the ALRC makes a range of
proposals to improve the existing law. Some of these
represent technical
refinements to the drafting. Mainly, however, the proposals are aimed at
ensuring there is a bright line between
freedom of expression—even when
exercised in a challenging or unpopular manner—and the reach of the
criminal law, which
should focus on exhortations to the unlawful use of force or
2.28 The ALRC is confident that, following further community feedback on these
proposals, the final report and recommendations will
achieve the desired aim in
terms of technical improvements to the law. It would be unfortunate, however, if
continued use of the
term ‘sedition’ were to cast a shadow over the
new pattern of offences. The term ‘sedition’ is much too closely
associated in the public mind with its origins and history as a crime rooted in
criticising—or ‘exciting disaffection’
against—the
established authority.
2.29 Chapters 5 and 7 consider in some detail the extent to which freedom
of expression is guaranteed by international law and by
domestic law
(respectively). As noted above, Australians place a high premium on free speech
and robust debate. We demand that our
public institutions be open, transparent
and accountable, and we reserve the right to criticise the most senior officials
believe they have erred. The cultural preference is for challenging
unpopular or radical views in the marketplace of ideas, rather
than in the
criminal courts.
2.30 Consequently, the ALRC proposes that the term ‘sedition’ no
longer be used in federal criminal law. To this end,
Division 80 of the
Criminal Code
should be renamed ‘Treason
and offences against political liberty’, and the heading of s 80.2
should be changed to ‘Offences
against political liberty and public
order’. (Proposal 11–1 calls for the repeal of s 30A of
, which contains the definition of ‘seditious
intention’ for the purposes of unlawful associations.)
The Australian Government should remove the term
‘sedition’ from federal criminal law. To this end, the headings of
and Division 80 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) should be
changed to ‘Treason and offences against political liberty’, and the
heading of s 80.2 should be changed
to ‘Offences against political
liberty and public order’.
2.31 As discussed above, most states and territories still have sedition laws in
the old and more objectionable form. In the interests
of improving and
harmonising the laws in this area across Australia, the ALRC also proposes that
the Australian Government should
initiate a process through the Standing
Committee of Attorneys-General to remove the term ‘sedition’ from
state and territory
The Australian Government should initiate a process through the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General to remove the term
from state and territory laws and to modernise and
harmonise the relevant laws in keeping with the proposed changes to federal
‘Glorification’
of terrorism
2.32 Chapter 6 describes the nature and use of sedition laws (or the
equivalent) in a range of other countries. Among other things,
the chapter
considers s 1 of the
Terrorism Act 2006
(UK), which makes it a
criminal offence in the United Kingdom to engage in the encouragement or
‘glorification’ of terrorism.
Glorification is defined to include
‘any form of praise or celebration, and cognate expressions are to be
construed accordingly’.
This law has been very controversial in the UK—including in the House of
Lords and the UK Parliament’s Joint Committee
Rights—drawing criticism that: the terminology used is too vague and too
broad; there is no requirement that the person
intends to incite terrorism; and
the prohibition improperly intrudes into protected free speech (under
art 10 of the European Convention
on Human Rights).
2.33 The submission to this Inquiry of the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) notes that the use of
‘praise’ and ‘glorify’ were considered during the
development of the
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2) 2005
rejected as too imprecise and capable of generating difficulties of
The AGD submission
concludes that the existing Australian law already ‘appropriately
encapsulates incitement and glorification
of [terrorist] acts’ and thus
there ‘appears to be no need for a separate
The ALRC agrees,
and Proposal 6–1 states that there is no present need to introduce
into federal law an offence of encouragement
or glorification of terrorism along
the lines of the recent law in the UK.
[back to top]
Offences against
political liberty and public order
2.34 While freedom of expression must be given a high premium, it is also well
understood that every liberal democratic society must
place some limits on the
exercise of free speech; for example, through civil defamation laws and criminal
prohibitions on obscenity
or incitement to commit a crime. The test at
international law is whether any such limits are necessary and reasonably
justifiable
in a democratic society.
Urging force or
2.35 In Chapters 8 and 9, the ALRC proposes ways of reframing or
otherwise dealing with the five offences in s 80.2 of the
to place a greater emphasis on the ‘force or violence’
aspect—continuing in the direction that the Government established
2005 amendments—and to draw the bright line between permitted speech and
criminal conduct.
2.36 The ALRC proposes the retention of the basic offences contained in
s 80.2(1) (urging the overthrow by force or violence of the
Constitution
Government); s 80.2(3) (urging interference in parliamentary elections by
force or violence); and s 80.2(5) (urging inter-group
force or violence).
However, two changes are suggested to the scope of the offences:
• section 80.2(3) should be extended to cover urging another to use force
or violence to interfere with a constitutional
referendum;
• section 80.2(5) should include ‘national origin’ among
the distinguishing features of a group for the purpose
2.37 More fundamental changes to the manner in which these offences should
operate are also proposed, including that:
• Each of the three provisions should be amended to make clear that the
person must intentionally urge the use of force or
• An additional provision should be inserted into s 80.2 to make
clear that for a person to be guilty of any of the three offences,
must intend that the urged force or violence will
• In considering whether the person intended the urged force or violence
to occur, context is critical. The ALRC proposes that
the court must take into
account whether the conduct was done: (i) in the performance, exhibition or
distribution of any artistic
work; or (ii) in the course of any statement,
publication, discussion or debate made or held for any genuine academic,
artistic or
scientific purpose, or any other genuine purpose in the public
interest; or (iii) in connection with an industrial dispute or an
matter; or (iv) in publishing a report or commentary about a matter of public
• Given the effect of those proposed changes, the ‘good faith’
defence in s 80.3 is inappropriate and should be
Most submissions and
consultations raise serious questions about the nature and application of the
existing provisions in s 80.3.
There is a strong view the such a defence is
inherently illogical: a person would need to point to evidence (which the
prosecution
would have to negative beyond reasonable doubt) showing that, while
he or she intentionally urged another person to use force or
violence to
overthrow the
Constitution
(for example), this was done ‘in good
faith’. Proposal 10–2 meets these concerns by building the
contextual issues
into the required elements of the offences, rather than
relying on an affirmative defence.
Assisting the enemy
and treason
2.38 The ALRC has significantly more concern about the offences currently
contained in s 80.2(7)–(8), which are not built around
the concept of
‘urging force or violence’, but rather with urging another to
‘assist’ an enemy at war with
Australia or an entity that is engaged
in armed hostilities against the Australian Defence Force (ADF), respectively.
three offences considered above, the ‘assisting’ offences
were not recommended by the Gibbs Committee.
2.39 The ALRC agrees with the run of submissions and commentary that point to
the undesirable breadth of the term ‘assist’,
which is not defined
Criminal Code
. There is an express exemption in s 80.2(9) for
providing ‘aid of a humanitarian nature’. However, significant
remain with the offences as drafted—and these provisions mirror
almost exactly the terms of s 80.1(1)(e) and (f) on treason,
which carries
a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.
2.40 The ALRC cannot suggest reform of the ‘assisting’ offences in
s 80.2, while leaving intact the parallel provisions
dealing with treason.
For that reason, the ALRC proposes the repeal of
s 80.2(7)–(9),
proposes a number of key changes to the equivalent provisions governing the
treason offences in s 80.1.
2.41 First, there is significant concern that such a blanket prohibition on
conduct that ‘assists’ the enemy unduly impinges
on freedom of
expression, to the extent that it captures merely dissenting opinions about
government policy. For example, it may
be said colloquially that strong
criticism of Australia’s recent military interventions in Afghanistan or
Iraq ‘gives
aid and comfort’ to—or
‘assists’—the enemy.
2.42 Secondly, there is no requirement to show that the defendant’s
conduct assisted the enemy
to wage war
against Australia or engage in
armed hostilities against the ADF; it would be sufficient to prove that the
person urged another to
assist an enemy that happened to be at war with
Australia or an entity happened to engage in armed hostilities against the
2.43 To remedy these concerns, the ALRC proposes that
s 80.1(1)(e)–(f) should be reframed to make clear that the offences
of intentionally and
assisting an enemy to wage war on
Australia or to engage in armed hostilities against the
The addition of the term
‘materially’ is meant to indicate that mere rhetoric or expressions
of dissent do not amount
to ‘assistance’ for these purposes; rather,
the assistance must enable the enemy or entity to wage war or engage in armed
hostilities, such as through the provision of funds, troops, armaments or
strategic advice or information.
2.44 The ALRC also proposes that s 80.1 be amended to require that the
person must be an Australian citizen or resident at the time
of the alleged
Such a qualification is
common in other countries, and consistent with the nature and historical origins
of the concept of treason,
which has at its centre the violation of a duty of
allegiance to one’s
Apart from the value of
this change as a matter of principle, it also will help avoid the potential for
anomalous cases in practice,
given that the offence has extraterritorial
application (see below). For example, virtually all enemy combatants who are
nationals could be swept up by the existing treason offence, even if
they arrived in Australia many years after hostilities have
2.45 There are a number of other aspects of the treason offences that, while not
related directly to this Inquiry, appear to warrant
further attention. For
example, some of the language in s 80.1 is rather archaic, and does not
mesh with the modern terminology or
concepts used in the
Criminal Code
There are also questions about the appropriateness of the penalty of life
imprisonment for accessories after the fact or those guilty
of ‘misprision
of treason’—failure to report the matter to a police officer as soon
as possible. Consequently,
the ALRC proposes that the Australian Government
conduct a further review of
[back to top]
associations
2.46 Part IIA of the
on unlawful associations was
introduced in 1926 to deal with the perceived threat of the Community Party of
Australia and radical
trade union
but rarely has been
used. Canadian provisions that served as a model for
were repealed
2.47 The Terms of Reference for the current Inquiry ask the ALRC to consider
because the declaration of an ‘unlawful association’
may proceed from a finding that the group shares a ‘seditious
intention’, as defined by s 30A of the
. (This area
is discussed in further detail in Chapter 11.)
2.48 Once a body is a declared to be an unlawful association, a number of
criminal offences come into play, including: failure to
provide information
relating to an unlawful association upon the request of the
Attorney-General;
officer, member or representative of an unlawful
association;
contributions of money or goods to, or soliciting donations for, an unlawful
association;
publishing or selling material issued by an unlawful
association;
and allowing
meetings of an unlawful association to be held on property owned or controlled
by a person.
2.49 In 1991, the Gibbs Committee considered the ‘little used’
unlawful associations provisions, commenting in a discussion
paper that it was
‘disposed to think that the activities at which these provisions are aimed
can best be dealt with by existing
laws ... and that there is no need for these
provisions’.
In its final
report, the Gibbs Committee noted that all the submissions received in response
to the proposal to repeal
endorsed that view, and the Committee so
recommended.
2.50 In 2002, a comprehensive set of provisions dealing with ‘terrorist
organisations’ was introduced into the
Criminal Code
(Division 102). No attempt was made to adapt the unlawful associations
provisions for this purpose, but neither were they repealed.
The criteria for
declaring that a group is a ‘terrorist organisation’ do not rely on
the concept of sedition or seditious
intention; rather, the group must be
directly or indirectly engaged in planning, fostering or advocating
‘terrorist acts’
(as defined in s 100.1).
2.51 A group may be ‘listed’ as a terrorist organisation in
Australia following proceedings in the Federal Court, or
pursuant to a
regulation (disallowable in Parliament) where the Attorney-General is satisfied
that the criteria are met (s 102.1(2)).
Prior listing by the United Nations
Security Council is no longer required.
2.52 Consultations and submissions strongly favoured the repeal of the unlawful
associations provisions in Part IIA of the
submission of the AGD did not agree with this proposition, but agreed that
was ‘developed in the context of concern about communism in
Australia’, while ‘circumstances have changed dramatically
since’ and the new terrorism provisions are better crafted to
‘address contemporary threats to the Australian
community’.
2.53 The ALRC agrees with the Gibbs Committee and the predominant view expressed
in consultations and submissions that the unlawful
associations provisions are
anachronistic and unnecessary. There is little point in seeking to modernise
these provisions since that
work already has been done in developing the
terrorist organisations provisions in the
Criminal Code
, which are better
suited to contemporary circumstances. Consequently, the ALRC proposes that the
unlawful associations provisions
of Part IIA of the
2.54 There are three ‘stand alone’ sections in
not rely on the concept of ‘seditious intent’ or the declaration of
an ‘unlawful association’: s
30C (advocating the overthrow of
the Government),
(illegal lockouts and strikes) and
(hindering services by threats or violence). In Proposal 8–5, the
ALRC suggests that s 30C is made redundant by the proposed
new offences
against political liberty, and should be repealed. There are no existing or
proposed counterparts for
–K, and further consideration of
these offences would be outside the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference.
Proposal 11–2
adds these provisions to a suggested list of those that
the Australian Government should cause to be reviewed (see below).
[back to top]
Review of old
2.55 In the course of this Inquiry, the ALRC has come across a large number of
old provisions in
that are related to the
existing sedition and treason laws. These include the offences of
‘treachery’ (s 24AA), sabotage
(s 24AB), assisting
prisoners of war (s 26), unlawful military drills (s 27), interfering
with political liberty (s 28), and damaging
Commonwealth property
2.56 All of these provisions are couched in archaic language, and many of them
may have been superseded by new and better laws. It
is beyond the
Inquiry’s Terms of Reference and timeframe to conduct a systematic review
of these provisions, but the ALRC proposes
that the Australian Government
initiate a review to determine which offences merit retention, modernisation and
relocation to the
Criminal Code
, and which should be abolished because
they are redundant or otherwise
inappropriate.
[back to top]
Extraterritorial
application
2.57 Common law countries traditionally have based criminal jurisdiction on
considerations of territorial sovereignty, and have been
suspicious of
has been a pronounced recent trend towards
the extraterritorial application of
criminal laws, generated by both: (a) rapid developments in transport and
communications technology;
and (b) increased concerns over serious crimes that
may be perpetrated across borders, such as genocide, people smuggling, child
tourism, sex slavery, hostage taking and terrorism.
2.58 Under s 80.4 of the
Criminal Code
, treason and sedition
offences are subject to ‘extended geographical
in s 15.4 to
mean that the law applies: (a) whether or not the conduct constituting the
alleged offence occurs in Australia; and
(b) whether or not a result of the
conduct constituting the alleged offence occurs in Australia.
2.59 Government policy is that sedition should be a category D offence
because offences may be committed from an external location
via the internet or
For example, someone
overseas could establish a website that urges others to use force or violence to
interfere in Australian parliamentary
elections, or could send SMS text messages
to associates in Australia, urging them to use force or violence against a
racial or ethnic group. As a practical matter, of course, enforcement
will be difficult unless the alleged offender is physically
extradition proceedings pursuant to a treaty.
2.60 The ALRC has no problem in principle with this policy choice in relation to
sedition. As noted above, the ALRC can see some
anomalies potentially arising in
the prosecution of treason offences under s 80.1 of the
Criminal Code
if the provisions are given extraterritorial effect. However, the ALRC
proposes to address this issue in another way, by adding a
requirement to
s 80.1 that the treason offences only apply to a person who is an
Australian citizen or resident at the time of the
Requirement of
Attorney-General’s consent
2.61 Under s 80.5, an offence under Division 80 of the
may not be prosecuted without the written consent of the
Attorney-General. In practice, this provision would be used only in very
circumstances, where the Director of Public Prosections has made a decision that
the evidence available and the public interest
warrant criminal proceedings, but
the Attorney-General believes otherwise. According to the Explanatory Memorandum
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, this provision is designed to
provide an additional safeguard for a person charged with a sedition
2.62 The requirement for the Attorney-General’s consent to a prosecution
is found throughout the federal criminal law. In some
cases, this is because the
legislation pre-dates the establishment of the independent office of the DPP in
However, a number of
modern provisions also impose the requirement—for example, offences in
relation to people smuggling
genocide, crimes against humanity, and war
2.63 Section 16.1 of the
Criminal Code
also provides a general rule
that the Attorney-General’s consent is required to prosecute any offence
where: (a) the alleged
conduct occurs wholly in a foreign country; and (b) the
person is not an Australian citizen, resident or body corporate incorporated
In such cases, the
purpose of the consent requirement is said to give regard to considerations of
international law, practice and
comity, international relations, and other
public interest
considerations.
2.64 The ALRC accepts that the intention behind s 80.5 is to provide an
additional safeguard for defendants, rather than an attempt
‘politicise’ this area. As the AGD argued before the 2005 Senate
Committee inquiry, ‘the Attorney is a political
safeguard on the DPP and
the DPP is a safeguard on the
reiterated this view in a submission to this Inquiry, stating that the consent
requirement ‘addresses any concerns
2.65 However, as discussed above, sedition (especially in its earlier forms) can
be characterised as an inherently political offence,
used against dissidents and
opponents of the established political order. Against this background, it is not
surprising that significant
misgivings were expressed in consultations and
submissions about any perceived influence by an Attorney-General—an
politician—in a prosecution process that has been reserved for the
past twenty years to independent officers operating under
published guidelines
and ethical obligations to the court.
2.66 On balance, the ALRC proposes that s 80.5 should be
The continued
existence of the general requirement in s 16.1 seems adequate to ensure
that the Attorney-General is given a role where
there are significant
implications for international relations. The ALRC is strongly influenced by the
fact that the run of new terrorism
offences in Part 5.3 of the
do not require the Attorney-General’s consent to a prosecution
(unless s 16.1 applies). Logic suggests that the same position
apply to the
Division 80.2 offences against political liberty and public order.
[back to top]
Net effect of the
proposed changes
2.67 It is proposed that most of Part IIA of the
unlawful associations) be repealed, with two offences
be reviewed.
2.68 A number of major and minor changes are proposed for Division 80 of
Criminal Code
, on treason and sedition. Appendix 1 of this Discussion
Paper contains the provisions in Division 80 are they currently exist.
2 indicates what these provisions would look like if the ALRC’s
proposals were implemented, with the changes highlighted.
Crimes Act 1900
—which expressly continues the operation of the
Treason Act of
(Imp) 25 Edw III c 2.
section was amended in 1986, following recommendations from the Hope Royal
Commission, to remove references to exciting disaffection
against the United
Kingdom Parliament, government or constitution, or the government or
constitution of ‘any of the King’s
Dominions’.
Schenck v United
[1919] USSC 64
O’Keefe, ‘Sedition threatens uni debate’,
, 3 May 2006, 23.
Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth
Interim Report
(1991), [32.13].
Part IIA of the
(Cth) on unlawful associations relies on the concept of a
‘seditious intention’, which is defined in s 30A. However,
Proposal 11–1 the ALRC calls for repeal of these
provisions.
Acts Interpretation Act
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(2005), [5.173-5.174],
Ibid, [5.176],
Terrorism Act
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Proposals 8–3,
There was no citizenship
qualification in the old
provision either. However, the Gibbs
Committee observed that the treason offences ‘must obviously be construed
so as not to
apply to an enemy alien in time of war outside Australia’:
see H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law:
Fifth Interim Report
the discussion in Ch 8.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
R Douglas, ‘Keeping the
Revolution at Bay: The Unlawful Associations Provisions of the Commonwealth
[2001] AdelLawRw 4
Adelaide Law Review
Crimes Act 1914
s 30AB, with a maximum penalty of imprisonment for six
Ibid s 30B, imprisonment
for up to one year; and see s 30H regarding proof of
membership.
Ibid s 30D,
imprisonment for up to six months.
ss 30E, 30F and 30FA.
s 30FC, imprisonment for up to six
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
(1991), [38.2]–[38.9].
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Proposal 11–1, which specifies repeal of ss 30A, 30AA, 30AB,
30B, 30D, 30E, 30F, 30FA, 30FC, 30FD, 30G and
Proposal 4–1.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
12 April 2006.
Proposal 8–11.
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Director of Public Prosecutions
Criminal Code
(Cth) Division 73, Subdivision A. See
Ibid Part 5.2. See
Ibid Division 268.
See s 268.121.
I Leader-Elliot,
Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 1 March 2002,
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee—Australian Parliament,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Transcript of Public Hearing
, 18 November 2005, 19 (G
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Proposal 8–12.
3. Origins and History of Sedition
Introduction
The origins and evolution of common law sedition
Early origins
Common law development
Sedition in the 20th century
Sedition in Australia
Colonial era inheritance
Crimes Act 1914
Communist Party prosecutions
Recent consideration
Reform trends: modernise or abolish?
Hope Royal Commission
Gibbs Committee
Legislative amendments in 2005
3. Origins and History of Sedition
Introduction
3.1 This chapter provides an overview of the history of the law of sedition. In
particular, it examines the evolution of sedition
at common law and outlines its
application in Australia in the 20th century.
3.2 The law of sedition prohibits words or conduct deemed to incite discontent
or rebellion against the authority of the state. Historically,
‘sedition’ described a number of common law or statutory offences,
namely, uttering seditious words, publishing or printing
seditious words,
undertaking a seditious enterprise, or engaging in a seditious
conspiracy.
Traditionally, for a
word or activity to be seditious it must be said, written or done with a
intention’.
3.3 The classic definition of seditious intention is found in Stephen’s
Digest of the Criminal Law
published in 1887:
A seditious intention is an intention to bring into hatred or contempt, or to
excite disaffection against the person of, His Majesty,
his heirs or successors,
or the government and constitution of the United Kingdom, as by law established,
or either House of Parliament,
or the administration of justice, or to excite
His Majesty’s subjects to attempt otherwise than by lawful means, the
of any matter in Church or State by law established, or to incite any
person to commit any crime in disturbance of the peace, or
to raise discontent
or disaffection amongst His Majesty’s subjects, or to promote feelings of
ill-will and hostility between
different classes of such
3.4 In this context, seditious intention further defines the physical element of
the offences, rather than referring to the mental
or fault element
Thus it can be seen that
the legal elements of sedition offences are ill-defined. The vagueness of the
language used to describe
the notion of seditious intention makes it difficult
to demarcate the boundaries of sedition offences with any certainty. In
Boucher v The Queen
, Kellock J stated that ‘probably no crime
has been left in such vagueness of
definition’.
3.5 Historically, the law of sedition has been used to punish a wide range of
behaviour—from satirical comment or mere criticism
of authority to the
incitement of violent uprising. The scope and application of the law has
fluctuated significantly over time.
One commentator has remarked:
What used to be regarded as a clear case of seditious libel in both England and
the United States is now generally considered to
be merely the vehement
expression of political opinion, and therefore the classic instance of
constitutionally protected speech.
3.6 The historical account of the law of sedition set out below reveals that the
development and use of sedition laws has been influenced
strongly by the
changing political climate and the degree of public support for existing state
institutions; theories about the relationship
between citizen and state; and
evolving notions of the relationship between action, idea, association and
responsibility. It also
reveals that there has been a general trend in the
common law courts to narrow the scope of sedition offences in accordance with
contemporary emphasis on the importance of free speech and open political
debate. A distinction has thus been drawn between the expression
of political
opinion with reformist aims and the advocacy of revolutionary or violent
political action.
3.7 However, an examination of prosecutions in Australia in the 20th century
also reveals cases in which the law of sedition has
been used to stifle
political dissent in a manner that many would consider incompatible with modern
democratic processes.
[back to top]
The origins and
evolution of common law sedition
3.8 The law of sedition derives from the law of treason, which since feudal
times has punished acts deemed to constitute a violation
of a subject’s
allegiance to his or her lord or
Sedition and treason are
related conceptually because seditious words or conduct can stir up opposition
to the established authority.
For this reason it has been said that sedition
‘frequently precedes treason by a short
3.9 The prohibition of mere criticism of government that does not incite
violence reflects an antiquated view of the relationship
between the state and
society. According to this view, the ruler is the superior of the subject and as
such is entitled to be shielded
from criticism or censure likely to diminish his
or her status or authority.
the 1704 case of
R v Tutchin
, Holt LCJ explained this view as
If people should not be called to account for possessing the people with an ill
opinion of the government, no government can subsist.
For it is very necessary
for all governments that the people should have a good opinion of it. And
nothing can be worse to any government,
than to endeavour to procure animosities
as to the management of it; this has been always looked upon as a crime and no
can be safe without it be
3.10 Prior to the early 17th century, offences that would now be classified as
sedition offences were prosecuted pursuant to statutes
creating treason
3.11 Seditious libel emerged as a distinct offence in the early 1600s in the
Court of Star Chamber.
Libellis Famosis
the defendant was prosecuted for defaming the deceased
Archbishop of Canterbury.
Court held that the basis of criminal libel was that it risked a breach of the
peace—the truth of the statements did not
provide a defence, since the
peace was just as likely to be broken whether the statements were true or
In addition, it held that
a libel against a public figure was a greater offence than one against a private
person, since
it concerns not only the breach of the peace, but also the scandal of
government; for what greater scandal of government can there
be than to have
corrupt or wicked magistrates to be appointed and constituted by the King to
govern his subjects under him? And greater
imputation to the state cannot be,
than to suffer such corrupt men to sit in the sacred seat of justice, or to have
any meddling
in or concerning the administration of
3.12 At the time of this decision, the absolute monarchy was under threat from
the rising parliamentarians. The advent of the printing
press had prompted a
more sustained effort to control expression of ideas critical of the church and
—foreshadowing, by
several centuries, current concerns about the rapid spread of information
through the internet and other
forms of modern communications technology.
Existing means of prosecuting seditious words and writings were inexpedient, and
seditious libel was developed as a more efficient and effective means of
securing convictions.
development
3.13 Following the demise of the absolute monarchy and the abolition of the Star
Chamber by the Long Parliament in 1641, the law
of sedition was developed in the
common law courts. The substantive law did not change significantly until the
late 18th century,
and until this time ‘any criticism of public men, laws
or institutions was liable to be treated as
During this
period, neither the intention of the defendant (or rather, the absence of
intention to incite disaffection or violence)
nor the truth of the matters
communicated affected the finding of
The courts emphasised
that it was the mere tendency of criticism to undermine government that rendered
the conduct an offence.
3.14 The breadth of the law of sedition during this period is partly
attributable to the functions of the judge and jury in seditious
libel trials.
Juries in seditious libel trials were entitled to determine only whether a
defendant uttered, published or printed
the words in question. They were
precluded from considering whether the words were in fact
‘seditious’ or whether the
defendant intended them to be
It has been noted that this
gave rise to conflicts between judges and juries, particularly when juries were
urged by defence counsel
to use their verdicts to protest against unjust
prosecutions.
3.15 A notable change to the law occurred with the passage of
gave the jury the legal right to deliver a general verdict on the entire case
and to determine the facts and the application
of the law to those
The practical effect of
this reform was the introduction of an intention requirement into the law of
In addition, by
allowing more political considerations to be taken into account by the jury, it
forced the law of sedition to conform
to some extent to popular opinion about
the right to free speech and political
3.16 The 19th century saw a significant shift in the definition and use of the
sedition offences. In response to the permeation of
liberal democratic notions
of the relationship between state and society—and, in particular, the
notion that individuals should
have freedom of speech in relation to political
matters—the law of sedition adapted to allow more criticism of
government.
However, the legal
elements of the offences remained far from clear, and authorities varied as to
the nature of the intention required
and whether such intention was to be
determined subjectively or
objectively.
It appears that the
general trend in the case law was to confine the offence to cases in which the
words urged others to commit illegal
acts or to create public
disturbances.
In addition, the
focus of sedition prosecutions began to shift to the seditious effect of the
words as opposed to their intrinsically
3.17 The increasing difficulty in prosecuting seditious libel and the upsurge of
radical activity following the Napoleonic wars led
to the development of the
offence of ‘seditious conspiracy’. This included ‘every sort
of attempt, by violent language
either spoken or written, or by a show of force
calculated to produce fear, to effect any public object of an evil
character’.
conspiracy bore similarities to the law of unlawful assembly, and was manifested
by making speeches, holding meetings or
taking steps in concert with
3.18 Prosecutions for seditious conspiracy were brought sporadically throughout
the 19th century, notably following the Peterloo
massacre of 1819 and in
connection with the Chartist disturbances in 1839 and the latter half of the
Despite the breadth of
this offence, it appears that it was prosecuted less often than other public
order offences, such as unlawful
assembly and
The changing nature of
political activity in the 19th century meant that ‘seditious’ speech
often occurred in the context
of protest activities, with authorities using the
unlawful assembly laws instead of sedition laws to control protest
Sedition in the 20th
3.19 Sedition prosecutions in the United Kingdom tapered off in the first half
of the 20th century and fell into disuse in the latter
half of the 20th century.
The last prosecution initiated by the British Crown was in
3.20 The legal elements of the common law sedition offences remain
uncertain—particularly whether a specific subjective intention
required, or whether a basic intention objectively discerned will
However, in
the Supreme Court of Canada held that in order to be guilty of a
sedition offence a defendant must intend to incite violence or to
create public
disturbance or disorder for the purpose of disturbing constituted
3.21 Sedition law was most recently considered by the Divisional Court in
England in 1991 when a private prosecution was brought
against the author and
publishers of
The Satanic
The Court approved
the statement in
that incitement to violence or public disorder
for the purpose of disturbing constituted authority is a necessary ingredient of
common law offences of
[back to top]
Sedition in
Colonial era
inheritance
3.22 The Australian states inherited the British common law of
State prosecutions for
sedition were brought at various periods throughout the 19th and early 20th
centuries. Notably, sedition laws
were used to prosecute:
• John Macarthur, founder of the Australian merino wool industry, for
seditious behaviour against Governor Bligh in
• Governor Darling’s political opponents, including critics in the
press, in the early 1800s;
• Henry Seekamp, the editor and owner of the
Ballarat Times
time of the Eureka Stockade in
• anti-conscriptionists who opposed Australia’s involvement in the
First World War;
• F W Paterson, the Member for Bowen from 1944–50, for
expressing support for the workers’ struggle against capitalism
public meeting in 1930.
Crimes Act 1914
3.23 Until 1914, criminal law in Australia was almost entirely the province of
the states and territories.
Following the commencement of the First World War, judicial doctrine approved a
marked expansion in Commonwealth legislative power,
resulting in a spate of
federal laws to regulate public
3.24 The first comprehensive piece of federal criminal legislation was the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), which contained a number of offences against the
government, including treason and incitement to
The sedition offences
were not included in the
. However, the
War Precautions Act
gave the Governor-General the authority to make
regulations designed to suppress discussion of war aims, alliances, and
conscription
3.25 The sedition provisions were inserted into the
These provisions repeated
in substance the common law definition of the
but were somewhat
broader in that they did not require proof of subjective intention and did not
require incitement to violence or
disturbance.
Under ss 24C
and 24D of the
, it was an offence to engage in a seditious
enterprise with a seditious intention or to write, print, utter or publish
words with a seditious intention.
3.26 ‘Seditious intention’ was defined as:
An intention to effect any of the following purposes, that is to say:
(a) to bring the Sovereign into hatred or contempt;
(b) to excite disaffection against the Sovereign or the
Government or the
Constitution
of the United Kingdom or against either House of
Parliament of the United Kingdom;
(c) to excite disaffection against the Government or
Constitution
of any of the
King’s Dominions;
(d) to excite disaffection against the Government or
Constitution
Commonwealth or against either House of the Parliament of the Commonwealth;
(e) to excite disaffection against the connexion of the King’s Dominions
under the Crown;
(f) to excite His Majesty’s subjects to attempt to procure the alteration,
otherwise than by lawful means, of any matter in
the Commonwealth established by
law of the Commonwealth; or
(g) to promote feelings of ill-will and hostility between different classes of
His Majesty’s subjects so as to endanger the
peace, order and good
government of the Commonwealth.
was further amended in 1926 to prohibit
‘unlawful associations’ that advocated or encouraged the doing of
any act purporting
to have as an object the carrying out of a seditious
Communist Party
prosecutions
3.28 The advent of federal sedition offences coincided with the foundation of
the Communist Party of Australia (CPA), although this
was not alluded to
extensively in the parliamentary
It is widely thought
that the enactment of the federal sedition provisions was prompted by concerns
and its impact on radical socialist activity in
It has also been
suggested that the federal government was motivated to enact such provisions
because it did not trust the Labor-controlled
states to suppress
‘subversive’ activities in accordance with its
3.29 It appears that the first federal sedition prosecution occurred in
As noted above, state
sedition laws had been used on a number of occasions prior to this time. While
state sedition laws were primarily
used to prosecute members of the CPA, there
is little information available on the manner or frequency of these
prosecutions.
It has been
reported that there were three sedition prosecutions brought against communists
in Queensland in the 1930s, and two prosecutions
in Tasmania and Queensland in
the 1940s. One defendant was charged for making pro-Nazi statements and the
other, a Jehovah’s
Witness, was charged for stating that people should not
put their faith in the King.
historian notes that these latter prosecutions received little attention outside
the states in which they were brought, and on
this basis concludes that there
may have been other state sedition prosecutions during this
3.30 There is evidence that the Australian government sought advice on a number
of occasions about whether those who opposed Australia’s
involvement in
the Second World War might be prosecuted for
It has been suggested
that the provisions were not used for this purpose because their scope was
unclear and there were doubts about
whether juries would be likely to convict
defendants for anti-war
propaganda.
3.31 The first federal sedition prosecution was brought in 1948 against a member
of the CPA, Gilbert Burns.
had been asked a hypothetical question at a public debate about the likely
attitude of the CPA in the event of a war between
the Soviet Union and the
western powers. He was convicted and sentenced to six months imprisonment for
making the following statement:
If Australia was involved in such a war, it would be between Soviet Russia and
American and British Imperialism. It would be a counter-revolutionary
would be a reactionary war. We would oppose the war, we would fight on the side
of Soviet Russia.
3.32 On appeal, Burns argued that the federal provisions were constitutionally
invalid and that his words were not expressive of
a seditious intention as they
referred to a hypothetical contingency. The High Court held that the provisions
were constitutionally
valid, coming within the ‘incidental’ head of
power in s 51(xxxix) of the
Constitution
. The Court was
evenly divided on the question whether the particular words were expressive of a
seditious intention, and the decision
of the Chief Justice prevailed.
Latham CJ held that, in effect, unlike the common law, the statutory
provisions did not require incitement
to violence or public
He further considered
that the hypothetical nature of the statement did not exclude a finding that the
words were seditious:
A statement that the view of the Communist Party is that Russia should be
supported as against Australia and the British Sovereign
in any war in which
Australia, the Sovereign, and Russia may be involved is a statement which is
presented as a policy to be approved
and to be put into effect. Such a statement
shows a present intention to excite disaffection against the Sovereign and the
Government.
... ‘Exciting disaffection’ refers to the implanting or
arousing or stimulating in the minds of people a feeling or view
or opinion that
the Sovereign and the Government should not be supported as Sovereign and as
Government, but that they should be
opposed, and when the statement in question
is made in relation to a war it means that they should, if possible, be
destroyed. Such
advocacy is encouragement of and incitement to active
disloyalty.
3.33 A second sedition case came before the High Court in
The General Secretary of
the CPA, Lance Sharkey, had prepared the following statement for publication in
response to a request by
a newspaper journalist:
If Soviet forces in pursuit of aggressors entered Australia, Australian workers
would welcome them. Australian workers would welcome
Soviet Forces pursuing
aggressors as the workers welcomed them throughout Europe when the Red troops
liberated the people from the
power of the Nazis. ... Invasion of Australia by
forces of the Soviet Union seems very remote and hypothetical to me. I believe
Soviet Union will go to war only if she is attacked and if she is attacked I
cannot see Australia being invaded by Soviet troops.
The job of the Communists
is to struggle to prevent war and to educate the mass of people against the idea
of war. The Communist
Party also wants to bring the working class to power but
if fascists in Australia use force to prevent the workers gaining that power
Communists will advise the workers to meet force with
3.34 Sharkey was convicted of uttering seditious words and sentenced to
13 months imprisonment. The High Court upheld the conviction
on the same
Burns v Ransley
, again holding that the hypothetical nature of
the statement did not affect the question of whether it could be considered
3.35 In both cases the High Court held that the test of seditious intention was
objective: that is, the prosecution did not need
to prove that the accused
subjectively intended to ‘incite disaffection’—rather, it
needed to prove only that the
words objectively could be said to express a
seditious intention. Further, the prosecutions were sustained on the basis of an
inferred from a hypothetical statement made in response to a question
both considered
improbable. In neither case was the statement directly intended to incite
violence or public disorder.
3.36 The High Court’s interpretation of the federal sedition
provisions—which, in effect, enabled them to be used to
punish expressions
of disloyalty—stands in contrast to the common law, which had in the
previous century narrowed sedition
to words or behaviour that incited violence
or public disorder. This interpretation also stands in stark contrast to the
adopted by the United States Supreme Court, which had drawn a
distinction between behaviour creating a ‘clear and present danger
public disorder’ and ‘doctrinal justification or prediction of the
use of force under hypothetical conditions at some
3.37 The High Court’s extension of the sedition offences can be explained
by reference to the evolving Cold War context and
the desire of the Chifley
Government to prove to the Australian public and the American and British
Governments that it was taking
measures to combat the internal threat of
This is underscored
by the selective manner in which sedition was prosecuted.
The intensity of Australian political debate in the early Cold War period was
such that, had the Commonwealth and State authorities
enforced the law of
sedition consistently, the courts would not have been equipped to cope with the
avalanche of sedition prosecutions
that would have ensued. ... A cursory reading
of the daily newspapers in the years 1947–1949 or the literature produced
all the political parties reveals countless examples of inflammatory speech
and expressive conduct which clearly fell within the
harsh sedition provisions
Crimes Act 1914
. Yet, in an environment in which inflammatory
political speech was commonplace, no sedition prosecutions were brought against
of the CPA’s equally determined and ruthless opponents on the far
right of the political spectrum.
3.38 Although sedition appears not to have been widely prosecuted, there is
evidence that the federal investigative authorities frequently
sought advice
from the Attorney-General’s Department in the early 1950s to determine
whether it could use sedition laws to
prosecute CPA members and
It has been suggested
that more sedition prosecutions were not instituted due to uncertainty caused by
a pending appeal brought by
one CPA member who had been convicted of publishing
an article criticising Australia’s involvement in the Korean
It has also been suggested
that authorities were able to execute far-reaching search warrants on
communists’ offices and homes
when investigating sedition
3.39 The last Commonwealth sedition prosecution was in 1953, when a member of
the CPA was tried unsuccessfully for publishing an
article derisive of the
The last sedition
prosecution at the state or territory level appears to have been in South
Australia in 1960, where a newspaper
editor was charged with seditious libel for
criticising the Royal Commission inquiring into the Stuart murder
consideration
3.40 There are suggestions that prosecutions for sedition have been considered
on a number of occasions in more recent times. Most
notably, in 1976 the
Attorney-General’s Department was asked for advice about whether the
remarks made by former Prime Minister
Gough Whitlam in the wake of the dismissal
of the Labor Government—to the effect that the Governor-General was
‘deceitful’
and ‘dishonourable’—could amount to
3.41 In the early 1990s there was some discussion in the media about the
possibility of sedition offences being used to prosecute
opponents to
Australia’s involvement in the first Gulf
but there is no evidence of
formal consideration being given to this by government officials.
[back to top]
Reform trends:
modernise or abolish?
3.42 Law reform commissions in Canada, Ireland and the United Kingdom have
recommended the abolition of existing sedition
on the basis that they
are unnecessary in light of more modern criminal offences, such as incitement
and other public order offences;
undesirable in light of their political nature and
and inappropriate in
modern liberal democracies where it is accepted that it is a fundamental right
of citizens to criticise and
challenge government structures and
3.43 In 1984, the Hope Royal Commission on Australia’s Security and
Intelligence Agencies (the Hope Commission) examined federal
sedition law as
part of its review of national security offences relevant to the Australian
Security Intelligence
Organisation.
Commission criticised the High Court decisions in
stating that
‘mere rhetoric or statements of political belief should not be a criminal
offence, however obnoxious they may be
to constituted
authority’.
3.44 The Hope Commission recommended that the provisions be amended to include
the common law requirement of intention to create
violence, public disturbance
or disorder.
It also recommended
the removal of those provisions referring to seditious intention in relation to
‘any of the Queen’s
dominions’, thus narrowing the scope of
the offences to seditious words or acts directed against the Australian
Constitution
federal provisions were amended in accordance with the Hope Commission’s
recommendations in 1986.
3.45 Australia’s federal sedition provisions were also reviewed by the
Committee of Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law (the
Gibbs Committee) in
The Committee criticised
the federal provisions for being archaic and excessively wide, and recommended
that they be ‘rewritten
to accord with a modern democratic
Committee considered that a separate offence of sedition should be retained, but
limited to inciting violence for the purpose
of disturbing or overthrowing
constitutional authority.
Gibbs Committee therefore recommended the replacement of the existing provisions
with the following offences:
• inciting the overthrow or supplanting by force or violence of the
Constitution
or the established Government of the Commonwealth or the lawful
authority of that Government in respect of the whole or part of its
• inciting interference by force or violence with the lawful processes for
Parliamentary elections; and
• inciting the use of force or violence by groups within the community,
whether distinguished by nationality, race or religion,
against other such
groups or members thereof.
Legislative
amendments in 2005
3.46 The Gibbs Committee recommendations were not acted upon at the time.
However, in September 2005 the Australian Government announced
its intention to
modernise the federal sedition provisions and adapt them to the
counter-terrorism context.
Prior to this, Australia’s sedition laws—like those in Britain and
Canada—were thought to be suspended somewhere
‘between obsolescence
and abolition’.
Australian Government stated that some of the amendments to the sedition
provisions effected by the
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2) 2005
(Cth) were in
accordance with the Gibbs Committee
recommendations.
3.47 Despite largely having fallen out of use in the last 50 years, the
Australian Government stated that in the counter-terrorism
‘sedition is just as relevant as it ever
particularly to
‘address problems with those who communicate inciting messages directed
against other groups within our community,
including against Australia’s
forces overseas and in support of Australia’s
amendments to federal sedition offences reflect international initiatives to
criminalise activity deemed to promote terrorist
These amendments
are discussed in greater detail in the following Chapter.
L Maher, ‘The Use and Abuse of
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
C Kyer, ‘Sedition Through the
Ages: A Note on Legal Terminology’
University of Toronto
Faculty of Law Review
A Digest of the Criminal Law
(1887), cited in Law Commission of
England and Wales,
Working Paper No 72 Second Programme, Item XVIII
Codification of the Criminal Law—Treason, Sedition and Allied Offences
(1977), 42.
R v Chief Metropolitan
Stipendiary Magistrate; ex parte Choudhury
[1991] 1 QB 429
Boucher v The King
See Ibid per Kellock J,
Freedom of Speech
(2nd ed, 2005), 163.
See ‘Historical
Concept of Treason: English and American’ (1960) 35
Indiana Law Journal
70. The word ‘sedition’ derives from the Latin
¸ meaning uprising or insurrection. In classical Rome and in
medieval England,
was used to refer to offences that, according
to modern understanding, would be referred to as treason (in other words, overt
of rebellion or insurrection). The contemporary use of the
word—denoting behaviour that may incite discontent or rebellion
lawfully constituted authority—did not appear until the 1600s: see C Kyer,
‘Sedition Through the Ages: A Note
on Legal Terminology’
University of Toronto Faculty of Law Review
R v Sullivan
11 Cox CC 44
Fitzgerald J.
Freedom of Speech
(2nd ed, 2005),
R v Tutchin
(1704) 14 State
Trials (OS) 1096, 1128.
The breadth of
the law of treason has fluctuated throughout history, at times encompassing the
whole of criminal law: ‘Historical
Concept of Treason: English and
American’ (1960) 35
Indiana Law Journal
70, 70; M Black,
‘Five Approaches to Reforming the Law: 650 Years of Treason and
Sedition’ (Paper presented at Australasian
Law Reform Agencies Conference,
Sydney, 11 April 2006). The law of treason was first codified in England by the
Statute of Treasons
(25 Edward III, St 5, c 2) during the reign
of Edward III. This Act attempted to narrow the scope of the law to three
primary offences:
imagining or compassing the death of the King; levying war
against the King; and aiding the King’s enemies. However subsequent
monarchs broadened its scope by the enactment of additional statutes creating
new treason offences. Commentators have noted that
these enactments were more a
matter of political expediency than principled reform of the law: see Law Reform
Commission of Canada,
Crimes Against the State
, Working Paper 49 (1986),
6. Given the narrow scope of the 1351 statute, the prosecution of words as
treason required a broad judicial
interpretation or a statutory extension of the
law. For example, in 1534 Henry VIII passed legislation that made it
possible to commit
treason by words or writing (
Act of Treasons
VIII c 13). See P Hamburger, ‘The Development of the Law of Seditious
Libel and the Control of the Press’
Stanford Law Review
; R Manning, ‘The Origins of the Doctrine of Sedition’ (1980)
See P Hamburger,
‘The Development of the Law of Seditious Libel and the Control of the
Stanford Law Review
, first proscribed in the 1275
Statute of Westminster
(3 Edw 1 c 34), stated that ‘from henceforth none be
so hardy to tell or publish any false news or Tales, whereby discord,
accession of discord or slander may grow between the King and his people, or the
Great Men of the Realm’. See Ibid,
See R Manning, ‘The Origins
of the Doctrine of Sedition’ (1980) 12
‘Sedition—Is the Star Chamber Dead?’
Criminal Law
, 94. The Court of Star Chamber became renowned for abuse and
misuse of power: Civil Liberties Australia,
April 2006.
The Case De Libellis
Famosis, or of Sandalous Libels
[1572] EngR 388
(1606) 5 Co Rep
Law Reform Commission (Ireland),
Consultation Paper on the Crime of Libel
(1991), 7; Law Reform Commission
Crimes Against the State
, Working Paper 49 (1986),
See P Hamburger, ‘The
Development of the Law of Seditious Libel and the Control of the Press’
Stanford Law Review
, 759; R Manning, ‘The Origins of
the Doctrine of Sedition’ (1980) 12
M Head, ‘Sedition—Is
the Star Chamber Dead?’
Criminal Law Journal
B Shientag,
Moulders of Legal
(1943), 167.
(1704) 14 State Trials (OS)
For a discussion of the
respective functions of the judge and jury during this period, see B Shientag,
Moulders of Legal Thought
19 April 2006.
B Shientag,
of Legal Thought
(1943), 177–178; B Wright,
19 April 2006.
‘Sedition—Is the Star Chamber Dead?’
Criminal Law
‘From Seditious Libel to Unlawful Assembly: Peterloo and the Changing Face
of Political Crime c1770–1820’
Oxford Journal of Legal
See L Maher,
‘The Use and Abuse of Sedition’
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
, 291. This shift provided the basis for the good faith defence that was
later incorporated into the common law, reflected in the
repealed s 24F of
Crimes Act 1914
Reform Commission (Ireland),
Consultation Paper on the Crime of Libel
(1991), 60–61.
‘Sedition—Is the Star Chamber Dead?’
Criminal Law
‘From Seditious Libel to Unlawful Assembly: Peterloo and the Changing Face
of Political Crime c1770–1820’
Oxford Journal of Legal
‘Sedition—Is the Star Chamber Dead?’
Criminal Law
‘Terrorist Speech and the Future of Free Expression’
Cardozo Law Review
M Lobban, ‘From Seditious Libel to Unlawful Assembly: Peterloo and the
Changing Face of Political Crime c1770–1820’
Journal of Legal Studies
Donohue, ‘Terrorist Speech and the Future of Free Expression’
Cardozo Law Review
See L Maher, ‘The Use and
Abuse of Sedition’
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
The defendant was
(Unreported, Birkett J,
Civil Liberties
and Human Rights in England and Wales
(2nd ed, 2002), 898. For example, in
(1886) 16 Cox CC 355
, Cave J instructed the jury that in
order to establish the requisite
there must be a distinct
intention, going beyond mere recklessness, to produce disturbances: 364.
However, in
(1909) 22 Cox CC 1
, the Court applied an objective
test, stating that ‘every person must be deemed to intend the consequences
which would naturally
flow from his conduct’: cited in Law Commission of
England and Wales,
Working Paper No 72 Second Programme, Item XVIII
Codification of the Criminal Law—Treason, Sedition and Allied Offences
(1977), 45.
Boucher v The King
[1951] 2 DLR 369.
Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate; ex parte Choudhury
[1991] 1 QB 429
Sedition offences were
subsequently codified in the code states:
Criminal Code 1924
Criminal Code 1913
(WA) ss 44–46;
(Qld) ss 44–46. The common law continued to operate in
the other states: see M Head, ‘Sedition—Is the Star Chamber
Criminal Law Journal
In Good Faith:
Sedition Law in Australia
(2006) E-Brief: Parliamentary
Library—Parliament of Australia
<www.aph.gov.au/library/INTGUIDE/LAW/sedition.htm> at 16
D Ash, ‘Sedition’
(2005) (Summer 2005–2006)
Forbes Flyer
2, 1; New South Wales Bar
Association,
M Black, ‘Five Approaches
to Reforming the Law: 650 Years of Treason and Sedition’ (Paper presented
at Australasian Law
Reform Agencies Conference, Sydney, 11 April 2006); New
South Wales Bar Association,
S Macintyre,
(1998), 17.
New South Wales Bar
Association,
The first piece of federal
criminal legislation was the
Punishment of Offences Act 1901
(Cth), which
provided punishments for infringements of the Commonwealth statutory
prohibitions. Subsequently, a number of federal
offences were created as
incidental to particular statutes: G Sawer,
Australian Federal Politics
(1956), 135.
The constitutional validity of the
Crimes Act 1914
was upheld on the basis of the
Commonwealth’s incidental power to protect its operations by creating
criminal offences:
[1915] HCA 58
(1915) 20 CLR
For example, s 4(d) of the
War Precautions Act 1914
(Cth) gave the Governor-General power to make
regulations in order to ‘prevent the spread of false reports or reports
to cause disaffection to His Majesty or public alarm, or to interfere
with the success of His Majesty’s forces by land or sea,
or to prejudice
His Majesty’s relations with foreign powers’. See G Sawer,
Australian Federal Politics 1901–1929
(1956), 141. The Commonwealth
could also prohibit the importation of literature with a ‘seditious
intent’ pursuant to
Customs Act 1901
(Cth): see R Douglas,
‘Saving Australia from Sedition: Customs, the Attorney-General’s
Department and the Administration
of Peacetime Political Censorship’
[2002] FedLawRw 5
Federal Law Review
War Precautions Repeal Act
(Cth) s 12. The provisions replicated those found in the
Criminal Code 1899
(Qld), which were based on the British common law as
outlined in Stephen’s
Digest of the Criminal Law
extracted earlier
in this chapter: Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
Representatives, 23 November 1920, 6851 (L
Australian Federal
Politics 1901–1929
22 Cox CC 1
(1886) 16 Cox CC 355.
See L Maher, ‘The Use
and Abuse of Sedition’
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
Crimes Act 1914
s 24A. Paragraphs (b), (c) and (e) were repealed in 1986: see discussion
Crimes Act 1926
s 17. These provisions were further strengthened by the
See S Ricketson,
‘Liberal Law in a Repressive Age: Communism and the Law
[1976] MonashULawRw 18
Monash University Law Review
L Maher, ‘Dissent,
Disloyalty and Disaffection: Australia’s Last Cold War Sedition
[1994] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
, 12; M Armstrong, D Lindsay
and R Watterson,
Media Law in Australia
(3rd ed, 1995), 150; S Ricketson,
‘Liberal Law in a Repressive Age: Communism and the Law
[1976] MonashULawRw 18
Monash University Law Review
Many Labor members had opposed the
War Precautions Acts
to suppress discussion of war aims and
alliances: G Sawer,
Australian Federal Politics 1901–1929
166. See R Douglas, ‘Keeping the Revolution at Bay: The Unlawful
Associations Provisions of the Commonwealth Crimes
[2001] AdelLawRw 4
Adelaide Law Review
Douglas, ‘Saving Australia from Sedition: Customs, the
Attorney-General’s Department and the Administration of Peacetime
Political Censorship’
[2002] FedLawRw 5
Federal Law Review
R Douglas, ‘Law, War and
Liberty: The World War II Subversion Prosecutions’
[2003] MelbULawRw 3
University Law Review
Burns v Ransley
[1949] HCA 45
R v Sharkey
[1949] HCA 46
(1949) 79 CLR 121.
Schneiderman v United
(1942), 157–159. The Supreme Court retreated from
this test during the McCarthy era, adopting a stricter approach in order
prosecute Communist Party members: see, eg,
Dennis v United States
494 (1951). However, it later reformulated the test in a more liberal manner,
holding that the First Amendment to the United
Constitution
permit the State to proscribe advocacy of the use of force or law violation
‘except where such advocacy is directed
to inciting or producing imminent
lawless action and is likely to incite or produce such action’:
Brandenburg v Ohio
[1969] USSC 141
L Maher, ‘Dissent,
Disloyalty and Disaffection: Australia’s Last Cold War Sedition
[1994] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
L Maher, ‘The Use and Abuse
of Sedition’
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
L Maher, ‘Dissent,
Disloyalty and Disaffection: Australia’s Last Cold War Sedition
[1994] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
R Douglas, ‘The Ambiguity of
Sedition: The Trials of William Fardon Burns’
Journal of Legal History
, 246; L Maher, ‘The Use and Abuse of
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
R Douglas, ‘The Ambiguity of
Sedition: The Trials of William Fardon Burns’
Journal of Legal History
, 247; L Maher, ‘Dissent, Disloyalty and
Disaffection: Australia’s Last Cold War Sedition Case’
[1994] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
Sweeny v Chandler
(Unreported, Sydney Court of Petty Sessions, 18 September
See L Maher, ‘The Use and
Abuse of Sedition’
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
, 287; K Inglis,
The Stuart Case
(1961), 279–292. Further, in 1961 Brian Cooper was
successfully prosecuted in Papua New Guinea pursuant to the sedition provisions
Criminal Code 1899
(Qld) for statements he made to indigenous
people about potential means—including violent means—for achieving
self-determination:
Cooper v The Queen
[1961] HCA 16
(1961) 105 CLR 177.
discussion of this case, see W Stent, ‘An Individual vs the State: The
Case of BL Cooper’ (1980) 79
(1984), 92. The opinion of the Attorney-General has never been
See M Armstrong, D Lindsay
and R Watterson,
Media Law in Australia
(3rd ed, 1995),
Law Reform Commission (Ireland),
Report on the Crime of Libel
, LRC 41–1991 (1991), 10; Law Reform
Commission of Canada,
Crimes Against the State
, Working Paper 49 (1986),
45; Law Commission of England and Wales,
Working Paper No 72 Second
Programme, Item XVIII Codification of the Criminal Law—Treason, Sedition
and Allied Offences
(1977), 48.
Commission of England and Wales,
Working Paper No 72 Second Programme, Item
XVIII Codification of the Criminal Law—Treason, Sedition and Allied
(1977), 48; Law Reform Commission of Canada,
Crimes Against the
, Working Paper 49 (1986),
Law Reform Commission (Ireland),
Report on the Crime of Libel
, LRC 41–1991 (1991), 10; Law
Commission of England and Wales,
Working Paper No 72 Second Programme, Item
XVIII Codification of the Criminal Law—Treason, Sedition and Allied
(1977), 48.
Commission (Ireland),
Report on the Crime of Libel
, LRC 41–1991
(1991), 10; Law Reform Commission of Canada,
Crimes Against the State
Working Paper 49 (1986), 39.
Commission on Australia’s Security and Intelligence Agencies,
the Australian Security Intelligence Organization
(1985). The Commission was
chaired by New South Wales Justice Robert
Burns v Ransley
[1949] HCA 45
R v Sharkey
[1949] HCA 46
Royal Commission on
Australia’s Security and Intelligence Agencies,
Report on the
Australian Security Intelligence Organization
Intelligence and Security
(Consequential Amendments) Act 1986
H Gibbs, R Watson
and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
[32.13]–[32.18].
J Howard (Prime Minister),
‘Counter-Terrorism Laws Strengthened’ (Press Release, 8 September
L Maher, ‘Dissent,
Disloyalty and Disaffection: Australia’s Last Cold War Sedition
[1994] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
, 73. See also E Barendt,
Freedom of Speech
(2nd ed, 2005), 163; M Armstrong, D Lindsay and R
Media Law in Australia
(3rd ed, 1995), 150. Article 19 (Global
Campaign for Free Expression),
Memorandum on the Malaysian Sedition Act
(2003) <http://www.suaram.net/
suaram%20A19%20sedition%20memo.pdf> at 20 January 2006; Lord Denning,
Landmarks in the Law
(1984), 295; H Lee,
Emergency Powers
Explanatory Memorandum,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee—Australian Parliament,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Transcript of Public Hearing
, 14 November 2005, 4 (G
J Howard (Prime
Minister), ‘Counter-Terrorism Laws Strengthened’ (Press Release, 8
September 2005).
In May 2005, the
Council of Europe adopted a new
Convention on the Prevention of
which requires States to criminalise public provocation to commit
a terrorist offence: art 5(2). See the detailed discussion in Chs
4. Australian Sedition Laws and
Related Provisions
Introduction
New sedition offences in the
Criminal Code
Other features of the provisions
Related federal legislation
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1914
Electoral offences
Crimes (Foreign Incursions and Recruitment) Act 1978
ALRC’s views
State and territory sedition laws
4. Australian Sedition Laws and
Related Provisions
Introduction
4.1 This chapter summarises the current federal sedition provisions and other
aspects of federal law related to sedition, including
the related offences of
treason, treachery and interfering with elections. These provisions are found in
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) and other
federal legislation. The chapter also considers state and territory laws on
sedition, treason and related matters.
4.2 A deeper analysis of four of the current sedition offences and proposals for
their reform are contained in Chapter 8. Chapter
9 considers the
offence of urging inter-group violence. Chapter 10 considers the
appropriate defences and penalties for these offences.
4.3 The Terms of Reference also ask the ALRC to consider the operation of
contains provisions
dealing with unlawful associations, including those that advocate the doing of
acts that have as an object the
carrying out of a ‘seditious
intention’.
considered in Chapter 11.
[back to top]
New sedition offences
Criminal Code
4.4 The new federal sedition offences were enacted by Schedule 7 of the
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2) 2005
and commenced on 11 January 2006. The
Act contains a range of measures designed to respond to the threat of terrorism
by criminalising
certain terrorist acts and conferring further powers on law
enforcement and intelligence
4.5 Schedule 7 repealed the old sedition offences found in
ss 24A–24F of the
The new offences are now
located in Part 5.1 of the
Criminal Code
. This is in keeping with
the Australian Government’s policy of shifting updated offences and
provisions dealing with criminal
responsibility from the
Criminal Code
now mainly concerned with
matters of practice and
procedure).
4.6 The stated purposes of the new sedition provisions were to modernise the
language of the offences and to ‘address problems
with those who incite
directly against other groups within the
community’.
4.7 Five new offences were created in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
under the heading ‘Sedition’. The first, under the sub-heading
Urging the overthrow of the
Constitution
or Government
, provides:
(1) A person commits an offence if the person urges another person to overthrow
by force or violence:
Constitution
(b) the Government of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
(c) the lawful authority of the Government of the Commonwealth.
(2) Recklessness applies to the elements of the offence under
subsection (1) that it is:
Constitution
(b) the Government of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
(c) the lawful authority of the Government of the Commonwealth that the
first-mentioned person urges the other person to overthrow.
4.8 The second offence,
Urging interference in Parliamentary elections
under s 80.2(3)–(4), states:
(3) A person commits an offence if the person urges another person to interfere
by force or violence with lawful processes for an
election of a member or
members of a House of the Parliament.
(4) Recklessness applies to the element of the offence under subsection (3)
that it is the lawful processes for an election of a
member or members of a
House of Parliament that the first-mentioned person urges the other person to
interfere with.
4.9 The third offence,
Urging violence within the community
s 80.2(5)–(6), states:
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person urges a group or groups (whether distinguished by race, religion,
nationality or political opinion) to use force or
violence against another group
or other groups (as so distinguished); and
(b) the use of the force or violence would threaten the peace, order and good
government of the Commonwealth.
(6) Recklessness applies to the element of the offence under subsection (5)
that it is a group or groups that are distinguished by
race, religion,
nationality or political opinion that the first-mentioned person urges the other
person to use force or violence
4.10 The fourth offence,
Urging a person to assist the enemy
s 80.2(7), states:
(7) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person urges another person to engage in conduct; and
(b) the first-mentioned person intends the conduct to assist an organisation or
country; and
(c) the organisation or country is:
(i) at war with the Commonwealth, whether or not the existence of a state of war
has been declared; and
(ii) specified by Proclamation made for the purpose of paragraph 80.1(1)(e) to
be an enemy at war with the Commonwealth.
4.11 The fifth offence,
Urging a person to assist those engaged in armed
hostilities
, under s 80.2(8), states:
(8) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person urges another person to engage in conduct; and
(b) the first-mentioned person intends the conduct to assist an organisation or
country; and
(c) the organisation or country is engaged in armed hostilities against the
Australian Defence Force.
4.12 Each of the five offences carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for
seven years. This follows the 1991 recommendation of
the Committee of Review of
Commonwealth Criminal Law (Gibbs Committee), which argued that ‘the more
specific nature of the
proposed offence[s]’ warranted an increase from the
maximum penalty of imprisonment for three years specified for the old sedition
offences under the
ss 24A–24D.
Other features of the
Fault elements
4.13 There has been considerable confusion in the public debate over the fault
elements required for the new sedition offences. IP
30 noted that much of
this uncertainty stemmed from a lack of understanding about how the physical and
fault elements work under
4.14 The fault element for the act of ‘urging’ another person to
engage in the relevant conduct is
Three of the new
sedition offences expressly contain recklessness as a fault element in relation
to some of the physical elements
required to constitute the offence—that
circumstances
arising from the person’s
‘urging’. Issues concerning the application of fault elements to the
offences are discussed
in detail in Chapter 8.
Urging group-based violence
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2) 2005
(Cth) created a new offence of
urging a group or groups to use force or violence against another group or other
4.16 Section 80.2(5) proscribes only the urging of force or
violence—it does not extend to vilification or incitement of racial
hatred. The offence is limited in that it applies only where a person urges a
group or groups to use force or violence against another
group or other groups.
It would not cover the urging of an individual to use force or violence against
a group (with the distinguishing
characteristics mentioned above), nor the
urging of a group to use force or violence against an
individual.
4.17 Section 80.2(5)(b) also requires that the force or violence that is
urged must threaten the ‘peace, order and good government
Commonwealth’. Both limbs must be proven for the offence to be
Extra-territorial application
4.18 The sedition and treason
offences under Division 80 of the
Criminal Code
are characterised as
‘Category D’ offences—as are the terrorism offences
created in 2002
in Divisions
101–104 of the
designation means that, by virtue of s 15.4 of the
Criminal Code
the offences apply:
• whether or not the conduct constituting the offence occurs in Australia;
• whether or not a result of the conduct constituting the alleged offence
occurs in Australia.
4.19 The implications of this extra-territorial application are considered in
Requirement of Attorney-General’s
4.20 Under s 80.5, proceedings for an offence under these provisions may
not be commenced without the written consent of the Attorney-General.
to the Explanatory Memorandum, this provision is designed to provide an
additional safeguard to a person charged with a
This matter is also
discussed in Chapter 8.
4.21 Section 80.3 of the
Criminal Code
provides for a specific
defence to the treason and sedition offences in Division 80, where the acts
in question were done ‘in
good faith’. The provisions in s 80.3
substantially replicate those in the old s 24F of the
4.22 Under s 80.3, comments made in good faith must, for example, point out
mistakes in government policy,
urge people to lawfully change laws or
or comment on matters
that produce feelings of hostility between groups with a view to bringing about
removal of those matters.
Section 80.3(1)(f) also allows the publication in good faith of a report or
commentary about a matter of public interest.
4.23 In deciding whether an act was done in good faith, the court may look to
matters such as whether the act was done: with a purpose
intended to be
prejudicial to the safety or defence of the
Commonwealth;
to assist an
or with the intention of
causing violence or creating public disorder or a public
disturbance.
4.24 Defences and proposals for reform are discussed in detail in
Chapter 10.
[back to top]
Related federal
legislation
4.25 The previous sedition offences under the
were part of a
grouping of offences relating to the security and defence of the Commonwealth.
In 1991, the Gibbs Committee recommended
reform of these provisions to modernise
their language, clarify their terms and bring greater consistency to their
However, aside from
changes such as removal of the death penalty, many of these offences have
remained unchanged since their enactment
in 1914. The response to modern threats
against the state posed by terrorism has generally been to enact a new set of
offences in
Criminal Code
rather than rely on these older
provisions.
4.26 Some submissions and commentary suggest that the sedition provisions in
s 80.2 are unnecessary as they overlap with existing
federal offences, or
may be covered by the offence of incitement to commit an existing offence. Under
s 11.4 of the
Criminal Code
it is an offence to urge the commission
of another offence. Therefore, some conduct covered by the offences in
s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
could overlap with conduct that
constitutes incitement to commit other offences—for example, the terrorism
offences under Part
Criminal Code.
4.27 This section of the chapter considers those existing offences in the
Criminal Code,
and other federal legislation, and
their interaction with the sedition provisions. The relationship between
sedition and incitement
to other offences is considered in greater detail in
4.28 The offence of treason was moved into the
Criminal Code
Section 80.1 of the
Code substantially replicates the former treason offence in s 24 of the
, although some amendments were made in accordance with the
recommendations of the Gibbs Committee, as well as to modernise the language
make it consistent with the drafting style used in the
4.29 Under s 80.1(1), a person commits treason if he or she:
• causes the death of, harm to, or imprisons or restrains the Sovereign,
the heir apparent of the Sovereign, the consort of
the Sovereign, the
Governor-General or the Prime Minister;
• levies war, or does any act preparatory to levying war, against the
Commonwealth;
• engages in conduct that assists, by any means whatever, with intent to
assist, an enemy at war with the Commonwealth;
• engages in conduct that assists, by any means whatever, with intent to
assist, another country or organisation engaged in
armed hostilities against the
Australian Defence Force;
• instigates a person who is not an Australian citizen to make an armed
invasion of the Commonwealth or a Territory of the Commonwealth;
• forms an intention to do any of the above acts and manifests that
intention by an overt act.
4.30 The penalty for an act of treason is imprisonment for life. Under
s 80.1(1A) there is a defence to the charges of assisting
the enemy where
the person engages in the conduct ‘by way of, or for the purposes of, the
provision of aid of a humanitarian
In common with
the sedition offences, the defence of ‘good faith’ is available
under s 80.3.
4.31 There is significant overlap between
treason in s 80.1 and the
sedition offences, particularly in relation to the provisions concerning
assisting the enemy or those engaged
in armed hostilities against the Australian
Defence Force (ADF) in s 80.2(7)–(8) of the
Criminal Code
Under s 80.2(7), it is an offence for a person to urge another to assist an
organisation or country at war with the Commonwealth,
s 80.1(1)(e) it is treason to engage in conduct that assists, by any means
whatever, an enemy at war with the Commonwealth.
4.32 A number of submissions to this Inquiry highlighted the overlap
although Patrick Emerton
notes that the new offence under s 80.2(7) is broader, since the offender
treasonous conduct, rather than
treasonous conduct
treasonous intentions, on the part of
4.33 In Chapter 8, the ALRC suggests that the direct overlap is unwarranted
in these circumstances and proposes that s 80.2(7) and
Chapter 8 also
highlights concerns with the framing of aspects of the treason offences, and
makes a number of proposals for
Terrorism offences
4.34 Part 5.3 of the
Criminal Code
was enacted in 2002 as part of
the Australian Government’s counter-terrorism legislative
Criminal Code
was amended to: transfer the offence of treason from the
Criminal Code
(as mentioned above); introduce a definition of
a ‘terrorist act’ to the Code and create specific terrorism
and introduce an administrative power to proscribe terrorist
organisations.
4.35 Division 100.1 of the
Criminal Code
defines a ‘terrorist
act’ as an action or threat that is made with the intention both of
‘advancing a political,
religious or ideological cause’ and
‘coercing, or influencing by intimidation’ a governmental authority
in Australia
or overseas. Under s 100.1(2) and (3), action falls within the
definition of a terrorist act where it causes serious physical harm
or death to
a person, or endangers human life; causes serious damage to property; creates a
serious risk to the health and safety
of the public; seriously interferes with,
disrupts, or destroys an electronic system; and is not advocacy, protest,
dissent or industrial
4.36 Division 101 creates a number of serious offences, including:
• engaging in a terrorist
• providing or receiving training connected with a terrorist
• possessing things connected with a terrorist
• collecting or making documents likely to facilitate a terrorist
• doing other acts in preparation for, or planning, a terrorist
4.37 Urging someone to overthrow the Australian Government by force or violence
under s 80.2(1) would cover some of the same conduct
required to establish
the offence of incitement to commit a terrorist
However, the practical
steps to be taken in proving an offence under s 80.2(1) would be quite
different to those under Division 101.
Under the sedition offences, there
is no need to prove a particular ideological or political intention on the part
of the person
undertaking the terrorist act. Proving that a person who urges the
commission of a terrorism offence is guilty of the offence of
incitement under
Criminal Code
requires evidence that the person intended that the
offence incited be committed.
The offences under s 80.2 currently require only an intention to urge the
conduct, not that the person intended that the crime urged
This distinction is
discussed in greater detail in Chapter 8.
Causing harm to public officials
4.38 Section 147.1–147.2 of the
Criminal Code
makes it an
offence to harm or threaten to harm a Commonwealth public official. This offence
applies where the person threatens or
harms the official because of the
official’s status or because of his or her conduct in an official
capacity. Penalties of
imprisonment for 10–13 years apply depending on
whether the person is a Commonwealth law enforcement officer or another public
official. It is also an offence to harm or threaten a former Governor-General,
former Minister or a former Parliamentary
4.39 Even after the relocation of the treason and sedition offences to the
Criminal Code
, Part II of the
retains a number of
other serious ‘offences against the government’, which may be
related to sedition.
4.40 Under s 24AA, a person commits ‘treachery’ if he or she
acts with intent to overthrow the
Constitution
by revolution or sabotage,
overthrow the government of a state or the Commonwealth by an act of force or
violence, or participates
in acts of war against proclaimed countries. Treachery
carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.
4.41 The Gibbs Committee was of the view that, given its similarity to the
treason offence, the offence of treachery should be repealed
and a new provision
created, making it an offence for an Australian citizen or resident to help a
state or any armed force against
which any part of the ADF is engaged in armed
hostilities.
This wording is now
part of the treason and sedition offences in the
Criminal Code.
4.42 Under s 24AB, a person commits an act of ‘sabotage’ if he
or she destroys, damages or impairs any article used by
the ADF or that relates
directly to the defence of the Commonwealth, with the intention of prejudicing
the safety or defence of the
Commonwealth. Sabotage carries a maximum penalty of
15 years imprisonment.
4.43 As with the treachery offence, the Gibbs Committee noted that no
prosecution had ever been brought under s 25AB, and that a
simplified and
narrower version of the offence should be
4.44 In common with the new sedition offences, a prosecution for treachery or
sabotage may be instituted only with the consent of
Attorney-General.
Inciting mutiny
4.45 Section 25 of the
creates an offence of inciting
disaffection with, or attempting to interfere with the operations of, the
‘Queen’s Forces’,
including inciting mutiny or
‘seducing’ any person in the military from his duty and
allegiance.
The penalty is life
imprisonment. The Gibbs Committee recommended repeal of this provision on the
basis that the
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) already contains
offences of mutiny and incitement to
prisoners of war to escape
makes it an offence, with a
penalty of life imprisonment, for a person to assist prisoners of war to escape.
The Gibbs Committee
noted the severity of the penalty for this offence, and
compared it with the five-year penalty for assisting a civilian prisoner
escape under s 46 of the Act. The Committee concluded that this offence
should be removed from an Act of general application such
Unlawful drilling
4.47 ‘Unlawful drilling’ involves training or drilling others
‘to the use of arms or the practice of military exercises,
movements, or
evolutions’,
contrary to a
proclamation of the Governor-General. No proclamation for the purpose of this
section has been made. There is some
overlap between this provision and offences
Crimes (Foreign Incursions and
Recruitment) Act 1978
(Cth), which is discussed below.
Intentionally damaging or destroying
Commonwealth property
4.48 Under s 29, a person who intentionally destroys or damages any
property, whether real or personal, belonging to the Commonwealth
Commonwealth public authority is guilty of an offence, punishable by
imprisonment for up to 10 years.
Offences under Part IIA of the Crimes
contains a range of provisions
concerning unlawful associations. Chapter 11 considers this area of the law
in detail, and Chapter
8 deals with s 30C (advocating overthrow of the
Constitution
), which substantially overlaps with the offence in
4.50 As discussed above, one of the new sedition offences (s 80.2(3) of the
Criminal Code
) involves urging others to interfere by force or violence
with parliamentary elections. Under s 28 of the
also an offence punishable by imprisonment for three years, where a person
‘by violence or by threats or intimidation
of any kind, hinders or
interferes with the free exercise or performance, by any other person, of any
political right or duty’.
4.51 A related summary offence also exists under
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(Cth), which provides that a person
‘shall not hinder or interfere with the free exercise or performance, by
any other person,
of any political right or duty that is relevant to an election
under this Act’. The penalty for breach is a fine of $1,000,
imprisonment for six months, or both. Under the
Referendum (Machinery
Provisions) Act 1984
(Cth) there is a mirror offence providing that a person
shall not hinder or interfere with the free exercise or performance, by any
other person, of any political right or duty that is relevant to an election or
referendum’.
offences are considered in more detail in Chapter 8.
Crimes (Foreign
Incursions and Recruitment) Act 1978
Crimes (Foreign Incursions and Recruitment) Act 1978
contains a number of offences preventing persons from recruiting, training or
organising people in Australia for armed incursions
or operations in another
country. Under the Act, it is an offence to:
• enter into a foreign state and engage in hostile activity in that
foreign state (s 6);
• enter into a foreign state with the intent to engage in hostile activity
in that foreign state (s 6);
• undertake preparation for the above purpose (including training, giving
money or goods to any body or association promoting
these activities)
• recruit persons to join organisations engaged in hostile activities
against foreign governments (s 8); or
• recruit persons to serve in or with an armed force in a foreign state
4.53 ‘Hostile activities’ under the Act include doing an act with
the intention of achieving: overthrow by force or violence
of the government of
the foreign state; causing the public of the foreign state to be in fear of
suffering death or injury; causing
the death or injury to the head of state or
public officials; or damaging the foreign government’s
4.54 The Act does not apply to acts done in defence of Australia, or in the
course of a person’s duty to the
Commonwealth.
An offender must
be an Australian citizen, permanent resident or resident in Australia for at
least a year.
Proceedings under
the Act require the Attorney-General’s written
4.55 The offences under s 80.2(7) and (8) overlap to some extent with these
provisions. Under
Crimes (Foreign Incursions and
Recruitment) Act
it is an offence to do ‘any act or other thing with
the intention of facilitating or promoting the recruitment of persons to
in any capacity in or with such an armed force’. Presumably this could
include urging another to assist the enemy or
those engaged in armed hostilities
with the ADF under s 80.1(1)(e)–(f) or s 80.2(7) and
4.56 While it is outside the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference and timeframe to
conduct a full review of all federal law relating
to the security of the
Commonwealth, it is clear that while attention has been given to modernisation
of some of the
offences, many still languish as
‘dead-letter’ laws, which are never prosecuted. These provisions are
couched in archaic
language and many of them effectively have been superseded by
new provisions in the
Criminal Code
and elsewhere.
4.57 Consequently, the ALRC proposes that the Australian Government initiate a
review of the remaining offences contained in Part
to determine
which offences merit retention, modernisation and relocation to the
, and which should be abolished because they are redundant or otherwise
inappropriate.
The Australian Government should initiate a review of the
remaining offences contained in Part II of the
Crimes Act 1914
to determine which offences merit retention, modernisation and relocation to the
Criminal Code
(Cth), and which offences should be abolished. This review
should include the offences in ss 24AA, 24AB and 25–29 of the
[back to top]
State and territory
sedition laws
4.58 Federal sedition law proscribes, among other things, urging the overthrow
by force or violence of ‘the Government of the
Commonwealth,
a Territory
the Commonwealth does not intend to ‘cover the whole
in relation to
sedition—which might render state and territory laws inoperative under
s 109 of the
Constitution
4.59 Section 80.6 of the
Criminal Code
states that the treason and
sedition provisions of Division 80 are ‘not to apply to the exclusion of a
law of a State or a
Territory to the extent that the law is capable of operating
concurrently’ with them.
4.60 Commonwealth, state and territory laws define sedition in different terms.
For example, some state laws seek to protect the
Sovereign, Government and
Constitution
of the United Kingdom from seditious
In contrast, the
Criminal Code
provisions apply only to sedition against the Australian
Constitution
or the Government of the Commonwealth or an Australian state or
4.61 In New South Wales and Victoria, the common law offence of seditious libel
remains in effect.
In New South
Wales, the common law offence is referred to by the
Imperial Acts Application
(NSW), which states that following a conviction for seditious libel
the court may give an order for the seizure of all copies of
the libel. The Act
refers to seditious libel as:
tending to bring into hatred or contempt the person of Her Majesty, Her heirs or
successors, or the government and constitution of
the State of New South Wales
as by law established, or either House of Parliament, or to excite Her
Majesty’s subjects to attempt
the alteration of any matter as by law
established, otherwise than by lawful means
4.62 The provision does not appear to codify the law of seditious libel, as it
does not establish or define an offence, but simply
provides for court orders
consequential to a
conviction.
4.63 In Victoria,
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) makes it an
offence to take an oath to, among other things, ‘engage in any mutinous or
seditious enterprise’. The
nature of a seditious enterprise is not
defined, leaving this to the common law.
4.64 Queensland, Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory have
statutory sedition offences. The offence provisions,
and the relevant defences,
are framed in a similar manner to those in the repealed
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) provisions
were based on similar provisions in the
Criminal Code
(Qld). However,
these state and territory laws do not require an intention to cause violence or
disorder to be proved in order for
a person to be convicted of
4.65 In Queensland, sedition offences are contained in the
Criminal Code
The offences concern
engaging in a seditious enterprise or publishing seditious words, and are
punishable by imprisonment for a maximum
of three years (or seven years if
previously convicted).
definition of ‘seditious intention’ refers to sedition directed at
the Sovereign, Government or
Constitution
of the United Kingdom or of
Queensland, or against the Parliaments of the United Kingdom or Queensland, or
against the administration
4.66 In Western Australia, the
Criminal Code
(WA) provides for the
offences of conspiring to carry into execution a seditious enterprise and
publishing seditious words.
offences are punishable by imprisonment for a maximum of three
The definition of
‘seditious intention’ refers to sedition directed against the
Sovereign or the
Constitution
or Government of the United Kingdom, the
Commonwealth or Western Australia; the Parliament of the United Kingdom, the
Commonwealth
or Western Australia; or against the administration of
4.67 In Tasmania, the
Criminal Code
(Tas) provides for the offences of
carrying into execution a seditious intention and publishing words or writing
expressive of a seditious
The definition of ‘seditious intention’ refers to sedition
directed against the Sovereign or the
Constitution
or Government of the United
Kingdom, the Commonwealth or Tasmania; or against the United Kingdom,
Commonwealth or Tasmanian Parliaments;
or against the administration of justice
in the United Kingdom, the Commonwealth or
4.68 In addition, Chapter V of the Tasmanian legislation, dealing with
includes an offence
directed to ‘inciting traitorous conduct’, which may best be
characterised as a sedition provision.
It applies to any person who
‘advisedly attempts’:
(a) to seduce any person serving in His Majesty's forces by sea or land from his
duty and allegiance to His Majesty;
(b) to incite any such person to commit an act of mutiny or any traitorous or
mutinous act; or
(c) to incite any such person to make or endeavour to make a mutinous assembly,
or to commit any traitorous or mutinous practice
4.69 Northern Territory legislation provides for offences in relation to
engaging in a seditious enterprise or publishing seditious
Both offences are
punishable by imprisonment for a maximum of three
The definition of
‘seditious intention’ refers to sedition directed at the Northern
Territory government or legislative
assembly, or at the administration of
justice in the Territory—but there is no reference to the
4.70 In South Australia, the common law offence of seditious libel was abolished
in 1992, along with a number of other common law
The ACT abolished the
common law offence of seditious libel in 1996 as part of a measure intended to
remove ‘outdated common
4.71 The abolition of seditious libel in the ACT was a by-product of defamation
law reform.
In 1995, the
Community Law Reform Committee of the ACT recommended abolition of seditious
libel—along with the other common
law misdemeanours of criminal,
blasphemous and obscene libel—in the course of its defamation inquiry. The
Committee considered
that these offences were ‘no longer appropriate in
4.72 In Chapter 2, the ALRC proposes that the term ‘sedition’
be removed from the federal statute book. Consideration
of state and territory
sedition laws indicates that they are as contentious as—or in many cases
more contentious than—the
original federal
provisions.
Proposal 2–2 states that in the interests of improving and
harmonising the laws in this area across Australia,
the Australian Government
should initiate a process through the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General to
remove the term ‘sedition’
from state and territory laws.
Crimes Act 1914
s 30A(1)(b).
Explanatory Memorandum,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(Cth). See also
See Ch 3 for a brief
history of the old sedition offences. A new s 30A(3) has been inserted into
, defining a ‘seditious intention’. However,
this is applicable only in relation to the offences of ‘unlawful
association’
Explanatory Memorandum,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(Cth). In its Inquiry into the sentencing of
federal offenders, the ALRC has proposed the repeal of
and its replacement by a dedicated federal Sentencing Act:
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
Discussion Paper 70 (2005),
Proposal 2–1.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates,
House of Representatives, 3 November 2005,
103 (P Ruddock–Attorney-General).
Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth
Interim Report
(1991), 307,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
[3.21]–[3.34].
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 5.6.
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Amendment (Incitement to Violence) Bill 2005 (Cth), 4; B
Saul, ‘Speaking of Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 877; N Roxton
Shadow Attorney-General,
Criminal Code
Security Legislation
Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002
Criminal Code
ss 101.1(2), 101.2(5), 101.4(4), 101.5(4), 101.6(3), 102.9, 103.1(3),
104.8. See the discussion
Explanatory Memorandum,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Criminal Code
80.3(1)(a).
80.3(1)(c).
80.3(1)(d).
80.3(2)(a).
80.3(2)(b).
80.3(2)(f).
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
(1991), ch 30–37.
Criminal Code
sets out a raft of terrorism offences. The operation
and effectiveness the counter-terrorism laws has been recently reviewed by the
Security Legislation Review Committee, as a statutory requirement of the
Security Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002
(Cth). At the time of
writing the findings of the review had not been released to the public. The
Committee’s terms of reference
are available at <www.ag.gov.au/slrc>
(19 May 2006).
Security Legislation
Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002
Explanatory Memorandum,
Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Bill 2002
The defendant bears the
evidential onus under s 13.3 to raise this matter, after which the
prosecution must negate it beyond reasonable
14 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian
Associated Press,
18 April 2006; Federation of
Community Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; J
10 April 2006; National Association for
the Visual Arts,
11 April 2006; P Emerton,
10 April 2006.
Proposal 8–9 to
Security Legislation
Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002
Criminal Code
s 101.1, punishable by a maximum of life
imprisonment.
Ibid s 101.2,
punishable by imprisonment for up to 15 or 25 years, depending upon the
circumstances.
Ibid s 101.4,
punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 or 15 years, depending upon the
circumstances.
Ibid s 101.5,
punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 or 15 years, depending upon the
circumstances.
Ibid s 101.6,
punishable by a maximum of life
imprisonment.
Criminal Code
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Criminal Code
ss 147.1, 147.1(2), 147.2,
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
(1991), [30.44]–[30.51].
Crimes Act 1914
Ibid s 25. The
‘Queen’s Forces’ is defined to mean the Australian Defence
Force or ‘the armed forces of the
United Kingdom or any British
possession’.
H Gibbs, R Watson
and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
(1991), [34.12].
Military evolutions are
training exercises to accustom troops to the different movements required, for
example, in defensive or offensive
operations.
Referendum (Machinery
Provisions) Act 1984
See Proposal
Proposal 11–2.
(Cth) s 80.2(1)(b) (emphasis
Viskauskas v Niland
[1983] HCA 15
(1983) 153 CLR
Section 109 provides that the
laws of the Commonwealth shall prevail over those of a state, to the extent of
any inconsistency.
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 44(b);
Criminal Code 1913
Criminal Code 1924
Criminal Code
s 80.2(1). See also the references to the states and territories in the
good faith defence provisions:
Criminal Code
See Butterworths,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
, vol 21 Human Rights,
[130–12080].
Imperial Acts
Application Act 1969
For more on the history
and interpretation of
, see G Griffith,
Sedition, Incitement and
Vilification: Issues in the Current Debate: Briefing Paper No 1/06
Crimes Act 1914
ss 24A–24D, 24F.
Butterworths,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
, vol 21 Human Rights,
[130–12075], citing
Cooper v The Queen
[1961] HCA 16
(1961) 105 CLR
Criminal Code 1899
s 52(1)–(2).
Criminal Code 1913
Criminal Code 1924
(Tas) s 67.
Ibid s 66(1)(b).
The Code also creates an offence in relation to libels on foreign powers where
any person, without lawful justification,
publishes writing tending to degrade,
revile, or expose to hatred or contempt the people or government of any foreign
State, or any
officer or representative thereof:
Criminal Code 1924
Criminal Code 1924
(Tas) ch V: ‘Treason and Other Crimes Against the Sovereign’s
Person or Authority’.
Criminal Code 1993
(NT) ss 45–46.
Ibid s 44. Compare
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Law Reform (Abolitions and
Repeals) Act 1996
Explanatory Memorandum, Law
Reform (Abolition and Repeals) Bill 1995
Community Law Reform Committee
of the Australian Capital Territory,
, CLRC 10 (1995), 17.
5. International Framework
Introduction
Status of international law
International law and terrorism
United Nations response to the threat of terrorism
Balancing anti-terrorism measures with human rights
Article 20 of the ICCPR: incitement
Article 4 of the ICCPR: derogation
International human rights law: article 19 of the ICCPR
Explanation of article 19 of the ICCPR
Question of compatibility
Submissions and consultations in the ALRC Inquiry
ALRC’s views
5. International Framework
Introduction
5.1 International law is
relevant to an analysis of Australian sedition laws in two seemingly
contradictory ways. First, international
law sets out a number of requirements
with which Australia is obliged to comply to protect the human rights of people
Australian law. Secondly, international law increasingly recognises
the need for states to take action to counter the threat of terrorism.
5.2 Any measures taken by the Australian Government—such as the enactment
of sedition laws—must be compatible with Australia’s
obligations
under international law to respect human rights, including freedom of
expression.
5.3 This chapter considers the status of international law and its interaction
with Australian domestic law. The chapter then goes
on to consider how
international law interacts with Australia’s sedition provisions.
[back to top]
international law
5.4 The status of international law, and its intersection with Australian
domestic law, are explained in detail in Issues Paper 30
However, the
following essential points should be noted:
• In Australian law, international treaties are not
self-executing.
This means that an
international treaty to which Australia is a party only becomes part of
Australian law to the extent that it is
implemented by way of Australian
domestic legislation.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR) is an
example of a treaty that has been ratified by Australia but has not been fully
incorporated into Australian law.
• Australian courts cannot refuse to recognise or apply an Australian
statutory provision merely because the provision is inconsistent
principle of international law, or an international treaty to which Australia is
• Australia’s international law obligations are relevant to the
interpretation of Australian
particularly where the
meaning of the provision in question is ‘ambiguous’,
‘obscure’ or where the ordinary
process of construction would give
rise to ‘a result that is manifestly absurd or ...
unreasonable’.
International
obligations are also relevant to the development of the common law.
• The courts will generally interpret legislation in a way that is
inconsistent with Australia’s international law obligations
only if there
is ‘a clear indication that the legislature has directed its attention to
the rights or freedoms in question,
and has consciously decided upon abrogation
or curtailment’.
• An inconsistency between an Australian statutory provision and
Australia’s international obligations may have consequences
international level. It may, for instance, lead to proceedings being commenced
against Australia in a United Nations (UN)
tribunal or committee.
[back to top]
International
law and terrorism
Nations response to the threat of terrorism
5.5 Since the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington DC on
11 September 2001, there has been an increasing focus on the threat
terrorism in international law and international relations. The UN Security
Council has called on all UN member states to take
anti-terrorism measures, some
of which may be relevant to sedition.
5.6 Security Council
Resolution 1456
states that all UN Members
‘must take urgent action to prevent and suppress all active and passive
support of terrorism’.
14 September 2005, the Security Council issued
Resolution 1624
in the strongest terms all acts of terrorism irrespective of
their motivation, whenever and by whomsoever committed, as one of the
serious threats to peace and security, and
reaffirming
the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the Charter of the
United Nations,
Condemning also
in the strongest terms the incitement of terrorist acts
repudiating
attempts at the justification or glorification
) of terrorist acts that may incite further terrorist acts,
Deeply concerned
that incitement of terrorist acts motivated by extremism
and intolerance poses a serious and growing danger to the enjoyment of human
rights, threatens the social and economic development of all States, undermines
global stability and prosperity, and must be addressed
urgently and proactively
by the United Nations and all States, and
emphasizing
the need to take
all necessary and appropriate measures in accordance with international law at
the national and international level
to protect the right to
5.7 The Security Council called upon all States to
adopt such measures as may be necessary and appropriate and in accordance with
their obligations under international law to:
(a) Prohibit by law incitement to commit a terrorist act or acts;
(b) Prevent such conduct;
(c) Deny safe haven to any persons with respect to whom there is credible and
relevant information giving serious reasons for considering
that they have been
guilty of such conduct.
5.8 Decisions of the UN Security Council are binding on Australia as a member
state of the UN.
Therefore, one
possible effect of these resolutions may be to provide constitutional
justification—if this is needed—for
the enactment of legislation
dealing with sedition. In other words, in the unlikely event that the
Commonwealth Parliament is not
otherwise empowered to enact certain of the
sedition provisions, the Commonwealth could rely on the ‘external
power in s 51(xxix) of the
Constitution
the extent that those laws implement Australia’s obligations under
international law.
5.9 However, these developments do not give Parliament
carte blanche
legislate in any way it sees fit in responding to the threat of terrorism.
Resolution 1456
Resolution 1624
terms, provides justification for breaching existing international
Resolution 1456
States must ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism comply with all
their obligations under international law, and should
adopt such measures in
accordance with international law, in particular international human rights,
refugee, and humanitarian law
5.10 The Security Council likewise makes clear that any measures taken by states
in furtherance of
Resolution 1624
must be ‘in accordance with
their obligations under international law’. The Resolution also explicitly
right of freedom of expression’ in art 19 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948
and art 19 of the ICCPR,
and states that ‘any restrictions thereon shall only be such as are
provided by law and are necessary
on the grounds set out in paragraph 3 of
Article 19 of the
5.11 Similarly, the UN General Assembly and the UN Commission on Human Rights
(UNCHR) have passed a number of resolutions stating
that anti-terrorism measures
must not violate human rights.
For instance, the UNCHR has urged states
to fulfil their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations in strict
conformity with international law, including human
rights standards and
obligations and international humanitarian law, to prevent, combat and eliminate
terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, wherever, whenever and by
whomever committed, and calls upon States to strengthen, where appropriate,
their legislation
to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations ...
anti-terrorism measures with human rights
5.12 The ALRC recognises the importance of balancing the need for measures to
reduce the risk of acts of terrorism with the need
to protect human rights in
accordance with Australia’s obligations at international law. This is
highlighted in the material
discussed above, and by participants in this
Inquiry. For instance, a non-government organisation, ARTICLE 19, stated in
its submission
Enacting legislation in order to protect national security requires a careful
balancing act between legitimate security measures
and maintaining international
obligations for the protection of human
5.13 The balancing process is also an accepted part of Australian law. In
Alister v The Queen
Brennan J described the balance as
It is of the essence of a free society that a balance is struck between the
security that is desirable to protect society as a whole
and the safeguards that
are necessary to ensure individual liberty. But in the long run the safety of a
democracy rests upon the
common commitment of its citizens to the safeguarding
of each man’s liberty, and the balance must tilt that
5.14 This balance is reflected in the approach the ALRC has taken to reform of
sedition laws in this Inquiry, and particularly in
the proposals that affect the
right to freedom of expression.
Article 20 of the
ICCPR: incitement
5.15 In its submission to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation
Committee inquiry on the provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry), the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) asserted that some of the
provisions—and especially the new offence in s 80.2(5) of the
Criminal Code
—fall within the ambit of art 20 of the
1. Any propaganda for war shall be prohibited by law.
2. Any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall
be prohibited by law.
5.16 The AGD stated that s 80.2(5) is ‘in part implementation of
Article 20 of the ICCPR which requires State parties to prohibit
advocacy that
incites violence, discrimination or
hostility’.
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law
(the Gibbs Committee) noted that
art 20 of the ICCPR requires the Commonwealth to prohibit ‘any
advocacy of national, racial
or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence’ and the offence it proposed was
to reflect this.
80.2(5) is substantially similar to the offence proposed by the Gibbs
5.17 In its submission to the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry, Australian Lawyers
for Human Rights (ALHR) accepted that if ‘the
Government’s purpose
is to limit speech or conduct capable of inciting violence’, this would be
‘legitimate’
and ‘consistent with Australia’s
obligations under Article 20(2) of the
However, it
implied that only the ‘urging’ offence in s 80.2(5) can be
justified by reference to art 20 of the ICCPR.
The other ‘new
sedition powers do not achieve that aim in a way which has the minimal effect on
human rights particularly freedom
5.18 Dr Ben Saul has made a different criticism of s 80.2(5), arguing
that it does not go far enough in implementing art 20(2) of
the ICCPR. He
has observed that s 80.2(5) only operates to protect ‘groups’,
thereby excluding ‘incitements aimed
to provoke individuals, or groups not
mentioned in the legislation’. Moreover, the requirement that the conduct
must ‘threaten
the peace, order and good government of the
Commonwealth’ (s 80.2(5)(b)) might not cover ‘sporadic or
isolated incitements
to violence’ and is not supported by the Gibbs
Committee recommendation or by international
4 of the ICCPR: derogation
5.19 The issue of ‘derogation’ from human rights obligations arose
in testimony before and submissions to the 2005 Senate
International law gives
states a limited capacity of derogation. This means that, in certain emergency
situations, a state may suspend
its obligation to give full protection to
certain rights recognised by the ICCPR. The purpose of derogation has been
explained as
In a society subject to the rule of law, a state of emergency proclaimed under
existing law enables the government to resort to measures
of an exceptional and
temporary nature in order to protect the essential fabric of that
5.20 The power to derogate is subject to several qualifications and exceptions,
and international law requires a state to follow
an established procedure (set
out in art 4) if it wishes to derogate from its obligations under the
5.21 In Australia, the AGD’s submission to the 2005 Senate Committee
inquiry expressly disclaimed any need or intention for
the Government to rely on
the derogation provisions in art 4 to justify any restrictions contained in
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2)
Nor have the
pre-conditions to the application of art 4 been undertaken: no public
emergency within art 4(1) has been officially
proclaimed, nor has Australia
given notice to the UN under art 4(3). Rather, the AGD submitted that:
A number of rights under the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights may be restricted on the basis of national security.
The Government is
satisfied that, to the extent that any rights are restricted by the Bill, their
restriction is justified on the
basis of national security and, accordingly, is
permitted under the ICCPR. ...
The Government has not derogated from its ICCPR obligations. It is not necessary
for there to exist an ‘emergency which threatens
the life of the
nation’ in order to justify the restriction of certain ICCPR rights on the
basis of national security. The
United Nations Human Rights Committee has stated
that: ‘Derogation from some Covenant obligations in emergency situations
clearly distinct from restrictions or limitations allowed even in normal
times under several provisions of the
[back to top]
International
human rights law: article 19 of the ICCPR
5.22 International human rights law articulates fundamental obligations with
which state parties must conform. Concern has been expressed
that certain
aspects of the Australian sedition provisions may be incompatible with
Australia’s international human rights
obligations.
Explanation
of article 19 of the ICCPR
5.23 Concern has been expressed that the new sedition offences might be
inconsistent with art 19 of the ICCPR. Article 19 states:
1. Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference.
2. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall
include freedom to seek, receive and impart information
and ideas of all kinds,
regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of
art, or through any other
media of his choice.
3. The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article
carries with it special duties and responsibilities. It
may therefore be subject
to certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as are provided by law and
are necessary:
(a) For respect of the rights or reputations of others;
(b) For the protection of national security or of public order (
), or of public health or morals.
5.24 Under art 19, a restriction on a person’s right to express
himself or herself freely is permissible only if that restriction:
‘provided by law’; and (b) satisfies the test of necessity in
5.25 The test of necessity is crucial. In the case of sedition, the restrictions
on the right to freedom of expression must be necessary
protection of national security or of public order ... or of public health or
morals’ within the meaning of
art 19(3)(b).
5.26 The UN Human Rights Committee (UNHRC) considered art 19(3) and
Paragraph 3 expressly stresses that the exercise of the right to freedom of
expression carries with it special duties and responsibilities
and for this
reason certain restrictions on the right are permitted which may relate either
to the interests of other persons or
to those of the community as a whole.
However, when a State party imposes certain restrictions on the exercise of
freedom of expression,
these may not put in jeopardy the right itself. Paragraph
3 lays down conditions and it is only subject to these conditions that
restrictions may be imposed ...
5.27 The question whether the sedition provisions satisfy the test of necessity
in art 19(3)(b) determines whether they are inconsistent
with the right of
freedom of expression as recognised at international law. There seems to be
general agreement that this is the
appropriate question—both by those
supporting and by those opposing the current sedition provisions in
The Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC), in its submission to the 2005 Senate
Committee inquiry, framed the question
as follows:
The sedition provisions will ... only constitute a permissible restriction on
freedom of expression to the extent that they can be
said to be necessary for
the purposes of protecting public order or national security. The word
‘necessary’ imports the
principle of proportionality, which requires
that any restriction must be proportionate to the legitimate ends sought to be
... [T]he restriction must represent the least restrictive means of
achieving the relevant purpose. This is to ensure that the restriction
jeopardise the right itself.
Question of
compatibility
5.28 Of the participants in the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry who commented on
this issue, only the AGD expressed the view that all
of the sedition provisions
satisfy this test.
participants who commented on this issue expressed concern, often in strong
terms, that the new sedition offences might be inconsistent
IP 30 contains
a summary of the views of those who argued to the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry
that the sedition provisions (as they
appeared in Schedule 7 of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(Cth) at the time of that inquiry) were
inconsistent with
5.29 The Senate Committee did not itself express an opinion on this question in
its report but, in recommending that Schedule 7 of
the Bill be removed in
its entirety, the Committee acknowledged concerns about the related issue of the
‘potential impact of
the sedition provisions on freedom of speech in
Australia’.
5.30 Given these concerns, IP 30 asked: ‘Are ss 80.2 and 80.3 of
Criminal Code
necessary for the protection of national security or
public order within the meaning of
art 19(3)?’
Submissions and
consultations in the ALRC Inquiry
5.31 As with the response to the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry, the vast
majority of stakeholders who commented on this issue in
this Inquiry expressed
concern that the sedition provisions are inconsistent with
Only the AGD
disagreed, simply stating that ‘the Government is satisfied that sections
80.2 and 80.3 of the Criminal Code are
consistent with its obligations under
international law’.
5.32 A number of submissions simply stated that the provisions—either in
part or in their entirety—fail the test of
Others offered a more
detailed critique. As summarised below, this criticism falls into three main
categories: that there is an insufficient
link between the offence provisions in
s 80.2 and violence; that the offences are insufficiently clear; and that
the existing offence
provisions are sufficient.
No link with violence
5.33 In their submissions, the ALHR, the Federation of Community Legal Centres
and the New South Wales Young Lawyers Human Rights
Committee argued that the
problem lies in the fact that the offences do not require a direct connection
between the offending conduct
and actual terrorist activity or actual
5.34 The ALHR, Dr Saul and the non-governmental organisation,
ARTICLE 19, submitted that further guidance can be gleaned from the
Johannesburg Principles on National Security, Freedom of Expression and
Access to Information
(the Johannesburg
Principles).
The Johannesburg
Principles, like other international instruments, can be relevant in statutory
construction.
In particular,
Principle 6 states that ‘subject to Principles 15 and 16’ (neither
of which is relevant here):
Expression may be punished as a threat to national security only if a government
can demonstrate that:
(a) the expression is intended to incite imminent violence;
(b) it is likely to incite such violence; and
(c) there is a direct and immediate connection between the expression and the
likelihood or occurrence of such violence.
5.35 The ALHR submitted that the offences in s 80.2 fail the test of
necessity, as coloured by Principle 6, in that s 80.2 contains
‘no requirement that the prosecution prove that the “urging”
was likely to incite violence’ that is ‘imminent’,
is no ‘requirement for proof of a “direct and immediate connection
between the expression and the likelihood
or occurrence of such
violence”’.
ARTICLE 19 made a similar
Instead, the
s 80.2 offences ‘apply to expression which, viewed objectively,
presents no threat whatsoever to the Australian
population’. The ALHR
submitted that the offences should be redrafted so as to accord with the
requirements in the Johannesburg
Principles.
5.36 The ALHR was particularly concerned about s 80.2(7) and (8). It argued
that these provisions fall foul of art 19 of the ICCPR
because they are
worded so broadly that conduct such as sending ‘stationery supplies’
or ‘“urging”
others to engage in verbal support of an
organisation or country’ may conceivably fall within the ambit of the
provisions.
Moreover, the provisions fall outside the art 19(3) exception
because they do not require proof of ‘any direct or indirect
with violence whether generally or
Lack of clarity
5.37 ARTICLE 19 expressed concern about the vagueness of the sedition
offences. It submitted that the statement in art 19(3) that
restriction on freedom of expression must be ‘provided by law’
requires ‘substantially more than simply
enacting a legislative
provision’. Instead, it imports two critical requirements:
In particular, the legislative provision must also meet certain standards of
clarity and precision, to enable citizen to foresee
the consequences of their
conduct on the basis of the law. This also entails not permitting excessive
discretion by public officials
in determining whether the provision has been
5.38 ARTICLE 19 submitted that the term ‘assist’ (in
s 80.2(7) and (8)) is particularly problematic, in that it is so
‘vague’ as ‘potentially [to] prohibit a wide raft of
legitimate speech’.
Existing powers sufficient
5.39 Victoria Legal Aid also submitted that the provisions fail the test of
necessity because ‘existing powers and offences
are sufficient to deal
with relevant conduct’.
The Chief Minister for the ACT made a similar point, stating that the
‘existing offences ... adequately address incitements
to violence and to
the extent that the sedition laws go further they cannot be
justified’.
stated that the sedition offences would be incompatible with the
Human Rights
(ACT). As the relevant provisions of that Act are materially the
same as the ICCPR, his reasoning in this regard is also relevant
to the question
whether the sedition provisions fail the test of necessity under art 19 of
5.40 Any analysis of whether a particular statutory provision falls foul of
art 19 of the ICCPR requires a balancing of competing
interests. Even if a
statutory provision is prima facie inconsistent with art 19(1) and (2), it
remains necessary to check this preliminary
judgment against the considerations
required by art 19(3). However, this is not the only balancing exercise
that needs to be undertaken.
It is also necessary to take account of the
following principles:
• the ICCPR should not be interpreted in such a way as to elevate certain
rights so as to permit the ‘destruction’
of any of the other rights
and freedoms in the ICCPR;
• any restriction on freedom of expression must not jeopardise the right
• the ‘exceptions [in art 19(3) of the ICCPR] are to be
construed strictly and
5.41 The ALRC’s concerns about the compatibility of the sedition
provisions with art 19 of the ICCPR may be divided into two
categories. The
first category relates to the offences in s 80.2(1), (3) and (5); and the
second category relates to the remaining
offences in s 80.2(7) and (8).
The offences in section 80.2(1), (3) and
5.42 The ALRC is of the view that the wording of the offences in s 80.2(1),
(3) and (5) contributes to a lack of clarity on the issue
of intention, in that
these offences may be interpreted to apply to conduct where the defendant does
not in fact intend force or
violence to occur. This lack of clarity causes
friction with the requirement in art 19(3) that any restriction on freedom
of expression
be ‘provided by law’. In
Sunday Times v United
the expression ‘provided by law’ was considered
in the context of art 10(2) of the
European Convention on Human Rights
, which is the equivalent of art 19(3) of the
The European Court of
Human Rights stated:
In the Court’s opinion, the following are two of the requirements that
flow from the expression ‘prescribed by law’.
First, the law must be
adequately accessible: the citizen must be able to have an indication that is
adequate in the circumstances
of the legal rules applicable to a given case.
Secondly, a norm cannot be regarded as a ‘law’ unless it is
with sufficient precision to enable the citizen to regulate his
conduct: he must be able—if need be with appropriate advice—to
foresee, to a degree that is reasonable in the circumstances, the consequences
which a given action may entail.
5.43 The ALRC has addressed this concern in Proposals 8–1, 8–3
and 9–2. These proposals, if adopted, would have
the effect of amending
the offences in s 80.2(1), (3) and (5) to clarify that the proscribed
‘urging’ must be intentional.
This would have the benefit of
removing the risk that a broader interpretation may be
The offences in section 80.2(7) and
5.44 The ALRC is concerned that the use of the term ‘assist’ in
s 80.2(7) and (8) may result in the offences being interpreted
as to encompass non-violent criticism of the Australian Government and others.
Such an interpretation would run a significant
risk of falling foul of
art 19 of the ICCPR. As stated earlier, the restrictions on freedom of
expression permitted by art 19(3)
are strict and narrow. The equivalent
jurisprudence relating to art 10 of the
European Convention on Human
Rights 1950
emphasises that any restriction on freedom of expression must be
proportionate to the legitimate objective that parliament is seeking
to achieve.
An anti-terrorism measure must not, for instance, jeopardise the
principles.
Similarly, in the
Australian context, it has been stated that in ‘reconciling the interests
of national security and the freedom
of the individual’ it is necessary to
recognise ‘freedom of legitimate political dissent’ as one of the
requirements of
democracy’.
5.45 This is particularly so if the impugned expression were found to constitute
political speech. Kirby J has stated that while
prohibition of incitement
to crime or violence falls within an exception to art 19(2) of the ICCPR,
‘expression characterised
as political expression is clearly protected by
art 19 of the
5.46 This concern is one of the factors contributing to Proposals 8–8
and 8–9. In particular, the adoption of Proposal
8–8 would mean
the repeal of s 80.2(7) and (8).
5.47 Many of the arguments raised in the critique of s 80.2(7) and (8) may
also be made in respect of the treason offences in s 80.1(e)
Consequently, the amendment suggested to the offence of treason in
Proposal 8–9 would have the effect of clarifying
‘assistance’ is intended to be captured by these
offences (as amended). This would go some way to alleviating concerns
offences may be used to prosecute legitimate expression of views that are not
themselves incitements to commit violence.
Moreover, the addition of this
element also responds to the concern expressed by a number of the participants
in this Inquiry—and
fortified by Principle 6 of the Johannesburg
Principles—that these offences may be used in circumstances where there is
genuine threat of force or violence.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
[5.3]–[5.11].
This contrasts with
some countries, such as the United States: see United States
Constitution
Dietrich v The
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into force
generally on 23 March 1976).
Commonwealth
[1945] HCA 3
(1945) 70 CLR 60
Horta v Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 32
For a detailed exposition of
the influence of international law (and especially international human rights
law) on Australian municipal
law, see R Piotrowicz and S Kaye,
Human Rights
in International and Australian Law
Acts Interpretation Act
Lim v Minister for Immigration
(1992) 176 CLR 1
S157/2002 v Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476
United Nations Security Council,
Resolution 1456
, UN SC, 4688th mtg, UN Doc S/Res/1456 (2003),
United Nations Security Council,
Resolution 1624
, UN SC, 5261st mtg, UN Doc S/Res/1624
Charter of the United
, 26 June 1945,
[1945] ATS 1
, (entered into force generally on
1 November 1945) art 25. For a discussion of the nature and effect of
Security Council Resolutions,
see B Simma,
The Charter of the United
Nations: A Commentary
(2nd ed, 2002), Vol 1,
Given that the earlier
statutory offence of sedition was found to be within the Commonwealth’s
legislative power (see
R v Sharkey
[1949] HCA 46
(1949) 79 CLR 121)
, it is unlikely
that the amended sedition offences would be found to be
unconstitutional.
This is also
consistent with international law more generally. See L Lasry and K Eastman,
Memorandum of advice to Australian Capital Territory Chief Solicitor
(undated), citing United Nations Secretary-General,
Protecting Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms while Countering Terrorism
, UN GA, 60th session, UN
Doc A/60/374 (2005);
Ireland v United Kingdom
[1978] ECHR 1
(1978) 2 EHRR
United Nations Security Council,
Resolution 1456
, UN SC, 4688th mtg, UN Doc S/Res/1456 (2003),
United Nations Security Council,
Resolution 1624
, UN SC, 5261st mtg, UN Doc S/Res/1624
See, eg, United Nations General
Resolution 58/174
, UNGA, 77th plenary mtg, UN Doc A/Res/58/174
(2004); United Nations Commission on Human Rights,
Resolution 2003/37
58th mtg, UN Doc Res/2003/37 (2003); United Nations Commission on Human Rights,
Resolution 2003/68
, 62nd mtg, UN Doc Res/2003/68
United Nations Commission on
Human Rights,
Resolution 2003/37
, 58th mtg, UN Doc Res/2003/37 (2003)
ARTICLE 19,
Alister v The Queen
[1984] HCA 85
154 CLR 404
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November
Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth
Interim Report
[32.17]–[32.18].
Lawyers for Human Rights,
Submission 139 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 11 November 2005. See also Gilbert &
Tobin Centre of Public Law,
Submission 80 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 10 November
Australian Lawyers for Human
Submission 139 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2)
, 11 November 2005.
‘Speaking of Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
[2.26]–[2.31].
N Jayawickrama,
The Judicial Application of Human Rights Law
See C Michaelsen,
‘International Human Rights on Trial—The United Kingdom’s and
Australia’s Legal Response
[2003] SydLawRw 13
Sydney Law Review
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290B to Senate
Inquiry into Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 3) 2005
, 24 November
Nations Human Rights Committee,
General Comment 10: Article 19
session, UN Doc HRI\GEN\1\Rev1 (1983),
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November 2005; Australian Lawyers for
Human Rights,
Submission 139 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No
, 11 November 2005; Gilbert & Tobin Centre of Public Law,
Submission 80 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
November 2005; Castan Centre for Human Rights Law,
Submission 114 to Senate
Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 11 November 2005; Australian
Capital Territory Human Rights Office,
Letter of Advice to Chief Minister and
Attorney-General of the Australian Capital Territory
, 19 October 2005; L
Lasry and K Eastman,
Memorandum of advice to Australian Capital
Territory Chief Solicitor
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Submission 158 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
, 11 November
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November 2005; Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290B to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 3) 2005
, 24 November
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Submission 158 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
, 11 November 2005; Australian Lawyers for Human Rights,
Submission 139 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
November 2005; Law Council of Australia,
Submission 140 to Senate Inquiry
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 11 November 2005; Sydney Centre for
International and Global Law,
Submission 188 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 17 November 2005; Castan Centre for Human
Rights Law,
Submission 114 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2)
, 11 November 2005; Australian Capital Territory Human Rights Office,
Letter of Advice to Chief Minister and Attorney-General of the Australian
Capital Territory
, 19 October
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
[5.35]–[5.39].
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
Question 22.
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006; J Goldring,
5 April 2006; Pax Christi,
April 2006; Centre for Media and Communications Law,
12 April 2006; New South Wales Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
10 April 2006; Fitzroy Legal Service Inc,
10 April 2006; Chief Minister (ACT),
13 April 2006; Australian Lawyers for Human
13 April 2006; Combined Community Legal
Centres Group (NSW) Inc,
13 April 2006;
Australian Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
17 April 2006; Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
18 April 2006.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
12 April 2006.
Centre for Media and
Communications Law,
12 April 2006; Australian
Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
Federation of Community Legal
Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; New South Wales
Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
2006; Victoria Legal Aid,
13 April 2006;
Australian Lawyers for Human Rights,
Australian Lawyers for Human
13 April 2006; B Saul,
14 April 2006; ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006, citing the
Johannesburg Principles on National
Security, Freedom of Expression and Access to Information
<http://www.article19.org/
pdfs/standards/joburgprinciples.pdf> at 20 April 2006. The Johannesburg
Principles were adopted on 1 October 1995 by a group of
international law, national security, and human
Acts Interpretation Act
(which addresses situations in which a statutory
provision is ‘ambiguous’, ‘obscure’ or would give rise
‘a result that is manifestly absurd or ... unreasonable’);
Mabo and Others v Queensland (No. 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
(Brennan J, covering the relevance of international law more generally); D
Williams, ‘Recognising Universal Rights in
[2001] UNSWLawJl 62
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Australian Lawyers for Human
ARTICLE 19,
Australian Lawyers for Human
Chief Minister (ACT),
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into
force generally on 23 March 1976)
United Nations Human
Rights Committee,
General Comment 10: Article 19
, 19th session, UN Doc
HRI\GEN\1\Rev1 (1983), [4].
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1
Sunday Times v United
[1979] ECHR 1
(1979) 2 EHRR 245.
See also ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006.
Sunday Times
v United Kingdom
[1979] ECHR 1
(1979) 2 EHRR 245
For further explanation of these
proposals, see accompanying text in Chs 8 and
Sunday Times v United Kingdom
[1979] ECHR 1
(1979) 2 EHRR 245
Handyside v United Kingdom
[1976] ECHR 5
(1976) 1 EHRR 737.
the analysis of the jurisprudence on the
European Convention on Human Rights
H Lee, P Hanks
and V Morabito,
In the Name of National Security: The Legal Dimensions
(1995), 15.
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1
6. Sedition Laws in Other
Introduction
European Convention on Terrorism
European Convention on Human Rights
United Kingdom
Common law sedition offences
The encouragement or glorification of terrorism offence
United States of America
Current sedition offence
The Smith Act
Other countries
6. Sedition Laws in Other
Introduction
6.1 An important principle of comparative law is that
useful lessons can be drawn from studying how other jurisdictions approach
This chapter
examines sedition laws in a number of selected countries, focusing on how other
need to proscribe seditious conduct with the
requirements of international
6.2 Submissions to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee
inquiry into the provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry) expressed concern that Australia was
out-of-step with other jurisdictions in re-invigorating
its sedition
provisions.
However, the
Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) has stated that it is necessary to
focus on the substance of offences in other
nomenclature, to determine whether they are ‘sedition’ offences.
While some have commented on a trend in some other countries away from
‘sedition’ offences, this appears to be an observation
in relation
to the naming of such offences, rather than an observation that the substance of
such offences are being removed from
the Statute
[back to top]
European Convention
on Terrorism
6.3 Two European treaties are particularly relevant to the law of sedition. The
first is the Council of Europe’s
Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism
(the European Convention on Terrorism), adopted in
Article 5 of this
Convention requires State parties to establish an offence of ‘public
provocation to commit a terrorist
which is defined
the distribution, or otherwise making available, of a message to the public,
with the intent to incite the commission of a terrorist
offence, where such
conduct, whether or not directly advocating terrorist offences, causes a danger
that one or more such offences
6.4 Article 5(2) provides that public provocation to commit a terrorist
offence is only an offence when committed ‘unlawfully
intentionally’. Currently, there are 31 signatories to this
Convention.
6.5 The Explanatory Report on this Convention provides examples of conduct that
may amount to the indirect incitement of terrorism
so as to fall within the
ambit of art 5. These include ‘the dissemination of messages praising
the perpetrator of an attack,
the denigration of victims, calls for funding for
terrorist organisations or other similar
‘presenting a terrorist offence as necessary and
justified’.
6.6 Dr Ben Saul has commented that the fact that art 5 requires a
specific intent to incite the commission of a terrorist offence
and a danger
that a terrorist offence may be committed means that ‘merely justifying or
praising terrorism, without more, is
criminalised’.
addition, Dr Saul has noted that the drafters of this Convention only agreed to
criminalise provocation because European human
rights remedies were available to
protect free expression from undue
European Convention
on Human Rights
6.7 The second relevant treaty is the Council of Europe’s
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950
referred to as the European Convention on Human Rights or
Australia is not a party
to this Convention. However, art 10 is substantially similar to art 19
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966
to which Australia is a
party. Thus, the way in which European jurisdictions have approached sedition in
light of art 10 of the ECHR
is instructive in the Australian context.
6.8 Article 10 of the ECHR states:
1. Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include
freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information
and ideas without
interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers. This article shall
not prevent States from requiring
the licensing of broadcasting, television or
cinema enterprises.
2. The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and
responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions,
restrictions
or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society,
in the interests of national security,
territorial integrity or public safety,
for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,
protection of the reputation or the rights of others, for preventing the
disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
6.9 In Europe, sedition (along with the crimes of treason and espionage) is
viewed as a political crime. This means that the crime
is ‘directed at the
security and structure of the state or the regime in official
constitute the offence of sedition there must be a nexus between the
defendant’s conduct and the intention or effect
of jeopardising the
security or integrity of the state. For this reason, sedition is best
characterised as a public order offence.
6.10 There has not been a direct challenge to the legitimacy of domestic
sedition legislation under the ECHR either in the European
Court of Human Rights
or in the European Commission of Human
However, the case of
Piermont v France
raised indirectly the issue of the interaction between
domestic sedition provisions and the freedom of expression guarantees in
10 of the ECHR.
approach of the European Commission of Human Rights in this case indicates that
a domestic sedition offence will not infringe
art 10 if it makes sedition a
public order offence and ensures that only people threatening public order are
prosecuted.
6.11 Although there are no European cases directly on point, the principles
derived from other cases dealing with substantively similar
issues provide some
assistance in analysing the interaction between art 10 of the ECHR (and, by
implication, art 19 of the ICCPR)
and sedition provisions. On the whole,
the national security and public safety exceptions to the operation of
art 10(1) of the ECHR
have been interpreted narrowly. However, the context
is critical: where the provision in question limits expression of a political
nature, that provision is more likely to fall foul of art 10 than other
forms of expression.
6.12 A number of decisions of the European Court of Human Rights have been
particularly protective of political
For example,
Vereinigung Demokratischer Soldaten Osterreichs and Gubi v Austria
involved the refusal by the Austrian military to authorise the distribution of a
publication, aimed at Austrian soldiers, which often
included items critical of
military life.
The authorities
claimed that the publication was prejudicial to national security. However, the
European Court of Human Rights held
that the publication did not prejudice
national security and thus Austria was unable to avail itself of the exception
in art 10(2)
6.13 In contrast to the protection afforded to political expression, domestic
legislation proscribing racial hatred is much less
likely to fall foul of
art 10 of the ECHR. Professor David Feldman has noted that the
‘weakest protection of all is accorded
[by art 10 of the ECHR] to
racist expression and the promulgation of racial
6.14 On the whole, states have been able to use art 10(2) of the ECHR to
criminalise the expression of racist views and hate speech,
so long as the tests
of legality, necessity and proportionality are
For example, it is an
offence in a number of European countries to publish material denying that the
Holocaust took place.
European Court of Human Rights has indicated that legislation that prohibits a
person from denying the Holocaust will not contravene
art 10 of the ECHR if
it satisfies the test of
proportionality.
[back to top]
Common law sedition
6.15 The United Kingdom does not have a statutory offence of sedition. However,
as discussed in Chapter 3, it has several common
law sedition offences such
as the offence of uttering seditious words.
6.16 It has been argued that the common law sedition offences require an
incitement to cause violence or
This is said to give
them ‘a public-order aspect’, which probably makes them compatible
with art 10 of the ECHR.
However, a public order offence that detracts from freedom of expression must be
‘strictly necessary’ to avoid contravening
art 10 of the
6.17 In 1977 the Law Commission of England and Wales concluded that there was no
need for an offence of sedition in the criminal
code because conduct that would
fall within its ambit would be caught by offences of incitement or conspiracy to
commit the relevant
Further, the Law Commission stated that:
it is better in principle to rely on these ordinary statutory and common law
offences than to have resort to an offence which has
the implication that the
conduct in question is
‘political’.
6.18 There have been relatively few prosecutions of sedition offences in the
United Kingdom during the 20th century—fewer even
It has been argued
that sedition offences have been ‘superseded by public-order legislation,
including the statutory crime
of inciting racial
6.19 The most recent sedition case in the United Kingdom was
Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate; ex parte
In this case the
applicant applied for summonses against the author and publisher of the book,
The Satanic Verses
, for the common law offence of seditious libel. The
applicant argued that by publishing and distributing the book the defendants
caused widespread discontent and disaffection among Her Majesty’s
subjects, provoking acts of violence particularly between
Muslim and non-Muslim
people. The Divisional Court dismissed the application for judicial review of
the magistrate’s refusal
to issue the summonses. Watkins LJ, on
behalf of the Court, held:
Proof of an intention to promote feelings of ill will and hostility between
different classes of subjects does not alone establish
a seditious intention.
Not only must there be proof of an incitement to violence in this connection,
but it must be violence or resistance
or defiance for the purpose of disturbing
... some person or body holding office or discharging some public function of
The encouragement or
glorification of terrorism offence
6.20 As noted above, there is no statutory offence of sedition in the United
Kingdom. However, in April 2006 legislation came into
force making it an offence
to encourage or glorify
Paper 30 (IP 30) the ALRC asked whether there was a need for a similar
offence in Australia.
6.21 Section 1 of the
Terrorism Act 2006
(UK) states:
1 Encouragement of terrorism
(1) This section applies to a statement that is likely to be understood by some
or all of the members of the public to whom it is
published as a direct or
indirect encouragement or other inducement to them to the commission,
preparation or instigation of acts
of terrorism or Convention offences.
(2) A person commits an offence if—
(a) he publishes a statement to which this section applies or causes another to
publish such a statement; and
(b) at the time he publishes it or causes it to be published, he—
(i) intends members of the public to be directly or indirectly encouraged or
otherwise induced by the statement to commit, prepare
or instigate acts of
terrorism or Convention offences; or
(ii) is reckless as to whether members of the public will be directly or
indirectly encouraged or otherwise induced by the statement
to commit, prepare
or instigate such acts or offences.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the statements that are likely to be
understood by members of the public as indirectly encouraging
the commission or
preparation of acts of terrorism or Convention offences include every statement
(a) glorifies the commission or preparation (whether in the past, in the future
or generally) of such acts or offences; and
(b) is a statement from which those members of the public could reasonably be
expected to infer that what is being glorified is
being glorified as conduct
that should be emulated by them in existing circumstances.
(4) For the purposes of this section the questions how a statement is likely to
be understood and what members of the public could
reasonably be expected to
infer from it must be determined having regard both—
(a) to the contents of the statement as a whole; and
(b) to the circumstances and manner of its publication.
(5) It is irrelevant for the purposes of subsections (1) to (3)—
(a) whether anything mentioned in those subsections relates to the commission,
preparation or instigation of one or more particular
acts of terrorism or
Convention offences, of acts of terrorism or Convention offences of a particular
description or of acts of terrorism
or Convention offences generally; and,
(b) whether any person is in fact encouraged or induced by the statement to
commit, prepare or instigate any such act or offence.
(6) In proceedings for an offence under this section against a person in whose
case it is not proved that he intended the statement
directly or indirectly to
encourage or otherwise induce the commission, preparation or instigation of acts
of terrorism or Convention
offences, it is a defence for him to show—
(a) that the statement neither expressed his views nor had his endorsement
(whether by virtue of section 3 or otherwise); and
(b) that it was clear, in all the circumstances of the statement’s
publication, that it did not express his views and (apart
from the possibility
of his having been given and failed to comply with a notice under subsection (3)
of that section) did not have
his endorsement.
(7) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable—
(a) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
7 years or to a fine, or to both;
(b) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months or to a fine not exceeding the
statutory maximum, or to
6.22 The concept of glorification is defined to include ‘any form of
praise or celebration, and cognate expressions are to
be construed
accordingly’.
Section 2 of the Act creates a separate offence of ‘dissemination of
terrorist publications’, which relies also on the
glorification.
6.23 The creation of an offence of encouraging or glorifying terrorism was
controversial.
An offence of
condoning or glorifying terrorism was initially included in the Racial and
Religious Hatred Bill 2005 (UK). However,
it was heavily
and abandoned prior
to enactment.
A similar offence,
referring to encouragement or glorification of terrorism, was then introduced in
a narrower form in the Bill that
Terrorism Act 2006
This Bill was
initially rejected by the House of Lords on 28 February 2006 (by a majority
of 160 to 156) and was the subject of vigorous
debate in both Houses of
Parliament. The European Convention on Terrorism provided some impetus for
encouragement of terrorism
s 1(5)(a) of the
Terrorism Act 2006
makes it clear that it is not
limited by the scope of this Convention.
6.24 The primary criticism of this new offence is that it impacts too heavily on
freedom of expression. During parliamentary debates
Dahrendorf, a member of the House of Lords, stated that ‘rants should be
rejected with argument, not
with police and
6.25 The United Kingdom Parliament’s Joint Committee on Human Rights
expressed concern that the new offence of ‘encouragement’
terrorism was not sufficiently certain to satisfy art 10 of the ECHR, which
requires interferences with freedom of expression
to be ‘prescribed by
law’. The Committee expressed concern about the following factors:
(i) the vagueness of the glorification requirement, (ii) the breadth of the
definition of ‘terrorism’ and (iii) the lack
of any requirement of
intent to incite terrorism or likelihood of such offences being caused as
ingredients of the offence.
6.26 Professor Eric Barendt has stated that an offence of glorification of
terrorism would make the government ‘the judge of
history’ and could blur the line ‘between extremist political speech
... and criminal
Submissions and consultations
6.27 In the current Inquiry, those stakeholders who commented on this issue
unanimously opposed the introduction of a new offence
of the encouragement or
glorification of terrorism in Australia. The AGD informed the ALRC that it did
not presently have any intention
of enacting such an
It submitted that:
A number of alternatives to the words ‘advocates’ and
‘praise’ were considered during development of the
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2) 2005
(Cth)], including ‘glorify’
or ‘condone’. It was considered that these terms were less precise
than ‘praise’
and could generate difficulties of proof, particularly
in the context of a criminal prosecution, where it must be proved beyond a
reasonable doubt. It is likely that, given its ordinary meaning,
‘glorify’ would be read down in a way that would be
more restrictive
than ‘praise’, while condone could include implications and may be
6.28 ARTICLE 19 submitted that criminalising the glorification of terrorism
violates the
Johannesburg Principles on National Security, Freedom of
Expression and Access to Information
because ‘there is an insufficient
connection between the speech and a likelihood of imminent
In addition, it
The UK offences of ‘glorification’ and ‘encouragement’
are both vaguely worded and broad in scope, failing
to meet the ‘provided
by law’ test. ... The concept of ‘glorification’ also removes
the requirement of mens
rea, a fundamental component of a society governed by
the rule of law.
6.29 Dr Saul submitted that introduction of a glorification offence would
be particularly undesirable ‘in the absence of any
entrenched protection
of human rights in
Australia’.
The Australian
Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network also opposed the introduction of such an
offence and noted that concerns had
been expressed in the United Kingdom that
such an offence would disproportionately target
ALRC’s views
6.30 The ALRC agrees that it is undesirable to introduce an offence of
‘glorification’ or ‘encouragement’
of terrorism. The
term ‘glorification’ is vague and is not used elsewhere in the
Criminal Code
. However, the
Criminal Code
does enable an
organisation to be listed as a terrorist organisation if it ‘directly
the doing of a terrorist act where there is a risk that
such praise might lead a person to engage in a terrorist
6.31 Although the word ‘praise’ is similar to the word
‘glorify’, it is used in a provision designed to assist
Attorney-General to determine whether or not an organisation is a terrorist
organisation.
It is not used in
a provision that imposes criminal liability on an individual or organisation for
praising terrorist acts. Accordingly,
there is no precedent in Australia for the
offence of glorifying terrorism and the
Criminal Code
provisions that
refer to the praising of terrorism would provide limited assistance in
determining the meaning of any offence of
glorification of terrorism.
6.32 Further, an offence of glorification of terrorism could represent an
unwarranted incursion into freedom of expression and the
constitutionally
protected freedom of political
In the United
Kingdom, courts must interpret statutory provisions so that they are consistent
with the human rights protections in
Thus, a crucial safeguard
against an overly broad interpretation of an offence of glorification of
terrorism would be absent if such
an offence were enacted in Australia.
There is no need to introduce into federal law an offence of
‘encouragement or glorification of terrorism’, along the
that in s 1 of the
Terrorism Act 2006
[back to top]
United States of
Sedition Act
was the first piece of legislation
proscribing sedition in the United
Since the passage of
this Act, the offence of sedition has been removed from the statute books from
time to time and has fallen into
disuse at other
Sedition prosecutions
were common in the United States during World War I and immediately
following World War II.
‘modern-day sedition trials are almost unheard of’ in the United
6.34 The critical issue in determining the validity of United States sedition
laws has been whether or not they are compatible with
the First Amendment to the
United States
Constitution
Chafee has stated that a common defect in sedition laws, and one that is
arguably not limited to the United States, is
that their operation is
unpredictable:
It is an outstanding feature of every sedition act that the way it is enforced
differs from the way it looks in print as much as
a gypsy moth differs from the
worm from which it has grown.
Keyishian v Board of Regents
the United States Supreme Court held
that an offence of uttering seditious words was so broad that the ‘the
possible scope of
“seditious” utterances or acts has virtually no
limit’. Accordingly, the provision fell foul of the First Amendment
protection of free speech.
Brennan J held that it cast ‘a pall of
selective prosecution of people who articulated views critical of the
government. This has been described in the United
States literature as
discrimination’.
6.36 The most recent Supreme Court case dealing with the constitutionality of
sedition law is
Brandenburg v Ohio
In this case, the Court
refined and clarified earlier tests of constitutionality. It held that three
elements were required before
a law criminalising the advocacy of illegal
conduct could be valid: there must be express advocacy of law violation; the
must call for immediate law violation; and the law violation must be
likely to occur.
More generally,
the United States Supreme Court has tended to invalidate criminal laws that
detract from freedom of expression—and
especially political
expression—unless they criminalise conduct that is ‘inherently
likely to cause violent
Current sedition
6.37 There is a federal offence of ‘seditious conspiracy’ in the
United States Code § 2384, which provides:
Seditious conspiracy
If two or more persons in any State or Territory, or in any place subject to the
put down, or to
destroy by force the Government of the United States, or to levy war against
them, or to oppose by force the authority
thereof, or by force to prevent,
hinder, or delay the execution of any law of the United States, or by force to
seize, take, or possess
any property of the United States contrary to the
authority thereof, they shall each be fined under this title or imprisoned not
more than twenty years, or both.
6.38 There are three principal elements to the offence. First, there must be a
‘conspiracy’ involving two or more persons,
occurring within United
States territory or jurisdiction. Secondly, the conspiracy must oppose the
United States government or threaten
its laws or property. Thirdly, the use of
force must be part of the conspiracy plot. The term ‘seditious’ is
only referred
to in the title and not the text of § 2384. This may be
‘because the word “seditious” in and of itself does
sufficiently convey what conduct it
United States v Rahman
a radical Islamic cleric, Sheik Omar Abdel
Rahman, and a number of other defendants were convicted of seditious conspiracy
to § 2384 of the United States Code. Rahman was said to have
incited members of his group to undertake subversive activities,
plotting to blow up the headquarters of the United Nations and other buildings
in New York City, during his sermons. In his
sermons he told his followers to,
among other things, ‘do jihad with the sword, with the cannon, with the
grenades, with the
missile ... against God’s
Further, he
stated that ‘being called terrorists was fine, so long as they were
terrorizing the enemies of Islam, the foremost
of which was the United States
and its allies’.
6.40 Rahman’s sentence and the constitutionality of § 2384 were
affirmed by the Court of Appeals for the Second
The Court of Appeals
held that the fact that his speech or conduct was ‘religious’ did
not immunise him from prosecution
under generally applicable criminal
6.41 One commentator has predicted that ‘prosecutions of seditious
conspiracy are more likely to occur in a climate of society’s
apprehension about terrorist plots against the
Alien Registration Act
of 1940, or ‘Smith
has been described
as the ‘companion statute’ to the law on seditious
conspiracy.
While the Smith Act
does not use the term ‘sedition’, it creates an offence of
advocating the overthrow of government.
The relevant provision states:
Whoever knowingly or willfully advocates, abets, advises, or teaches the duty,
necessity, desirability, or propriety of overthrowing
or destroying the
government of the United States or the government of any State, Territory,
District or Possession thereof, or the
government of any political subdivision
therein, by force or violence, or by the assassination of any officer of any
such government;
Whoever, with intent to cause the overthrow or destruction of any such
government, prints, publishes, edits, issues, circulates,
sells, distributes, or
publicly displays any written or printed matter advocating, advising, or
teaching the duty, necessity, desirability,
or propriety of overthrowing or
destroying any government in the United States by force or violence, or attempts
to do so; or
Whoever organizes or helps or attempts to organize any society, group, or
assembly of persons who teach, advocate, or encourage the
overthrow or
destruction of any such government by force or violence; or becomes or is a
member of, or affiliates with, any such
society, group, or assembly of persons,
knowing the purposes thereof—
Shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than twenty years, or
both, and shall be ineligible for employment by the
United States or any
department or agency thereof, for the five years next following his
conviction.
6.43 The relevant provisions of the Smith Act have been interpreted in a similar
manner to the seditious conspiracy provisions, such
that they apply ‘only
to concrete violent action as distinguished from the teaching of abstract
principles related to the forcible
overthrow of the
government’.
‘academic discussion’ is not enough to support a
prosecution.
However, the Smith
Act does not appear to require proof to the same level of specificity as is
required to prosecute under §
2384. Rather, it catches ‘the mere
teaching or advocacy of the violent overthrow of the
government’.
constitutionality of the Smith Act was affirmed by the United States Supreme
Court in 1951.
The Court later
refined the meaning of advocacy to require that ‘those to whom the
advocacy is addressed must be urged to do
something, now or in the future,
rather than merely to believe in
something’.
[back to top]
6.44 As part of the transitional arrangements that followed China’s
resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong on 30 June 1997,
entitled the
Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the
People’s Republic of China 1997
(the Basic Law) was enacted. Its
effect was to retain the existing legal edifice for at least 50 years
(art 5) subject to certain
qualifications, including that Hong Kong’s
law must be amended so as to conform to the Basic Law itself (art 8).
of the Basic Law provides:
The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall enact laws on its own to
prohibit any act of treason, secession, sedition, subversion
against the Central
People’s Government, or theft of state secrets, to prohibit foreign
political organizations or bodies from
conducting political activities in the
Region, and to prohibit political organizations or bodies of the Region from
establishing
ties with foreign political organizations or bodies.
6.45 In September 2002, the Hong Kong government published its proposals to
implement art 23. On 25 February 2003, these proposals
were included
in the National Security (Legislative Provisions) Bill. The reaction to this
Bill was ‘deafening and swift’,
with 500,000 people marching against
the Bill on
1 July 2003
largest protest march ever held against the Hong Kong
government’.
Ultimately,
the Bill was withdrawn from the Legislative Council.
6.46 Accordingly, Hong Kong retains colonial era offences of sedition, which
criminalise any seditious act, seditious words or dealings
with a seditious
publication.
‘seditious intention’ is defined in s 9(1) as follows:
A seditious intention is an intention—
(a) to bring into hatred or contempt or to excite disaffection against the
person of Her Majesty, or Her Heirs or Successors, or
against the Government of
Hong Kong, or the government of any other part of Her Majesty’s dominions
or of any territory under
Her Majesty's protection as by law established;
(b) to excite Her Majesty's subjects or inhabitants of Hong Kong to attempt to
procure the alteration, otherwise than by lawful means,
of any other matter in
Hong Kong as by law established; or
(c) to bring into hatred or contempt or to excite disaffection against the
administration of justice in Hong Kong; or
(d) to raise discontent or disaffection amongst Her Majesty’s subjects or
inhabitants of Hong Kong; or
(e) to promote feelings of ill-will and enmity between different classes of the
population of Hong Kong; or
(f) to incite persons to violence; or
(g) to counsel disobedience to law or to any lawful order.
6.47 This offence was used by the colonial authority to suppress internal
It has been described
as ‘archaic’, out of step with ‘a narrower definition to
comport with the stability of most
‘draconian’.
also said to have a ‘chilling effect on free
The offence was
used in the 1960s, but rarely
thereafter.
6.48 It has been observed that unlike most statutes dealing with sedition, the
Hong Kong law does not require proof of an intention
to incite violence. Thus it
presents a relatively low bar to
prosecution.
The Bill that was
proposed to implement art 23 of the Basic Law did not incorporate a
requirement of an intention to incite violence—a
factor contributing to
the disquiet that led to its
abandonment.
[back to top]
6.49 In a 1986 working paper, the Law Reform Commission of Canada (LRCC)
described the offence of sedition as ‘an outdated
and unprincipled
law’, asking ‘is it not odd that our
Criminal Code
contains the offence of sedition which has as its very object the suppression of
[freedom of political
expression]?’
6.50 This is particularly problematic given that s 2(b) of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
recognises the ‘fundamental ...
freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of the
press and other
media of communication’. The LRCC went on to note that the
leading Canadian authority on sedition,
Boucher v The
construed the
relevant provisions narrowly. As a result, the LRCC concluded:
Applying [the Supreme Court of Canada’s] narrow definition, there no
longer seems to be a need for a separate offence of sedition,
because the only
conduct that would be proscribed by it could just as well be dealt with as
incitement ... , conspiracy ... , contempt
of court, or hate propaganda ... .
legislative
revision is in
6.51 Nevertheless, sedition remains a part of Canadian criminal
However, there does not
appear to have been a prosecution for sedition in Canada since the 1950s. This
may be due, at least in part,
to the Supreme Court of Canada’s finding
that the sedition provisions do not have any reach beyond those allied offences
by the LRCC.
[back to top]
6.52 Prosecutions for sedition are relatively rare. Nevertheless, they still
occur from time to time in other countries. The following
is a brief,
representative overview of some recent attempts to prosecute sedition in certain
other countries. The account below focuses
on prosecutions for offences defined
as sedition offences—as opposed to other offences that may fall within the
legal definition
of sedition, such as incitement to violence.
6.53 There have been very few recent reported cases of sedition in Europe or
North America (other than the United States case of
above). Rather, it appears that sedition is now viewed as an outdated and
inappropriate offence. For example, on 3 May
2006, 78 people of German
descent convicted of sedition during World War I in the United States state of
Montana were posthumously
6.54 In Asia, a number of countries possess sedition
laws inherited from the United Kingdom. In Malaysia in early 2006, a government
minister with responsibility for legal matters threatened to prosecute for
sedition a number of non-Muslim authors of articles written
Any such prosecution
would be based on Malaysia’s
Sedition Act 1948
, in which the
definition of sedition is based on the common law definition of ‘seditious
6.55 Article 139 of the Philippines
Criminal Code
contains an
offence of sedition, which is committed when a person rises ‘publicly and
tumultuously in order to obtain by force,
intimidation, or by other means
outside legal methods’ certain political objectives. There is a related
offence of incitement
to sedition (art 142) and this is therefore more closely
analogous to the Australian sedition offences that are the subject of this
6.56 These offences have been used recently against Filipino journalists during
the state of emergency declared by the Arroyo administration
24 February and 3 March 2006. For example, Professor Randy David and
Argee Guevarra were arrested on 24 February 2006 for
inciting sedition
after leading a demonstration march on the day that the state of emergency was
declared. They were released on
the same day and the charges were
However, the
following day police raided the offices of
The Daily Tribune
newspaper’s editor and two columnists were charged under art 142 of
Criminal Code
with incitement to sedition. Those charges are
currently being challenged on the basis of a decision by the Philippines High
that the presidential proclamation authorising the raid on
was unlawful.
6.57 Article 301 of the Turkish
was enacted on
1 June 2005. It criminalises the public denigration of Turkishness, the
Republic or the Grand National Assembly of
Turkey, the judicial institutions of
Turkey, and Turkey’s military or security structures. It further provides
that where the
denigration of Turkishness is committed by a Turkish citizen in
another country the punishment shall be increased by one third. However,
‘expressions of thought intended to criticize shall not constitute a
6.58 It has been reported that at least 29 journalists have been charged
under art 301,
with authors, professors, publishers, activists and artists. Prominent author
Orhan Pamuk was charged after he said in an interview
with a Swiss newspaper
that ‘30,000 Kurds and a million Armenians were murdered. Hardly anyone
dares mention it, so I do. And
that’s why I’m hated.’ The
charges against Pamuk were eventually dropped because the interview occurred
art 301 was enacted. Others charged under art 301 include two
members of the Turkish Human Rights Advisory Board, for their role
publication of a report on minority and cultural rights in
However, in May 2006,
a judge acquitted the defendants of the sedition charges after a prosecutor said
the two men had used their
right to free speech in the report.
M Glendon, W Gordon and C Osakwe,
Comparative Legal Traditions
(2nd ed, 1994),
K Zweigert and H Kötz,
Introduction to Comparative Law
(3rd ed, 1998),
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(2005), [5.32]–[5.42]. See also C
Connolly, ‘Five Key Facts on Sedition’ (2005) (November/December
Human Rights Defender (Special Issue)
20, 20. Connolly states that
Canada, Ireland, Kenya, New Zealand, South Africa, Taiwan and the United States
have repealed or are
in the process of repealing sedition
legislation.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November 2005,
Council of Europe Convention on the
Prevention of Terrorism
, 16 May 2005, CETS 196, (entered into force
generally on 16 May 2005).
Committee of Ministers of
the Council of Europe,
Explanatory Report on Council of Europe Convention on
the Prevention of Terrorism
, adopted at 925th Meeting (2005),
B Saul, ‘Speaking of
Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
University of
New South Wales Law Journal
Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
, 4 November
, (entered into force generally on 3 September
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into
force generally on 23 March 1976). See also the discussion of art 19 of the
ICCPR in Ch 7.
P Lansing and J
Bailey, ‘The Farmbelt Fuehrer: Consequences of Transnational Communication
of Political and Racist Speech’
Nebraska Law Review
(revised ed, 1996), 158. Professor Barendt states generally that the
position of the European Commission of Human Rights, as expressed
Arrowsmith v United Kingdom
(1981) 3 EHRR 218, ‘strongly suggest[s]
that such laws [as sedition] would be upheld as necessary restrictions to
protect national
security and public safety, or to prevent disorder and
Piermont v France
(1993) 15 EHRR 76. The issue was raised indirectly because the applicant (the
defendant at first instance) did not argue that the
sedition provision was
incompatible with art 10 of the ECHR, but rather that her impugned
statements were ‘not in any way seditious
and could not by themselves
constitute a serious threat to public
Civil Liberties and
Human Rights in England and Wales
(2nd ed, 2002),
Lingens v Austria
[1986] ECHR 7
(1986) 8 EHRR 407
Vereinigung Demokratischer Soldaten Osterreichs and Gubi v
(1995) 20 EHRR 56
Vogt v Germany
[1995] ECHR 29
(1995) 21 EHRR 205
(criticism of candidates for elective office);
Open Door Counselling and
Dublin Well Woman Centre v Ireland
[1992] ECHR 68
(1992) 15 EHRR 244
(publication of
information in Ireland about abortion services available in foreign
Vereinigung
Demokratischer Soldaten Osterreichs and Gubi v Austria
(1995) 20 EHRR
This provision is materially
equivalent to art 19(3) of the ICCPR. For further discussion, see
Liberties and Human Rights in England and Wales
(2nd ed, 2002), 760. See
also E Barendt,
Freedom of Speech
(2nd ed, 2005),
[1994] ECHR 33
(1994) 19 EHRR 1.
the relevant German legislation:
130(3) which
must be read in conjunction with
1. See also
France’s ‘Loi Gayssot’, which makes it an offence to contest
the existence of certain crimes against
humanity on the basis of which Nazi
leaders were tried and convicted by the International Military Tribunal at
Nuremberg. The Loi
Gayssot is discussed in Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Human Rights Brief No 4: Lawful Limits on Fundamental
http://www.hreoc.gov.au/Human_RightS/briefs/brief_4.html#hr4.30
March 2006.
A good summary of the
relevant case law can be found in A Marshall Williams and J Cooper, ‘Hate
Speech, Holocaust Denial and
International Human Rights Law’
European Human Rights Law Review
Law Commission of
England and Wales,
Working Paper No 72 Second Programme, Item XVIII
Codification of the Criminal Law—Treason, Sedition and Allied Offences
(1977), [70]; J Boasberg, ‘Seditious Libel v Incitement to Mutiny: Britain
Teaches Hand and Holmes a Lesson’ (1990) 10
Oxford Journal of Legal
106, 107; H Fenwick,
Civil Liberties
Civil Liberties and
Human Rights in England and Wales
(2nd ed, 2002),
Percy v DPP
Crim LR 835, 835.
Law Commission of
England and Wales,
Working Paper No 72 Second Programme, Item XVIII
Codification of the Criminal Law—Treason, Sedition and Allied Offences
(1977), [77]–[78]. A similar view was expressed in L Leigh, ‘Law
Reform and the Law of Treason and Sedition’ (1977)
Law Commission of England
Working Paper No 72 Second Programme, Item XVIII Codification of
the Criminal Law—Treason, Sedition and Allied Offences
L Maher, ‘The Use and Abuse
of Sedition’
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
, 294. See also E
Freedom of Speech
(revised ed, 1996),
Civil Liberties and
Human Rights in England and Wales
(2nd ed, 2002),
R v Chief Metropolitan
Stipendiary Magistrate; ex parte Choudhury
[1991] 1 QB
Terrorism Act
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006), Question
Terrorism Act
(UK) s 20(2).
There are also
other references to ‘glorification’. See Ibid ss 3 and
See, eg, Amnesty International,
UK: Human Rights: A Broken Promise, 23 February 2006
http://web.amnesty.org/library/Index/ENGEUR450042006?open & of=ENG-GBR
at 1 March 2006.
See B Saul,
‘Speaking of Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 870–871; E Barendt,
‘Threats to Freedom of Speech in the United Kingdom’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 55
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Racial and Religious
Saul, ‘Speaking of Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
University of New South Wales Law Journal
R Dahrendof,
Free Speech on
(2005) Project Syndicate
http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/dahrendorf45
at 27 February
House of Lords and House of
Commons Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Counter-Terrorism Policy and Human
Rights: Terrorism Bill and Related Matters
, Third Report of Session
2005–06 (2005), 3.
‘Threats to Freedom of Speech in the United Kingdom’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 55
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
2006; Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Consultation
, Canberra, 26 April
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006. The Johannesburg Principles are discussed in
Australian Muslim Civil Rights
Advocacy Network,
Criminal Code
s 102.1(1A)(c).
See especially
Ibid s 102.1(2).
Human Rights Act 1998
‘Terroristic Religious Speech: Giving the Devil the Benefit of the First
Amendment Free Exercise and Free Speech Clauses’
1230, 1240.
detailed account of the history of United States sedition legislation, see Ibid,
1241–1245; Z Chafee,
Free Speech in the United States
1954); J Rudanko,
The Forging of Freedom of Speech: Essays on Argumentation
in Congressional Debates on the Bill of Rights and on the Sedition Act
J Cohan, ‘Seditious
Conspiracy, the Smith Act, and Prosecution for Religious Speech Advocating the
Violent Overthrow of the
Government’ (2003) 17
St John’s Journal
of Legal Commentary
The First Amendment states:
‘Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of
the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the
Government for a redress of
grievances.’
Brandenburg v
[1969] USSC 141
(1969); Z Chafee,
Free Speech in the United States
(2nd ed, 1954), 459.
Keyishian v
Board of Regents
[1967] USSC 25
(1967), 598–599
(Brennan J).
See I Hare, ‘Method and
Objectivity in Free Speech Adjudication: Lessons from America’ (2005) 54
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
Brandenburg v Ohio
[1969] USSC 141
B Schwartz, ‘Holmes
versus Hand: Clear and Present Danger or Advocacy of Unlawful Action’
Supreme Court Review
, 240; H Keehn, ‘Terroristic
Religious Speech: Giving the Devil the Benefit of the First Amendment Free
Exercise and Free Speech
Clauses’ (1998) 28
Seton Hall Law Review
1230, 1245.
[1971] USSC 114
Crimes and Criminal Procedure
Code of 1948
(1994) 18 USC
‘Seditious Conspiracy, the Smith Act, and Prosecution for Religious Speech
Advocating the Violent Overthrow of the
Government’ (2003) 17
John’s Journal of Legal Commentary
United States v Rahman
[1999] USCA2 364
(1999), 104.
J Cohan, ‘Seditious
Conspiracy, the Smith Act, and Prosecution for Religious Speech Advocating the
Violent Overthrow of the
Government’ (2003) 17
St John’s Journal
of Legal Commentary
after Representative Howard W Smith of
J Cohan, ‘Seditious
Conspiracy, the Smith Act, and Prosecution for Religious Speech Advocating the
Violent Overthrow of the
Government’ (2003) 17
St John’s Journal
of Legal Commentary
Crimes and Criminal
Procedure Code of 1948
(1994) 18 USC
‘Seditious Conspiracy, the Smith Act, and Prosecution for Religious Speech
Advocating the Violent Overthrow of the
Government’ (2003) 17
John’s Journal of Legal Commentary
Dennis v United States
US 494 (1951).
Yates v United
[1957] USSC 89
(1957), 325.
Wacks, ‘National Security and Fundamental Freedoms: Hong Kong’s
Article 23 under Scrutiny—A Review’ (2006)
181. See also T Kellogg, ‘Legislating Rights: Basic Law Article 23,
National Security, and Human Rights in Hong Kong’
Journal of Asian Law
Petersen, ‘Introduction’ in F Hualing, C Petersen and S Young (eds),
National Security and Fundamental Freedoms: Hong Kong’s Article 23
under Scrutiny
Crimes Ordinance
ss 10(1) and (2).
See F Hualing,
‘Past and Future Offences of Sedition in Hong Kong’ in F Hualing, C
Petersen and S Young (eds),
National Security and Fundamental Freedoms:
Hong Kong’s Article 23 under Scrutiny
(2005) 217,
‘Legislating Rights: Basic Law Article 23, National Security, and Human
Rights in Hong Kong’
Columbia Journal of Asian Law
Yan Mei Ning on behalf of the Hong
Kong News Executives' Association,
On Sedition, Police Investigation Power
and Misprision of Treason [Legal Opinion]
, 1 December 2001,
F Hualing, ‘Past and Future
Offences of Sedition in Hong Kong’ in F Hualing, C Petersen and S Young
National Security and Fundamental Freedoms: Hong Kong’s Article
23 under Scrutiny
(2005) 217,
T Kellogg, ‘Legislating
Rights: Basic Law Article 23, National Security, and Human Rights in Hong
Columbia Journal of Asian Law
, 327; F Hualing,
‘Past and Future Offences of Sedition in Hong Kong’ in F Hualing, C
Petersen and S Young (eds),
National Security and Fundamental Freedoms: Hong
Kong’s Article 23 under Scrutiny
(2005) 217,
T Kellogg, ‘Legislating
Rights: Basic Law Article 23, National Security, and Human Rights in Hong
Columbia Journal of Asian Law
Law Reform Commission of Canada,
Crimes Against the State
, Working Paper 49 (1986),
Boucher v The King
[1951] 2 DLR 369.
Law Reform Commission
Crimes Against the State
, Working Paper 49 (1986),
Criminal Code 1985
For a detailed
analysis of this decision and the Montana wartime sedition law, see J Robbins,
‘Pardons Granted 88 Years After
Crimes of Sedition’,
(online), 3 May 2006,
<www.nytimes.com>.
See report in
‘Jail Threatened Over Islam Insults’,
The Australian
(online), 21 March 2006,
<www.theaustralian.news.com.au>.
offences include inciting rebellion or insurrection (art 138) and
publishing false news that may endanger public order, or
cause damage to the
interest or credit of the State
H Bryant, L Macale
and N Lee, ‘“No” to the Dark Days’,
Journalism Review Reports
, March 2006,
See G Mabutas, ‘Publisher
Wants Charge Dismissed’,
Manila Bulletin Online
(online), 10 May
http://www.mb.com.ph/issues/2006/05/10/MTNN2006051063599.html
International,
Turkey: Article 301: How the Law on ‘Denigrating
Turkishness’ is an Insult to Freedom of Expression
http://web.amnesty.org/library/Index/ENGEUR440032006?open & of=ENG-TUR
at 24 April 2006.
Nationalism and the Press —As Turkish Nationalists Resist European
Tilt, Freedom of Expression is a Victim
(2006) Committee to Protect
Journalists
http://www.cpj.org/Briefings/2006/turkey_3-06/turkey_3-0
April 2006.
Amnesty International,
Turkey: Article 301: How the Law on ‘Denigrating Turkishness’ is
an Insult to Freedom of Expression
http://web.amnesty.org/library/Index/ENGEUR440032006?open & of=ENG-TUR
at 24 April 2006.
7. Sedition and Freedom of
Introduction
Freedom of expression and the Constitution
ALRC’s view
Sedition and domestic protection of human rights
ALRC’s view
Risk of unfair or discriminatory application of sedition laws
Submissions and consultations
Suggestions for reform
ALRC’s view
Absence of bills of rights in Australia
ALRC’s view
Sedition and freedom of expression generally
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Journalism and the arts
Journalists
Suggestions for reform
ALRC’s view
7. Sedition and Freedom of
Introduction
7.1 This chapter analyses the interaction between the
sedition provisions and freedom of expression in Australian domestic law. The
chapter analyses the character and extent of any chilling effect on freedom of
expression caused by the sedition provisions and discusses
the interaction
between the sedition provisions and other domestic legislation that protects
human rights.
7.2 Most comparable foreign jurisdictions incorporate a general right to freedom
of expression in a statutory or constitutional bill
As discussed later in this
chapter, no Australian jurisdiction except the Australian Capital Territory
(ACT) currently possesses
a bill of rights—and so (except in the ACT)
there are no formal, legislative guarantees of protection for freedom of
in Australia.
7.3 Freedom of expression is nevertheless given some limited forms of protection
in Australian law—particularly under the
Constitution
which is discussed below. The common law, and some federal, state and territory
legislation, also provide limited protection to
certain categories of
expression.
For instance, all
Australian jurisdictions are subject to at least one ‘Freedom of
Information’ regime, the objectives
of which include fostering public
debate and discussion.
7.4 Also relevant is the common law principle that the law permits everything
except that which is expressly
This means that, unless
explicitly prohibited by laws (such as those proscribing defamation, offensive
behaviour, obscenity or sedition),
individuals are allowed to say what they
7.5 Strong concern has been voiced about the impact of the sedition provisions
on freedom of expression. This criticism falls within
a number of broad
categories:
• The sedition provisions are, in whole or in part, inconsistent with the
Constitution
• There is insufficient statutory protection of human rights at the
federal level and, as a result, there are inadequate safeguards
to prevent an
overly broad interpretation of the offence provisions.
• There is a risk that the sedition offences will be applied unfairly or
in a discriminatory manner against certain groups in
the Australian
• The sedition laws have the potential to restrict the expression of views
that ought to be permitted in a liberal democracy
such as Australia. This
criticism may be linked to the more specific concern that the drafting of some
or all of the offences is
open to differing constructions. The offences may be
interpreted broadly, with the consequence that they may infringe too much on
freedom of expression.
• The sedition provisions provide inadequate protection to established
media organisations in carrying out their functions of
news reporting and the
dissemination of bona fide comment on matters of public interest or
importance.
• The sedition provisions are likely to ‘chill’ free artistic
expression by forcing artists and authors to engage
in self-censorship or risk
facing prosecution. A related fear is that the scope of the sedition provisions
is vague and, if interpreted
broadly, may cover satire and ridicule, which ought
not to be proscribed.
7.6 Some of these concerns are interrelated. All are addressed in greater detail
in this chapter, along with consideration of some
proposed solutions.
[back to top]
Freedom of expression
Constitution
Constitution
gives express recognition to a limited
number of human rights, though none expressly mentions freedom of expression. It
argued that some provisions—especially
, which relates
to religious freedom
potential to provide some direct protection to freedom of
expression.
However, the courts
have not interpreted
in this way.
7.8 Of greater constitutional significance is the protection given to political
expression. Notwithstanding the absence of explicit
constitutional protection
for free speech, in a series of cases culminating in
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
, the High Court has held that the
Constitution
must be read as impliedly protecting a particular category of
expression—namely, political
The test for
constitutionality was said to involve two limbs:
First, does the law effectively burden freedom of communication about government
or political matters either in its terms, operation
or effect? Second, if the
law effectively burdens that freedom, is the law reasonably appropriate and
adapted to serve a legitimate
end the fulfilment of which is compatible with the
maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed system of representative and
responsible
government and the procedure prescribed by
for submitting
a proposed amendment of the
Constitution
to the informed decision of the
7.9 As was pointed out in
Coleman v Power
test should
be applied such that ‘if the first [question] is answered
“Yes”, and the second “No”, the
In other words, to
the extent that a statutory provision under challenge fails to meet these
requirements, it will be invalid.
7.10 Some stakeholders expressed concern in this Inquiry
that the sedition provisions may be unconstitutional. The joint submission
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd (Fairfax), News Ltd and Australian Associated Press
(AAP), with which the Australian Broadcasting Corporation
argues that ‘there
can be no question but that the provisions burden such [political] discourse;
the real question is whether
they are reasonably adapted to serve a legitimate
7.11 The submission argues that the provisions are unconstitutional on the
following basis:
Given the burden which these offence provisions would appear to impose on
discussion in the media of matters necessary and desirable
to the effective
exercise of their franchise by electors, as required by the Constitutional
principle of responsible and representative
government, the relevant provisions
of the Act appear to exceed what is reasonably required, and not to be
reasonably adapted, to
serve the legitimate end (anti-terrorism) which the Act
seeks to achieve.
7.12 Some other stakeholders express more muted concern about the
constitutionality of the sedition
7.13 In considering the scope of the constitutional protection of freedom of
expression, it is important to bear in mind two propositions.
The first is that
the constitutional protection given to freedom of political communication is not
absolute or unqualified; it extends
only to what is necessary for the effective
operation of that system of representative and responsible government provided
Constitution
In the specific context of the sedition provisions, the limited nature of the
constitutional protection of freedom of expression
was acknowledged in the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee inquiry into the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(the 2005 Senate Committee
7.14 The second proposition is that this implied constitutional right
encompasses the right (technically vested in people possessing
the right to vote
in Australian elections) to engage in public criticism of the official conduct
of elected representatives.
7.15 For a legislative provision to be unconstitutional, it is necessary to show
something more than that it merely burdens a broad
notion of freedom of
political communication. Rather it would be necessary to demonstrate that the
provision infringes the constitutional
right to engage in public criticism of
the government or government action. The ALRC considers that the sedition
provisions cannot
reasonably be construed in this way, whether viewed in their
current form or in the amended form proposed by the ALRC.
7.16 In the absence of Australian case law since the 1950s dealing with
sedition, let alone cases considering the ‘updated’
offences in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth), it is difficult to
assess with complete certainty the scope of operation of the sedition
provisions. It is necessary, therefore,
to apply the normal processes of
statutory interpretation to the relevant offences.
The offences in section 80.2(1), (3) and
7.17 The offences in s 80.2(1), (3) and (5) each purport to criminalise the
urging of conduct by ‘force or violence’.
This is quite different
from the kind of criticism of government that the cases on the constitutional
protection for freedom of political
discourse, such as
protect. As McHugh J stated in
Coleman v Power
Regulating political statements for the purpose of preventing breaches of the
peace by those provoked by the statements is an end
that is compatible with the
system of representative government established by the
Constitution
7.18 The sedition offences appear to fit comfortably within McHugh J’s
statement. However, should there be any ambiguity in
this regard, a court could
look to extrinsic materials.
statements made after the enactment of the
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2)
(Cth)—which would not strictly be relevant for the purposes of
interpretation
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) and the
Attorney-General of Australia have sought to make
clear that it was not the
intention of the government to criminalise mere criticism of the
government.
7.19 There is also some evidence for this in material that would be relevant for
the purposes of
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
For instance, the Supplementary Explanatory Memorandum, in explaining the
amendment made to the (then draft) defence to be
inserted in s 80.3 of the
Criminal Code
following the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry, stated that
this change was designed to ‘reassure those who publish reports or
commentaries about matters of public interest’ that they ‘are not
caught by the [sedition] provision, provided the publication
is done in good
At the 2005 Senate
Committee inquiry, the AGD also suggested that the offence provisions were
designed in such a way as to ensure
that ‘people who make comments without
seeking to incite violence or hatred will not be deprived of the freedom of
7.20 The ALRC considers that the offences in s 80.2(1), (3) and (5) cannot
properly be construed in such a way as to capture mere
criticism of government
action. Consequently, these provisions are unlikely to breach the constitutional
protection for freedom of
political communication, as it has been articulated by
the High Court. However, even if the Crown advocated a contrary interpretation
in a prosecution for one or more of these offence provisions, the court would be
obliged to ‘read down’ the provision
in question so that it remains
consistent with the
Constitution
The offences in section 80.2(7) and
7.21 The ALRC is also of the view that the offences in s 80.2(7) and (8)
are unlikely to infringe the
Constitution
threshold question (that is, the first limb of the
test) is whether
each offence purports to cover ‘communication about government or
political matters either in its terms, operation
or effect’. It is
certainly conceivable that, if a court took a broad view of the word
‘assist’ in subsections
(7) and (8), some forms of assistance to an
enemy of Australia or those engaged in armed hostilities against Australia may
within the ambit of constitutionally protected political discourse.
7.22 However, even if the first limb of
were satisfied, the more
important question is whether these provisions satisfy the second limb of the
test. Certainly, these offences do not expressly state that the
proscribed assistance must relate to ‘force or violence’.
7.23 The High Court decision in
Coleman v Power
is relevant
That case dealt with
s 7(1)(d) of the
Vagrants, Gaming and Other Offences Act 1931
which made it an offence if a person, in a public place, ‘uses any
threatening, abusive, or insulting words to any
Hayne JJ addressed the United States ‘fighting words’
cases—namely, the line of authority holding that
the First Amendment to
United States
Constitution
does not protect expression that has the
purpose or effect of inciting violence. They then said:
The Australian constitutional and legal context is different from that of the
United States. The United States decisions about so-called
words’ find no direct application
7.24 Gummow and Hayne JJ, with whom Kirby J agreed, assumed (but did
not decide) that s 7(1)(d) of the Queensland Act ‘may,
in some cases,
burden a communication about government or political
considered whether the provision, so construed, satisfied the second limb of the
. They held that, by construing the term ‘insulting
words’ in s 7(1)(d) so as to apply only to ‘words intended,
reasonably likely, to provoke unlawful physical retaliation’, the
provision was ‘reasonably appropriate and adapted
to serve the legitimate
public end of keeping public places free of
7.25 The ALRC considers that the burden on political expression caused by
s 80.2(7) and (8) of the
Criminal Code
is likely to arise only in a
relatively small number of situations, if at all. However, to the extent that it
arises, the ALRC believes
that these provisions either would not fall foul of
the second limb in the
test or would be construed in such a way as
to prevent prosecution in respect of non-violent urging that is
‘disproportionate’
to serving a legitimate end in the
Conclusion on the question of
constitutionality
7.26 The principal concern about the constitutionality of the offences in
s 80.2 is the risk that they may be used in circumstances
impugned conduct consists of ‘political speech’ that, in substance,
neither incites violence nor directly threatens
the institutions of government
in Australia or the Australian Defence Force. This risk is most pronounced in
relation to the offences
in s 80.2(7) and (8). Putting to one side the
disincentives to prosecute an offence of this
such a situation is at
least theoretically conceivable.
7.27 It is possible to conceive of a person being prosecuted under
s 80.2(7) or (8) for providing political advice to a country at
Australia. However, the approach of the High Court in
Coleman v Power
demonstrates that, if an attempt were made to use these provisions to prosecute
what might be described as protected political speech
by a constitutionally
impermissible means, a court would simply adopt a narrower construction of the
offence provision. The result
would not be invalidity; rather it would be a
construction that makes clear that the scope of the provision is too narrow to
such a prosecution.
7.28 The High Court might, at some later stage, expand the constitutional
protection to freedom of expression beyond the principles
However, the current state of the law makes it unlikely that a constitutional
challenge to the validity of the sedition provisions
would be successful.
Consequently, the ALRC makes no proposal to amend the sedition provisions
specifically to avoid constitutional
invalidity.
7.29 The ALRC does have other concerns about the framing, breadth and potential
application of s 80.2(7) and (8), and their overlap
with the substantially
similar provisions in s 80.1(1)(e)–(f) of the
Criminal Code
concerning treason. In Chapter 8, the ALRC proposes the repeal of
s 80.2(7) and (8), and reform aimed at rationalising and narrowing
related treason provisions.
[back to top]
Sedition and
domestic protection of human rights
7.30 In Issues Paper 30 (IP 30), the ALRC asked whether any aspects of
ss 80.2 to 80.6 of the
Criminal Code
were inconsistent with domestic
legislation protecting human
7.31 On the whole, responses to this question indicated no great concern about
inconsistency between the sedition provisions and
domestic human rights
legislation.
The Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) noted that there may be some
inconsistency between these provisions and
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT). However, the fact that the offences in s 80.2 are, in essence,
public order offences of general application means that there
is no substantive
inconsistency with federal human rights
legislation.
7.32 The AGD rejected any suggestion that the sedition provisions are
inconsistent with any domestic protections of human rights,
stating that any
inconsistency could only arise if the sedition provisions ‘authorised
behaviour that is currently unlawful’
under anti-discrimination
legislation. Moreover, the AGD stated:
The Government is satisfied that sections 80.2 to 80.6 of the
Criminal Code
are consistent with domestic human rights legislation and there has been no
rolling back of any of Australia’s domestic human
legislation.
7.33 Putting to one side the question whether the sedition provisions are
compatible with the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), which is discussed in Chapter 5, the ALRC sees no
substantive inconsistency between the sedition provisions and domestic
rights legislation. This view applies with reference to the sedition provisions
in their current form, and as they would appear
if the amendments proposed by
the ALRC were adopted.
[back to top]
Risk of unfair or
discriminatory application of sedition laws
7.34 In IP 30, the ALRC noted that concerns have been raised that some of the
new offences may be applied disproportionately or unfairly
to the disadvantage
of particular groups within the Australian community. IP 30 asked whether this
was a problem and, if so, what
legal or administrative steps should be taken to
address it.
7.35 Australian law prohibits many forms of direct and indirect discrimination.
At the federal level, the most important Acts are
Racial Discrimination
(Cth) (RDA), the
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) and the
Discrimination Act 2004
(Cth). There are also protections afforded by
other federal laws dealing with discrimination in particular
circumstances,
and by state and
territory anti-discrimination
7.36 Importantly for present purposes,
of the RDA prohibits both direct
and indirect discrimination ‘based on race, colour, descent or national or
ethnic origin’.
Taking the example of racial discrimination, the
difference between direct and indirect discrimination is as follows. Direct
discrimination
occurs where the rights of a person, X, are impaired because of
conduct that distinguishes, excludes, restricts or prefers another
person on the
basis of certain grounds, such as X’s national
Indirect discrimination
occurs where X cannot comply with a particular requirement or condition (which
has the purpose or effect
of impairing X’s rights), but a higher
proportion of people that do not have X’s national origin could comply,
condition is unreasonable in all the
circumstances.
Submissions and
consultations
7.37 Submissions to the Inquiry demonstrate a concern that the sedition
provisions, in their application, may have an unfair or indirectly
discriminatory impact on certain groups within the Australian community,
particularly those who are already disadvantaged or
marginalised.
The AGD does not
share this view, stating that the offences do not ‘expressly or impliedly
discriminate against any racial,
ethnic or religious groups’ and that they
‘apply equally to any group or
7.38 Some of those critical of the provisions argue that this is an inevitable
incident of the legislative framework. For example,
the Federation of Community
Legal Centres (Federation of CLCs) submits:
This potential for politicised and discriminatory prosecution is not simply an
unintended by-product of the sedition laws. In our
view it is the very nature of
the laws, insofar as they are intended to prosecute political speech, that they
be prosecuted in a
politicised
7.39 A similar point is made by the New South Wales Young Lawyers Human Rights
Committee, and others, who point to the fact that
public order offences, and
particularly those directed ‘against publicly insulting or offensive
speech’, historically
have been disproportionately and unfairly
7.40 A number of stakeholders assert that there has been disproportionate
‘targeting’ of individuals of Muslim faith
or those of Middle
Eastern origin,
and a rise in
Australia and other western countries of what has been termed
‘Islamophobia’. The Australian Muslim Civil
Rights Advocacy Network
(AMCRAN) describes this as a form of ‘social
exclusion’.
The Federation
of CLCs submits:
The current climate of institutionalised ‘Islamophobia’ and the
widely held perception of a link between Islam and terrorism
creates a grave
risk that Muslim individuals may be disproportionately prosecuted with sedition
offences (as it would seem Communist
Party members were in the past). Statements
made by Muslims before a Muslim audience may be more readily regarded as
seditious than
similar such statements made by other community members. The
statements of Muslim community members may be perceived through the
lens of the
highly politicised concept of ‘extremism’ and as a result assessed
as ‘terrorist’ or
7.41 The Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) states that the establishment of
a permanent police taskforce to work in Muslim communities
in south-west Sydney
has caused greater scrutiny of this section of the broader community. PIAC
submits that this, coupled with the
fact that s 80.2 only requires the
Attorney-General to give consent to the prosecution of a sedition offence (with
no such consent
requirement in respect of arrest, detention or charge),
‘leads to a very real risk that action will be taken against members
this community by police in reliance on the provisions even if there is limited
likelihood of a prosecution being approved by
Attorney-General’.
7.42 The Combined Community Legal Centres Group (NSW) Inc cites the concluding
observations of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination, as
relevant to Australia:
The Committee notes with concern reports that prejudice against Arabs and
Muslims in Australia has increased and that the enforcement
of counter-terrorism
legislation may have an indirect discriminatory effect against Arab and Muslim
Australians.
The Committee ... recommends that the State party increase its efforts to
eliminate such prejudice and ensure that enforcement of
counter-terrorism
legislation does not disproportionately impact on specific ethnic groups and
people of other national
7.43 AMCRAN expresses its concern about the undesirable eventuality of
‘the criminalisation of statements made by Muslims as
“incitement” where there may otherwise be no evidence of violent
acts which threaten the safety of the
Suggestions for
7.44 Suggestions have been made to counteract the threat of unfair enforcement
of the sedition offences. These fall into two categories:
education and external
monitoring.
7.45 In relation to the former, it is suggested in submissions that education
programs should be developed to inform the Muslim community
of ‘what may
be covered by the legislation and what the legal rights of those affected
and that law
enforcement authorities be given more cross-cultural
Emrys Nekvapil submits
that these provisions are likely to hamper inter-community dialogue, stating
that ‘creating self-censorship
around opinions in support of an enemy can
only inhibit exactly that dialogue which is required at all levels to bring
and the peaceful resolution of
differences’.
7.46 The AGD also recognises that education and communication in this area
represents an ‘important aspect of ensuring that
this legislation is
applied fairly’. The AGD pointed to the establishment of the following
The Australian Federal Police delivers a cultural diversity program to all new
recruits and provides a booklet on Cultural Diversity
as a ready reference to
different cultures. This booklet,
A Practical Reference to Religious
Diversity for Operational Police and Emergency Services
, is produced by the
Australasian Police Multicultural Advisory Bureau. In furtherance to this, a
program focusing on Islamic culture
will be delivered across the organisation to
all employees, with the first of many courses commencing this financial
7.47 In relation to monitoring, PIAC submits that the government should
‘monitor the impact of these provisions through collection
of statistics
on who is being subject to these measures and whether they are being
Similarly, Emrys
Nekvapil suggests the establishment of ‘accessible complaint mechanisms
for people targeted by these laws’
and ‘a comprehensive system of
reporting and recording all incidents, investigations and crimes under the new
sedition legislation’.
7.48 The AGD notes that a person who feels they have suffered indirect
discrimination in contravention of the RDA may complain to
HREOC or initiate
action in the courts.
would be possible to take a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman or to seek
disciplinary action against an Australian
Federal Police officer.
7.49 One concern of the ALRC is the risk that the choice about the categories of
people prosecuted for a sedition offence may be
tainted by politics. As outlined
in Chapter 3, the law of sedition historically has been used to criminalise
political dissent in
a manner that seems incompatible with contemporary notions
of free speech in a liberal democracy.
7.50 The ALRC considers that this risk can be dealt with in two ways. First, it
proposes that the term ‘sedition’ be
removed from the statute book,
thereby severing the tie with the old jurisprudence, which pays insufficient
regard to freedom of
expression and freedom of
association.
Secondly, the ALRC
proposes repeal of the current provisions dealing with consent to prosecutions.
The ALRC endorses the independent
role of the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions (CDPP) in making prosecutorial decisions, and in the particular
of these offences, it is preferable to remove the requirement for the
Attorney-General’s consent in order to avoid any perception
that there may
be a political element in the decision about whether or not to
7.51 The ALRC is of the view that the legislation is itself neither directly nor
indirectly discriminatory. As Gummow, Hayne and
Heydon JJ stated in
Purvis v New South Wales
, ‘the requirement for equality of
treatment’ is ‘central to the operation of ... the
Discrimination Act 1975
’. A ‘central purpose’ of the Act
‘is to require that people not be treated differently’ on the
prescribed in the Act.
It cannot reasonably be said that the statutory provisions that are the subject
of this inquiry promote an object, or tend towards
consequences, inconsistent
with the operative purpose of the RDA. Although the sedition offences are not
structured so as to promote
unlawful discrimination, this is not to say that
discrimination in this area is impossible. On one level,
offence may
be applied in a discriminatory manner to target particular groups. Again, if
that occurs, there are avenues of redress
through HREOC and the federal
7.52 The ALRC is conscious of the genuinely held concern that the sedition
offences may operate unfairly, particularly against people
of the Muslim faith
or those from a Middle Eastern background. However, as explained below, the ALRC
considers that the most appropriate
way to deal with the risk of unfair
application of the sedition provisions is through education and related
strategies.
For this reason, the
ALRC proposes that the Australian Government should continue to pursue
strategies, such as educational programs,
to promote inter-communal harmony and
understanding.
[back to top]
Absence of bills of
rights in Australia
7.53 As previously noted, the ACT is the only Australian jurisdiction that
currently possesses a bill of
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT) specifically recognises freedom of
expression, stating that:
(1) Everyone has the right to hold opinions without interference.
(2) Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right includes the
freedom to seek, receive and impart information and
ideas of all kinds,
regardless of borders, whether orally, in writing or in print, by way of art, or
in another way chosen by him
7.54 The Chief Minister of the ACT submits that the sedition provisions,
‘if passed locally [ie in the ACT], would be inconsistent
Human Rights Act 2004
’. In his view, they would fail the test of
proportionality by the following chain of reasoning. First, while it is
for government to attempt to stop the spread of terrorism, it is
‘not legitimate to suppress mere commentary, even radical
commentary, on
such issues’. Secondly, there is no ‘rational connection between the
offences and the legitimate objective
of preventing the spread of terrorist
activities’. Thirdly, the provisions do not represent the least
restrictive means possible
of achieving the legitimate aim of preventing
terrorism because they are too vague and, potentially, too broad. In particular,
offences should contain a requirement that a person charged with a sedition
offence must ‘intend that the conduct urged be
in fact carried out’.
Also, ‘assist’ in s 80.2(7) and (8) ‘is too wide and too
imprecise’. Fourthly,
the defences do not provide adequate protection for
legitimate expression.
7.55 The Victorian Government has indicated its intention to enact a Charter of
Human Rights and Responsibilities. A Bill for this
purpose was introduced in the
Victorian Legislative Assembly on 2 May 2006 and received its second reading
speech on 4 May 2006.
is designed to ‘establish a framework for the protection and promotion of
human rights’, based on those contained
The Bill contains a
provision recognising freedom of expression in a manner similar to art 19 of the
(1) Every person has the right to hold an opinion without interference.
(2) Every person has the right to freedom of expression which includes the
freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas
of all kinds, whether
within or outside Victoria and whether—
(a) orally; or
(b) in writing; or
(c) in print; or
(d) by way of art; or
(e) in another medium chosen by him or her.
(3) Special duties and responsibilities are attached to the right of freedom of
expression and the right may be subject to lawful
restrictions reasonably
(a) to respect the rights and reputation of other persons; or
(b) for the protection of national security, public order, public health or
public morality.
7.56 Governments in Tasmania, Western Australia and New South Wales also have
indicated that they may consider the introduction of
However, recent news
reports suggest that the current Australian Government intends to
oppose—possibly, by way of legal challenge—any
attempt by a state to
introduce its own bill of
7.57 In most comparable foreign jurisdictions, freedom of expression is
protected in a statutory or constitutional bill of rights.
constitutional protection to freedom of expression. The archetypal
constitutional articulation of freedom of expression
is the First Amendment to
United States
Constitution
, which states:
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom
of speech, or of
the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the
Government for a redress of grievances.
7.58 Other jurisdictions recognise freedom of expression in statutory bills of
rights, such as those of the United
Irrespective of whether
it is protected by a constitutional or a statutory bill of rights, freedom of
expression in these jurisdictions
tends to be conceived, and protected, in a
manner that is broadly consistent with the approach taken in art 19 of the
In other words, freedom
of expression is regarded as a human right of fundamental importance, though in
certain circumstances this
right must be reconciled with other competing rights
or interests.
7.59 Submissions and consultations express a concern that the sedition
provisions are made more problematic by the absence of a federal
bill of rights
in Australia.
Some express this
concern in general terms, with the argument essentially being that a bill of
rights would provide an important
counter-balance to any undesirable incursions
that the sedition provisions might make on people’s human
7.60 Another concern expressed is that it is inappropriate to justify
Australia’s sedition legislation on the basis that other
have similar legislation because those jurisdictions (most notably, the United
Kingdom) do possess a bill of
7.61 It may be the case that the presence of a bill of rights would provide some
safeguards against the unwarranted and undesirable
incursion of anti-terrorism
measures into individuals’ human rights. However, the question whether
Australia should enact a
bill of rights falls well outside the Terms of
Reference in this Inquiry and the ALRC does not express any opinion on this
7.62 Nevertheless, two points should be made. First, the fact that a
from taking
robust anti-terrorism measures. This is evidenced by recent legislative
amendments in the United States, the United Kingdom
This demonstrates
that governments bound by constitutional or statutory bills of rights
nevertheless consider it is possible to reconcile
vigorous responses to
terrorism with formal, enforceable requirements to respect individual human
7.63 Secondly, the absence of a bill of rights at the federal level in Australia
does not remove or lessen the importance of measuring
the sedition provisions
against accepted human rights standards. The absence of a federal bill of rights
heightens the need for legislation
to be carefully considered—both prior
to enactment in Parliament and when the law is subject to later review—in
to ensure that the provisions do not breach fundamental human rights, as
recognised, for instance, in the ICCPR.
[back to top]
Sedition and freedom
of expression generally
7.64 The sedition offences unquestionably involve some dilution of an absolute
notion of freedom of expression. In criminalising
certain categories of
expression, the relevant statutory provisions must necessarily reduce the scope
of lawful expression.
7.65 As a general proposition, this is neither unique nor illegitimate. For
instance, the law in Australia and elsewhere has always
imposed legal
restrictions on certain forms of expression—for instance, where it is
defamatory (civil liability), or indecent
or obscene (criminal liability). The
Privy Council, hearing an appeal from the High Court of Australia in 1936,
Free speech does not mean free speech; it means speech hedged in by all the laws
against defamation, blasphemy, sedition and so forth;
it means freedom governed
7.66 The question is whether the sedition offences impose an unwarranted or
unlawful burden on freedom of expression. Particular
concern has been expressed
that the sedition offences will impact negatively on members of the media and
the arts. However, other
groups of people who are said to be at particular risk
of being affected include
political activists,
religious leaders and dissidents more generally.
Submissions and
consultations
7.67 Many stakeholders argue that the offences, taken as a whole, are likely to
chill free speech within the community in a manner
inconsistent with
Australia’s status as a liberal
This criticism often
is linked to the more specific concern that the offences may be interpreted
broadly, and unduly infringe upon
expression.
7.68 AMCRAN submits that ‘the sedition offences lead to a significant
chilling effect on the Muslim community in expressing
legitimate support for
self-determination struggles around the
The offences have a particular effect on Muslim community groups who may wish to
express solidarity with Muslims who live under oppressive
regimes or various
kinds of occupying forces. This is particularly the case as the law makes no
distinction between legitimate liberation
and independence movements and
7.69 There is particular concern about s 80.2(7) and (8), with a number of
people arguing that these provisions are too broad, inhibiting
expression to an unwarranted
The National Association
for the Visual Arts (NAVA) submits:
[O]rganizers and speakers at the huge protest marches and gatherings of
thousands of Australian citizens which took place immediately
prior to the
commitment by the Australian government to join the ‘Coalition of the
Willing’ in sending troops to Iraq,
could now be regarded as urging
conduct which assists a country at war with Australia and therefore seditious
under this law.
The New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties and the Fitzroy Legal Service
offer similar examples,
argue that criminalising such activity would be fundamentally
anti-democratic.
7.70 Most critics of s 80.2(7) and (8) argue for
Others put as their
preferred position
second preference if repeal is
unavailable
—that these
provisions should be amended to ensure they only capture conduct intended to
lead to violence.
7.71 In response, the AGD provided its own hypothetical examples, drawing the
following distinction:
Where someone places a notice on the internet calling for a more restrictive
immigration policy in relation to young people from
certain countries, it might
enrage many young people from those countries, but it would not amount to
sedition if it was genuinely
merely criticising government policy or urging a change to the law have a
available to them.
7.72 Among the provisions that are the subject of this Inquiry, s 80.2(7)
and (8) of the
Criminal Code
have the greatest potential to cause
incursions into the right to freedom of expression. The ALRC shares the concern
that these provisions
do not draw a clear enough distinction between legitimate
dissent—speech that ought not to be interfered with in a liberal
democracy—and expression, whose purpose or effect is to cause the use of
force or violence within the state. Lee, Hanks and
Morabito make the point in
the following terms:
A distinction has to be made between, on the one hand, those who wish to
overthrow the democratic system or use violence or threats
of violence to
violate democratic procedures and, on the other hand, those who seek radical
change in the social, economic or political
arrangements within the democratic
system. Such a distinction must not be abandoned, even though difficulty may
arise in particular
7.73 For these reasons, and those discussed in Chapter 8, the ALRC proposes
the repeal of s 80.2(7) and (8). Further, the ALRC proposes
similar treason offences in s 80.1(1)(e)–(f) be modified to make it
clear that mere rhetoric or expressions of dissent
are not caught. The
prosecution should have to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant has
materially assisted an enemy
to wage war—for instance, by way of funds,
troops, armaments or strategic
information.
7.74 As discussed in detail in Chapters 8 to 10, the ALRC also proposes
reframing the elements required for liability under s 80.2(1),
(3) and (5)
Criminal Code
. In conscious recognition of the need for clear
protection for freedom of expression, the ALRC proposes that the prosecution
be required to prove that the person intended that the force or violence
urged will occur (Proposal 8–1). Under Proposal 10–2,
trier of fact, in considering this element of the offence, would be asked to
consider the context—that is, whether the
conduct in question was done: in
connection with the performance or exhibition of an artistic work; as part of
any discussion or
debate in pursuit of any genuine academic, artistic or
scientific purpose, or for any other genuine purpose in the public interest;
connection with an industrial dispute or an industrial matter; or in publishing
a report or commentary about a matter of public
[back to top]
Journalism and the
7.75 Particular concerns have been expressed to the Inquiry that the sedition
offences may impact negatively on the right to freedom
of expression enjoyed by
journalists and their publishers, as well as people engaging in or facilitating
artistic expression—all
of whom may be exposed to restrictions on freedom
of expression because their role often involves reporting or reflecting
or dissenting viewpoints.
Journalists
7.76 Submissions to the Inquiry identify particular concern that the sedition
provisions could leave the established media organisations
liable to prosecution
for carrying out their functions of news reporting and the dissemination of bona
fide comment on matters of
public interest or
importance.
The general concern,
as expressed in the joint submission of Fairfax, News Ltd and AAP, is that there
is ‘a real risk’
a comment made, letter or advertisement published, wire service story or
interview reproduced, factual report carried, video-tape
footage published,
editorial opinion expressed, or feature film or documentary screened could by
reason of its subject matter, prominence,
content, tone, wording, manner of
promotion and ultimate authorship be thought capable of being held by a jury to
amount to ‘urging’
of a proscribed kind ... particularly if it were
perceived to form part of an ongoing
7.77 Several specific concerns also were identified. First, the provisions could
lead to self-censorship because media organisations
are uncertain about how
broadly the provisions will be interpreted. Essentially, the concern seems to be
that ‘fear of inadvertently
breaching the law is likely to impact on the
willingness of many in the community to publicly express their views and their
to government actions and
Entertainment and Arts Alliance (MEAA) submit:
Part of the uncertainty stems from the wording, including the offences of
‘urging’ others to use ‘force or violence’
question of intent. It is hard to control or predetermine how individuals will
interpret the various layers of meaning that
comprise an actor’s
performance or a playwright/screenwriter’s
7.78 Another concern relates to the potential breadth of the
‘urging’ offences in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
MEAA ask whether journalists ‘who directly quote other people in their
stories’ are likely to commit an urging offence,
‘unwittingly’.
Fairfax, News Ltd and AAP express a similar fear, noting that it might become
increasingly difficult for the media lawfully to ‘facilitate
or contribute
to debate on the topic of
“terrorism”’.
7.79 Thirdly, the offences of assisting the enemy in s 80.2(7) and (8) are
potentially so broad as to capture conduct that ought
not to be criminalised.
The MEAA hypothesises as follows:
A play sympathetic to Iraqi Insurgents; an article celebrating the Eureka
Stockade that draws parallels with the current workplace
struggles; cartoonists
and commentators giving drawn, written or verbal support or encouragement to
groups deemed to be ‘enemies’
of the Commonwealth ... could all
conceivably be caught by this offence. Of major concern is that the
‘enemy’ does not
have to be an organisation or a country with which
a state of war has been declared. It can be one ‘specified by Proclamation
made for the purpose of paragraph 80.1(1)(e) to be an enemy at war with the
Commonwealth.
7.80 The AGD reject criticism that the sedition provisions unduly infringe upon
the ability of the media to operate freely:
Given that the sedition offences always involve intentionally urging violence
(either directly or indirectly by assisting an enemy),
it is unlikely that the
conduct of journalists and media organisations would be captured within these
7.81 The AGD’s submission also points out that, in any event, under
existing law ‘the defence of good faith would protect
journalists and
media organisations that act in good
7.82 A number of stakeholders expressed the concern that the sedition provisions
are likely to ‘chill’ free artistic
expression by encouraging
artists and authors to engage in self-censorship or risk facing
prosecution.
There was a
concern that the offences may be interpreted so as to criminalise certain forms
of satire, parody and
7.83 The Australian Writers’ Guild submit that the chilling effect of the
sedition provisions will lead to self-censorship,
which will have the following
If writers know that their works have little chance of being produced as they
may be perceived as risky, seditious or confrontational,
there is less
likelihood of writers creating such works and of striving only to meet the
requirements of broadcasters and publishers.
Stories will remain untold. Voices
will remain unheard. Audiences will not be challenged, ideas will not be thrust
forward. Life
will become increasingly unexamined. And Australia will not only
lose a richness and diversity in terms of the kinds of films, television
programmes, theatre and interactive content available to them, there is the real
chance that we will also lose a vast amount of
7.84 The Arts Law Centre of Australia submit that the sedition provisions might
impact disproportionately on impecunious artists
because they will be
‘unwilling to risk incurring fees for legal advice, let alone defending
7.85 A further risk—one that NAVA submits is already a reality—is
that those who facilitate the exhibition and performance
of artistic works
(gallery owners, theatre companies etc) will refuse to deal with certain works
if they are fearful that they may
be interpreted as being
7.86 During consultations, a number of hypothetical scenarios were raised. Some
stakeholders express the fear that mere discussion
of certain matters related to
terrorism could be caught by the new sedition provisions. NAVA offers the
following hypothetical example:
[A]n artist might represent the events of September 11 intending this to be
critical of what happened. However, a viewer may think
that the artist is in
support of the perpetrators. The artist could be accused of being responsible
for urging another person to
commit similar offences, as a result of the viewer
interpreting their artwork in an unintended
7.87 The Cameron Creswell Agency Pty Ltd is concerned that ‘a telemovie
a (possibly fictional,
possibly real) character who called for the overthrow of the government’
or ‘a film like
with its sympathetic portrayal of Islamic
suicide bombers’ might fall foul of the sedition
provisions.
7.88 NAVA offer the following example from recent events:
In late December 2005 NAVA learned of an incident where an invited video artist
visiting from overseas was taking documentary video
footage in public places.
Twice in 10 days the artist was told that his/her name would be sent for
possible inclusion in a terrorist
watch list. In the first instance, despite
previously having been given official authorisation, the artist was apprehended
by a security
official who took his/her ID details. Some of the video footage
had to be deleted. The second time the same artist was baled up by
while videoing road signs in a regional town in NSW and the same threat
7.89 A number of submissions noted that the effect of the sedition offences on
chilling free expression would likely be much greater
than the risk of actual
prosecutions and
convictions.
Suggestions for
7.90 A number of stakeholders propose legislative reform to dilute the potential
negative impact of the sedition provisions. NAVA
favours repealing the offences
in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
but argues in the alternative for an
amendment to these provisions to make clear that ‘urging’ for the
purposes of s 80.2
means ‘intentional urging or inciting politically
motivated violence’.
7.91 NAVA proposes a program of education and policy to augment legislative
reform in this area, stating:
[T]he Federal Government should provide authoritative guidelines and an
education campaign to inform the police, security staff and
community interest
groups and institutions about what is the appropriate course of action when a
complaint is made by members of
the community about an
7.92 As noted above, the ALRC proposes removal of the concept—and
historical legacy—of ‘sedition’ from Australian
to 10 contain a range of proposals aimed at tightening the elements and
interpretation of the ‘urging force or violence’
offences in order
to minimise any effects on freedom of expression. Specific recognition is given
to the nature of the work of journalists,
artists, academics, social critics and
7.93 Taken together, Proposals 8–1 and 10–2 require the
prosecution to prove that the person intended that the force
or violence they
urged will occur—and in considering this matter the trier of fact must
take into account the context in which
the statements were made, including
whether this was in connection with media reporting or commentary, or expressed
through visual
or dramatic art. Proposal 8–9 makes clear that the
treason offences relating to ‘assisting the enemy’ deal with
provision of
assistance (guns, funds, intelligence) rather than
with the expression or reporting of dissenting views.
7.94 Finally, Proposal 11–1 calls for the repeal of the provisions in
Part IIA of the
concerning unlawful associations, which
should remove concerns by universities, theatre owners, art galleries and others
might be prosecuted for hosting conduct by others that has an
underlying ‘seditious intention’.
The term ‘bill of rights’ is
used here as a shorthand expression to describe any legislative or
constitutional instrument
that purports to list and offer legal protection to
basic human rights.
See M Chesterman,
Freedom of Speech in Australia: A Delicate Plant
Freedom of Information Act
Freedom of Information Act 1989
Information Act 1989
Information Act 2002
Information Act 1992
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Freedom of Information Act 1992
Clough v Leahy
[1904] HCA 38
Malone v Metropolitan Police Commissioner
[1979] Ch 344
Constitution
states: ‘The Commonwealth shall not make any law for
establishing any religion, or for imposing any religious observance, or
prohibiting the free exercise of any religion, and no religious test shall be
required as a qualification for any office or public
trust under the
Commonwealth.’
The suggestion was
made that s 80.2(5) of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) might be inconsistent
with s 116 of the
Constitution
: Gilbert & Tobin
Centre of Public Law,
Submission 80 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
, 10 November
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation,
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006. See also Australian National University Academics,
Consultation
, Canberra, 27 April 2006; Australian Broadcasting
Corporation,
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006, which was endorsed in Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
See, eg, ARTICLE 19,
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
Commonwealth
[1996] HCA 43
(1996) 186 CLR 302
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1
77; M Chesterman,
Freedom of Speech in Australia: A Delicate Plant
(2000), 25.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Nationwide News v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
Australian Capital Television v Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 45
177 CLR 106
Theophanous v Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
, 130; M Chesterman,
Freedom of Speech in Australia: A
Delicate Plant
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
Acts Interpretation Act
, which provides a non-exhaustive list of extrinsic
material to which a court may have regard in construing
legislation.
This is because a court is
only permitted to have regard to such explanatory material as is produced prior
to the enactment of the
statutory provisions that the court is construing: Ibid
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Consultation
, Canberra, 26 April
2006; P Ruddock, ‘Opening Address’ (Paper presented at Security
In Government Conference, Canberra,
9 May 2006),
Supplementary Explanatory
Memorandum,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November 2005, Attachment
Acts Interpretation Act
proposes, for other reasons, that s 80.2(7) and (8) be repealed. See
Proposal 8–8.
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1.
provision was amended by the Queensland Parliament in 2003 prior to the High
Court’s decision in
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1
Ibid, 78 (Gummow
and Hayne JJ), 89
Ibid, 77–78
(Gummow and Hayne JJ), 98
This is the term
preferred by Kirby J in Ibid,
See the discussion in Chs 2, 8
and 10 on the discretion of the Director of Public Prosecutions to refuse to
prosecute, and the likely
interpretation of the offence and defence
provisions.
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1
, 53–56 (McHugh J), 78–79 (Gummow and
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
Question 23.
Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission,
Consultation
, Sydney, 31 March 2006; New
South Wales Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
10 April 2006.
Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission,
Consultation
, Sydney, 31 March
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
Question 24.
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Relations Act 1996
See, especially,
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Racial Vilification Act
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
Equal Opportunity
Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Discrimination Act 1991
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
Racial Discrimination Act
Federation of Community
Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; New South
Wales Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
April 2006; E Nekvapil,
13 April 2006; Arts Law
Centre of Australia,
13 April 2006; Combined
Community Legal Centres Group (NSW) Inc,
April 2006; B Saul,
14 April 2006; Australian
Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
17 April 2006; Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
18 April 2006; G Zdenkowski,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Federation of Community Legal
Centres (Vic),
New South Wales Young Lawyers
Human Rights Committee,
10 April 2006. See also
E Nekvapil,
Federation of Community Legal
Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; New South Wales
Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
2006; Fitzroy Legal Service Inc,
10 April 2006;
E Nekvapil,
13 April 2006; Combined Community
Legal Centres Group (NSW) Inc,
13 April 2006;
Australian Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
17 April 2006; Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
18 April 2006.
Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
Federation of Community Legal
Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006. See also E
13 April 2006; Australian Muslim
Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
Combined Community Legal Centres
Group (NSW) Inc,
13 April 2006 citing Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
Concluding Observations
Doc CERD/C/AUS/CO/14 (2005),
Australian Muslim Civil Rights
Advocacy Network,
E Nekvapil,
13 April 2006.
E Nekvapil,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
E Nekvapil,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
See Ch 2 and Proposals
2–1 and 2–2.
and Proposal 8–12.
New South Wales
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR 92
See Ch 9 and
Proposal 9–4.
Human Rights Act
Chief Minister (ACT),
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Bill 2006
Explanatory Memorandum,
of Human Rights and Responsibilities Bill 2006
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Bill 2006
E Hannan, ‘Minister
Joins Bill of Rights Backers’,
The Australian
, 20 March 2006, 15; M
Farr, ‘PM Will Fight States’ Push for Bill of Rights’,
Daily Telegraph
(Sydney), 27 March 2006,
See, eg, M Farr, ‘PM Will
Fight States’ Push for Bill of Rights’,
The Daily Telegraph
(Sydney), 27 March 2006, 13; M Farr, ‘State Rights Push Wrong’,
The Daily Telegraph
(Sydney), 7 April 2006,
Canadian Charter of Rights and
Constitution
the Republic of South Africa 1996
Human Rights Act 1998
(UK) ss 12–13, which should be read in conjunction with the
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
1950, 213 UNTS 222
, (entered into force generally on 3 September 1953)
New Zealand Bill of
Rights Act 1990
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, 16 December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
(entered into force generally on 23 March 1976). See Ch 5 for an analysis
of art 19 of the ICCPR.
13 April 2006; Public Interest
Advocacy Centre,
18 April 2006; Media and
Arts Organisations,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March
See, eg, Public Interest Advocacy
E Nekvapil,
13 April 2006.
particular, the discussion in
James v Commonwealth
[1936] HCA 32
(1936) 55 CLR 1
See Australian
Vice-Chancellor’s Committee,
24 March 2006; B Ho,
9 March 2006; A
10 April 2006; The Law Society of
Western Australia,
28 March 2006; letter
accompanying National Tertiary Education Union,
10 April 2006; Australian Writers’ Guild,
11 April 2006; Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; Screen Producers Association of Australia,
11 April 2006; Fitzroy Legal Service Inc,
10 April 2006; Victoria Legal Aid,
13 April 2006; Chief Minister (ACT),
13 April 2006; Australian Press Council Office,
13 April 2006; Australian Screen Directors
Association Limited,
10 April 2006; B Saul,
14 April 2006; Australian Muslim Civil Rights
Advocacy Network,
17 April 2006; John Fairfax
Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006, which was endorsed in Australian Broadcasting
Corporation,
20 April 2006; B Wright,
19 April 2006; National Legal Aid,
20 April 2006; Australian
Vice-Chancellor’s Committee,
2006; Media and Arts Organisations,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March 2006;
Media Organisations,
Consultation
, Sydney, 28 March
Australian Society of Authors,
18 April 2006; letter accompanying National
Tertiary Education Union,
10 April 2006;
Professor JM Coetzee, Tom Keneally and David Williamson on behalf of Sydney PEN,
Sydney PEN,
10 April 2006; Australian
Writers’ Guild,
11 April 2006; National
Association for the Visual Arts,
11 April 2006;
Centre for Media and Communications Law,
April 2006; Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; Australia Council for the Arts,
11 April 2006; New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties Inc,
10 April 2006; Chief Minister (ACT),
13 April 2006; Arts Law Centre of Australia,
13 April 2006; Australian Lawyers for Human
13 April 2006; Combined Community Legal
Centres Group (NSW) Inc,
13 April 2006;
Australian Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
17 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and
Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006,
which was endorsed in Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
20 April 2006; Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
18 April 2006; Australian Vice-Chancellor’s Committee,
25 April 2006; N Roxton Shadow
Attorney-General,
28 April 2006; Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Consultation
, Sydney, 31 March 2006;
Human Rights Lawyers,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March 2006; Media
Organisations,
Consultation
, Sydney, 28 March
Australian Muslim Civil Rights
Advocacy Network,
Association for the Visual Arts,
11 April 2006;
New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties Inc,
10 April 2006; Arts Law Centre of Australia,
13 April 2006; Australian Press Council Office,
13 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian
Associated Press,
18 April 2006, which was
endorsed in Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
20 April 2006.
Association for the Visual Arts,
New South Wales Council for Civil
Liberties Inc,
10 April 2006; Fitzroy Legal
Service Inc,
See, eg, New South Wales Council
for Civil Liberties Inc,
10 April 2006; Fitzroy
Legal Service Inc,
Australian Major Performing Arts
16 April 2006; N Roxton Shadow
Attorney-General,
New South Wales Council for Civil
Liberties Inc,
10 April 2006; Victoria Legal
13 April 2006; Australian Press Council
13 April 2006; Australian Screen
Directors Association Limited,
10 April 2006;
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006, which was endorsed in Australian
Broadcasting Corporation,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
H Lee, P Hanks and V Morabito,
In the Name of National Security: The Legal Dimensions
See Proposals 8–8 and
8–9, and accompanying text in
Media Entertainment and Arts
10 April 2006; Victoria Legal Aid,
13 April 2006; Australian Screen Directors
Association Limited,
10 April 2006; B Saul,
14 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006, which was endorsed in Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
20 April 2006; Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
18 April 2006; Free TV Australia,
19 April 2006; Australian
Vice-Chancellor’s Committee,
2006; N Roxton Shadow Attorney-General,
April 2006; Media Organisations,
Consultation
, Sydney, 28 March 2006;
Human Rights Lawyers,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006. Agreement with this position was expressed in Australian
Broadcasting Corporation,
20 April 2006. See
also Free TV Australia,
Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
Media Entertainment and Arts
10 April 2006. See also, Victoria
13 April 2006; Public Interest
Advocacy Centre,
Media Entertainment and Arts
10 April 2006. See also Free TV
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd,
News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006, which was endorsed in Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
Media Entertainment and Arts
10 April 2006. See also John Fairfax
Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006, which was endorsed in Australian Broadcasting
Corporation,
20 April 2006. A similar concern
is expressed by Free TV Australia,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Confidential,
4 April 2006; Australian Society of Authors,
18 April 2006; Media Entertainment and
Arts Alliance,
10 April 2006; Australian
Writers’ Guild,
11 April 2006; Centre for
Media and Communications Law,
12 April 2006;
Screen Producers Association of Australia,
11 April 2006; Victoria Legal Aid,
April 2006; Chief Minister (ACT),
2006; Arts Law Centre of Australia,
2006; Australian Press Council Office,
2006; Australian Screen Directors Association Limited,
10 April 2006; Media and Arts Organisations,
Consultation
Sydney, 29 March 2006.
Arts Organisations,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March 2006; The Cameron
Creswell Agency Pty Ltd,
10 April 2006; Media
Entertainment and Arts Alliance,
10 April 2006;
Australian Writers’ Guild,
11 April 2006;
New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties Inc,
10 April 2006; N Roxton Shadow Attorney-General,
Australian Writers’
11 April 2006. A similar point is made
in Australian Press Council Office,
Arts Law Centre of Australia,
National Association for the
Visual Arts,
11 April 2006. NAVA gives the
example of the difficulty faced by two artists in finding a venue to exhibit
their performance, which
was ‘much like a school chemistry lesson and
demonstrated how to make chemical explosives including fire bottles, Molotov
light-bulb bombs,
Cameron Creswell Agency Pty Ltd,
10 April 2006.
See also Australian Lawyers for Human Rights,
13 April 2006.
National Association
for the Visual Arts,
Arts Law Centre of Australia,
13 April 2006; Australian Screen Directors
Association Limited,
National Association for the
Visual Arts,
2–1 and 2–2.
8. Offences Against Political
Introduction
Incitement and the sedition offences
Incitement and ulterior intention
Connection with a specific offence
ALRC’s views
Fault elements
Fault elements under the Criminal Code
Fault elements and the sedition offences
ALRC’s views
Other drafting issues
The meaning of ‘urges’
Force or violence
Reasonable likelihood of violence
Urging the overthrow of the Constitution or Government
Framing the provision
ALRC’s views
Urging interference in Parliamentary elections
Related offences
ALRC’s views
Urging a person to assist the enemy
The meaning of ‘assist’
Other issues
Reform of the treason offences
ALRC’s views
Extraterritorial application
Implications of extra-territorial application
ALRC’s views
Requirement of Attorney-General’s consent
Consent and the prosecution process
ALRC’s views
8. Offences Against Political
Introduction
8.1 This chapter presents the ALRC’s proposals for reform of four of the
five existing sedition offences, which were inserted
in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
) by Schedule 7 of the
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2) 2005
These offences are:
• urging another person to overthrow the
Constitution
or Government by
force or violence;
• urging another person to interfere in Parliamentary elections by force
or violence;
• urging another person to assist an enemy at war with
• urging another person to assist those engaged in armed hostilities
against the Australian Defence Force
8.2 Issues solely concerning reform of s 80.2(5), which deals with urging
inter-group violence
its relationship with offences under anti-vilification legislation—are
dealt with separately in Chapter 9.
8.3 As discussed in Chapter 2, the ALRC considers that it is not
appropriate for the offences set out in s 80.2 to be described as
‘sedition’. Rather, to the extent that retention of the offences is
justified, the focus should be on the urging of force
or violence and they
should be characterised as offences against political liberty and public
8.4 The ALRC proposes to retain, in a modified form, the present offences
dealing with urging force or violence to overthrow the
Constitution
Government and urging the use of force or violence to interfere in Parliamentary
and to repeal the
offences dealing with urging a person to assist the enemy or those engaged in
armed hostilities with the ADF.
connection with the latter, the ALRC also proposes amendments to the treason
offences set out in s 80.1 of the
Criminal Code
8.5 Aspects of the framing of the offences, both present and proposed, are
discussed in detail. These matters relate to the physical
and fault elements of
the offences and include: the distinction between the offences under review and
the offence of incitement of
the role of intention and
recklessness as fault elements; and the interpretation of certain terms used in
the provisions. The chapter
discusses matters that are common to more than one
of the present offences before dealing, in turn, with reform of each specific
8.6 The chapter also examines the extraterritorial application of these offences
and the requirement for the Attorney-General to
consent to prosecution.
[back to top]
and the sedition offences
8.7 Much conduct covered by the offences in s 80.2 of the
will also constitute incitement to commit other offences. Some of the
relevant offences under Commonwealth law that most closely
relate to the
offences in s 80.2 are set out in detail in Chapter 4. These
• the offence of treason under s 80.1 of the
Criminal Code
• terrorism offences under Part 5.3 of the
Criminal Code
• the offences concerning causing harm to Commonwealth officials under
Part 7.8 of the
Criminal Code
• offences against the government under Part II of the
• offences concerning the protection of the
Constitution
services under
• offences under the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
• offences under the
Crimes (Foreign Incursions and Recruitment) Act
• standard criminal offences prohibiting harm, or threats of harm, against
persons or property.
8.8 Part 2.4 of the
Criminal Code
provides extensions of criminal
responsibility, including in relation to attempt, conspiracy and incitement of
criminal offences.
Incitement is set out in s 11.4 of the
, which provides that:
(1) A person who urges the commission of an offence is guilty of the offence of
incitement.
(2) For the person to be guilty, the person must intend that the offence incited
be committed.
8.9 The relationship between sedition and the incitement of other offences is
examined in detail below. This relationship is important
in two ways. First, it
has been suggested that, because the conduct covered by the sedition offences
may constitute incitement to
commit other offences, the sedition offences
themselves are unnecessary.
Secondly, it has been suggested that, to the extent the sedition offences extend
criminal responsibility beyond incitement, the offences
are too broad and should
be wound back.
Incitement and
ulterior intention
8.10 The requirement under s 11.4(2) that the person ‘must intend
that the offence incited be committed’ is sometimes
referred to as a
‘specific intention’ or an ‘ulterior
intention’—that is, engaging in conduct with
the intention to
achieve some further objective or
The requirement that the
prosecution prove an ulterior intention arguably is equivalent to a requirement
of proof of purpose.
context of incitement to commit an offence, the requirement of an ulterior
intention requires proof beyond reasonable doubt
that it was the
offender’s object to induce commission of the offence
8.11 In contrast, the sedition offences do not require an ulterior intention
that the conduct incited be
This key difference
between the ancillary offence of incitement to commit an offence and the
sedition offences can be examined using
terrorism offences under Part 5.3
Criminal Code
as an example.
8.12 Under s 101.6(1) of the
Criminal Code
, a person commits an
offence if the person ‘does any act in preparation for, or planning, a
terrorist act’. ‘Terrorist
act’ is defined in s 100.1 and
covers any action that: (a) causes serious physical harm or death to a person,
endangers a person’s
life, or creates a serious health or safety
and (b) is done with the
intention of advancing a political, religious or ideological cause and of
coercing or influencing a government
by intimidation. Importantly, under
s 101.6(2), a person may commit the preparatory terrorist offence even if a
terrorist act does
not occur; or the person’s act is not done in
preparation for, or planning, a specific terrorist act; or is done in
preparation
for, or planning, more than one terrorist act.
8.13 A person is guilty of the offence of incitement, under s 11.4, if he
or she urges another person to prepare or plan a terrorist
act and intends that
the offence of preparing or planning a terrorist act be committed. A person may
be found guilty of incitement
even if committing the offence incited is
impossible.
8.14 Some conduct that urges another person to overthrow the government by force
or violence, in terms of the sedition offence in
s 80.2(1), also could
constitute incitement to plan a terrorist act. For example, a person may
indicate to a gathering of other individuals
(who share a political, religious
or ideological cause) that they should prepare to bomb the Australian Parliament
on ANZAC Day in
order to intimidate or overthrow the Australian Government.
8.15 However, it is less clear that incitement to plan a terrorist act would
cover conduct that amounts to a more generalised call
to action—for
example, to prepare to use force against the Australian Government in order to
intimidate or overthrow it. Even
in the case of the broadly framed terrorism
incitement requires a
connection to a substantive offence. That is, because it must be shown that the
person intended ‘the
offence incited’ be committed, the person must
have a particular offence in
8.16 Interestingly, the terrorism offences under Part 5.3 of the
Criminal Code
extend to a range of specific acts that ordinarily might be
expected to be covered by extensions of criminal responsibility applying
general substantive offences. That is, offences such as possessing things
connected with terrorist
making documents likely to facilitate terrorist
or doing any acts in preparation or planning for terrorist
are the kinds of conduct
that, in other contexts, would be caught by attempt, complicity and common
purpose, incitement or
conspiracy.
Connection with a
specific offence
8.17 It was noted in Issues Paper 30 (IP 30) that the framing of the
new sedition offences was aimed at overcoming the obstacle posed
requirement to show a connection to a terrorist act or a particular terrorist
organisation, in order to prove incitement to
commit a terrorism
8.18 The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) has
stated that there was ‘absolutely no doubt’
that the new sedition
offences would be easier to establish than incitement to commit an offence, and
that this was justified because
‘in this case the urging of the use of
force and violence is in its own right dangerous and should be prohibited as a
8.19 In its submission to this Inquiry, the AGD confirms this perspective and
In the context of terrorism, proving that a person who urges or encourages the
commission of a terrorism offence is guilty of the
‘incitement’ under the
Criminal Code
would require proof that
the person intended that the offence incited be committed. That would require
proof of a connection to a
‘terrorist act’.
A significant difference with the new sedition offence, as opposed to relying on
incitement under section 11.4 of the
Criminal Code
, is that the
requirement to prove a connection to a terrorist act or a particular terrorist
organisation is removed. The rationale
is that while it may not be possible to
show that a person intends that the relevant offence be committed, to
communicate such ideas
is dangerous as it can be taken up by the naïve and
impressionable to cause harm to the
8.20 Dr Ben Saul states that incitement under the
Criminal Code
is largely consistent with the meaning of incitement (or instigation) in
international criminal law, which requires direct and explicit
encouragement,
along with a direct intent to provoke the offence (or an awareness of the
likelihood that the crime would result).
The incitement must aim to cause a
specific offence, and vague or indirect suggestions are not sufficient. There
must be a ‘definite
causation’ between the incitement and a specific
8.21 It is not clear exactly how specific an intention that an offence be
committed needs to be, in order to constitute incitement.
The ALRC has found
little guidance in Australian case law, perhaps because incitement to commit
offences is not often
prosecuted.
Prosecution
Policy of the Commonwealth
, prepared by the Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP), states that, whenever possible, substantive charges should
be laid, rather than ancillary charges such as incitement or
conspiracy.
8.22 Incitement can be seen as analogous to aiding and abetting in the sense
that both forms of liability depend upon doing an act
in furtherance of a
In cases relating to
aiding and abetting, it has been held sufficient for the Crown to establish that
a defendant contemplated the
of crime committed by
the principal offender.
R v Bainbridge
, the English Court of Criminal Appeal held that it
was not enough to show that the defendant contemplated that the oxyacetylene
he provided was going to be used to dispose of stolen property, when
it was in fact used for breaking into a
8.24 At common law, it is unclear whether the broad qualification in
applies to intention as well as to knowledge. That is, whether
it is sufficient that ‘the accessory intended to assist or encourage
commission of a crime of the same type as that which is actually committed by
the perpetrator’.
Criminal Code
, the complicity and common purpose provisions state
expressly that the person must have intended that his or her conduct would aid,
abet, counsel or procure the commission of any offence
of the type
the other person committed
(emphasis added).
8.25 In cases of incitement, it may be harder to determine whether the intention
that an offence be committed is sufficiently specific.
Contrary to the position
in the law of complicity—where the person ‘ aids, abets, counsels or
procures’ the commission
necessary that the substantive offence be
Therefore, there may
be no conduct, beyond the incitement itself, which may be referred to in making
this determination.
8.26 A related issue is whether the present sedition offences, or proposed new
require a closer connection between urging and the
commission of another offence.
8.27 IP 30 noted concerns about the existing lack of a direct
connection.
For example, in the
course of the Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee inquiry into
the provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(Cth) (2005 Senate
Committee inquiry),
the Gilbert
and Tobin Centre of Public Law argued that the absence of a requirement of
ulterior intention resulted in criminalising
‘indirect incitement or
generalised expressions of support for terrorism, without any specific intention
to encourage violence
or any connection to a particular offence’. The
Centre submitted that ‘only incitements which have a direct and close
connection to the commission of a specific crime are justifiable restrictions on
8.28 Submissions to this Inquiry made similar
Judge John Goldring
submits that incitement,
conspiracy,
and the extended
application of complicity,
cover any possible conduct that should be proscribed. He considers that the
requirement that incitement be specific and intentional
should apply to all
Commonwealth offences.
News Ltd and AAP submit that the sedition offences should include a
‘rider’, similar to that in s 11.4(2) of
8.29 The ALRC considers that, despite the many alternative substantive offences,
the ancillary offence of incitement cannot cover
all conduct proscribed by the
existing sedition offences—because incitement requires an ulterior
intention that the offence
incited be committed. The sedition offences cannot,
therefore, be considered unnecessary simply on the ground that much of the
proscribed by them constitutes incitement to commit other offences.
8.30 There was a deliberate policy decision to retain a distinction between
‘urging’ for purposes of the sedition offence
and incitement. The
new sedition offences were framed to avoid any need for a connection between
urging and a specific terrorist
act or other
A central rationale for
the sedition offences is that this particular form of ‘urging’
presents such serious risks to
public safety and the body politic that it should
be punishable without the need to prove an intention that a specific offence be
committed by another. The harm addressed relates to the creation of an
environment in which the likelihood of force or violence being
used for the
proscribed purposes is increased. Calls to ‘use whatever force or violence
it takes to bring down the Government’,
for example, may be hard to match
up with incitement to commit a specific offence. The view is that an intention
to urge force or
violence in these circumstances should be sufficient, without
the need for further proof of intention with regard to the commission
specific offence.
8.31 This justification for the offences relies on their coverage of general
exhortations to use force or violence for broadly political
or anti-social ends.
The ALRC does not, therefore, consider that the offences should require that the
person have an ‘ulterior
intention’, or purpose directed to the
commission of a specific offence by another person.
8.32 However, while the operation of the offences in s 80.2 should be less
constrained than in the case of incitement, the ALRC considers
that there should
be a more concrete link between the offences in s 80.2 and force or
violence. The ALRC proposes that for the person
to be guilty of the offences, he
or she should intend that the force or violence urged will occur. This
requirement will help remove
from the ambit of the offences rhetorical
statements that the person does not intend anyone will act upon. At the same
‘ulterior intention’ falls short of that required to
prove incitement.
Section 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
) should be amended to provide that, for a person to be guilty of any of
the offences under s 80.2, the person must intend that the
urged force or
violence will occur.
(The relevant sections of the Criminal Code,
amended as proposed, are set out in
Appendix 2.)
[back to top]
8.33 There has been considerable confusion over the fault elements required
under the sedition provisions, much of which appears
to proceed from a
misunderstanding of the construction of criminal responsibility under the
Criminal Code
of the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry recommended that ‘all offences in
proposed section 80.2 should be amended to
expressly require intentional
Fault elements under
Criminal Code
8.34 Under the
Criminal Code
, an offence consists of physical elements
In order for a person to be found guilty of committing an offence, each of the
following must be proved by the prosecution beyond
reasonable doubt:
(a) the existence of such physical elements as are, under the law creating the
offence, relevant to establishing guilt;
(b) in respect of each such physical element for which a fault element is
required, one of the fault elements for the physical
8.35 Under s 5.1(1) of the
Criminal Code
, the possible fault
elements ‘may be intention, knowledge, recklessness or negligence’.
The policy behind the provision
is to standardise, to the extent possible, the
fault elements used in federal criminal law. However, Parliament is not
from enacting a law that specifies other fault elements for a physical
element of an offence where that is seen to be desirable,
and the language used
is clear and express.
8.36 Section 5.2 of the
Criminal Code
‘intention’ as follows:
(1) A person has intention with respect to conduct if he or she means to engage
in that conduct.
(2) A person has intention with respect to a circumstance if he or she believes
that it exists or will exist.
(3) A person has intention with respect to a result if he or she means to bring
it about or is aware that it will occur in the ordinary
course of events.
8.37 Section 5.4 of the
Criminal Code
‘recklessness’ as follows:
(1) A person is reckless with respect to a circumstance if:
(a) he or she is aware of a substantial risk that the circumstance exists or
will exist; and
(b) having regard to the circumstances known to him or her, it is unjustifiable
to take the risk.
(2) A person is reckless with respect to a result if:
(a) he or she is aware of a substantial risk that the result will occur; and
(b) having regard to the circumstances known to him or her, it is unjustifiable
to take the risk.
(3) The question whether taking a risk is unjustifiable is one of fact.
(4) If recklessness is a fault element for a physical element of an offence,
proof of intention, knowledge or recklessness will satisfy
that fault element.
8.38 It is important to note that ‘recklessness’ under the
Criminal Code
has a precise meaning—and one that differs from its
use in common parlance, where it is roughly interchangeable with
‘negligence’
or perhaps ‘serious negligence’. As a term
of art in Australian criminal law, recklessness is much closer to
intentionality,
requiring that the person consciously consider the substantial
and unjustifiable risks involved, and nevertheless proceed with the
8.39 Under the
Criminal Code
, if the legislation creating an offence
makes no reference to fault when specifying a physical element of an offence,
then either
intention or recklessness (depending upon the circumstances) will
apply by default. Section 5.6 of the
Criminal Code
provides that (emphasis
(1) If the law creating the offence does not specify a fault element for a
physical element that
consists only of conduct
, intention is the fault
element for that physical element.
(2) If the law creating the offence does not specify a fault element for a
physical element that
consists of a circumstance or a result
recklessness is the fault element for that physical element.
Fault elements and
the sedition offences
8.40 It can be difficult in practice to separate the physical elements of an
offence into ‘conduct’ on the one hand,
‘circumstance’ or ‘result’ on the
In the case of the
sedition offences, questions arise about whether the physical elements of the
offence comprise ‘conduct’
only, or ‘conduct’
one or more ‘circumstances’ or ‘results’.
8.41 The construction given to these provisions by the AGD appears to be that
the physical elements of the sedition offences (except
for those to which
recklessness is expressly
comprise conduct
only—and, therefore, intention is the fault
That is, the physical
elements of the offence are not divisible into conduct and a circumstance or
8.42 However, as confirmed by submissions to the Inquiry, it is plausible to
view the physical elements of the sedition offences
as divisible into conduct
and one or more circumstances or
If the physical
elements are divisible, a person need only be reckless as to whether the conduct
(the urging) occurs in particular
circumstances or leads to particular results
(for example, the use of force of violence).
8.43 Three of the sedition offences expressly contain recklessness as a fault
element, but only in relation to some of the physical
elements required to
constitute the offence—that is, the circumstances or results arising from
the person’s ‘urging’:
the fact that it is the
Constitution
Government that others have been urged to
the fact that it is
the lawful processes of a Parliamentary election that others have been urged to
interfere with;
or the fact that
it is a group distinguished by race, religion, nationality or political opinion
that others have been urged to use
force or violence
8.44 Some submissions also criticised the express application of recklessness as
the fault element for some elements of the sedition
In particular, it is
argued that it is hard to understand how a person could intend to urge a person
to, for example, overthrow the
Government by force or violence, but only be
reckless as to whether the entity to be overthrown was, in fact, the
Government.
The application of
recklessness also was criticised for being inconsistent with recommendations of
the Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee (MCCOC), which expressed concern in
1992 that ‘recklessness in incitement was too great a threat to free
8.45 The ALRC considers that the technical construction given to the offences in
s 80.2(1), (3) and (5) by the AGD is
However, in IP 30,
the ALRC suggested that there nevertheless may be value in putting the matter
beyond doubt by stating that all
of the offences involve intentional urging of
the use of force or violence. The suggestion that the application of the fault
should be clarified received broad support in
submissions.
8.46 Even assuming that the application of the general principles of criminal
responsibility in the
Criminal Code
to the sedition offences is
reasonably clear,
arguments that the applicable fault elements should be stated expressly in any
new offences drafted to replace them.
8.47 As discussed elsewhere in this Discussion Paper, where interests in freedom
of speech and expression are constrained by criminal
sanctions, community
perceptions about the law are especially important. Submissions to the Inquiry
emphasised the importance of
clarity in promoting community understanding of the
8.48 It would not be inconsistent with the way in which the
Criminal Code
is drafted to state that a person commits an offence if he or she
intentionally
urges’ the conduct referred to in s 80.2.
There are many other offence provisions in the Code that follow this model,
those where, arguably, it is clear that intention is the fault element
by virtue of the operation of
8.49 For example, under s 72.3(1) of the
Criminal Code
commits an offence if the person ‘intentionally’ delivers, places,
discharges, or detonates an explosive or
lethal device; under s 102.2(1)
a person commits an offence if the person ‘intentionally’
directs the activities of a
terrorist organisation; under s 102.3(1)
a person commits an offence if the person ‘intentionally’ is a
member of an
terrorist organisation; under s 102.4(1) a person commits
an offence if the person ‘intentionally’ recruits a person
terrorist organisation; under s 102.5(1) a person commits an offence
if the person ‘intentionally’ provides
training for terrorism.
[back to top]
Other drafting
The meaning of
8.50 The offences in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
provide that a
person commits an offence if the person ‘urges’ another person to
engage in the proscribed
‘urges’ is not defined in the
Criminal Code
and, in the
course of the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry, concerns were expressed about the
broad scope of the term.
Urging involves a person endeavouring to induce or persuade, as by entreaties or
earnest recommendations; to recommend or advocate
earnestly. This is far broader
than the better term ‘incitement’ which embraces such terms as to
‘spur on, stir
up, prompt to action, instigate or
stimulate’.
8.51 The ALRC has received similar
ARTICLE 19, an
international human rights organisation, submitted that to ‘incite’
would be a preferable term because:
Not only is the language of incitement recognised under international standards
as the threshold for restricting freedom of expression,
the lay usage of the
term ‘incite’, rather than ‘urge’ recognises the
implicit connection with unlawful behaviour
8.52 Others expressed concerns about the uncertainty of the concept of
its inherent
subjectivity, and the difficulty in determining whether
when an opinion is expressed or a comment made which, by the manner in which it
is made, might be one which in a particular context
had sufficient forcefulness
in its manner, delivery or content to evidence the act of
8.53 As discussed above, under the
Criminal Code
, the conduct element of
incitement is to ‘urge’ another person or persons to commit an
offence. The 1992 MCCOC report
on principles of criminal responsibility noted
that differing verbs had been employed in relevant Australian and overseas
legislation
dealing with incitement ‘with little consideration of what the
differences, if any, might
For example, the
incitement provisions used the words ‘incites to, urges,
aids or encourages’.
expressed concern that some courts have interpreted ‘incites’ as
requiring causing rather than advocating the
MCCOC stated that using
the word ‘urges’ would avoid this
8.54 Consistently with MCCOC’s advice, s 11.4(1) of the
provides that a person ‘who urges the commission of an offence is
guilty of the offence of incitement’:
The restriction of liability to circumstances in which the defendant
‘urges’ the commission of an offence narrows the
common law, which
traditionally imposed liability for incitement when the offender
‘counsels, commands or advises’ the
commission of an offence. The
Code formulation was intended to emphasise the necessity for proof that the
activity of the defendant
was meant to encourage the commission of the
8.55 The AGD stated that this term was adopted by the drafters of the
Criminal Code
sedition provisions for similar reasons and for internal
consistency.
It makes sense for
the language to be consistent with the incitement provisions of the
—in the ALRC’s view there is no reason to change the
existing terminology in this regard.
8.56 Another set of concerns expressed to the Inquiry relates to the words
‘force or violence’, used in s 80.2(1), (3)
and (5). Neither
term is defined in the
Criminal Code
. It has been suggested that the
meaning of ‘force or violence’ for the purposes of the sedition
offences is unclear and
8.57 ARTICLE 19 observes that:
‘force’ is a broad term which is not restricted to ‘imminent
violence’. Indeed, ‘force’ could
encompass a broad range of
non-violent activity. In conjunction with the problematic term
‘urges’, a person could encourage
a person to act to lobby or picket
against policies of the government, which could be considered
‘force’ and should not
prohibited.
8.58 The Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic) expresses concern that the
provisions do not specify that the force used must
be physical force, so that
many of the strategies and techniques of activists and protestors may be
encompassed by the term.
8.59 The ALRC is not convinced that there is any clearly preferable alternative
to the words ‘force or violence’. While
the term as a whole is not
used elsewhere in the
Criminal Code
, there are many uses of the words
‘force’ and ‘violence’, notably in provisions relating
to genocide, crimes
against humanity and war
likelihood of violence
8.60 There was support, in submissions and consultations, for the idea that, if
the sedition offences are retained, there should
be some requirement that force
or violence is reasonably likely to occur as a result of the offending
For example,
Dr Saul stated that only ‘incitements which have a direct and close
connection to the commission of a specific
crime are justifiable restrictions on
Dr Saul and others
to the United States case of
Brandenburg v
Brandenburg
, the United States Supreme Court confirmed that
constitutional guarantees of free speech and free press do not permit a State
forbid or proscribe advocacy of the use of force or of law violation
except where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing
imminent lawless
action and is likely to incite or produce such
Dr Saul submits
The twin requirements of the imminence and likelihood (or probability) of crime
ensure that speech is not prematurely restricted;
there must be a sufficiently
proximate connection or causal link between the advocacy and the eventuality of
8.62 Similar points were made by others. For example, Australian Lawyers for
Human Rights recommends that s 80.2 be redrafted so
that in order for
‘urging’ to constitute an offence, it be ‘intended to incite
imminent violence, be likely to
do so and there is a direct and immediate
connection between the urging and the likelihood or occurrence of such
stated that the concept of urging force ‘does not properly reflect the
necessary link between the prohibited speech
and a risk of imminent violence
which justifies the prohibition in terms of national
8.63 Introducing such a requirement could provide an additional protection for
interests in freedom of speech and expression without
imposing any burden on the
prosecution to make a connection between the conduct and any particular offence
or act. The prosecution
would only need to point to a category of force or
violence that is reasonably likely to be encouraged. On the other hand, it may
be difficult, in practice, for the prosecution to show a reasonable likelihood
of force or violence. Expert sociological or other
evidence may be required. The
suggested requirement would provide additional protection for a defendant only
where the defendant
intended to urge force or violence.
8.64 The ALRC considers that the proposal to require that, for the purposes of
the s 80.2 offences, the person must intend that the
urged force or
violence will occur (Proposal 8–1) adequately addresses the concerns
expressed about the need for a closer connection
between the urging and the
increased likelihood of violence eventuating.
[back to top]
Urging the overthrow
of the Constitution or Government
8.65 The first of the present offences deals with urging the overthrow of the
Constitution
or Government. Section 80.2(1) states that:
(1) A person commits an offence if the person urges another person to overthrow
by force or violence:
Constitution
(b) the Government of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
(c) the lawful authority of the Government of the Commonwealth.
Framing the
8.66 A range of concerns are expressed in relation to the framing of
s 80.2(1). Questions are raised about the abstract and vague
nature of some
of its terms. For example, what does it mean to ‘overthrow’ the
Constitution
by force or
—especially given
Constitution
’ is a legal concept rather than a physical
institution? One view is that:
overthrowing connotes a physical act and that the use of the term in relation to
the overthrow of regimes is a metaphorical use of
the word. It is not
appropriate to determine criminal liability with
8.67 To what extent must the ‘lawful authority’ of the Government be
challenged? Is it sufficient that force or violence
be urged to resist one or
more specific laws, or must there be a more general challenge to the legitimacy
of the Government?
8.68 Patrick Emerton notes that the 1991 recommendations of the Committee of
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law (Gibbs Committee)
refer to ‘the lawful
authority of [the Government of the Commonwealth]
in respect of the whole or
part of its territory
’ (emphasis
Emerton submits that, in
One disturbing feature of [s 80.2(1)] is the vagueness of ‘lawful
authority of the Commonwealth’. Is it sufficient to
constitute the
overthrowing of this that the execution of one law be prevented? If so, then we
have a manifestly excessive intrusion
on political
8.69 As discussed in Chapter 2, s 80.2(1) is not best characterised as
a sedition offence. It does not proscribe conduct that, in
terms of the old
definition of seditious intention, tends to bring the Sovereign into hatred or
contempt, or to excite disaffection
against the
Constitution
or Government.
Rather, it criminalises conduct that encourages the use of force or violence
against constituent elements of democratic
government in Australia. For this
reason it is better characterised as an offence against political liberty.
8.70 The ALRC considers that an offence based on the present s 80.2(1)
should be retained in the
Criminal Code
and headed ‘
overthrow by force or violence of the
Constitution
or Government
Proposal 8–2). This offence should retain the current wording but should
state in relevant part that ‘a person
commits an offence if the person
intentionally urges
another person to overthrow by force or
violence ...’.
8.71 The ALRC considers that, even assuming that the application of s 5.6
Criminal Code
to this offence is clear, the applicable fault
element should be stated expressly in the offence. This amendment is in addition
Proposal 8–1, which would add an ‘ulterior
intention’—that is, an intention to achieve an objective which
not a physical element of the offence—in respect to which the meaning of
intention is determined by ordinary usage and common
8.72 A number of other criticisms may be levelled at the present framing of
s 80.2(1). However, the ALRC is not convinced that the
section can be
significantly improved without introducing other broad concepts as alternatives
or adding unwarranted complexity.
The terms ‘
Constitution
‘Government’ have been used in sedition offences since 1920. The
concept of advocating the ‘overthrow’
Constitution
Government has existed since
Other elements of the
drafting of the s 80.2 offences were recommended by the Gibbs
8.73 The Australian Government and the DPP appear to accept that there are
difficulties for the prosecution in interpreting and applying
the words of the
offence and in proving these matters beyond reasonable doubt—but do not
propose any alternative formulation.
The ALRC does not consider that there would
be any value in, for example, substituting the phrase ‘the institutions of
government’ for references to the
Constitution
or Government.
Alternative formulations along these lines inevitably would face similar
problems of interpretation and application
to those that already exist.
8.74 There is a significant overlap between the offence in s 80.2(1) and
other offences in the
Criminal Code
and elsewhere.
Many submissions suggested that the sedition offence provisions should be
repealed on this basis.
However, as discussed above, there are important differences between
‘urging’ under s 80.2 and incitement under s 11.4
Criminal Code
. These mean that, despite the number of alternative
substantive offences, the ancillary offence of incitement cannot cover all
proscribed by the existing sedition offences.
8.75 An exception is the offence in s 30C of the
Advocating or inciting to
covers almost identical ground. Section 30C provides that:
Any person who by speech or writing advocates or encourages:
(a) the overthrow of the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth by revolution or
(b) the overthrow by force or violence of the established government of the
Commonwealth or of a State or of any other civilized
country or of organized
government; or
(c) the destruction or injury of property of the Commonwealth or of property
used in trade or commerce with other countries or among
the States;
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment
for any period not exceeding 2 years.
8.76 The ALRC proposes that s 30C of the
be repealed.
Repeal need not await the outcome of the review of offences in
(see Proposals 4–1 and 11–2).
Consistently with
Criminal Code
harmonisation policy, this review will
involve modernising some offences for re-enactment in the
Criminal Code
and the repeal of others. However, because s 30C is clearly redundant there
is no need to save it for such a review.
The heading of s 80.2(1) of the
Criminal Code
be changed to refer to urging the overthrow by ‘force or violence’
Constitution
or Government.
Proposal 8–3
‘intentionally’ should be inserted in s 80.2(1) of the
Criminal Code
before the word ‘urges’ to clarify the fault
element applicable to urging the use of force or violence.
Section 30C of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), concerning
‘advocating or inciting to crime’, should be repealed.
relevant sections of the Criminal Code, amended as proposed, are set out in
Appendix 2.)
[back to top]
Urging interference
in Parliamentary elections
8.77 The second of the present sedition offences deals with urging interference
by force or violence in Parliamentary elections.
Section 80.2(3) states
A person commits an offence if the person urges another person to interfere by
force or violence with lawful processes for an election
of a member or members
of a House of the Parliament.
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(Cth) defines
‘election’ as ‘an election of a member of the House of
Representatives or an election of senators
for a State or
Territory’.
8.79 As in the case of s 80.2(1), there is some overlap between the offence
in s 80.2(3) and other offences, and submissions suggested
that the offence
should repealed on this basis. Most significantly,
offence, punishable by three years imprisonment, entitled ‘
Interfering
with political liberty
’. The section states:
Any person who, by violence or by threats or intimidation of any kind, hinders
or interferes with the free exercise or performance,
by any other person, of any
political right or duty, shall be guilty of an offence.
Section 327(1)
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
creates a lesser summary offence, punishable by six months imprisonment,
Interference with political liberty etc
offence does not refer to the use of force, violence, threats or intimidation.
A person shall not hinder or interfere with the free exercise or performance, by
any other person, of any political right or duty
that is relevant to an election
under this Act.
Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Act 1984
a parallel regulatory system for conducting referenda under the authority of the
Australian Electoral Commission (AEC). A
referendum is defined as: ‘the
submission to the electors of a proposed law for the alteration of the
Constitution
Section 120
creates a summary offence, punishable by
six months imprisonment, entitled ‘
Interference with political
’. The section states:
A person shall not hinder or interfere with the free exercise or performance, by
any other person, of any political right or duty
that is relevant to a
referendum under this Act.
8.82 The AEC also administers elections for the Torres Strait Regional Authority
(TSRA) under Division 5 of the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act
(Cth) and secret ballots under Division 4 of the
Relations Act 1996
(Cth). Both Acts contain a number of offences relating to
interference in the conduct of such elections and
8.83 Again,
is better characterised as an offence against
political liberty than as a sedition offence (see Proposal 2–1). The
ALRC concludes
that an offence based on
should be retained in the
Criminal Code
and entitled ‘
Urging interference in Parliamentary
elections by force or violence
8.84 Urging interference in elections by force or violence is as much a threat
to the constituent elements of democratic government
as the conduct proscribed
by s 80.2(1), and should also be punishable. As is the case with the
offence in s 80.2(1), the applicable
fault element should be stated
expressly in the offence. The offence should state in relevant part that
‘a person commits an
offence if the person
intentionally urges
another person to
interfere ...’.
New s 80.2(7) will also apply—to require that the person intends that
the force or violence urged will occur (see Proposal
8.85 The ALRC considers that the logic behind the provision means that it should
cover constitutional referenda as well as parliamentary
election processes.
There is, however, no reason to include TSRA elections or workplace ballots,
which are far less ‘national’
or central to the protection of
democratic institutions (and are subject to specific and targeted offences).
Section 80.2(4) also
should be amended in a consistent manner, to refer to
constitutional referenda.
8.86 The offence in s 28 of the
covers similar ground to
that in s 80.2(3) of the
Criminal Code
. It is wider, in that it
refers to interference with any ‘political right or
and narrower, in
that incitement of the offence requires an intention that the offence incited be
should be reviewed as part of the proposed review of offences in Part II
and Part IIA of the
(see Proposals 4–1 and
The heading of s 80.2(3) of the
Criminal Code
be changed to refer to urging interference in Parliamentary elections by
‘force or violence’.
Proposal 8–6
Section 80.2(3) of
Criminal Code
should be amended
• insert the word
‘intentionally’ before the word ‘urges’, to clarify the
fault element applicable to
urging the use of force or violence;
• apply to interference with the lawful processes for a referendum
on a proposed law for the alteration of the
Constitution
As a consequence of Proposal 8–6, s 80.2(4) of the
Criminal Code
should be amended to apply recklessness to the element of
the offence under s 80.2(3) that it is lawful processes for a referendum
a proposed law for the alteration of the
Constitution
that a person urges
another to interfere with.
(The relevant sections of the Criminal Code,
amended as proposed, are set out in
Appendix 2.)
[back to top]
Urging a person to
assist the enemy
8.87 Sections 80.2(7) and (8) are significantly different from the other
three offences in that they do not require that a person
urge the use of force
or violence. These sections make it an offence for a person to urge another
person to engage in conduct intended
to ‘assist’ the enemy or those
engaged in armed hostilities against the ADF.
8.88 Submissions to the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry argued that these
provisions were not a mere update of existing laws, but represented
completely new offences that ‘considerably expand existing sedition
Further, the
provisions were said to conflict with 1991 recommendations of the Gibbs
Committee recommended the enactment of three sedition offences, each of which
required the incitement of force or
8.89 The AGD did not accept that the offences were new, but argued that they
were ‘clearly contemplated’ by the repealed
sedition provisions. The AGD’s view was based on the fact that
s 24F(1) created an exception to the offences for certain acts done
in good faith and s 24F(2) provided that an act or thing done
with intent
to assist an enemy or those engaged in armed hostilities against the ADF is not
done in good faith.
Submissions to this Inquiry challenged the AGD’s view that the offences
are not new.
The meaning of
8.90 The word ‘assist’ is not defined. In the context of criminal
law, someone who ‘aids, abets, counsels or procures’
the commission
of an offence may be guilty of an offence under the complicity provisions of the
Criminal Code.
categories of conduct are forms of assistance, albeit direct in nature. However,
at the other end of the range of interpretation,
to ‘assist’ might
encompass mere intellectual or moral ‘support’.
8.91 IP 30 noted that, on this basis, it could be argued that to urge
another to assist an organisation ‘would conceivably
extend to providing
verbal support or encouragement for insurgent groups who might encounter the ADF
which is present in their
s 80.2(7) and (8) may apply:
even if Australia invades another country in violation of international law. If
opposing Australian aggression is interpreted as
tacit support for its enemies,
Australians may be prosecuted for condemning illegal violence by their
government, or for seeking
to uphold the
United Nations
8.92 Many submissions to the Inquiry express concern about the breadth of the
term ‘assist’ as used in s 80.2(7) and
Submissions provide
numerous examples of conduct that, it is claimed, might breach these provisions
and impose criminal liability:
• organising an anti-war protest, such as a street rally, calling for the
return of ADF personnel from a war
• performing a theatrical production drawing attention to the casualties
• showing a documentary which sympathises with or presents the perspective
of insurgents in, for example,
• encouraging Australian soldiers and their allies to lay down their arms
and refuse to fight;
• publishing opinion in the media that might be seen to support or lend
sympathy to claims made by armed groups which might
encounter the ADF in the
course of peace-keeping operations
8.93 Media organisations express particular concern
Fairfax, News
Ltd and AAP highlight a range of media activities that could give
rise to conduct seen as urging a person to assist an
For example, it is
claimed that the provisions may be breached if third party commentators make
statements supportive of an enemy
or those engaged in armed hostilities with the
The result is that film and television producers, media commentators, leader
writers, editorial cartoonists, journalists or current
affairs hosts wishing to
participate in, facilitate or contribute to debate on the topic of
‘terrorism’ (and indeed a
range of far wider matters) cannot be
confident that in so doing they will not risk breaching the
legislation.
8.94 Submissions highlight many direct and indirect means by which organisations
or countries in conflict with Australia may be ‘assisted’.
of these can reasonably be seen as justifying criminal sanctions:
It could not, for example, be legitimately said that urging people to send
stationery supplies to the insurgents in Iraq is really
deserving of
imprisonment for up to
8.95 Some concerns about the breadth of the term ‘assist’ may be
exaggerated. The AGD submit that the word ‘assist’
is intended to be
interpreted by its ordinary meaning and includes
taking action to help, contribute, work for or be a servant to or of, support.
The prosecution would need to prove that the assistance
provided assistance to
the enemy beyond a reasonable doubt. This would require proving a real
contribution.
8.96 Most of those who made submissions to the Inquiry consider that
s 80.2(7) and (8) should be repealed. If not repealed, the provisions
be narrowed, by defining the forms of assistance that are prohibited (for
example, providing military equipment or
personnel).
8.97 The 2005 Senate Committee report recommended that, if enacted,
s 80.2(7) and (8) should be amended to require a link to force
submissions to the present Inquiry agreed with this
8.98 Uncertainty is seen to arise from the reference to those ‘engaged in
armed hostilities against the Australian Defence
Force’ under
Goldring submits that it does not accord with the rule of law for conduct to be
criminalised when a person cannot know with
certainty whether a given country or
organisation falls in this
8.99 Similar concern is expressed about the reference in s 80.2(7) to those
at war with the Commonwealth ‘whether or not the
existence of a state of
war has been declared’.
However, the legislation is clear on this point: the organisation or country
must be specified by Proclamation issued by the Governor-General
to be an enemy
at war (declared or otherwise) with the
Commonwealth.
Reform of the
treason offences
8.100 IP 30 noted the view that s 80.2(7) and (8) are redundant
because much of the conduct proscribed would constitute incitement
other offences, such as the offences of treason and
In particular,
s 80.1 of the
Criminal Code
states, in relevant part:
(1) A person commits an offence, called treason, if the person: ...
(e) engages in conduct that assists by any means whatever, with intent to
assist, an enemy:
(i) at war with the Commonwealth, whether or not the existence of a state of
war has been declared; and
(ii) specified by Proclamation made for the purpose of this paragraph to be an
enemy at war with the Commonwealth; or
(f) engages in conduct that assists by any means whatever, with intent to
(i) another country; or
(ii) an organisation;
that is engaged in armed hostilities against the Australian Defence Force ...
Crimes (Foreign Incursions and Recruitment) Act 1978
provides a range of relevant offences. For example, under
offence to recruit another person to serve with an armed force in a foreign
state or to advertise or do any other act with
the intention of facilitating
such recruitment.
8.102 Submissions emphasise the overlap between the offences in s 80.2(7)
and (8) and treason
highlighted the fact that many criticisms made about the former offences apply
equally to treason.
Pyke observes, ‘the sedition offence really cannot be considered
separately; the treason, treachery and sedition offences
should be rationalised
at the same time, and
harmonized’.
8.103 The ALRC concludes that the offences in s 80.2(7) and (8), and the
associated defence in s 80.2(9), should be repealed. The
offences are
inappropriately broad. The breadth of the term ‘assist’ creates
valid concerns that the offences could be
interpreted or applied to proscribe
legitimate political protest, and punish merely verbal encouragement or support
for those in
conflict with Australian government policy.
8.104 Importantly, these provisions make it an offence to urge conduct by others
that is itself legal. For example, urging people
not to enlist for service in
the ADF might constitute the offence if this ‘assists’ an enemy.
While courts are likely
to interpret this provision narrowly, in accordance with
the normal restrictive approach to criminal statutes, there are risks in
the provision overly broad and reliant upon judicial interpretation.
If it was to be interpreted broadly by courts, the provisions could be a very
serious limitation on Australia’s democratic
process. If the concept was
interpreted in a more appropriate and narrow manner, it seems likely that the
offences would not be needed,
being covered by other aspects of criminal law
such as incitement to
8.105 Given the similarity of the language used in s 80.2(7) and (8) with
that in s 80.1(1)(e) and (f), aspects of the treason offences
addressed by this Inquiry.
8.106 Treason offences should not encompass strong political dissent and
rhetoric including through media commentary or artistic
expression. Such a broad
view of treason calls to mind arguments invoked by United States President Nixon
in the context of anti-Vietnam
War protests, that criticism of the war effort
amounted to giving ‘aid and comfort to the enemy’ in terms of the
Constitution
8.107 Rather, s 80.1(1)(e) and (f) should apply only where the person
provides assistance (eg, funds, troops, armaments, intelligence,
strategy) that
enables an organisation or country to engage in
war against Australia or in armed hostilities against the ADF.
Sections 80.1(1)(e)
and (f) are stated not to apply to ‘engagement in
conduct by way of, or for the purposes of, the provision of aid of a
humanitarian
Despite this, the provisions are still inappropriately broad.
8.108 The ALRC considers that s 80.1(1)(e) and (f) should be reframed.
Section 80.1(1)(e) should require that the person ‘engages
that materially assists ... an enemy
to engage in war
Commonwealth’—rather than simply to assist an enemy (that is engaged
in such a war).
8.109 Similarly, s 80.1(1)(f) should state that the person ‘engages
in conduct that materially assists ... another country
or an organisation
engage in armed hostilities
against the Australian Defence Force’. In
addition, the phrase ‘by any means whatever’ should be deleted from
subsections,
added below s 80.1(f) explaining the intended meaning of the word
‘materially’.
8.110 Given the proposed alterations to the offence of treason, the ALRC does
not consider that there is any need for a separate,
specific provision
concerning ‘urging’ others to assist an enemy or those engaged in
armed hostilities against the ADF.
As with the other strands of treason, a
prosecution for urging treason should have to rely on the law of incitement and
ulterior intention that this very serious offence be
8.111 There are other aspects of the treason offences that, while not related
directly to the ALRC’s Inquiry, have come to
attention and should be
reviewed. For example, s 80.1(1)(h) provides a separate ground for treason
where a person ‘forms an
intention to do any act referred to in a
preceding paragraph and manifests that intention by an overt act’.
8.112 The historical antecedents of this provision are clouded, but it may be
derived from a time when the statutory definitions
of treason included
‘imagining or compassing the death of the King’ under the 1351
Statute of Treasons. As such offences
were concerned with ‘acts of the
mind’, some ‘open or overt act’ was required to prove the
In modern legal
terms, the provision shares some characteristics with the offence of conspiracy,
which, under the
Criminal Code
, requires the commission of ‘an
overt act’ pursuant to an
Section 80.1(1)(h) appears redundant and should probably have been deleted,
along with s 80.1(1A) and 80.1(8), in modernising the
offence for enactment
Criminal Code
. The Gibbs Committee recommended the repeal of the
8.113 The offences and penalties set out in s 80.1(2) also deserve review.
These offences concern allowing another person who has
committed treason
‘to escape punishment or apprehension’ and not preventing the
commission of an offence of treason by
informing a constable or using other
reasonable endeavours. In other words, accessories after the fact to treason and
of treason.
offences are punishable by life imprisonment. Arguably, such ancillary offences
should be covered by general provisions dealing
with extensions of criminal
responsibility,
and subject
to a lesser penalty than the substantive offence of treason.
Sections 80.2(7), (8) and (9) of the
Criminal Code
concerning the offences of urging a person to assist the enemy and urging a
person to assist those engaged in armed hostilities
against the Australian
Defence Force, should be repealed.
Proposal 8–9
The treason
offences in s 80.1(1)(e)–(f) should be amended
• remove the words
‘by any means whatever’;
• provide that conduct must
‘materially’ assist an enemy, making it clear that mere rhetoric or
expressions of dissent
are not sufficient; and
• provide that
assistance must enable an enemy ‘to engage in war’ with Australia or
a country or organisation ‘to
engage in armed hostilities’ against
the Australian Defence Force.
The Australian Government should review the treason offences in
s 80.1 of the
Criminal Code
(The relevant sections of the
Criminal Code, amended as proposed, are set out in
Appendix 2.)
[back to top]
Extraterritorial
application
8.114 Common law countries traditionally have based criminal jurisdiction on
considerations of territorial sovereignty. The criminal
law was said to apply to
all offences alleged to have occurred within the territorial boundaries of the
state or where the act concerned
was intended to have its impact there (such as
a fraud procured in Australia through a communication made from overseas),
of the origins of the alleged offender. Conversely, common law
countries traditionally have been loath to recognise the concept of
‘universal jurisdiction’ or the extra-territorial reach of domestic
criminal law—except perhaps for a very limited
category of serious crimes
with an international flavour, such as piracy or
8.115 However, there has been a pronounced modern trend towards extending the
reach of the criminal law across boundaries. In part
this was prompted by
expanded territorial claims over the seas and
and in part by
globalisation and the increased speed and capabilities of modern transportation
and communications technology. This
trend clearly has been accelerated by
increased concerns over such serious transnational crimes as people smuggling,
child sex tourism,
sexual servitude, hostage taking and terrorism.
8.116 Even where a country can point to jurisdictional authority in principle,
as a practical matter it must have custody of the
alleged offender in order to
proceed. This often will require seeking extradition of the person from another
country, usually pursuant
8.117 In 2000, Division 15 of the
Criminal Code
to provide a more
transparent and certain scheme for the geographical jurisdiction of Commonwealth
criminal law. Division 15 provides
for four jurisdictional categories
(A–D) in ss 15.1–15.4. Category A is the most limited
extension; category D is the
8.118 The sedition and
offences under
Division 80 of the
Criminal Code
are characterised as
‘category D’ offences—as are the terrorism offences
created in 2002
in Divisions
101–104 of the
designation means that, by virtue of s 15.4 of the
Criminal Code
they apply to all persons (whether or not citizens or residents of
Australia):
• whether or not the conduct constituting the offence occurs in Australia;
• whether or not a result of the conduct constituting the alleged offence
occurs in Australia.
Implications
of extra-territorial application
8.119 Concerns are expressed about the application of category D
extraterritoriality to the sedition
This category of
extraterritoriality is said to give rise to the possibility that the
Commonwealth could launch a prosecution against
anyone suspected of these
offences, anywhere in the world, ‘creating what is in essence a universal
particular concern is that such a universal jurisdiction creates a potential
conflict with the law on combatant immunity in armed
IP 30 asked
8.120 Submissions highlight a number of problems claimed to
For example, John
Pyke observes that s 80.4, by applying category D jurisdiction to the
offences in Division 80, makes the ‘action
of any person of another
country who fights against Australia a criminal offence against our
He submits that
while there may be some justification for the laws to apply extraterritorially
to Australian citizens, s 80.4 should
refer to category A extended
category D.
8.121 Pax Christi states that the extended jurisdiction of Division 80
amount to a ‘questionable intrusion into the affairs
It could have the effect that a person domiciled in say Italy who expresses
views on the war in Iraq—for example that Italian
forces should be
withdrawn—which are entirely lawful in that country could expose himself
or herself to prosecution under Australian
sedition laws on the grounds that
such views assist the enemy.
8.122 Dr Saul also focuses on the implications for s 80.2(7) and (8)
Criminal Code
and expresses concern that the extra-territorial
application of these offences potentially interferes with the operation of
international
humanitarian law in armed conflicts. He states that, under these
laws commanders of enemy forces who order their troops to attack
forces in armed conflicts outside Australia may be liable to prosecution under
Australian law:
Such offences give rise to a plain conflict with international humanitarian law,
under which combatants participating lawfully in
an international armed conflict
are entitled to
combatant immunity
and Prisoner of War (POW) status upon
capture ...
Under international law, Australia is not lawfully entitled to criminalize enemy
commanders for directing their forces to fight in
conformity with international
law. Indeed, international law does not support the kind of extended
to exercise over such conduct, precisely
because of the potential conflict with the law on combatant immunity in armed
8.123 The AGD considers that category D jurisdiction should apply to the
offences in s 80.2, in particular, to capture the possible
commission of
sedition offences via the internet:
There appears to be no basis for not treating this offence like other offences
that involve conduct which could lead to harm to Australians
when it occurs
outside Australia, whether people trafficking, war crimes or computer
8.124 In the context of a Senate committee inquiry into people trafficking
legislation, the AGD advised that category D offences
are generally
restricted to the most serious international offences—such as genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes—for
which specific resources are
available for investigations and
prosecutions.
8.125 The implications of extraterritoriality are most problematic in relation
to the offences in s 80.2(7) and (8), which concern
urging another person
to assist an enemy or those engaged in armed hostilities against Australia. As
discussed above, the ALRC proposes
the repeal of these offences.
8.126 The application of category D jurisdiction to the remaining offences
in s 80.2—urging the overthrow of the
Constitution
or Government,
urging interference in Parliamentary elections, and urging inter-group
violence—is not as likely to create undesirable
outcomes in practice. The
elements of the offences themselves mean that the urged conduct will generally
be intended to occur in
Australia, being directed at the Australian
Constitution
or Government, Australian Parliamentary elections or at groups within
8.127 Further, under s 16.1 of the
Criminal Code
, the consent of the
Attorney-General is required for prosecution where the conduct (the urging)
occurs wholly overseas and the person
alleged to have committed the offence is
not an Australian citizen or body
This provides an additional safeguard against inappropriate prosecution. The
ALRC considers that category D extended geographical
continue to apply to the offences in s 80.2(1), (3) and (5).
8.128 The application of category D to the treason offences in s 80.1
creates more difficulty. Patrick Emerton states:
This aspect of Australia’s law of treason is objectionable in itself,
because it makes criminals under Australian law of all
foreigners—both
civilians and soldiers—who wage war against Australia, contrary to general
principles of international
law relating to armed conflict. Criminalising
foreign soldiers, in particular, threatens principles of combatant immunity, and
the reciprocal forbearance between conflicting powers that Australian
soldiers rely upon when engaged in military
8.129 Any problems that are seen to arise in relation to the application of
category D to s 80.2(7) and (8) (which the ALRC proposes
be repealed)
also may apply to the treason offences in s 80.1(1)(e) and (f), with
implications for the concept of combatant immunity
and other aspects of
international humanitarian law.
8.130 An example is if a person were forcibly conscripted by the Taliban and
required to fight against Australian troops in Afghanistan.
The person later
flees to Australia and is granted a temporary protection visa while claims for
refugee status are being determined—and
may then be subject to prosecution
for engaging in armed hostilities against the Australian Defence Force under
s 80.1(1)(f).
8.131 A simple solution to these problems would be to limit the application of
the treason offences to those who are Australian citizens
or residents at the
time of the offence. Such a qualification is consistent with the historical
origins of the law of treason, which
punished acts deemed to constitute a
violation of a subject’s allegiance to his or her lord or
8.132 The concept of allegiance has retained legal importance in the law of
Treason Act
remains in force in the United Kingdom (and New South Wales) was used to
prosecute William Joyce (also known as Lord Haw-Haw),
a propagandist for Germany
during the World War II, for high treason. Joyce was an American citizen,
who had resided in British territory
and applied for and obtained a British
passport. A key issue, on appeal before the House of Lords was whether Joyce had
himself of allegiance to the British
8.133 The repealed
treason offences had no citizenship
qualification, although the Gibbs Committee observed that the treason offences
‘must obviously
be construed so as not to apply to an enemy alien in time
of war outside
Australia’.
Committee recommended that the offence of treason should be stated to apply
(i) an Australian citizen or a member of the Public Service or Defence Force
anywhere; and
(ii) any person (including an enemy alien) voluntarily in
8.134 For present purposes, the ALRC considers that the term ‘Australian
citizen or resident’ should be adopted. These
words are used extensively
Criminal Code
, including in relation to extended geographical
residents, the operation of category D jurisdiction is appropriate. If a
citizen or resident commits the offence of treason, it should
not matter whether
or not the conduct or a result of the conduct occurs in Australia.
8.135 Where relevant offences are committed by non-citizens or non-residents
there is adequate coverage in other laws, including
the terrorism offences in
Criminal Code
. Those parts of the treason offences dealing with
causing the death of, or harming, the Sovereign, Governor-General or Prime
are covered by many other standard provisions in the criminal law.
Section 80.1 of the
Criminal Code
should be amended
to require that, at the time of the alleged offence, the person is an Australian
citizen or resident.
(The relevant sections of the Criminal Code,
amended as proposed, are set out in
Appendix 2.)
[back to top]
Requirement
of Attorney-General’s consent
8.136 Under s 80.5, proceedings for an offence under Division 80 of
Criminal Code
may not be commenced without the written consent of the
Attorney-General. According to the Explanatory Memorandum, this provision
designed to provide an additional safeguard for a person charged with a sedition
8.137 A person may be arrested, charged and remanded into custody without the
prior consent of the
Attorney-General.
As with any
other criminal matter, the investigating authority, such as the Australian
Federal Police, will provide the DPP with
a brief of evidence, on which the DPP
will determine—according to its published
there is sufficient probative evidence to proceed, and whether launching a
prosecution would be in the public interest.
Once the DPP has made a decision to
prosecute, then the written consent of the Attorney-General must be sought under
8.138 A number of other
Criminal Code
offences require the
Attorney-General’s written consent to
These include
offences in relation to:
• international terrorist activities using
explosive or lethal
• people smuggling
• espionage and similar
activities;
Australians;
• genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and crimes against the administration of the justice of the International
8.139 In addition, as noted above, the
Criminal Code
provides that the
Attorney-General’s consent is required in prosecutions for any offence (to
which the jurisdictional provisions
if the alleged conduct
occurs wholly in a foreign country, and the person is not an Australian citizen,
resident or body corporate
incorporated in
In such cases, the
purpose of the consent requirement is to give regard to considerations of
‘international law, practice and
comity, international relations,
prosecutions action that is being or might be taken in another country, and
other public interest
considerations’.
and the prosecution process
8.140 There have been suggestions that the political nature of the sedition
offences mean there could be perceptions in the community
Attorney-General, as a political figure, might be inclined to agree more readily
to the prosecution of persons who criticise
government policy or are unpopular
with the electorate.
8.141 In IP 30, the ALRC stated that it agrees that the requirement of the
Attorney-General’s written consent is intended as
an additional safeguard
rather than an attempt to ‘politicise’ this area. The DPP is a
statutory officeholder, with a
high degree of independence afforded to that
office by statute and legal culture, while the Attorney-General is accountable
people for his or her actions through Parliament, and subject to media
scrutiny. As the AGD argued before the 2005 Senate Committee
inquiry ‘the
Attorney is a political safeguard on the DPP and the DPP is a safeguard on the
8.142 IP 30 asked whether the Attorney-General’s consent should be
required for any prosecution for the sedition
There was a mixed
response to this question in submissions to the Inquiry. Some consider that the
requirement does provide an additional
protection against unwarranted
prosecution;
others oppose
the involvement of the Attorney-General or hold serious reservations about
8.143 Sedition, at least in its earlier forms, can be characterised as an
inherently political offence. Historically, sedition was
used against political
dissidents and opponents of the established political order. Against this
background, it is not surprising
that there are misgivings about involving the
Attorney-General in the prosecution process.
8.144 The Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic) submits that ‘it is
the very nature of the laws, insofar as they are
intended to prosecute political
speech, that they be prosecuted in a politicised manner’. The requirement
for the consent would:
create a situation where political motives influence whether particular conduct
is prosecuted or not. This is inappropriate in a
democratic society and any laws
creating the potential for such political influence are anti-democratic as
8.145 The Centre for Media and Communications Law expresses similar concerns and
notes that removing the requirement for the Attorney-General’s
would ‘significantly lessen the risk of decisions about prosecutions being
as political and would place the provisions more clearly within
the general operation of the criminal
8.146 ARTICLE 19 oppose requiring the consent of the Attorney-General in
matters of press freedom because, in its view, ‘written
ministerial
consent is open to abuse and political interference in respect of the press,
which should be robustly protected from
such threats to its
independence’.
8.147 The consent of the Attorney-General only becomes an issue where the DPP
has already made a decision to prosecute. Concerns
involvement are also directed to decisions
to prosecute—that
is, the risk of selective prosecution, where some categories of alleged
offenders are prosecuted but not
others. Arguably, the Attorney is less
accountable where there is a decision not to prosecute because the prudence of
the decision
is not exposed by a criminal trial and consequent media and
political scrutiny. It is suggested that, to provide additional transparency
decision-making, the Attorney-General should have to give a report justifying
the exercise of the
discretion.
Others suggest,
as a further safeguard, the promulgation of guidelines for sedition
prosecutions.
8.148 The AGD states that there is no reason to remove the consent requirement,
which provides an additional safeguard and ‘addresses
any concerns about
officials misusing the
8.149 On balance, the ALRC considers that s 80.5 should be repealed. The
Attorney-General’s consent to prosecution would still
be required under
s 16.1, where the alleged conduct occurs wholly in a foreign country and
the person charged is not an Australian
citizen, resident or body corporate
incorporated in Australia.
8.150 In modern offences, the requirement for the Attorney-General to consent to
prosecution is most often imposed in response to
considerations about the
extraterritorial operation of offences. In relation to the offences in
Division 80 of the
Criminal Code
, s 16.1 seems adequate to
ensure that these implications are considered by the Attorney-General.
8.151 The ALRC is strongly influenced by the fact that the terrorism offences in
Part 5.3 of the
Criminal Code
do not require the consent of the
Attorney-General (unless s 16.1 applies). It seems logical for the same
position to apply to the
Division 80.2 offences against political liberty
and public order (as proposed by the ALRC).
8.152 The AGD advises that a consent requirement is sometimes considered
desirable to ensure that political responsibility will be
taken for offences
that are perceived to have potential for abuse in the hands of officials. The
ALRC is not convinced that this
rationale justifies the consent requirement for
the Division 80 offences. The independent status given to the Director of
of the DPP under the
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1983
(Cth) (DPP Act) provides adequate protection in this regard.
Prosecution Policy of the
Commonwealth
Prosecution Policy) provides guidelines for the making of decisions in the
prosecution process. Chapter 2 of the Prosecution
Policy contains a
discussion of the factors that may arise for consideration in determining
whether the public interest requires
a prosecution. These include, for
(a) the seriousness or, conversely, the triviality of the alleged offence or
that it is of a ‘technical’ nature only
(g) the effect on public order and morale ...;
(h) the obsolescence or obscurity of the law;
(i) whether the prosecution would be perceived as counter-productive, for
example, by bringing the law into disrepute ...;
(l) whether the consequences of any resulting conviction would be unduly harsh
and oppressive;
(m) whether the alleged offence is of considerable public concern ...;
(p) the likely length and expense of a trial ...;
(t) the necessity to maintain public confidence in such basic institutions as
the Parliament and the
8.154 The Prosecution Policy also provides that a decision whether or not to
prosecute must clearly not be influenced by:
(a) the race, religion, sex, national origin or political associations,
activities or beliefs of the alleged offender or any other
person involved
(c) possible political advantage or disadvantage to the Government or any
political group or party ...
8.155 Under s 8 of the DPP Act, the performance of the DPP’s
functions is subject to directions or guidelines given by the
Attorney-General.
Such directions or guidelines may, among other things, relate to the
circumstances in which the Director should
institute or carry on prosecutions
for offences; and can be given in relation to particular
directions or guidelines must be published in the
and tabled in
Parliament.
Therefore, while
the ALRC proposes the repeal of s 80.5, there remains another mechanism for
ministerial intervention in prosecutions
under s 80.2—one that is
subject to Parliamentary
8.156 Further, under s 9(5) of the DPP Act, the DPP may take over any
private prosecution and terminate it. In 1996, with respect
to the repeal
of certain provisions requiring the Attorney-General’s consent to
prosecution, the Attorney-General, the Hon
Daryl Williams MP, observed that the
consent provisions were originally enacted for the purpose of deterring private
prosecutions
brought in inappropriate circumstances—particularly for
offences which related to national security or international treaty
obligations:
However, since establishing the office of the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions the retention of those provisions is difficult
to justify. That is
particularly so now that the Director of Public Prosecutions has the power to
take over and discontinue a private
prosecution brought in relation to a
Commonwealth offence.
Section 80.5 of the
Criminal Code
regarding the
requirement of the Attorney-General’s written consent to a prosecution
should be repealed.
(The relevant sections of the Criminal Code, amended
as proposed, are set out in
Appendix 2.)
The relevant sections of the
(Cth) are set out in full in Appendix 1. The relevant sections of
the Code, amended as proposed in this Discussion Paper, are set
Appendix 2.
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 80.2(1).
Ibid s 80.2(1),
Ibid s 80.2(7),
That is, the offence of incitement
under Ibid s 11.4.
The offences in
s 80.2(7) and (8) are dealt with
See, eg, J Goldring,
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006.
Leader-Elliot,
The Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 1 March 2002, 61.
61, referring to
Chew v The Queen
[1992] HCA 18
(1991) 173 CLR
I Leader-Elliot,
Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 1 March 2002, 273.
also stands in contrast to the repealed
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) sedition
offences, which required the person to engage in a seditious enterprise or
publish seditious words ‘with the
intention of causing violence or
creating public disorder or a public nuisance’:
Crimes Act 1914
ss 24C–24D.
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 100.1(2).
s 11.4(3). For example, where the person urged to commit the offence is an
undercover police officer who would never actually
carry through the plan; or
the building that is to be attacked has burned down
Courts have recognised the
‘clear intention of Parliament to create offences where [a principal]
offender has not decided precisely
what he or she intends to do’:
v The Queen
[2006] NSWCCA 121
It is, however, clear that
incitement can be directed to the world at large:
(1881) 7 QBD
; for example, in a speech to a crowd:
Pankhurst v Kiernan
[1917] HCA 63
Criminal Code
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006), [3.108] citing The Hon
Philip Ruddock MP (Attorney-General),
New Counter Terrorism Measures:
Incitement of Terrorism (Question and Answer Brief 17 October 2005)
<www.abc.net.au/mediawatch/img/2005
/ep33/tpsedition.pdf> at 12 March
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
(2005), [5.61]; Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November 2005,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
14 April 2006.
Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions,
Consultation
, Canberra, 26 April
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
The Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
<www.cdpp.gov.au/Prosecutions/Policy/Default.aspx> at 11 March 2006,
S Bronitt and B McSherry,
Principles of Criminal Law
Ancuta v The Queen
49 A Crim R 307
, following
R v Bainbridge
[1960] 1 QB 129. See D Brown
and others,
Brown, Farrier, Neal and Weisbrot’s Criminal Laws:
Materials and Commentary on Criminal Law and Process in New South Wales
ed, 2006), [11.4.4.2].
[1960] 1 QB 129, 133.
Bronitt and B McSherry,
Principles of Criminal Law
(2005), 363. The High
Giorgianni v The Queen
[1985] HCA 29
(1985) 156 CLR 473
may support
such a proposition.
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 11.2(3).
A person may, however, be
convicted of incitement where the principal offence has been committed. In
practice, ‘incitement
which succeeds in its object will usually result in
conviction for the principal offence as an accomplice’: I Leader-Elliot,
The Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 1 March 2002,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
[3.106]–[3.107].
See, Senate
Legal and Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
[5.117]–[5.122].
Tobin Centre of Public Law,
Submission 80 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 10 November 2005. Other submissions made
similar criticisms: Senate Legal and Constitutional Committee—Parliament
of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
[5.105]–[5.106]; Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Submission 158B to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
22 November 2005. See also B Saul, ‘Speaking of Terror: Criminalising
Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
University of New South Wales Law
5 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings
Ltd, News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006; Chief Minister (ACT),
April 2006.
Criminal Code
J Goldring,
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006.
They do not differ in this
respect from the repealed sedition offences in the
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006), [3.21],
[3.30]–[3.31].
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(2005), [5.176],
Criminal Code
See I Leader-Elliot,
Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 1 March 2002,
That is, under
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 80.2(2), (4) and
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November 2005. See also Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
[5.107]–[5.112].
John Fairfax
Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006; A Steel,
2006; B Saul,
Criminal Code
10 April 2006; Chief Minister (ACT),
13 April 2006; Australian Muslim Civil Rights
Advocacy Network,
10 April 2006.
Chief Minister
13 April 2006. See Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee,
Model Criminal Code: Chapters 1 and 2: General Principles
of Criminal Responsibility
No similar issue arises in the case
of the offences in s 80.2(7) and (8). These provisions do not refer to
urging force or violence,
but simply to urging another person to ‘engage
in conduct’, to which intention will clearly apply as the fault element:
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) s 80.2(7)(a); 80.2(8)(a); and state
expressly that the person ‘
the conduct to assist an
organisation or country’:
Criminal Code Act 1995
s 80.2(7)(b); 80.2(8)(b) (emphasis
Human Rights Lawyers,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March 2006; National Association for the Visual
11 April 2006; National Legal Aid,
20 April 2006; Centre for Media and
Communications Law,
12 April 2006; Australian
Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
As submitted by the AGD:
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Muslim Civil Rights
Advocacy Network,
17 April 2006; N Roxton
Shadow Attorney-General,
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 102.6 (1); 102.7 (1); 102.8(1)(a)(i); 270.3 (1);
471.7(2)(a).
Criminal Code Act
(Cth) s 80.2(1), (3), (5), (7),
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
Liberty Victoria,
221 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 11 November
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006; Combined Community Legal Centres Group (NSW) Inc,
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006.
Shadow Attorney-General,
Chief Minister (ACT),
13 April 2006. See also Australian Muslim Civil
Rights Advocacy Network,
Model Criminal Code Officers
Model Criminal Code: Chapters 1 and 2: General Principles of
Criminal Responsibility
Crimes Act 1914
s 7A (repealed).
However, the case
law does not clearly establish that the term ‘urges’ is broader than
other terms used to describe incitement.
Laws of Australia
states that
the words ‘urges’ and ‘encourages’ are synonyms for
‘incites’: Law Book Company,
The Laws of Australia
Criminal Law Principles, [122]. The word ‘procures’—sometimes
also treated as a synonym of ‘incites’—has
in some cases been
given a meaning that makes it equivalent to ‘cause’: Law Book
The Laws of Australia
, vol 9 Criminal Law Principles, [122]
A-G (UK) Reference (No 1 of 1975)
[1975] EWCA Crim 1
Model Criminal Code Officers
Model Criminal Code: Chapters 1 and 2: General Principles of
Criminal Responsibility
I Leader-Elliot,
Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 1 March 2002,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 16 November
ARTICLE 19,
of Community Legal Centres (Vic),
2006. See also B Saul,
14 April 2006; A Steel,
Criminal Code
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 April 2006; University of Melbourne Academics,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 April 2006; Australian Lawyers for Human
Submission 139 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2)
, 11 November 2005; ARTICLE 19,
April 2006; B Saul,
14 April 2006.
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 April 2006; University of Melbourne Academics,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 April
Brandenburg v Ohio
[1969] USSC 141
14 April 2006.
Lawyers for Human Rights,
13 April 2006,
referring to
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
December 1966,
[1980] ATS 23
, (entered into force generally on 23 March 1976)
Johannesburg Principles on National Security, Freedom of
Expression and Access to Information
http://www.article19.org/pdfs/standards/joburgprinciples.pdf
at 20 April
2006 art 6.
ARTICLE 19,
M Weinberg,
Consultation
Melbourne, 3 April 2006; A Steel,
18 April 2006.
University of
Melbourne Academics,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 April 2006; P Emerton,
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
(2005), [31.18].
Recklessness would still apply to
the element that it is the
Constitution
or Government that others have been
urged to overthrow:
Criminal Code
I Leader-Elliot,
Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 1 March 2002,
Crimes Act 1914
s 30C inserted by
Crimes Act 1926
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
(1991), [32.18].
Federation of
Community Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006;
Liberty Victoria,
Submission 221 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill
(No 2) 2005
, 11 November 2005; P Emerton,
10 April 2006.
Protection of the
Constitution
public and other
Commonwealth
Electoral Act 1918
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Recklessness would
still apply to the element that it is the
Constitution
or Government that others
have been urged to overthrow:
Criminal Code
This could, for
example, include the implied constitutional right of freedom of political
communication.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
(1991), 306–307.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate
Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November 2005, Attachment
Fairfax, News Ltd and AAP submit
that the AGD view is to ‘conflate matters of defeasance with substantive
offence provisions’:
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and
Australian Associated Press,
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) s 11.2.
Memorandum of advice to Australian Broadcasting Corporation
, 24 October
B Saul, ‘Speaking of
Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
University of
New South Wales Law Journal
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006; Pax Christi,
April 2006; New South Wales Bar Association,
April 2006; Confidential,
3 May 2006;
Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance,
2006; Centre for Media and Communications Law,
12 April 2006; Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; P Emerton,
April 2006; New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties Inc,
10 April 2006; Chief Minister (ACT),
13 April 2006; Australian Press Council Office,
13 April 2006; Australian Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
17 April 2006; Victoria Legal Aid,
13 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006.
Pax Christi,
Confidential,
10 April 2006.
Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
Lawyers for Human Rights,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Pax Christi,
9 April 2006.
Legal and Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(2005), [5.175],
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006; National Association for the
Visual Arts,
11 April 2006; Centre for Media
and Communications Law,
12 April 2006; Victoria
13 April 2006; B Saul,
J Goldring,
5 April 2006; Australian Press Council Office,
13 April 2006.
Media Entertainment and Arts
10 April 2006; Australian Press
Council Office,
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 80.2(7)(c)(ii).
Saul, ‘Speaking of Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
University of New South Wales Law Journal
14 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and
Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006;
Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic),
April 2006; J Pyke,
10 April 2006; National
Association for the Visual Arts,
11 April 2006;
14 April 2006; National Association for the Visual Arts,
11 April 2006; J Pyke,
10 April 2006.
Centre for Media and
Communications Law,
Reform of these aspects of the
treason provisions clearly constitutes a ‘related matter’ under the
Inquiry’s Terms
Criminal Code
s 80.1(1A).
Early drafts of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
used the words ‘assist, by any means
whatever’ in the sedition provisions: Draft-in-Confidence
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
(Cth). These were later
That is, under
(Cth) s 11.4(2).
Black, ‘Five Approaches to Reforming the Law: 650 Years of Treason and
Sedition’ (Paper presented at Australasian Law
Reform Agencies Conference,
Sydney, 11 April 2006),
Criminal Code
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
(1991), [31.38].
[31.39]–[31.40].
Criminal Code
(Cth) Part 2.4;
Crimes Act 1914
Cross-Border
Criminal Law
(1997), 266.
Crimes (Ships and Fixed Platforms) Act 1992
Extradition Act 1988
Criminal Code Amendment
(Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences) Act 2000
Criminal Code
Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 101.1(2); 101.2(5); 101.4(4); 101.5(4); 101.6(3); 102.9;
103.1(3); 104.8. See also the discussion below regarding terrorist
organisations.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
[3.53]–[3.54].
Memorandum of advice to Australian Broadcasting Corporation
, 24 October
B Saul, ‘Speaking of
Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
University of
New South Wales Law Journal
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006), Ch 7,
Question 14.
10 April 2006; Pax Christi,
9 April 2006; Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; P Emerton,
10 April 2006; Victoria Legal Aid,
13 April 2006; B Saul,
10 April 2006.
Briefly, under
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 15.1, where category A
‘standard geographical
the time of the alleged offence the person charged with the offence was an
citizen or was a body corporate incorporated under Australian
Pax Christi,
9 April 2006.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Legislation Committee,
Criminal Code Amendment (Trafficking in
Persons Offences) Bill 2004 [2005]
That is, in the case of the
latter offence, so as to ‘threaten the peace, order and good government of
the Commonwealth’):
Criminal Code
s 80.2(5)(b).
This position
will not be changed by the repeal of s 80.5
(Proposal 8–12).
See, eg, ‘Historical
Concept of Treason: English and American’ (1960) 35
Indiana Law Journal
In the United States, the
United States Code offence of misprision of treason applies only to those
‘owing allegiance to the
United States’:
Treason Act of 1351
Edw III c 2.
Director of Public Prosecutions
[1946] AC 347.
The Court held that an alien
abroad holding a British passport enjoys the protection of the Crown and if he
is adherent to the King’s
enemies he is guilty of treason, so long as he
has not renounced that protection.
Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth
Interim Report
Explanatory Memorandum,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Criminal Code
s 80.5(2)(a) and
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
The Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
<www.cdpp.gov.au/Prosecutions/Policy/Default.aspx> at 11 March
The consent of the
Attorney-General is also required for offences under some other statutes,
including under the
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes (Ships and Fixed
Platforms) Act 1992
Crimes at Sea Act 2000
Criminal Code
Division 72. See
Ibid Division 73,
Subdivision A. See s 73.5.
Part 5.2. See s 93.1.
Division 115. See
Division 268. See
That is, Ibid
ss 14.1, 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 or 15.4.
I Leader-Elliot,
Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 1 March 2002,
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
[5.146]–[5.151].
Senate Legal
and Constitutional Committee—Australian Parliament,
Anti-Terrorism Bill
(No 2) 2005
: Transcript of Public Hearing
, 18 November 2005, 19 (G
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006), Ch 7,
Question 15.
18 April 2006; Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
2006; B Saul,
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006; Centre for Media and Communications Law,
12 April 2006; Federation of Community Legal
Centres (Vic) Inc,
Submission 167 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill
(No 2) 2005
, 11 November 2005; P Emerton,
10 April 2006; A Spathis,
10 April 2006; M
Consultation
, Melbourne, 3 April 2006; R Connolly and C
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 April
Federation of Community Legal
Centres (Vic),
Centre for Media and
Communications Law,
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006.
Institute of Victoria,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 April
University of Melbourne
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 April
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Criminal Code
ss 80.4, 15.4,
Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions,
The Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
<www.cdpp.gov.au/Prosecutions/Policy/Default.aspx> at 11 March
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1983
The ALRC understands
that, to date, the power to issue
directions or guidelines has not been
exercised by an Attorney-General: Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
Consultation
, Canberra, 26 April
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 4 December 1996, 7714
(D Williams, Attorney-General).
9. Urging Inter-Group
Introduction
Legislating against the incitement of hatred and violence
Federal law reform
Existing anti-vilification laws
Reform movements: 1995 to 2005
Sedition and inter-group violence
The common law
Crimes Act 1914
Gibbs Committee
Legislative amendments in 2005
Criticisms of section 80.2(5)
Sedition and vilification
Linking inter-group violence and terrorism
Peace, order and good government of the Commonwealth
Obligations under international law
Identified groups
Broader review of anti-vilification laws
ALRC’s view
A public order offence
Modification of the offence
9. Urging Inter-Group
Introduction
9.1 This chapter will examine the new offence of urging inter-group violence in
s 80.2(5) and (6) of the
Criminal Code
(Cth), which provides
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person urges a group or groups (whether distinguished by race, religion,
nationality or political opinion) to use force or
violence against another group
or other groups (as so distinguished); and
(b) the use of the force or violence would threaten the peace, order and good
government of the Commonwealth.
(6) Recklessness applies to the element of the offence under subsection (5) that
it is a group or groups that are distinguished by
race, religion, nationality or
political opinion that the first-mentioned person urges the other person to use
force or violence
9.2 The scope and operation of the offence is set out in detail in
9.3 Section 80.2(5) ‘modernises’ the old sedition offence
contained in s 24A(g) of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), which defined an
intention to ‘promote feelings of ill-will and hostility between different
classes of Her Majesty’s
subjects so as to endanger the peace, order or
good government of the Commonwealth’ as a ‘seditious
intention’.
9.4 This new offence overlaps to some extent with existing federal and state
anti-vilification laws, which render unlawful (and in
some cases, criminal)
public acts which could incite others to hate, hold in contempt or seriously
ridicule a person or group of
people. At a federal level, the conduct proscribed
by s 80.2(5) may in some cases be prosecuted using other criminal offences
as incitement to commit an offence or telecommunications offences. However,
s 80.2(5) is the first federal provision specifically
to criminalise the
urging of violence against racial, religious, national or political groups.
9.5 Section 80.2(5) has generated mixed responses in public debate and
consultation. It has been welcomed by many as a step towards
the implementation
of Australia’s obligations under international law to criminalise
incitement of national, racial and religious
hatred. However, it has also been
subject to a number of criticisms in relation to both the drafting of the
provision and the anti-terrorist
framework in which it was enacted. In
particular, it has been argued that the urging of inter-group violence cannot be
properly categorised
as ‘sedition’ and that such an offence belongs
with anti-vilification laws, rather than with the cluster of offences
9.6 This chapter will examine the background and policy rationale for the
creation of a federal offence of urging the use of force
or violence against
groups distinguished on the basis of race, religion, nationality or political
opinion. It will examine the historical
link between sedition offences and
inter-group violence, and the relationship between s 80.2(5) and
anti-vilification laws. The criticisms
of s 80.2(5) in its current form
will be examined in detail.
9.7 The ALRC proposes to characterise the present offence as an offence against
public order, and to retain it in a modified form
Criminal Code
The important role of anti-discrimination laws is highlighted, and the ALRC
recommends continuing educational programs and other
strategies designed to
promote inter-communal harmony and understanding.
9.8 Aspects of the framing of the offence, including
the role of intention and recklessness as fault elements, the extraterritorial
application of the offence and the requirement for the Attorney-General to
consent to prosecution, are discussed in detail in Chapter
8. Defences are
discussed in detail in Chapter 10.
[back to top]
Legislating against
the incitement of hatred and violence
9.9 The debate about the role that the law—particularly the criminal
law—can or should play in combating expressions
or acts of racial and
other prejudice gained prominence in the early 1990s, following a number of
significant national inquiries
which highlighted the nature and extent of the
problem of racism and racist violence in
anti-vilification laws were introduced in New South Wales in
and similar legislation
subsequently was enacted in all state and territory jurisdictions except the
Northern Territory.
Despite having
been debated since the 1970s,
federal anti-vilification laws were not introduced until
Federal law
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) (RDA) was introduced to
implement into Australian law the provisions of the
International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 1966
to which Australia is a
party. When first debated in Parliament, the Racial Discrimination Bill 1975
(and the earlier 1973 and 1974
Bills) included a number of criminal offences of
incitement to racist violence. These were opposed by the majority of the Senate,
and the amendment to remove the offences was accepted by the Government
‘with a total lack of enthusiasm’ in order to
progress the
This resulted in the
Government entering a reservation to art 4(a) of CERD in relation to
criminal offences, which noted that ‘it
is the intention of the Australian
Government, at the first suitable moment, to seek from Parliament legislation
specifically implementing
the terms of article
9.11 In its 1991 report,
Racist Violence,
the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission (HREOC) recommended that the
to include new criminal offences of racist violence and
intimidation,
and incitement of
racist violence and incitement to racial hatred likely to lead to
HREOC also recommended
that incitement to racial hostility should be made unlawful, but not attract
criminal sanctions.
further recommended that federal, state and territory criminal laws be amended
to enable courts to impose higher penalties
where there is a racist motivation
in the commission of an
9.12 In the national report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in
Custody, Commissioner Elliott Johnston QC recommended
the creation of a
civil offence (but not a criminal offence) at the federal level proscribing
racial vilification.
9.13 In 1991, the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law (the Gibbs
Committee) recommended the adoption of a new federal
offence of incitement to
inter-group violence, whether distinguished by nationality, race or religion, as
part of its proposed modernisation
of the law of sedition. This is discussed
later in this Chapter.
9.14 In its 1992 report
Multiculturalism and the Law
recommended that the
be amended to include an offence of
incitement to racist violence.
The ALRC was divided on the question of whether incitement to racist hatred and
hostility should be made unlawful or a criminal offence.
A majority recommended
that it should be made unlawful, subject to civil penalties, on the basis that
making incitement to racist
hatred and hostility a criminal offence would unduly
restrict freedom of speech.
However, two Commissioners recommended that incitement to racist hatred should
be a criminal offence on the basis that this is required
in order to fulfil
Australia’s international obligations pursuant to art 4(a) of
Such ideas are the root cause of racism. To leave the propagation of hatred to
be dealt with under ‘offensive behaviour’
or similar provisions is
to ignore the quite different insidious effects of this kind of
9.15 The minority therefore recommended the inclusion of the following offence
A person must not publish, by any means, anything that is based on ideas or
theories of superiority of any race or group of persons
of one colour or ethnic
origin over another, or promotes hatred or hostility between such races or
groups, if the person intends
that the publication will incite hatred or
hostility towards an identifiable group and is likely to have that
9.16 Following these inquiries, the
Racial Discrimination Amendment Bill 1992
was introduced into the House of Representatives and community consultation was
conducted. A revised version, the Racial Hatred Bill,
was introduced in 1994.
The Bill originally contained three criminal offences which were to be placed in
under the heading ‘Offences Based on Racial
Hatred’: first, threatening to cause physical harm to a person or group
of their race, colour, or national or ethnic
secondly, threatening to
destroy or damage property because of the race, colour, or national or ethnic
origin of any other group;
thirdly, doing an act otherwise than in private that is reasonably likely to
incite racial hatred.
9.17 The Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee examined the
Racial Hatred Bill 1994
, and the majority supported the introduction of the Bill
without amendment.
However, the
Opposition and the Greens were opposed to the inclusion of the criminal
The Government agreed
to remove the criminal offences from the Bill in order to ensure that the rest
of the Bill, including the civil
remedies, was
anti-vilification laws
9.18 Anti-vilification laws in Australia rely primarily on civil rather than
criminal mechanisms. Criminal offences exist in some
serious vilification.
Federal anti-vilification laws
9.19 Section 18C of the RDA renders it unlawful (but not criminal) to use
sounds, words, images or writing in public that are ‘reasonably
offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate another person or a group of
people’ and that are ‘used because of
the race, colour or national
or ethnic origin of the other person or group of
9.20 Religious vilification is not included in this provision; however, courts
have held that some religious groups (such as Jewish
people and Sikhs) fall
within the definition of groups distinguished by ‘ethnic
It has yet to be
determined whether Muslim people fall within the definition under the federal
legislation; however, courts that
have considered the issue under state and
territory laws have held that Muslim people do not share a common racial,
national or ethnic
its 2004 report,
Isma—Listen: National Consultations on Eliminating
Prejudice against Arab and Muslim Australians
, HREOC concluded that is
unlikely that a person discriminated against or vilified solely on the basis of
their Islamic faith would
be protected by the federal
legislation.
State and territory anti-vilification
9.21 As outlined above, all state and territory jurisdictions in Australia
except the Northern Territory have anti-vilification laws.
However, there is
significant jurisdictional variation as to which groups are protected from
vilification, what harm thresholds are
applied, and whether criminal sanctions
or civil remedies are available.
9.22 Racial vilification is unlawful in the ACT, New South Wales, Queensland,
South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria and Western Australia.
Only civil remedies
are available in Tasmania, and only criminal sanctions apply in Western
Australia. In the remaining jurisdictions,
a two-tiered approach has been
adopted—racial vilification constitutes a civil wrong, and may amount to a
criminal offence
where the conduct is serious.
9.23 Religious vilification is unlawful in Tasmania, Queensland and Victoria. In
the latter two jurisdictions, serious conduct may
attract criminal sanctions.
9.24 Vilification on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity is
unlawful in the ACT, New South Wales and Queensland (civil
and criminal
sanctions apply). Vilification on the basis of HIV/AIDS status is unlawful in
New South Wales and the ACT (civil and
criminal sanctions apply). Vilification
on the basis of disability is unlawful in Tasmania (civil sanctions only).
9.25 In most jurisdictions, for vilification to be a criminal offence it must
generally be shown that the conduct involves a high
level of harassment or
threat, such as incitement to violence, or threats to persons or
For example, in New
South Wales, s 20D of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
renders it an offence to
by a public act, incite hatred towards, serious contempt for, or severe ridicule
of, a person or group of persons on the ground of
the race of the person or
members of the group by means which include: (a) threatening physical harm
towards, or towards any property
of, the person or group of person, or (b)
inciting others to threaten physical harm towards, or towards any property of,
or group of persons.
Reform movements:
1995 to 2005
9.26 The anti-vilification regimes throughout
Australia have been subject to a number of criticisms. In particular, the laws
been criticised on the basis that there is no jurisdictional uniformity
with regard to: which groups are protected; which acts are
proscribed; what harm
thresholds apply; and whether civil or criminal sanctions apply. Further, it has
been argued that the existing
laws lack precision and clarity in a number of key
respects, which has led to the development of an incoherent body of case
9.27 In both its 1998 report,
Article 18: Freedom of Religion and
, and its 2004 report,
Isma—Listen: National Consultations on
Eliminating Prejudice against Arab and Muslim Australians
, HREOC recommended
the introduction of a federal law rendering vilification on the ground of
religion or belief unlawful.
HREOC criticised the current federal and state regimes for being inconsistent
and inadequate.
It stated that
while it was clear that vilification, harassment and incitement to religious
hatred on the basis of religion or belief
occurred in
whether a person was
able to seek redress pursuant to anti-vilification laws depended upon the
9.28 In 2003, the federal Opposition introduced a Bill to create offences for
racial and religious vilification—substantially
the same offences as those
proposed in the original
Racial Hatred Bill
The Bill did not
9.29 In December 2005, when the
Anti-Terrorism Bill 2005
(Cth) was before
Parliament, the Opposition introduced the
Amendment (Incitement to
Violence) Bill 2005 (Cth). This Bill proposed that criminal offences for racial
and religious vilification
be inserted in the
Opposition’s preferred option to the proposed s 80.2(5). The proposed
incitement offences were broader than the current
sedition provision in that
they applied to acts directed at individuals on the basis of race etc, and did
not confine the offences
to incitements directed at defined
There was no requirement
that the violence disturb the peace, order and good government of the
Commonwealth.
sedition provisions, the Bill did not contain political opinion as a ground upon
which incitement to violence was prohibited.
This model mirrors substantially
the offence of serious vilification contained in
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW). The Bill has not proceeded.
[back to top]
Sedition and
inter-group violence
9.30 In light of the protracted debate about federal legislative reform to
address the incitement of hatred and violence against
particular groups, many
have found the introduction of s 80.2(5) in 2005 a surprising occurrence.
In order to understand s 80.2(5),
it is important to examine the historical
link between the law of sedition and inter-group violence.
9.31 Classically, the law of sedition was concerned with words or actions
inciting disaffection or violent opposition against the
state. In 1887 the
eminent legal historian Sir James Fitzjames Stephen, whose definition of
seditious intention was widely accepted
as the classic statement of the law,
asserted that ‘seditious intention’ included an intention to
‘raise discontent
or disaffection amongst His Majesty’s subjects, or
to promote feelings of ill-will and hostility between different classes
9.32 The primary basis of Stephen’s assertion appears to have been an 1844
O’Connell v The Queen
, in which the defendants were
prosecuted successfully for conspiring to promote feelings of ill-will and
hostility between the English
Although the legal basis
for this aspect of Stephen’s statement of the law has been
challenged,
his definition was
adopted by the Criminal Code Commissioners in
9.33 This extended definition of the offence allowed it, in theory, to be used
to prosecute those who incited racial or religious
However, the few
recorded cases in this area indicate that attempts to prosecute this type of
conduct using sedition law were generally
unsuccessful.
9.34 There was considerable uncertainty at common law about whether inciting
ill-will between groups could amount to sedition or
whether there was an
additional requirement that there be an intention to incite violence or create
public disturbance with the purpose
of disturbing constituted authority. This
uncertainty was addressed by the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Boucher v The King
, where a member of the Jehovah’s Witnesses was
convicted of seditious libel for publishing a pamphlet entitled
Burning Hate for God and Christ and
The pamphlet
detailed instances of alleged persecution of members of the group by members of
the Roman Catholic clergy and concluded
with a statement to the effect that
Quebec Catholics were indoctrinated by the priesthood to think that they were
serving God’s
cause by attacking Jehovah’s Witnesses. On appeal, the
Supreme Court of Canada overturned the conviction, holding that the
of sedition could not be used to prosecute acts inciting ill-will or violence
between groups unless there was an intention
to incite resistance or violence
for the purpose of disturbing constituted
9.35 The decision in
was approved by the Queen’s Bench in
R v Chief Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate; ex parte Choudury
private prosecution for seditious and blasphemous libel was brought against the
author and publishers of
The Satanic
The basis of the
charge was that the book’s portrayal of Islam created hostility between
Muslims and non-Muslims, provoking
violence and threats of violence against
Muslims. The Court held that the charge of seditious libel had not been made
Proof of an intention to promote feelings of ill will and hostility between
classes of subjects does not alone establish a seditious
intention. Not only
must there be proof of an incitement to violence in this connection, but it must
be violence or resistance for
the purpose of disturbing constituted authority.
... By constituted authority what is meant is some person or body holding public
office or discharging some public function of the
9.36 These authorities emphasise that the focus of sedition offences is the
subversion of political authority and indicate that there
is little scope for
the common law of sedition to be used to prosecute vilification or incitement to
violence against particular
groups, unless it can be shown that there is a clear
intention to incite violence or public disturbance against the state or the
institutions of government.
9.37 The recently repealed sedition provisions in the
enacted in 1920 and replicated in substance the British common law.
Section 24A(g) rendered it an offence to ‘promote
feelings of
ill-will and hostility between different classes of Her Majesty’s subjects
so as to endanger the peace, order and
good government of the
Commonwealth’,
engaging in a seditious
enterprise,
or by writing,
printing, uttering or publishing seditious
9.38 Subsection 24A(g) was considered by the High Court in
R v Sharkey
where the defendant was successfully prosecuted for seditious libel on the basis
of a statement that the Communist Party of Australia
would support Soviet troops
in the event that they invaded
The majority held
that s 24A(g) was constitutionally
finding that the words
‘peace, order and good government of the Commonwealth’ were words of
limitation which brought
the subsection within the Commonwealth’s power
(pursuant to
s 51(xxxix)
Constitution
to punish acts
‘which strike at the
Constitution
, the established order of Government and
the execution and maintenance of the
Constitution
and Commonwealth
For example,
Williams J stated:
The difficulty is to determine what is meant by the Commonwealth. If it means
the Commonwealth as a geographical unit, the provision
would be too wide,
because laws directed to prevent the promotion of ill-will and hostility between
different classes of His Majesty’s
subjects would fall within the sphere
of State legislative power except to the extent to which the promotion of such
feelings could
detrimentally affect the exercise of the executive legislative or
judicial powers of the Commonwealth. But the word ‘Commonwealth’
capable of meaning the Commonwealth as the body politic in the sense in which it
is used in the Act to constitute the Commonwealth
of Australia. I am of the
opinion that this meaning should be given to the word in s 24A(1)(g) of the
. The words ‘so as to endanger the peace, order and good
government of the Commonwealth’ then limit the generality of
the preceding
words and confine the seditious intention to an intention to promote feelings of
ill-will and hostility between different
classes of His Majesty’s subjects
so as to endanger the peace, order and good government of the Commonwealth as a
body politic.
9.39 The majority held that Sharkey’s words were expressive of a seditious
intention within the meaning of s 24A(g) of the
9.40 In a dissenting judgment, Dixon J held that s 24A(g) was not a
valid exercise of Commonwealth power.
Unless in some way the functions of the Commonwealth are involved or some
subject matter within the province of its legislative power
or there is some
prejudice to the security of the Federal organs of government to be feared,
ill-will and hostility between different
classes of His Majesty’s subjects
are not a matter with respect to which the Commonwealth may legislate ... It was
because this was seen to be the case that the curious words ‘so
as to endanger the peace, order or good government of the Commonwealth’
were added. ...
The words are in my opinion incapable of any definite meaning which would
provide the necessary connection with the subjects of Federal
power, with the
administration of the Federal Government or with the security of any of its
institutions. They are as large as the
practically identical words in
which are larger than the enumerated legislative powers of the
Parliament.
9.41 There are no reported cases in Australia in which s 24A(g) has been
used to prosecute vilification of racial, religious or other
Despite this—and
the fact that the
sedition offences had not been used for over
half a century—a number of modern commentaries prior to the 2005
amendments listed
the sedition provisions in the
potential means of prosecuting conduct motivated by racial and religious
However, the
Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) informed the Senate Committee inquiry
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
that s 24A(g) may not apply
in this context as the word ‘classes’ might be read literally so as
not to apply to groups
distinguished on the basis of race and similar
9.42 In 1991, the Gibbs Committee reviewed the sedition provisions in the
and made a broad recommendation that they be modernised (along
with other national security offences, such as treason and
treachery).
In particular, the
Gibbs Committee considered that a ‘narrower version’ of
s 24A(g) should be
and recommended that
it be made an offence to
incite by any form of communication ... the use of force or violence by groups
within the community, whether distinguished by nationality,
race or religion,
against other such groups or members
9.43 The Gibbs Committee did not discuss whether the label
‘sedition’ should still attach to the recommended offence.
recommended provision did not contain the requirement that the force or violence
be intended to disturb the ‘peace, order
and good government of the
Commonwealth’.
9.44 The Gibbs Committee’s rationale for recommending the creation of such
an offence is not evident in its report. The recommendation
was made at a time
when the enactment of federal provisions addressing racial and other
vilification was being hotly debated, coinciding
with a number of significant
national inquiries such as HREOC’s National Inquiry into Racist Violence
in Australia
and the ALRC Inquiry into multiculturalism and the law.
However, neither the background nor the policy rationale for such reform was
alluded to by the Gibbs Committee.
Legislative
amendments in 2005
9.45 According to the Explanatory Memorandum for the
Anti-Terrorism Act
(No 2) 2005
, ‘new subsection 80.2(5) modernises the language from
classes or groups as recommended by the Gibbs
s 80.2(5) differs from the provision recommended by the Gibbs Committee in
two ways: first, s 80.2(5) contains the requirement
that the force or
violence urged would threaten the ‘peace, order and good government of the
Commonwealth’; and secondly,
s 80.2(5) extends protection to groups
distinguished on the basis of political opinion.
9.46 The rationale for retaining and modernising this offence was that the
existing provisions did not ‘focus on key terrorism
themes such as urging
violence by one racial group against
In a submission
to the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry, the AGD also argued that s 80.2(5)
was necessary to prosecute acts urging violence
between groups as other relevant
criminal offences such as incitement carried too high a proof
It referred to the
example of a web page that gave readers instructions on how to shoot foreigners
in the streets of Jakarta and
[Section 80.2(5)] would capture the type of conduct outlined in the web page ...
Although the page depicts shooting foreigners it
does not appear to focus much
on the political motivations which would be necessary for proof of a
‘terrorist act’ offence
(so charging for incitement to commit a
terrorist act offence or a terrorist act offence itself would appear excluded,
as would an
individual advocating a terrorist act offence) and it is probably
insufficiently specific in terms of the target to be prosecuted
as incitement to
commit murder. The threat to kill offences in the
Criminal Code
apply because of lack of specificity about who is being threatened (see
s 474.15—using a carriage service to make a
threat). Subsection
474.17—Using a carriage service to menace or cause offence—appears
feasible but the maximum penalty
is only 3 years imprisonment. ... This offence
is easier to prove than the alternatives—it would not have been put
as an option if it was
9.47 The AGD also stated that s 80.2(5) partly implemented art 20 of
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966
However, the AGD has
not indicated whether s 80.2(5) was intended as a response to calls for the
enactment of federal anti-vilification
laws. Indeed, in its submission to the
2005 Senate Committee inquiry, the AGD reiterated that
The [Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005] implements those aspects of the Gibbs
Report that are relevant to the prevention of terrorism.
The Bill has been
developed to deal with terrorism and is not a suitable vehicle for broader law
reform initiatives.
[back to top]
of section 80.2(5)
9.48 Section 80.2(5) has generated largely positive, but at times mixed,
responses in public debate and community consultation. It
has been welcomed by
many as a first step in the implementation of Australia’s obligations
under international law to proscribe
advocacy of racial, religious and national
hatred. However, the drafting of s 80.2(5) and the context in which it has
been enacted
have been questioned.
9.49 It should be noted that many of the criticisms in public debate and
submissions to the present Inquiry apply generally to the
offences in
s 80.2. These include concerns about insufficient clarity of the fault
elements of the offence, leading to an overall
concern that the s 80.2
offences may capture an excessively broad range of conduct. These more
generalised concerns are dealt with
in Chapters 7 and 8, while this chapter
addresses specific criticisms relating to the offence in s 80.2(5).
Sedition and
vilification
9.50 Most submissions and consultations that directly addressed s 80.2(5)
supported the existence of an offence of this
However, there has been
considerable support for the view that the urging of inter-group violence should
not be characterised as
It has been argued
that sedition centres on subversion of political authority, and has little to do
with inter-group violence.
rationale for protecting one group from violence by another is to guarantee the
dignity of the members of that
Accordingly, a large
number of commentators and submissions suggest that the appropriate place for
such an offence is within the
framework of anti-discrimination
legislation.
Others suggest it
could be framed as a public order offence within criminal legislation, but with
the sedition link removed.
9.51 John Pyke argues that the offence in s 80.2(5) does not belong in
s 80.2 because, if the violence urged within the community
were so severe
that it threatens constitutional government, the urging will be an offence under
s 80.2(1) (treason). Alternatively,
if the violence urged were less severe,
such urging should not be characterised as sedition or anything
synonymous.
9.52 The AGD submits that ‘sedition’ is the appropriate term to
identify the conduct in s 80.2(5) because the urging
of violence against
groups in a society, which is made up of different cultures and religions,
constitutes ‘a very real attack
on the fabric of
It submits:
While in some circumstances conduct that is covered by s 80.2(5) may also
come within the scope of the Commonwealth
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
the purposes of the legislative regimes are distinctly different. Accordingly,
the prospect of overlap in any meaningful way
is relatively
9.53 The AGD argues that s 80.2(5) sends a strong message to the community
that such public acts will not be tolerated, and this
offence is likely to
provide a greater deterrent than the civil provisions in the RDA or the
incitement provisions in the
Criminal Code
. In relation to the argument
that a criminal offence of this type might be appropriate in the RDA, the AGD
notes that the Act has
no criminal regime, but instead has established civil
remedies that are particularly suited to an anti-discrimination regime
where the focus is on education and conciliation, rather than punitive measures
to overcome discrimination and vilification, which
are often created in
situations of misunderstanding and lack of
familiarity.
Linking inter-group
violence and terrorism
9.54 In its submission to the Senate Committee inquiry, the AGD described the
urging of violence by one racial group against another
as a ‘key terrorist
In its submission
to this Inquiry, the AGD was clear that it considers s 80.2(5) is most
appropriately expressed as a sedition offence
as it ‘drives at the root
cause of the problem of terrorism by focusing on violence that is behind
9.55 Dr Ben Saul argues that inter-group violence is conceptually distinct
from terrorism, and should be treated separately by the
Further, a number of
submissions criticise s 80.2(5) on the ground that presenting this offence
as a counter-terrorism measure stigmatises
inter-group violence and reinforces
the stereotyping of certain ethnicities or religions as
In its 2004 report
Isma—Listen
, HREOC found that Australian Arabs and Muslims are
often vilified on the basis that they share responsibility for terrorism or are
potential terrorists.
found that following the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001, Australian
Muslims and Arabs suffered an increase in physical
attacks, threats of physical
violence and vilification.
9.56 It has been argued that the wording of s 80.2(5) could be construed in
a manner that allows a person’s race, religion,
nationality or political
opinion to be used adversely and in a discriminatory
Concerns were expressed
to the Senate Committee inquiry and to this Inquiry that the introduction of
such a provision in the present
context (where it was previously rejected as a
matter of policy) is due to the fact that the provision is concerned with
the majority, rather than vulnerable racial or religious minority
For example, Pax Christi
Section 80.2(5) in particular which is concerned with racial or religious
violence may also strengthen the misleading and dangerous
impression that the
problem of terrorism has its roots in Islam and that the leaders of Islamic
communities may be likely to contravene
the sedition
provisions.
9.57 Emrys Nekvapil submits that:
The re-enlivening of an offence of sedition, in the modern context, and as part
of anti-terror provisions, is clearly a response
to the perceived threat of the
voice of Islamic extremism. The anxiety of the Muslim community that these new
offences are designed
squarely with them in mind is apparent from submissions to
the Senate Inquiry.
The problem is not the enactment of Section 80.2(5)
enactment as part of the newly written laws on sedition under the banner of
anti-terrorism legislation. The grave danger
in characterising a racial or
religious discrimination/vilification law as political offences cannot be
over-stated.
9.58 A parallel was drawn between the effect of this offence on the Muslim
community and the effect of some summary offences on the
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander community—while the offences were seemingly neutral, the
circumstances of the population
and decisions surrounding prosecution had a
disproportionate effect on one
9.59 A number of submissions indicate that moving the offence to
anti-vilification legislation would alleviate some of the concerns
relating to
stigmatisation of certain
9.60 Patrick Emerton argues that if the purpose of s 80.2(5) is the
preservation of public order, then the offence is unnecessary
inter-group violence (or incitement thereto) does not generally pose any
particular threat to public order in
order and good government of the Commonwealth
9.61 While s 24A(g) of the
contained the ‘peace,
order and good government of the Commonwealth’ phrase, the offence as
recommended by the Gibbs
Committee did not. The phrase was interpreted in
as providing constitutional support for
Committee considered that constitutional support for the altered provision could
be found in the external affairs power
Constitution
and art 20 of the ICCPR, which requires states to prohibit ‘any
advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to
discrimination, hostility or
Lawyers for Human Rights also acknowledge that s 80.2(5) draws to some
extent upon art 4 of CERD and art 20 of the
The basis of accepting
that s 80.2(5) would be a valid law made in conjunction with the external
affairs power of the
Constitution
is that it is ‘reasonably capable
of being considered as appropriate and adapted to implementing a treaty to which
is a party’.
9.62 The AGD agrees that the ‘peace, order and good government of the
Commonwealth’ phrase is not necessary to provide
a ‘constitutional
peg’, but argues that the inclusion of the requirement in the offence
provides the appropriate Commonwealth
‘flavour’ for the
9.63 A number of commentators and submissions have questioned the ‘peace,
order and good government’ limb of the offence.
One issue raised is
whether the word ‘Commonwealth’ in s 80.2(5) is used in a
geographic sense or whether it refers to
the ‘matrix of institutions,
rights and functions constituted under the Federal
Constitution
basis of the High Court’s interpretation in
, the latter is
likely to be the preferred interpretation.
9.64 The phrase is commonly used in constitutions to convey plenary power and
the proposition that it constitutes ‘words of
limitation’ has been
However, when
examining the predecessor of the s 80.2(5) offence in
Dixon J expressed concern that, while the phrase had a well-understood
constitutional meaning when used to confer a plenary power,
it was meaningless
as an element of a crime.
McTiernan J gave some indication of its meaning in the criminal context
when quoting from Stephen’s,
The Criminal Law of England
The first and most general object of all political associations whatever is to
produce and to preserve a state of things in which
the various pursuits of life
may be carried on without interruption by violence, or, according to the
well-known expression of our
law, to keep the peace. Every crime is to a greater
or less extent a breach of the peace, but some tend merely to break it as
some particular person or small number of persons, whereas others
interfere with it on a wider scale, either by acts which strike
at the State
itself, the established order of Government, or by acts which affect or tend to
affect the tranquillity of a considerable
number of persons or an extensive
local area.
9.65 It is of concern to some that the phrase may be interpreted to limit the
scope of the offence in s 80.2(5) to the urging of
acts of large-scale
violence that would damage the Commonwealth’s international standing or
reputation,
and that sporadic
or isolated incitements to violence may not be covered by s 80.2(5) without
a broader link to the
Commonwealth.
The Explanatory
Memorandum for the
Amendment (Incitement to Violence) Bill 2005 (Cth)
states that the ‘peace, order and good government of the
Commonwealth’
requirement
would make it difficult to use [this offence] against those who incite violence
against minorities at a local or neighbourhood level.
It might also be a barrier
to prosecution where the incitement is directed solely at a minority group,
rather than a large majority
9.66 For example, if ‘Commonwealth’ is interpreted in a geographical
sense, those involved in the urging of force or
violence in the Cronulla riot in
Sydney in December 2005 could be prosecuted under s 80.2(5) if SMS messages
were sent across state
boundaries.
However, if
‘Commonwealth’ is interpreted in an institutional and functional
sense, it may be more difficult to draw
A number of
commentators and submissions consider that this makes the provision too narrow,
particularly when considering whether
the offence implements Australia’s
international human rights obligations (this issue is discussed in more detail
9.67 The Federation of Community Legal Centres submits that narrowing the
offence to conduct that threatens the good order and governance
Commonwealth is ‘misguided’ and ‘has missed the point’
as ‘the incitement of violence within
the community is primarily a problem
for those groups that find themselves the target of such
hostility’.
that the approach promotes a ‘narrow view of human rights by making
protection from incitement to violence contingent
upon the effect of such
violence on the authority of the
government’.
9.68 However, some consider that the terminology of the ‘peace, order and
good Government of the Commonwealth’ requirement
makes s 80.2(5) too
broad. If retained as a sedition offence, the Centre for Media and
Communications Law submits that the common
law requirement of incitement to
violence against ‘constituted authority’ should be substituted in
place of the ‘peace,
order and good Government of the Commonwealth’
requirement.
Obligations under
international law
9.69 Issues Paper 30 (IP 30) asked whether the offence in
s 80.2(5) implements effectively Australia’s obligations under
international
law to proscribe incitement of national, racial or religious
hatred (in particular, art 20 of the ICCPR and art 4 of
9.70 A number of submissions welcome the federal move towards the creation of a
federal offence of racial and religious vilification,
but argue that
s 80.2(5) is too narrow to provide full compliance with Australia’s
obligations under international law.
9.71 Fitzroy Legal Service raises a number of issues that would need to be
addressed before Australia’s obligations under CERD
could be implemented
effectively. In particular, it notes that s 80.2(5) proscribes only
incitement to violence, and not incitement
of hatred, discrimination and
ridicule more generally, and that the ‘peace, order and good government of
the Commonwealth’
limb of the offence narrows the application
A human rights
group, ARTICLE 19, expresses concern about the link between group violence
and the protection of the state.
This does not reflect the purpose of Article 20, which is a special State
obligation to take preventative measures at the horizontal
level to enforce the
rights to life (Article 6) and equality (Article 26). Accordingly,
s 80.2(5)(b) exceeds the scope and purpose
9.72 Without commenting directly on whether s 80.2(5) implements
Australia’s international obligations, HREOC notes that art
ICCPR is not really concerned with public order offences but is rather directed
towards anti-discrimination and
anti-vilification.
9.73 The AGD notes that Australia has entered reservations to both art 20
of the ICCPR and art 4 of CERD, to the effect that Australia
consider itself bound to enact criminal provisions addressing the advocacy of
racial, national or religious hatred. It emphasises
that the enactment of
s 80.2(5) is consistent with, but not required by, Australia’s
obligations under international
While acknowledging the
existence of the reservations, a number of bodies have called for the Australian
Government to remove the
reservations.
9.74 The AGD notes that s 80.2(5) is a modernised version of the
pre-existing s 24A(g) of the
. Following the
recommendations of the Gibbs Committee, the language of ‘class’ in
s 24A(g) was removed and the offence
was redrafted to focus on groups in
the community. The AGD submits that the move away from ‘classes’ to
has ‘advantages for national unity and
9.75 One submission points out that the question of which groups deserve
protection is complex and deserves more consideration:
[A]ny offence of committing violence on the basis of the perceived group
affiliation of the victim needs to carefully identify which
groups are worthy of
such protection. Race is a reasonably clear example, but religion is sometimes
considered controversial (what
if a religion advocates human sacrifice, for
example—ought it to be a crime distinct from ordinary assault to use force
group members in the name of rescuing sacrificial victims?). Political
affiliation is an even more controversial example—why
ought it to be
especially criminal to use force against fascists, for
9.76 Dr Saul queries whether incitement to violence against groups based on
‘political opinion’ can be supported in the
provision’s constitutional validity rests on the external affairs power,
it can be supported only to the extent that
it implements a treaty obligation.
Saul notes that no such protection for groups based on ‘political
opinion’ is found
in human rights treaties. Others query whether it would
always be appropriate to punish or protect groups based on ‘political
opinion’ advocating violence, citing Jews defending themselves against a
violent fascist group or Fretilin’s resistance
activities in
pre-independence East Timor as
9.77 The inclusion of ‘religion’ is questioned by some. While
‘religion’ is included in art 20 of the ICCPR,
federal laws do
not otherwise provide for protection from vilification or discrimination on the
basis of religion.
principle concerns appears to be the difficulty involved in determining what
constitutes a ‘religion’ and
the reluctance to extend protection to
sects or ‘newer’ religions such as Scientology. Because religion is
matter of belief or ideas (as opposed to race or ethnicity, which are
intrinsic), there is concern that mere criticism could be caught
stifling free and open public
However, these
concerns have greater validity when discussing a more general religious
vilification offence, as opposed to an offence
of urging the use of force or
violence against a religious group.
9.78 In a consultation, HREOC suggested that a further group of ‘national
origin’ should be added to the
This would ensure
that persons who are Australian citizens but who are identified with a
particular national community will receive
the same protections as those of that
national community who do not hold Australian citizenship. For example, if there
were a call
to use force or violence against ‘Vietnamese’ in the
Australian community, many Vietnamese-Australians would not be covered
existing provision of ‘race, religion, nationality or political
opinion’ as many have taken out Australian citizenship
or were born in
Australia. The AGD agreed with this
suggestion.
9.79 PIAC is concerned that the requirement that the urging of violence be
directed to a group with a common characteristic limits
the operation to
situations where those being urged can be identified as a homogenous group in
terms of race, religion, nationality
or political opinion. PIAC considers the
provision may therefore miss more general urging at large, such as through mass
the Internet.
9.80 Following the argument that s 80.2(5) is not an implementation of
Australia’s international obligations, and the ‘peace,
good government of the Commonwealth’ limb provides a constitutional peg,
it has been suggested that it is not necessary
to link the conduct described in
s 80.2(5) to race, religion or
nationality.
enable the inclusion of a greater range of identified groups, or a return to the
broader language of ‘class’
used in s 24A(g).
Broader review of
anti-vilification laws
9.81 A number of submissions criticise existing anti-vilification laws and
pointed to a need to review this area generally in order
to develop effective
responses to the problem of inter-communal violence.
9.82 It has been argued that the existing federal and state legislative regimes
are inadequate, and that the law should address not
only the incitement of
violence, but also the incitement of hatred or vilification and the perpetration
of actual inter-group violence.
Saul submits:
While violence against group members can always be prosecuted as ordinary crime
under state, territory or federal law, treating group-based
violence or
‘hate crimes’ as ordinary offences fails to recognise the additional
psychological element and social harm
involved in such cases. It is not
sufficient to merely consider racial or religious motives as aggravating factors
in sentencing,
since that approach does not stigmatise the offending conduct as
the conduct a racial or religious
9.83 Fitzroy Legal Service states that existing federal measures to eradicate
racial hatred, violence, discrimination and vilification
are inadequate in both
form and substance.
Lawyers for Human Rights submits that Australia has yet to fully implement its
obligations under art 20 of the ICCPR ‘in
the sense that the
Commonwealth has failed to implement civil laws which make unlawful religious
discrimination and religious hatred
in the ways it has done with respect to
[back to top]
A public order
9.84 As discussed in Chapter 2, the ALRC does not consider that
s 80.2(5) or any of the other offences in s 80.2 should be
characterised
as sedition offences (see Proposal 2–1). However, there
is a need for an offence such as s 80.2(5) in Commonwealth law. The
considers that an offence based on the present s 80.2(5) should be retained
Criminal Code
and headed ‘
Urging inter-group force or
’ (see Proposal 9–1).
9.85 There are examples in recent history where inter-group violence has
occurred in Australia. It is important to ensure that Australian
law condemns
the urging of such violence and has the capacity to punish this conduct in
appropriate cases. It should not be necessary
to wait for such anti-social
activity to become more common before the Australian Government prohibits such
conduct and applies a
criminal sanction—both for reasons of deterrence as
well as to provide a clear statement about where the line is drawn between
acceptable and unacceptable conduct.
9.86 Although there is a clear relationship between s 80.2(5) of the
Criminal Code
and the RDA, the ALRC proposes to retain the ‘urging
inter-group violence’ offence in the
Criminal Code
as a public
order offence. There are two reasons why the ALRC considers this would be
preferable to moving the offence to the RDA.
9.87 First, the offence as framed has a narrow application. It applies only to
the urging of inter-group force or violence—that
is, the force or violence
urged must be between two groups rather than between an individual and a group,
or between individuals.
The offence is also focused on the urging of force or
violence, not a more general offence of urging hatred or vilification. Although
related to anti-vilification laws, the ALRC considers that the offence is best
characterised as a public order offence.
9.88 Another reason for maintaining s 80.2(5) in the
Criminal Code
is that the ALRC considers it appropriate to retain serious criminal
offences in the
Criminal Code
rather than spread throughout various
pieces of legislation. There is also a question whether the RDA—which has
a strong conciliation
and civil remedies basis—would be the appropriate
location for serious criminal offences, even where based on racial or other
discriminatory grounds.
9.89 As outlined above, many submissions consider that the s 80.2(5)
offence is too narrow, inappropriately focuses on the state
rather than the
individual, and does not fully implement Australia’s international
obligations particularly in relation to
art 4 of CERD and art 20 of
the ICCPR. This does not necessarily mean that s 80.2(5) is bad law, or
that it lacks constitutional
support from the external affairs power. A number
of lawyers and agencies have acknowledged that s 80.2(5) is consistent with
Australia’s
international obligations.
9.90 While supportive of the s 80.2(5) offence, the ALRC agrees that a
broader range of offences is required in order to implement
Australia’s international obligations. These may include some criminal
offences as well as additional civil offences.
However, it is beyond this
Inquiry to examine and recommend changes to the federal anti-discrimination
regime more generally.
9.91 The ALRC notes the concerns raised about the stigmatising effect of
characterising the conduct proscribed in s 80.2(5) as sedition,
a package of anti-terrorism laws. However, the provision itself has been, and
should be, welcomed into Australian law.
It has value that extends beyond the
current climate of terrorism, and can be used as a statement condemning the use
of force or
violence against any defined racial, national or religious group.
9.92 The ALRC considers that further initiatives are necessary in order to
ensure that the offence is appropriately characterised
in the future. It is
important that the Australian Government continues to develop strategies,
including educational programs, to
promote inter-communal harmony and
understanding; and highlight the existence of civil remedies in the RDA
and relevant state and territory legislation. It is preferable that such
programs exist to stifle the kinds of activities that might
otherwise need to be
punished using the criminal offence.
9.93 As indicated above, it is beyond the scope of this Inquiry to examine and
recommend changes to anti-discrimination law more
generally. However, the ALRC
notes that, unlike other federal anti-discrimination legislation, the RDA has
not been the subject of
review since its enactment in
During this time there
has been enactment and reform of state and territory anti-discrimination laws,
and at present there are great
variations in the coverage and operation of those
laws across Australia. The ALRC considers that a targeted review of the RDA
be highly desirable.
Modification of the
Fault elements
9.94 Chapter 8 discusses the technical construction given to the offences in
s 80.2(1), (3) and (5). There was broad support in submissions
it clear that all of the offences involve intentional urging of the use of force
or violence. Even assuming that the application
of the general principles of
criminal responsibility in the
Criminal Code
to the sedition offences is
reasonably clear, it would not be inconsistent with the way in which the
Criminal Code
is drafted to state that a person commits an offence if he
intentionally
urges’ the conduct referred to in
9.95 Consistent with proposals in relation to s 80.2(1) and
the ALRC proposes that
s 80.2(5) be amended to insert the word ‘intentionally’ before
the word ‘urges’.
9.96 Chapter 8 also considers whether there should be a more concrete link
between the offences in s 80.2 and force or violence.
While acknowledging
the deliberate policy decision to retain a distinction between
‘urging’ for the purposes of s 80.2
and incitement, the ALRC
proposes that for a person to be guilty of any of the s 80.2 offences the
person should intend that the
force or violence urged will
Proposal 8–1, which would apply to s 80.2(5) and the other
s 80.2 offences, will help remove from the ambit of the offences
statements that a person does not intend anyone to act upon.
Peace, order and good government of the
Commonwealth
9.97 The ALRC has given careful consideration to whether the second limb of
s 80.2(5)—that the use of the force or violence
would threaten the
peace, order and good government of the Commonwealth—should be retained.
Retention clearly limits the offence,
and provides a ‘public order’
character, which would be diminished without the limb. The ALRC considers that
it is appropriate
to focus the offence on public order issues related to the
Commonwealth. This provides a federal offence that is distinct from state
territory laws, and focuses on more serious inter-group conduct that has an
impact on the broader society. An array of state
and territory laws exists to
cover group incidents that may not fall within the ambit of s 80.2(5), as
exhibited in the case of the
Cronulla riot. Not every incident of civil unrest
requires federal intervention. Although the ALRC notes there may be gaps in
anti-vilification laws, it does not consider that s 80.2(5) is the
place to remedy the deficiencies, or that removal of the ‘good
government’ limb would in any case be the ideal solution.
9.98 While it may not be necessary to include the phrase ‘peace, order and
good government of the Commonwealth’ for constitutional
reasons, the ALRC
does not propose to remove or make any change to this limb of the offence.
Identified groups
9.99 The ALRC generally supports the modernisation of s 80.2(5) to include
specific groups as distinguishing factors. As pointed
out in submissions, there
may be instances where more general urging of violence is not captured by this
provision due to the need
to identify a homogenous group. Other provisions exist
to capture such conduct and the ALRC considers it is appropriate to have a
provision (such as s 80.2(5)) that highlights the particular need to
discourage and punish the urging of inter-group violence on
the basis of race,
nationality, or religion.
9.100 Consistent with advice received from HREOC, the ALRC proposes inserting
‘national origin’ as an additional category
of ‘group’.
As noted above, there is at present a gap in the provision relating to
Australian citizens who are identified
with a particular national community. The
ALRC considers that the enhancement of the provision is consistent with
art 4 of CERD and
art 20 of the ICCPR. Section 80.2(6) also
should be amended in a consistent manner.
9.101 With the retention of the ‘peace, order and good government of the
Commonwealth’ limb of the offence, the offence
has two possible
constitutional pegs. This would alleviate concerns that the inclusion of
‘political opinion’ as a distinguishing
factor has no constitutional
support given its absence from art 4 of CERD and art 20 of the ICCPR.
At this stage the ALRC is not
proposing to remove the distinguishing factor of
‘political opinion’, although would welcome further comment on this
9.102 The ALRC also notes concerns regarding using ‘religion’ as a
distinguishing factor, although does not consider
the concerns persuasive in
relation to an offence that seeks to protect a religious group from being
subjected to group force or
violence. In addition, in this case there is a clear
basis for the inclusion of religion as a distinguishing factor in s 80.2(5)
given its history in art 20 of the ICCPR.
Other drafting issues
9.103 The meanings of ‘urges’ and ‘force or violence’
are discussed in detail in Chapter 8. The ALRC does
not propose changes to
these aspects of s 80.2(5).
9.104 Chapter 8 also discusses the idea that, if the current offences in
s 80.2 are retained, there should be some requirement that
violence is intended to occur as a result of the urging. The ALRC proposal to
require that the person must intend that the
urged force or violence will occur
(Proposal 8–1) addresses these concerns. However, the ALRC is
interested in further comment
on this issue.
9.105 The approaches taken to the issues of extraterritoriality and the
requirement of consent of the Attorney-General in relation
to s 80.2(5) are
dealt with in Chapter 8. The application of a defence to s 80.2(5) is
discussed in Chapter 10.
The heading of s 80.2(5) of the
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
) should be changed to refer to urging ‘inter-group
force or violence’.
Proposal 9–2
Section 80.2(5) of the
Criminal Code
should be amended
• insert the word
‘intentionally’ before the word ‘urges’, to clarify the
fault element applicable to
urging the use of force or violence;
• add ‘national origin’ to the distinguishing features
of a group for the purposes of the
As a consequence of Proposal 9–2, s 80.2(6) of the
Criminal Code
should be amended to apply recklessness to the element of
the offence under s 80.2(5) that it is a group distinguished by national
origin that a person urges another to use force or violence
Proposal 9–4
The Australian Government should continue
to pursue other strategies, such as educational programs, to promote
inter-communal harmony
and understanding.
(The relevant sections of the
Criminal Code, amended as proposed, are set out in
Appendix 2.)
Crimes Act 1914
See M Jones, ‘The
Legal Response: Dealing with Hatred—A User’s Guide’ in C
Cunneen, D Fraser and S Tomsen
Faces of Hate—Hate Crime in
Anti-Discrimination (Racial
Vilification) Amendment Act 1989
Criminal Code 1913
(WA) ss 76–80 (inserted 1990);
Discrimination Act 1991
Racial Vilification Act 1996
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
Anti-Discrimination
(inserted 2001);
Racial and Religious
Tolerance Act 2001
‘The Legal Response: Dealing with Hatred—A User’s Guide’
in C Cunneen, D Fraser and S Tomsen (eds),
Faces of Hate—Hate Crime in
(1997) 214, 217.
Hatred Act 1995
(Cth), which inserted
Racial Discrimination
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 13 February 1975, 285
(K Enderby—Attorney-General).
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 3 June 1975, 3248 (K
Enderby—Attorney-General).
declaration of reservation was attached to the instrument of ratification
entered for Australia on 30 September 1975:
International Convention on
the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination
, 7 March 1966,
, (entered into force generally on 4 January
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Racist Violence: Report of the National Inquiry into
Racist Violence in Australia
Royal Commission into Aboriginal
Deaths in Custody,
National Report
, Vol 4 (1991),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Multiculturalism and the Law
, ALRC 57 (1992),
Racial Hatred Bill 1994
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Legislation Committee,
Racial Hatred Bill 1994
Ibid, minority report. See
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives,
31 August 1995, 945 (P
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 31 August 1995, 945 (M
Lee—Minister for Communications and the Arts). In this speech the Minister
also noted the Labor Government’s intention to take the issue of the need
for criminal offences relating to incitement of racial
violence to the next
Racial Discrimination Act
Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Isma—Listen: National Consultations
on Eliminating Prejudice Against Arab and Muslim Australians
(1998) 45 NSWLR
Anti-Discrimination Act
(NSW) s 20D.
‘So Far So Good?: A Critical Evaluation of Racial Vilification Laws in
Australia’ (2004) 32
Federal Law Review
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Article 18: Freedom of Religion and Belief
rec 5.3; Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Isma—Listen: National Consultations on Eliminating Prejudice Against
Arab and Muslim Australians
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Article 18: Freedom of Religion and Belief
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Isma—Listen: National Consultations on Eliminating
Prejudice Against Arab and Muslim Australians
(2004), 3–4; Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Article 18: Freedom of Religion and
(1998), 139.
Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Isma—Listen: National Consultations
on Eliminating Prejudice Against Arab and Muslim Australians
(2004), 128;
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Article 18: Freedom of
Religion and Belief
Racial and Religious Hatred Bill
Racial and Religious Hatred Bill 2003
Explanatory Memorandum,
Amendment (Incitement to Violence) Bill 2005 (Cth),
A Digest of the
Criminal Law
(1887), cited in Law Commission of England and Wales,
Working Paper No 72 Second Programme, Item XVIII Codification of the Criminal
Law—Treason, Sedition and Allied Offences
O’Connell v The Queen
[1844] EngR 880
(1844) 8 ER 1061
, discussed in
Boucher v The King
[1951] 2 DLR 369
(Kellock J).
Boucher v The
[1951] 2 DLR 369
Criminal Code was drafted and introduced into the British Parliament in 1892,
however it was rejected in the House of Commons.
Section 102 of the Code
adopted in substance Stephen’s definition of ‘seditious
intention’: see Ibid, 395.
Commission of England and Wales,
Working Paper No 72 Second Programme, Item
XVIII Codification of the Criminal Law—Treason, Sedition and Allied
(1977), 41.
(1886) 16 Cox CC 355
(Unreported, Birkett J,
1947). See also D Feldman,
Civil Liberties and Human Rights in England and
(2nd ed, 2002), 899.
(Unreported, Birkett J, 1947);
, 19 and 22 September 1936). The prosecution history of this aspect of
sedition is discussed in some detail in
Boucher v The King
[1951] 2 DLR
Boucher v The King
R v Chief Metropolitan
Stipendiary Magistrate; ex parte Choudhury
[1991] 1 QB
Crimes Act 1914
R v Sharkey
[1949] HCA 46
79 CLR 121.
Ibid, 137–138
(Latham CJ), 145 (Rich J), 158 (McTiernan J) 159–160
(Williams J), 163
(McTiernan J).
I Grant and G Dean,
Race Hate Speech: A Proposal for Criminal Law Reform
(1999) National Law
Review <www.nlr.com.au> at 29 January 2006,
See, eg, Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Article 18: Freedom of Religion and Belief
(1998), 127; I Grant and G Dean,
Regulating Race Hate Speech: A Proposal for
Criminal Law Reform
(1999) National Law Review <www.nlr.com.au> at 29
January 2006, [21]; Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Violence: Report of the National Inquiry into Racist Violence in Australia
(1991), 29.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November 2005,
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
Explanatory Memorandum,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November 2005, Attachment A,
Ibid, Attachment A,
Ibid. Attachment A,
There was also some opposition to
or ambivalence towards an offence of this kind, primarily due to a concern about
the operation
of anti-vilification laws generally: L Maher,
Consultation
Melbourne, 4 April 2006; D Neal,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 April 2006;
University of Melbourne Academics,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 April
30 March 2006; Centre for Media and Communications Law,
12 April 2006; Fitzroy Legal Service Inc,
10 April 2006; B Saul,
14 April 2006; Australian Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
17 April 2006; Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
18 April 2006; National Legal Aid,
20 April 2006; M Weinberg,
Consultation
Melbourne, 3 April 2006.
14 April 2006; Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
Centre for Media and
Communications Law,
12 April 2006; B Saul,
‘Preventing Communal Violence: Blurring Sedition, Vilification and
Terrorism’ (2005) (November/December
Human Rights Defender
(Special Issue)
9 April 2006; J Pyke,
10 April 2006; J Goldring,
5 April 2006; Centre for Media and Communications Law,
12 April 2006; P Emerton,
10 April 2006; New South Wales Young Lawyers
Human Rights Committee,
10 April 2006; Fitzroy
Legal Service Inc,
10 April 2006; Chief
Minister (ACT),
13 April 2006; Combined
Community Legal Centres Group (NSW) Inc,
April 2006; Australian Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
17 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and
Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006;
Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
18 April 2006;
Australian Vice-Chancellor’s Committee,
25 April 2006; National Legal Aid,
2006; Human Rights Lawyers,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March 2006; M
Consultation
, Melbourne, 3 April 2006; R Connolly and C
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 April 2006; B Saul,
‘Preventing Communal Violence: Blurring Sedition, Vilification and
Terrorism’ (2005)
(November/December 2005)
Human Rights Defender
(Special Issue)
National University Academics,
Consultation
, Canberra, 27 April 2006;
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Consultation
, Sydney, 31
March 2006.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290 to Senate
Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 16 November 2005,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
14 April 2006. See also B Saul, ‘Preventing Communal Violence:
Blurring Sedition, Vilification and Terrorism’ (2005)
(November/December
Human Rights Defender (Special Issue)
Pax Christi,
9 April 2006; Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; New South Wales Young Lawyers
Human Rights Committee,
10 April 2006; Chief
Minister (ACT),
13 April 2006; E Nekvapil,
13 April 2006; B Saul,
14 April 2006; Australian Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network,
17 April 2006; R Connolly and C Connolly,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 April
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Isma—Listen: National Consultations on
Eliminating Prejudice Against Arab and Muslim Australians
[2.2.1]–[2.2.3].
L Lasry and K
Memorandum of advice to Australian Capital Territory Chief
, (undated), 42; P Matthew,
Anti-Terrorism Bill 2005
(2005) Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission <www.hreoc.gov.au> at
29 January 2006, 6.
See, eg, P Matthew,
Submission 187 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Pax Christi,
E Nekvapil,
13 April 2006.
Rights Lawyers,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March
E Nekvapil,
13 April 2006; R Connolly and C Connolly,
Consultation
Melbourne, 5 April 2006.
10 April 2006. Emerton suggests that
while there are some examples of terrorism overseas that can be usefully
analysed in terms of
group conflict (for example, Chechnya, Israel/Palestine),
this is not relevant in the Australian context, although he notes recent
isolated examples such as the Redfern and Cronulla
R v Sharkey
[1949] HCA 46
(1949) 79 CLR
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
[32.17]. For a more detailed discussion of Australia’s obligations under
international law, see Chs 5,
Australian Lawyers for Human Rights,
Toben v Jones
[2003] FCAFC 137
, 328 referring to
Victoria v Commonwealth
(1996) 187 CLR 416.
While many submissions argue that the articles are not fully implemented, the
‘deficiency’ in implementation
of the relevant articles is only
fatal to the validity of the law if the deficiency is so substantial ‘as
to deny the law the
character of a measure implementing the Convention or it is
a deficiency which, when coupled with other provisions of the law, make
substantially inconsistent with the Convention’:
Commonwealth
(1996) 187 CLR 416,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Consultation
, Canberra, 26 April
2006. Officers of the CDPP agreed that the phrase may not be constitutionally
necessary: Commonwealth Director
of Public Prosecutions,
Consultation
Canberra, 26 April 2006.
G Griffith,
Sedition, Incitement and Vilification: Issues in the Current Debate: Briefing
Paper No 1/06
Union Steamship Co of
Australia Pty Ltd v King
[1988] HCA 55
(1988) 166 CLR 1
R v Sharkey
[1949] HCA 46
(1949) 79 CLR
, 152, 154.
G Griffith,
Incitement and Vilification: Issues in the Current Debate: Briefing Paper No
(2006), 35. See also Fitzroy Legal Service Inc,
10 April 2006.
14 April 2006. See also B Saul,
‘Speaking of Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Explanatory Memorandum,
Amendment (Incitement to Violence) Bill 2005 (Cth),
B Saul, ‘It’s
Essential to Clean Up this Mess’,
Sydney Morning Herald
14 December 2005, 17, 17; Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
Consultation
, Canberra, 26 April
Although the AGD considered
there was a reasonable argument that an incident such as this had significance
beyond New South Wales:
Australian Government Attorney-General’s
Department,
Consultation
, Canberra, 26 April
Federation of Community Legal
Centres (Vic),
Public Interest Advocacy
Although it should be noted
that the Centre for Media and Communications Law considers it preferable to
delete the provision from
sedition offences and amend the
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth): Centre for Media and Communications Law,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
Question 20.
Fitzroy Legal
Service Inc,
10 April 2006. See also New South
Wales Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
April 2006.
ARTICLE 19,
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Consultation
, Sydney, 31 March
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
See, eg, Fitzroy Legal Service
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
10 April 2006.
University of Melbourne
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 April
Although it is argued this is
necessary for full implementation of Australia’s obligations under
art 20 of the ICCPR: Australian
Lawyers for Human Rights,
13 April 2006.
Chow, ‘Inciting Hatred or Merely Engaging in Religious Debate: The Need
for Religious Vilification Laws’
Alternative Law Journal
; E Barendt, ‘Threats to Freedom of Speech in the United
[2005] UNSWLawJl 55
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Consultation
, Sydney, 31 March
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Consultation
, Canberra, 26 April
Public Interest Advocacy
18 April 2006. See also New South Wales
Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
L Lasry and K Eastman,
Memorandum of advice to Australian Capital Territory Chief Solicitor
(undated), 42.
14 April 2006. See also New South Wales Young
Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
Fitzroy Legal Service Inc,
Australian Lawyers for Human
13 April 2006. See also B Saul,
See Productivity Commission,
Review of the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(2004). Many components
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) have been reviewed as part of
the ALRC inquiry on women and the law or by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner:
see, eg, Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law
69 (1994); Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Pregnant and
Productive: Its a Right Not a Privilege to Work While Pregnant
(1999); Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
20 Years On: The Challenges
Continue...Sexual Harassment in the Australian Workplace
See Proposal 8–3 and
Proposal 8–1.
10. Defences and Penalties
Introduction
The good faith defences
History of the good faith defences
The meaning of good faith
Defences and the media
Defences and artistic expression
Burden of proof
Criticism of the good faith requirement
A media exemption?
ALRC’s views
ALRC’s views
10. Defences and Penalties
Introduction
10.1 This chapter presents the ALRC’s proposals in relation to the
defences provided by s 80.3 of the
Criminal Code
). Section 80.3 provides defences to treason (s 80.1) and the
offences created in s 80.2, where the acts in question are done ‘in
good faith’.
10.2 This chapter describes the scope and history of the good faith defences and
the meaning of good faith, by reference to defamation
and anti-vilification law.
As discussed in this chapter, the defences in s 80.3 have been criticised
for, among other things, lack
of clarity and failure to protect media reporting
and artistic expression.
10.3 The ALRC proposes the repeal of the good faith defences, which are no
longer appropriate given the modifications made to the
offences in
s 80.2(1), (3) and (5) and the proposed repeal of s 80.2(7) and (8).
The defences should be replaced with a provision
that requires the trier of fact
to take into account the context of the conduct in question in determining
whether there is an intention
that the force of violence urged will occur.
10.4 The chapter also briefly discusses the applicable penalties for the
offences in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
. The ALRC concludes that the
penalties provided under the present sedition offences are appropriate for the
proposed modified offences.
[back to top]
The good faith
10.5 There are six defences set out in
s 80.3(1)(a)–(f).
first three defences can be characterised broadly as dealing with aspects of
political communication. Under s 80.3(1)(a) it is
a defence to try in good
faith to show that certain persons are mistaken in any of their counsels,
policies or actions—the
persons being the Sovereign, the Governor-General,
a governor of a state, an administrator of a territory, or their advisers, or
person responsible for the government of another country.
10.6 Section 80.3(1)(b) provides a defence to a person who ‘points
out in good faith errors or defects’ in any Australian
government, the
Constitution
, Australian legislation, or the administration of justice in
Australia or another country ‘with a view to reforming those errors
defects’. This suggests that ‘criticism which is not considered
constructive (a subjective determination) is not
protected’.
10.7 Section 80.3(1)(c) protects a person who, in good faith, urges another
person to ‘attempt to lawfully procure a change
to any matter established
by law, policy or practice’, in Australia or another country.
10.8 Section 80.3(1)(d) is concerned with relationships between different
groups in the community. It provides that the sedition
offences (most
relevantly, the offence of urging inter-group
do not apply to persons
who point out in good faith any matters that produce ‘feelings of ill-will
or hostility between different
groups, in order to bring about the removal of
those matters’. It seems that, as with s 80.3(1)(b), the criticism
must be constructive—aimed
at improving a state of affairs within the
10.9 Under s 80.3(1)(e), there is a defence for anything done in good faith
in connection with an industrial dispute or matter. Finally,
s 80.3(1)(f)
provides a defence for a person who ‘publishes in good faith a report or
commentary about a matter of public interest’.
As discussed in more detail
below, the latter defence shares common language with
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) (RDA), which provides a defence to
an allegation of unlawful offensive behaviour based on racial hatred.
10.10 In considering the application of the defences, the courts may have regard
to any relevant matter, including whether the acts
done: were intended to be
prejudicial to the safety or defence of the Commonwealth; were intended to
assist an enemy or those engaged
in armed hostilities against the Australian
Defence Force (ADF); or were intended to cause violence or create public
disorder or
disturbance.
of the good faith defences
10.11 The provisions in s 80.3 of the
Criminal Code
substantially
replicate those in the repealed s 24F of the
, which were
inserted into the
in 1920 along with the sedition
According to the
Explanatory Memorandum to the Anti-Terrorism (No 2) Bill 2005 (Cth), the
only substantive difference is that greater
discretion is given to the court in
considering whether an act was done in ‘good faith’ by allowing the
court to have
regard to ‘any relevant matter’ as well as a number of
specific considerations that have been carried over from
10.12 Another difference between the
Criminal Code
and repealed
provisions is that an additional good faith defence was inserted
(s 80.3(1)(f)), which permits publication in good faith of ‘a
or commentary about a matter of public
This provision was
inserted in response to media organisation concerns, expressed to the 2005
Senate Committee inquiry,
might commit a sedition offence by reporting the views or statements of
10.13 As discussed in Chapter 3, the 1920 sedition provisions replicated
those found in the
Criminal Code 1899
(Qld), which in turn were based on
the English common law as outlined in
Stephen’s Digest of the Criminal
10.14 The concept of ‘good faith’ in the context of sedition law is
traceable to its origins in the law of libel and
defamation. As discussed in
Chapter 3, the sedition provisions of have their roots in the common law of
seditious libel. At least
until the 17th century, seditious libel was a
sub-category of libel (written defamation) and in 18th century England, it was
government’s chief means of controlling the
meaning of good faith
10.15 Each of the defences in s 80.3(1)(a)–(f) requires that the
conduct be ‘in good faith’. Case law provides
little guidance on the
meaning of good faith in the context of sedition.
10.16 Some guidance on the meaning of good faith is available by analogy from
defamation and anti-vilification law. Good faith (and
the common law test of
malice) are established elements of defamation law in relation to the defence of
qualified privilege. More
recently, the concept of good faith has been
incorporated into statutory exemptions relating to conduct that might constitute
racial or other
vilification.
10.17 The law in each of these areas relates to civil causes of action rather
than criminal offences. However, it has relevance in
view of the history of
sedition (and its roots in common law seditious libel) and shared concerns with
constraints on freedom of
expression.
Defamation law: good faith and
10.18 In defamation law, the protection accorded by qualified privilege is lost
if the publisher was motivated by what the common
law describes as malice
and—prior to the enactment of the uniform defamation
codifications of defamation law referred to as the absence of good
10.19 For example, Queensland legislation provided that, for the purposes of
general qualified privilege:
a publication is said to be made in good faith if the matter published is
relevant to the matters the existence of which may excuse
the publication in
good faith of defamatory matter; if the manner and extent of the publication
does not exceed what is reasonably
sufficient for the occasion; and if the
person by whom it is made is not actuated by ill will to the person defamed, or
by any other
improper motive, and does not believe the defamatory matter to be
10.20 In the case of the privilege accorded to the publication of reports on
matters of public interest, ‘good faith’
was defined differently. It
required that the publisher is not motivated by ill-will or other improper
motive; and the manner of
the publication is such as is ordinarily and fairly
used in the case of the publication of
Therefore, this privilege
was not lost simply because the defendant knew that statements included in the
report were false.
10.21 At common law, malice renders the protection accorded by qualified
privilege unavailable.
malice can be shown by having either an improper motive or no honest belief in
the truth of the material—although
where a publisher has no honest belief
in information or even positively disbelieves it, protection will not be lost
where a publisher
is under a positive duty to pass on the defamatory
information.
10.22 The position with regard to the extended qualified privilege that is
accorded to the publication of material concerning government
and political
has particular relevance
to the meaning of good faith in the context of sedition law. This privilege
derives from decisions of the
High Court culminating in
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation.
The right is said to be based on the interest of each member of the Australian
community in ‘in disseminating and receiving
information, opinions and
arguments concerning government and political matters that affect the people of
Australia’.
10.23 The qualified privilege in relation to government and political matters
will be defeated, as with other qualified privilege,
if the publication is
actuated by malice. However, malice differs in its application to this form of
privilege. In
, the High Court said that:
‘actuated by malice’ is to be understood as signifying a publication
made not for the purpose of communicating government
or political information or
ideas, but for some improper
10.24 The Court stated that having regard to the subject matter of government
and politics, the motive of causing political damage
to the plaintiff or his or
her political party cannot be regarded as improper—‘nor can the
vigour of an attack or the
pungency of a defamatory statement, without more,
discharge the plaintiff’s onus of proof of this
10.25 This differs from the ordinary common law concept of malice in two
respects. First, malice cannot be established by showing
that the defendant did
not have a belief in the truth of what was published. Secondly, the motive of
causing political damage is
not enough to establish improper
10.26 The recently agreed upon uniform defamation
preserve the common law
relating to malice. The Acts state that, for the avoidance of doubt, a defence
of qualified privilege is
defeated if the plaintiff proves that the publication
of the defamatory matter was ‘actuated by
The general law
applies to determine whether a particular publication was actuated by
Anti-vilification laws
10.27 Commonwealth, state and territory anti-vilification legislation contains
exemptions that are, in some respects, similar to
defences in defamation law and
refer to the concept of good faith. For example, s 18D of the RDA creates
an exemption for:
... anything said or done reasonably and in good
(a) in the performance, exhibition or distribution of an artistic work; or
(b) in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made or
held for any genuine academic, artistic or scientific
purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest; or
(c) in making or publishing:
(i) a fair and accurate report of any event or matter of public interest; or
(ii) a fair comment on any event or matter of public interest if the comment is
an expression of a genuine belief held by the person
making the comment.
10.28 Similarly, the racial vilification provisions of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) state that a ‘public act’
is not unlawful if it is:
(a) a fair report of a public act ... or
(b) a communication or the distribution or dissemination of any matter on an
occasion that would be subject to a defence of absolute
privilege ... in
proceedings for defamation, or
(c) ... done reasonably and in good faith, for academic, artistic, scientific or
research purposes or for other purposes in the public
interest, including
discussion or debate about and expositions of any act or
10.29 There is case law on the meaning of good faith in the context of
anti-vilification legislation. In
Bropho v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
the Full Court
of the Federal Court considered the application of s 18D of the RDA.
French J held that, having regard to the public
mischief to which the RDA
is directed, both subjective and objective good faith is
A person acting in the exercise of a protected freedom of speech or expression
under s 18D will act in good faith if he or she is
subjectively honest, and
objectively viewed, has taken a conscientious approach to advancing the
exercising of that freedom in a
way that is designed to minimise the offence or
insult, humiliation or intimidation suffered by people affected by it. That is
way, not necessarily the only way, of acting in good faith for the purpose
case was applied in
Islamic Council of Victoria v
Catch the Fire Ministries Inc
In this case an
evangelical Christian group and two pastors were found to have breached
Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001
(Vic). This provision
states that it is unlawful on the ground of race to incite ‘hatred
against, serious contempt for, or revulsion
or severe ridicule of’ another
person or class of persons.
10.31 The respondents made claims about Muslim beliefs and conduct, including
that Muslims are violent, terrorist, demonic, seditious,
untruthful, misogynist,
paedophilic, anti-democratic, anti-Christian and intent on taking over
The Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal found that the statutory exemptions for conduct
engaged in ‘reasonably and
were unavailable in
the circumstances. Higgins J found that the ‘unbalanced’
presentation of a seminar about Islam evidenced
absence of good faith, whether
viewed subjectively or
objectively.
and the media
10.32 A particular focus of concern has been on whether the defences in
s 80.3 of the
Criminal Code
provide adequate protection for media
organisations and journalists. Media organisations express concern that the good
faith defences
may not be sufficiently broad to cover the publication of the
views of others—for example, in the context of news and current
related commentary, opinion and analysis.
10.33 Section 80.3(1)(f) is the defence most likely to apply to the media.
The effect of this provision is that a person who ‘publishes
in good faith
a report or commentary about a matter of public interest’ is not guilty of
an offence under s 80.2.
10.34 As discussed above, the meaning of good faith in sedition law is unclear.
On one view, good faith is a legal term of art (derived
from defamation law),
which is difficult to apply in another context. It is suggested that the
requirement to demonstrate good faith
in the context of media reports:
is likely to be extraordinarily difficult if not impossible to satisfy in
practice, particularly in relation to republication of
third-party statements,
as it may readily be negatived by, for example, a perceived lack of proportion
or congruence between the
opinion expressed and the facts within the
publisher’s knowledge at the time of
publication.
10.35 A related concern is that media organisations or journalists may be
required to reveal information about the sources of information
integrity of those sources in order to show good
This is said to raise
similar concerns as in defamation litigation where a media organisation claiming
the defence of ‘honest
opinion’ may need to prove that the opinion
was based on ‘proper
The possibility
that sources may need to be revealed to defend sedition charges may chill media
reporting of certain views and affect
the willingness of individuals to provide
their views to the media.
10.36 Submissions to this Inquiry also question the effectiveness of the
defences in protecting media organisations and
journalists.
For example, the
Chief Minister of the ACT observes that what amounts to ‘publishing’
is not clear:
Although paragraph (1)(f) may protect media reporting and comment it does not
appear to excuse similar (oral) comment or reporting
that may occur in the
context of public discussion or debate. Public discussions concerning the
comments of others would not appear
to have the protection of paragraph 1(f)
even if the person repeated the comments (which might be said to be seditious)
more than to advance the
discussion.
10.37 The Public Interest Advocacy Centre notes that this defence applies only
to a ‘report’ or ‘commentary’
and may not include other
forms of communication such as
Dr Saul states that the
defence may be too narrow because it allows judges to ‘second-guess expert
journalists on what matters
are thought to be in the public
10.38 Fairfax, News Ltd and AAP express concern about the operation of
s 80.3 generally because, in practice, it may be ‘necessary
publisher to negative recklessness in order to succeed under the defence’.
This view is based on an understanding that,
in defamation law, good faith can
be defeated by mere
recklessness.
Therefore, to the
extent that recklessness is the fault element under the s 80.2 offences,
once the requisite fault element has been
proven, the good faith defence will
10.39 The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department’s
(AGD) position is that the good faith defences adequately
protect journalists
and media organisations as the defence applies where a communication is
‘merely about criticising government
policy or publishing reports or
commentary on public interest
10.40 In this context, the ALRC notes that, in interpreting the scope of the
good faith defences, courts may be influenced by the
implied constitutional
right of communication concerning government and political
The ambit of the right
is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
and artistic expression
10.41 Media and arts organisations also focus on the perceived threat to
artistic expression posed by sedition laws. Concerns have
been expressed that
the defences do not provide adequate protection, for example, in relation to
satire, theatre and comedy using
irony, sarcasm and ridicule. Such expression
may not be ‘constructive’—that is, with a view to reforming
errors or defects as required by s 80.3(b)—nor in good
faith, as the purpose may be (at least in the first instance) to ridicule
hold political institutions in contempt.
10.42 The defences in s 80.3 do not make any special provision for artistic
expression. Submissions to the Inquiry note that artists
are often critical of
the Government and the established order and that it is much more difficult to
determine whether or not forms
of artistic expression are ‘urging’
violence than in the case of the spoken or written
For example, visual art
may be open to multiple and conflicting interpretations, and dramatic arts may
rely on hyperbole to accentuate
the issues. Other concerns include that the
phrase ‘report or commentary’ in s 80.3(1)(f) is unlikely to
cover artistic
expression,
that ‘publishing’ may not extend to audio-visual
10.43 Submissions to the Inquiry argue that the nature of artistic work
expressly should be recognised and protected, as in the RDA
provisions.
Section 18D
provides an exemption for anything said or done reasonably and in good faith
‘in the performance, exhibition or
distribution of an artistic work’
or in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made or
held for any
‘genuine artistic purpose’.
10.44 In response to suggestions that artistic expression may not be covered by
the defences, the AGD highlighted that the prosecution
must prove beyond
reasonable doubt that the person intended to urge the use of force or violence,
or intended to assist an enemy
of Australia. The Department observed, in
relation to a hypothetical scenario about the positive portrayal of a suicide
a painting or a play,
A positive portrayal could be for many other reasons – it might be to do
with the person’s appalling poverty, it could
be to do with the innocence
of the child in the image who has been exploited by the cruel directors of the
relevant terrorist organisation.
A painting, short of one that has the words,
‘it is your duty to do likewise’ emblazoned next to the image, will
even get off first base in a prosecution for the sedition offence. The same
is also true of plays and other forms of art, as well
as educative
10.45 The AGD referred to the danger wholesale exemptions or ‘special
defences’ might allow terrorists ‘to use
education, the arts and
journalism as a shield for their
activities’.
10.46 IP 30 noted concerns expressed to the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry
that the wording of the defences in s 80.3 might shift
the burden of proof
onto the defendant.
In response,
the AGD noted that, as is standard practice under Australian evidence law, the
defendant only must satisfy the
burden that there is a
reasonable possibility that the defence exists:
The defences do not shift the legal burden of proof to the defence. The defence
has to satisfy the evidential burden. This means
the burden of adducing or
pointing to evidence that suggests a reasonable possibility that the defence
exists (s 13.3(6) of the
Criminal Code
). Once the defence
establishes that this reasonable possibility exists, the prosecution has to
prove the defence does not exist beyond
reasonable doubt. The prosecution takes
this into account when making the initial decision to prosecute. No prosecutor
goes to court
without being in a position to counter defences of this
10.47 Section 13.3 of the
Criminal Code
(1) Subject to section 13.4, a burden of proof that a law imposes on a
defendant is an evidential burden only. ...
(3) A defendant who wishes to rely on any exception, exemption, excuse,
qualification or justification provided by the law creating
an offence bears an
evidential burden in relation to that matter. The exception, exemption, excuse,
qualification or justification
need not accompany the description of the
offence. ...
(6) In this Code:
evidential burden
, in relation to a matter, means the burden of adducing
or pointing to evidence that suggests a reasonable possibility that the matter
exists or does not exist.
10.48 In the context of the defence in s 80.3, once the accused has
satisfied the evidential burden by raising a reasonable possibility,
ultimate burden shifts to the prosecution to
that defence beyond
reasonable doubt.
The published
policy of the AGD is that the evidential onus only should be placed on the
where the matter is peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant; and is
significantly more difficult and costly for the prosecution
to disprove than for
the defendant to
10.49 Some submissions to the Inquiry continue to express concern about the
burden of proof in proceedings under
Patrick Emerton
submits that ‘in a liberal democracy, a dissenter should not bear even an
evidential burden with respect to
the legitimacy of
Rather, offences
that criminalise speech should be defined with sufficient precision so as not to
interfere with free speech.
Criticism of the
good faith requirement
10.50 Some who favour extending the defences consider that the term ‘good
faith’ is inappropriate and should be
As discussed above, the
term ‘good faith’ is a requirement of the defences under the RDA, as
well as under s 80.3 of
Criminal Code.
10.51 However, s 18D of the RDA does not provide a defence to a criminal
offence. Rather, it provides exemptions in relation to certain
(offensive behaviour based on racial hatred) that would otherwise amount to a
civil wrong in relation to which a complaint
may be made to the Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission.
Similarly, the New South Wales
do not apply to the
criminal offences of serious
vilification
incitement is by means that include inciting or threatening physical harm to
persons or property) but only to conduct
that is stated to be
‘unlawful’. There is no express statutory defence to the criminal
offences, beyond those generally
available in criminal
10.52 The New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties criticises the good faith
requirement as an inappropriate element in a defence
to a criminal offence
leading to possible imprisonment:
The requirement for good faith in the various defences ... suggests that if any
action was taken for an ulterior motive, then the
defences would not apply even
though to any other observer it would appear that the person was engaged in
legitimate political activity.
10.53 Fairfax, News Ltd and AAP submit that ‘good faith’ is a term
of art, and as such will import into the criminal
law ‘singularly
inappropriate matters of defeasance which belong to the civil law, in particular
the law of defamation’.
These media organisations do not support a defence
based on the RDA unless the words ‘reasonably and in good faith’ are
10.54 In contrast, the AGD advises that the Government does not want to remove
the concept of ‘good faith’ from the defence:
To do so would open the door to people suggesting that it was legitimate to urge
the use of force or violence to procure changes
in policy. The use of the term
‘good faith’ in the defence points to the real motivation of the
media exemption?
10.55 Submissions to the Inquiry suggest that the
Criminal Code
amended to make clear that the s 80.2 offence provisions ‘are neither
intended nor designed to prevent journalists
from reporting, nor to impede the
free flow and expression of opinion in the
10.56 Media organisations suggest that the media and journalists should be
exempt from the ambit of the
In this context,
Fairfax, News Ltd and AAP highlight precedents for such media exemptions in the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and the
We suggest a media-specific exception which makes clear that any act or omission
in the course of, for the purposes of, or associated
or in connection with the
reporting or publication of news or current affairs, opinion, comment or
artistic expression does not amount
to and is not capable of evidencing a
seditious intent for the purposes of
section 30A (3) or of amounting
to a breach, or conspiracy to breach, any of the offence provisions set out in
section [80.2].
10.57 Fairfax, News Ltd and AAP also state that such an exemption should be
‘wide enough to ensure freedom from liability for
contributors, including
letter writers, arising out of publication of their views in the
Similarly, the
Press Council states that a media exemption would not be sufficient in the
absence of protection for ‘artists,
freelance writers, webloggers and
other citizens who engage in expressive
10.58 Other submissions oppose a media exemption. For example, the National
Association for the Visual Arts states that the scope
exemption—in terms of the people to whom the exemption would
apply—is difficult to determine and involves
a high degree of
subjectivity.
Further, it would
be anomalous for the media to be permitted to engage in conduct that would be
criminal, if committed by anyone
10.59 The AGD advises that:
The Government does not want to introduce a defence that specifically applies to
journalists or other professions. It is preferable
for the whole community to
rely on the same defence. The danger with using special defences is that the
terrorists may attempt to
use that defence as a shield for their
activities.
10.60 The ALRC notes that the suggested precedents for a media exemption come
from areas of civil regulation, and do not concern
criminal offences. The
provides that an act done, or practice engaged in, by a
‘media organisation’ is an ‘exempt act or practice’
the purposes of the Act if done by the organisation ‘in the course of
journalism’ and the organisation is publicly
committed to self-regulatory
organisation is defined as:
an organisation whose activities consist of or include the collection,
preparation for dissemination or dissemination of the following
material for the
purpose of making it available to the public:
(a) material having the character of news, current affairs, information or a
documentary;
(b) material consisting of commentary or opinion on, or analysis of, news,
current affairs, information or a
documentary.
10.61 Under the TPA, ‘prescribed information providers’ are exempt
from compliance with some of the consumer protection
provisions of Part V of the
A prescribed information
provider is defined as ‘a person who carries on a business of providing
information’.
10.62 Discussion concerning the defences in s 80.3 of the
has focused on the ambit of the defences (in terms of the activities
covered) and on the concept of the good faith itself—and
whether this
should be retained.
10.63 The s 80.3 defences are criticised for being too limited. It is
suggested that while the defences would likely protect much
expression, the protection for academic, educational, artistic, scientific,
religious, journalistic or other public interest
purposes is significantly more
10.64 The Senate Committee recommended that, should the new sedition offences be
introduced, the defence for acts done in good faith
should be amended to extend
the defence to include statements for journalistic, educational, artistic,
scientific, religious or public
interest purposes (along the lines of the
defence in s 18D of the
Submissions to the Inquiry
agree that the more elaborated defences under s 18D of the RDA provide a
better model, by extending the
defences to cover a broader range of
10.65 The Senate Committee also recommended that the words ‘in good
faith’ should be removed from the
and this suggestion
receives some support in submissions to this
10.66 As discussed above, the concept of good faith in sedition law has its
origins in seditious libel. In modern civil defamation
law, good faith is
more often expressed as the requirement for absence of malice. It has
been claimed that reliance on good faith
as a defence in relation to criminal
offences is anomalous and
inappropriate.
10.67 The ALRC considers that the good faith requirement is an anachronism. The
statutory good faith defences came into being in
1920, when the sedition
offences themselves were enacted. Critically, at that time, the sedition
offences did not require proof of
subjective intention or incitement to violence
or public disturbance.
10.68 Arguably, the good faith defences made sense when it was not necessary to
prove intention. In contrast, s 80.2(1), (3) and
(5) require a person to
have an intention to urge force or
It is difficult to
envisage circumstances in which a person acts in good faith for purposes set out
in s 80.3, yet intends to urge
force or violence to overthrow the
Constitution
, interfere with electoral processes or promote inter-group
violence. Generally, the good faith requirement is not needed because
elements of the offence are not made out in the first place.
10.69 It is also clear that the way in which the defences are drafted reflects
the more deferential political and social environment
in which sedition offences
emerged. For example, while s 80.3(1)(a) refers to showing that any of the
named persons is ‘mistaken’,
it is not sufficient to show that such
a person is, for example, corrupt, biased or dishonest. Further, in order to
rely on the defence
in s 80.3(1)(b), a person must have a ‘view to
reforming’ the errors or defects pointed out; and under s 80.3(1)(d)
person must be seeking to ‘bring about the removal’ of the
matters pointed out. A requirement that acts urging the use
of force or violence
be done with a ‘constructive’ political or social purpose in order
for a defence to be available
makes little sense.
10.70 Rather than attempt to protect freedom of expression through a
‘defence’ that arises after a person has been found
‘technically’ committed a sedition offence, the ALRC considers it
would be better in principle and in practice
to reframe the criminal offences in
such a way that they do not extend to legitimate activities or unduly impinge on
freedom of expression
in the first place. In other words, the focus should be on
proving that a person intentionally urges the use of force or violence
specified circumstances), with the intention that the force or violence urged
will occur (see Proposal 8–1).
10.71 Further, the ALRC proposes that in considering whether a person has such
an intention, the trier of fact should be required
explicitly to take into
account whether the conduct was done:
• in the performance, exhibition or distribution of an artistic work;
• in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made
or held for any genuine academic, artistic or scientific
purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest; or
• in connection with an industrial dispute or an industrial matter; or
• in publishing a report or commentary about a matter of public
10.72 The proposed new provision, set out in Proposal 10–2 below, draws
from words used in the RDA
and existing
s 80.3(1)(e)–(f) of the
Criminal Code
. The ALRC also observes
that s 100.1(3) of the
Criminal Code
, which comprises part of the
definition of a terrorist act for the purposes of the terrorist offences in
Part 5.3, provides, in effect,
that action is not terrorism if it is
‘advocacy, protest, dissent or industrial action’ and ‘is not
to cause physical harm or a serious risk to the health or safety
of the public. The ALRC’s approach to reform of s 80.3 takes
consistent approach—focusing on intention and context in the formulation
of the offences rather than on elaborate defences.
10.73 The ALRC does not believe that a case has been made for any blanket
exemption for media organisations or journalists. The general
principles of
corporate criminal responsibility under the
Criminal Code
provide that
the Code applies to bodies corporate in the same way as it applies to
individuals, with such modifications as are made
necessary by the fact that
criminal liability is being imposed on bodies corporate rather than
individuals.
10.74 The provisions cited as precedents for a media exemption do not relate to
criminal offences but exempt organisations from compliance
with regulatory
regimes. There is no precedent for exempting classes of persons or bodies
corporate, defined by occupation or business
activity, from the ambit of an
indictable criminal offence.
Section 80.3 of the
Criminal Code
), concerning the defence of ‘good faith’, should be
Proposal 10–2
Section 80.2 of the
should be amended to provide that in considering whether a person
intends that the urged force or violence will occur, the trier
of fact must take
into account whether the conduct was done (i) in the performance, exhibition or
distribution of an artistic work;
or (ii) in the course of any statement,
publication, discussion or debate made or held for any genuine academic,
artistic or scientific
purpose or any other genuine purpose in the public
interest; or (iii) in connection with an industrial dispute or an industrial
or (iv) in publishing a report or commentary about a matter of public
interest; and may have regard to any relevant matter.
A note should be inserted after each of the offences in
s 80.2(1), (3) and (5) of the
Criminal Code
drawing attention to the
proposed new provisions regarding proof of intention that the force or violence
urged will occur.
(The relevant sections of the Criminal Code, amended
as proposed, are set out in
Appendix 2.)
[back to top]
10.75 Each of the five sedition offences in
s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
carries a maximum penalty of
imprisonment of seven years. This follows a recommendation of the Gibbs
Committee, which argued that
‘the more specific nature of the proposed
offence[s]’ warranted an increase from the maximum penalty of imprisonment
for three years specified for the old sedition offences under the
ss 24A–24D.
10.76 These penalties may be compared with the maximum periods of imprisonment
for the following
Criminal Code
• treason—life;
• espionage—25
• engaging in a terrorist
• directing the activities of a terrorist
organisation—25 years;
• membership of a terrorist organisation—10
• getting funds for a terrorist organisation—25
10.77 A person who urges the commission of these offences is guilty of the
offence of incitement. Under s 11.4 of the
Criminal Code
the penalty
for incitement is set with reference to the maximum penalty for the offence
incited, as follows:
• if the offence incited is punishable by life imprisonment—10
• if the offence incited is punishable by imprisonment for 14 years
or more—7 years;
• if the offence incited is punishable by imprisonment for 10 years or
more (but less than 14 years)—5 years; or
• in other cases—3 years or for the maximum term of imprisonment for
the offence incited, whichever is the lesser.
Section 4B(2)
sets out a formula that can be
applied to determine the maximum pecuniary penalty for an offence where the
provision creating the
offence refers only to a penalty of imprisonment. In
addition, s 4(2A) states that if an offence provides for imprisonment for
the court may impose a maximum pecuniary penalty of 2,000 penalty
10.79 IP 30 asked whether the maximum penalties for the offences in
s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
appropriate.
Bearing in mind
that most submissions favour the abolition of the sedition offences, it is
perhaps unsurprising that many also considered
that the penalties were too
and should not exceed
the maximum of three years imprisonment, as provided under the repealed
provisions.
10.80 There is recognition that the appropriateness of the maximum penalties may
change if the offences are narrowed to apply only
to the urging of force or
violence. For example, ARTICLE 19 submits:
if custodial sanction were ever to be justified for a s 80.2 offence, the
provisions of s 80.2 would need to be much more narrowly
drawn, with a
direct and immediate connection between an intention to incite imminent violence
and a likelihood or occurrence of
such violence. Furthermore, we would recommend
that the use of custodial sanctions be limited to the most serious of the scale
the offences, and that it should be a discretionary rather than a mandatory
penalty, so as to allow for a proper consideration of
the full appropriateness
of applying a custodial penalty in the individual
10.81 Mr Alex Steel states that the maximum penalty for the s 80.2(1)
offence is in line with the penalty scheme set out in the
Criminal Code
for incitement offences. He observes:
The basic approach of the Code appears to be to set a maximum of 10 years
imprisonment as a default penalty and then increase or
decrease depending on the
offence. Inchoate offences are given lesser penalties. Incitement to a crime
with a maximum life imprisonment
has a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment
... As urging the overthrow of the government might not incite an act of treason
lesser penalty of a maximum 7 years is
appropriate.
10.82 However, Mr Steel considers that the maximum penalties for the
offences in s 80.2(3) and (5) are not appropriate when compared
offences under the s 327 of the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1914
and most State assault
offences—the penalties for which are set considerably lower.
10.83 The AGD refers to the conclusions of the Gibbs Committee and advises that
the Government regards the conduct covered by the
offences as
‘sufficiently serious to warrant an increase in the penalty from 3 years
to 7 years imprisonment’. The AGD
also notes that the imprisonment period
is consistent with the penalty in the equivalent new offence in the United
10.84 The ALRC does not propose any change to the maximum penalties for the
offences in s 80.2(1), (3) or (5) of the
Criminal Code
, as modified
by the proposals in this Discussion Paper. The ALRC does not consider that the
existing penalties are disproportionate
to the seriousness of these offences. In
fact, on one view, if the offences are narrowed as proposed, the maximum
penalties may not
adequately reflect the seriousness of the
10.85 There are stronger arguments that the penalties are inappropriate for the
offences in s 80.3(7) and (8), which require no link
with force or
violence—but the ALRC proposes that these offences be repealed.
10.86 The ALRC notes that, in February 2006, the Australian Government announced
a review of criminal penalties in Commonwealth legislation.
This review will,
among other things, assess the appropriateness of Commonwealth criminal
penalties in the light of comparisons with
relevant state and territory criminal
penalties and international best practice and seek to understand community
expectations about
penalising criminal
The review team is
due to report to the Government by the end of 2006.
The relevant sections of the
(Cth) are set out in full in Appendix 1. The relevant sections of
the Code, amended as proposed in this Discussion Paper, are set
Appendix 2.
B Saul, ‘Speaking
of Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
of New South Wales Law Journal
Criminal Code
War Precautions Repeal
(Cth) s 12.
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
s 80.3(f). Compare Draft-in-Confidence
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
See, Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
[5.117]–[5.122].
Digest of the Criminal Law
P Hamburger, ‘The
Development of the Law of Seditious Libel and the Control of the Press’
Stanford Law Review
Racial Discrimination
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001
Defamation Act 2005
(Vic) and cognate state and territory
legislation.
Defamation Act 1889
(Qld) s 16;
Defamation Act 1957
(Tas) s 16. See Law Book
The Laws of Australia
, vol 6 Communications, 6.1, Ch 6,
Defamation Act 1889 (Qld)
s 16(2). See also
Defamation Act 1957
(Tas) s 16. It is said
that these factors are not dissimilar to those applied under the common law test
of malice: Law Book Company,
The Laws of Australia
, vol 6 Communications,
6.1, Ch 6, [89].
Defamation Act
The Laws of Australia
, vol 6 Communications, 6.1, Ch 6,
Ibid, 6.1, Ch 6,
See Ibid, 6.1, Ch 6,
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520.
The decision involved a
re-examination of the High Court’s previous decisions in
Theophanous v
Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
Stephens v West
Australian Newspapers Ltd
[1994] HCA 45
(1994) 182 CLR
Lange v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
Law Book Company,
The Laws of
, vol 6 Communications, 6.1, Ch 6,
Defamation Act 2005
and cognate state and territory
legislation.
cognate state and territory
legislation.
cognate state and territory
legislation.
Anti-Discrimination Act
v Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Commission
[2004] FCAFC 16
(2004) 204 ALR
Ibid, 787. Carr J stated (at
803) that the focus of the inquiry should be ‘an objective consideration
of all the evidence,
but that the evidence of a person’s state of mind may
also be relevant’. Lee J held (at 795) that ‘good faith must
assessed, in part, by having regard to the subjective purpose of the publisher
but overall it is an objective
determination’.
Council of Victoria v Catch the Fire Ministries Inc
B Saul, ‘Speaking
of Terror: Criminalising Incitement to Violence’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 53
of New South Wales Law Journal
Racial and Religious Tolerance
Islamic Council of
Victoria v Catch the Fire Ministries Inc
(2005) EOC 93–377, [389]. In
August 2005, the respondents were granted leave to appeal to the Victorian Court
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd,
News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006.
Media Organisations,
Consultation
, Sydney, 28 March
of the uniform
defamation Acts it is a defence to the publication of defamatory matter if the
defendant proves that: (a) the matter
was an expression of opinion of another
person, rather than a statement of fact, and (b) the opinion related to a matter
interest, and (c) the opinion is based on proper
In this context, the ALRC
recommended in 2005 that the uniform Evidence Acts should be amended to provide
for a qualifed professional
confidential relationship privilege, applicable to
confidential relationships, including between journalists and their sources:
Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC
112, VLRC FR (2005), Ch 15,
See, eg, ARTICLE
10 April 2006; Victoria Legal Aid,
13 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd,
News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006; Chief Minister (ACT),
2006; Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
2006; B Saul,
14 April 2006; The Cameron
Creswell Agency Pty Ltd,
Chief Minister (ACT),
Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
14 April 2006.
Australian Consolidated Press v Uren
(1966) 117 CLR 185.
The High Court
considered the meaning of ‘good faith’ for the purposes of the
defence of qualified privilege under the
Defamation Act 1958
The ALRC observes that, as
discussed in Ch 8, recklessness is the fault element only in relation to
some of the physical elements
required to constitute the offences and this
position will be clarified by the ALRC’s
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520.
The power of a court to read
down legislation that may be inconsistent with the
Constitution
discussed in
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR
Public Interest Advocacy Centre,
18 April 2006; Pax Christi,
9 April 2006.
Rights Lawyers,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March
Confidential,
3 May 2006.
Arts Organisations,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March 2006; Human Rights
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March 2006; Public Interest Advocacy
18 April 2006; Australian Major
Performing Arts Group,
16 April 2006; National
20 April 2006; Confidential,
3 May 2006; National Association for the Visual
11 April 2006; Australia Council for the
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November
Law Reform Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November 2005,
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences: Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
See, eg, Federation of Community
Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; P Emerton,
10 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006.
Rights Lawyers,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March 2006; Federation of
Community Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006;
New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties Inc,
10 April 2006; Australian Lawyers for Human Rights,
13 April 2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and
Australian Associated Press,
Racial Discrimination Act
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
New South Wales Council for
Civil Liberties Inc,
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission 290A to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 22 November
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006; Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
20 April 2006.
Australian Press
Council Office,
13 April 2006; John Fairfax
Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
18 April 2006; Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
20 April 2006; Free TV Australia,
19 April 2006; Australian Major Performing Arts
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006. Similar views are expressed by other media organisations: Australian
Press Council Office,
13 April 2006; Australian
Broadcasting Corporation,
20 April 2006; Free
TV Australia,
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News
Limited and Australian Associated Press,
April 2006.
Australian Press Council
National Association for the
Visual Arts,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) s 65A.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
Ibid, [5.175],
Centre for Media and
Communications Law,
12 April 2006;
Confidential,
3 May 2006; Media Entertainment
and Arts Alliance,
10 April 2006; Australian
Writers’ Guild,
11 April 2006; Victoria
13 April 2006 Arts Law Centre of
13 April 2006; Australian
Vice-Chancellor’s Committee,
2006; N Roxton Shadow Attorney-General,
April 2006.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
(2005), [5.175],
Human Rights Lawyers,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March 2006; Federation of Community Legal
Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; New South Wales
Council for Civil Liberties Inc,
10 April 2006;
Australian Lawyers for Human Rights,
2006; John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
Good faith is used in some other
Criminal Code
offences. See, eg,
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 71.8,
71.15: defence to a charge of unlawful sexual penetration that the sexual
penetration was ‘carried out in the
course of a procedure in good faith
for medical or hygienic purposes’. See also s 474.6, which provides
that a law enforcement
officer ‘acting in good faith in the course of his
or her duties’ is not criminally responsible for offences of interfering
with telecommunications facilities; s 474.21, which creates defences in
respect of child pornography material; and s 474.30, which
creates defences
for National Relay Service employees and emergency call
See L Maher, ‘The Use
and Abuse of Sedition’
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
The ALRC proposes to clarify the
application of intention as the fault element of the offences in s 80.2(1),
(3) and (5). See Ch
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) s 12.1. Where intention, knowledge or recklessness is a
fault element in relation to a physical element of an offence (as is
with the sedition offences), that fault element must be attributed to a body
corporate that ‘expressly, tacitly or
impliedly authorised or permitted
the commission of the offence’:
Criminal Code
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
(1991), 307, [32.19].
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 80.1.
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, DP 70 (2005), Ch 7. A
penalty unit for the purpose of Commonwealth offences is $110:
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006), Ch 7,
Question 10.
Pax Christi,
9 April 2006; A Steel,
18 April 2006; Australian Writers’ Guild,
11 April 2006; Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic),
10 April 2006; Victoria Legal Aid,
Australian Writers’
11 April 2006; Victoria Legal Aid,
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006.
However, this offence need not
involve the use of force or
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
M Weinberg,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 3 April
See Australian Government
Attorney-General's Department,
Review of Criminal Penalties in Commonwealth
Legislation
(2006) Australian Government Attorney-General's Department
gov.au/penalties> at 23 March 2006.
11. Unlawful Associations
Introduction
Unlawful associations provisions
History of the unlawful associations provisions
Criticisms of the unlawful associations provisions
Terrorist organisations under the Criminal Code
Comparing the unlawful associations and terrorist organisation provisions
ALRC’s views
Other offences under Part IIA
Section 30C
Sections 30J and 30K
11. Unlawful Associations
Introduction
11.1 The Terms of Reference direct the ALRC to consider the operation of
(Cth) dealing with unlawful
associations.
was inserted into the
in 1926, apparently
in response to federal government concerns about radical trade unionism, the
rise of communism and the potential
for revolutionary
Schedule 7 of the
Anti-Terrorism Act (No 2) 2005
(Cth) amended s 30A of the
to insert a definition of ‘seditious’
intention’ into the sections, following the repeal of the sedition
11.3 As the changes to
were consequential rather than substantive,
they have not attracted the same attention or criticism as the sedition
provisions. Despite
being invoked rarely, these provisions have not been without
controversy—and the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Criminal
(Gibbs Committee) in 1991 recommended their repeal.
11.4 This chapter considers the unlawful associations provisions as they
currently stand and the new definition of ‘seditious
inserted into s 30A. It then compares their operation with the terrorist
organisation offences added to the
Criminal Code
in 2002 and
concludes that the unlawful associations provisions have been superseded and
should be repealed. The chapter then considers
the three stand alone offences
within Part IIA that are not directly linked to unlawful associations, and
proposes that they be subject
to repeal or review, in line with previous
proposals in this Discussion Paper.
[back to top]
Unlawful associations
11.5 Section 30A of the
declares as ‘unlawful
associations’:
(1) (a) any body of persons, incorporated or unincorporated, which by its
constitution or propaganda or otherwise advocates or encourages:
(i) the overthrow of the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth by revolution or
(ii) the overthrow by force or violence of the established government of the
Commonwealth or of a State or of any other civilized
country or of organized
government; or
(iii) the destruction or injury of property of the Commonwealth or of property
used in trade or commerce with other countries or
among the States;
or which is, or purports to be, affiliated with any organization which advocates
or encourages any of the doctrines or practices
specified in this paragraph;
(b) any body of persons, incorporated or unincorporated, which by its
constitution or propaganda or otherwise advocates or encourages
the doing of any
act having or purporting to have as an object the carrying out of a seditious
(2) Any branch or committee of an unlawful association, and any institution or
school conducted by or under the authority or apparent
authority of an unlawful
association, shall, for all the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be an
unlawful association.
11.6 Under s 30A(1A) a body is an unlawful association if it is declared to
be so by the Federal Court of Australia, following a
‘show cause’
application by the Attorney-General pursuant to
An earlier version of
this provision was introduced in 1932, to address the uncertainty that might
arise if a body that had, by virtue
of its attributes, become an unlawful
association subsequently changed its policies and activities in relevant ways,
and should no
longer be deemed to be an unlawful
association.
11.7 Following the relocation of the sedition provisions from the
Criminal Code
, a new definition of ‘seditious
intention’ was inserted as s 30A(3) of the
definition is the ‘modernised’ version of s 24A the
that was recommended by the Gibbs
11.8 Section 30A(3) of the
provides that:
seditious intention
means an intention to use force or violence to
effect any of the following purposes:
(a) to bring the Sovereign into hatred or contempt;
(b) to urge disaffection against the following:
Constitution
(ii) the Government of the Commonwealth;
(iii) either House of the Parliament;
(c) to urge another person to attempt to procure a change, otherwise than by
lawful means, to any matter established by law of the
Commonwealth;
(d) to promote feelings of ill-will or hostility between different groups so as
to threaten the peace, order and good government
of the Commonwealth.
11.9 If a body is an unlawful association, whether by virtue of s 30A(1),
(1A) or (2), a number of criminal offences may apply, as
specified in
ss 30AB–30FC. These offences include:
• failure to provide information relating to an unlawful association upon
the request of the
Attorney-General;
• being an officer, member or representative of an unlawful
association;
• giving contributions of money or goods to, or soliciting donations for,
an unlawful association;
• printing, publishing or selling material issued by an unlawful
association;
• allowing meetings of an unlawful association to be held on property
owned or controlled by a person.
11.10 Each offence involves a maximum penalty of imprisonment for six or twelve
History of the
unlawful associations provisions
11.11 The unlawful associations provisions arose in the context of government
concern about radical trade unionism and revolutionary
politics. Following the
Australia-wide strike by the seamen’s union in 1925, the Bruce-Page
Government sought to introduce
a number of legislative measures designed to
attack trade unions and their leaders in
The Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) note that
developed in the context of concern about communism in
11.12 The unlawful associations legislation was based on a similar Canadian
model, although the penalties in Australia were considerably
lighter. This
Canadian legislation was repealed in
Some amendments were made
in 2001, in part to bring some of the language into line with
the concepts and terminology used in the
11.13 Only one person has ever been convicted in Australia of an offence under
the unlawful associations provisions—and that
conviction was overturned on
Dr Roger Douglas
notes that it was largely the threat of prosecution that was used to discourage
people from making premises and
public halls available to communists for public
Between 1932–37, Part IIA was used to discourage the renting of
meeting halls to communists, and, more importantly, as the
basis of banning the
postal transmission of communist publications. Between 1935–37, the
Commonwealth made a half-hearted attempt
to seek a declaration banning the
Friends of the Soviet Union (and, almost incidentally, the Communist Party of
Australia). But,
with the settlement of that litigation, governments largely
lost interest in the Act, and never again were any attempts made to enforce
unlawful associations provisions of
11.14 Douglas notes that even when the
Communist Party Dissolution Act
(Cth) was defeated in the High Court, no attempt was made to use the
unlawful associations provisions to prosecute
communists.
Criticisms of the
unlawful associations provisions
11.15 In 1991, the Gibbs Committee recommended the repeal of Part IIA of
in its entirety since the unlawful associations provisions
had been ‘little used since their introduction in 1926’. In
Discussion Paper, the Gibbs Committee stated that it was:
disposed to think that the activities at which these provisions are aimed can
best be dealt with by existing laws creating such offences
as murder, assault,
abduction, damage to property and conspiracy and that there is no need for these
provisions.
11.16 In the final report, the Committee noted that all the submissions received
in response to the proposal to repeal
endorsed that
A separate recommendation
was made in relation to
discussed below.
11.17 A comprehensive survey of the history and use of the
provisions on unlawful associations by Douglas concludes that the case for
retention is weak.
drafted to be of general application,
was designed to deal with
the threat posed by bodies such as the Communist Party—‘centrally
co-ordinated bodies with
authoritative programs, proud of their revolutionary
credentials’.
these laws were not even effective against the Communist Party of Australia once
it had ‘abandoned hopes of imminent
revolution’.
It is therefore hard to see how
could be used against a movement
less formally committed to modernist norms such as consistency, coherence,
rationality or against
a movement lacking the highly bureaucratised structure of
the Communist Party.
11.18 Douglas suggests that prosecutions may not have been attempted under the
sections because of both the likely political backlash
and the difficulty of
proving an offence. For example, he argues that the wording ‘by revolution
or sabotage’ is unclear
(without any need to link to
revolution). In the case of the Communist Party, the difficulty could arise as
to whether a body was advocating revolution when its
doctrine was that
revolution could not happen until a state of affairs existed that had not yet
There is also the need
for the organisation to have indicated its unlawful purposes via its
constitution or propaganda. Douglas suggests
that without a clear constitution,
the prosecution may have difficulty proving that propaganda was produced by the
particular body
sought to be
11.19 There is a distinction between the unlawful associations provisions and
the sedition offences (both the former ones under
those under s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
). Sedition offences
traditionally have required that the maker poses a seditious intention and that
the acts not be done in good
faith. There is no defence of good faith available
to a body or persons prosecuted under
11.20 Similar concerns were expressed about the
unlawful associations provisions during the course of the 2005 Senate Committee
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
. It was said, for example,
The ability to ban ‘unlawful associations’ is linked to an archaic
definition of ‘seditious intention’ that
covers practically all
forms of moderate civil disobedience and objection (including boycotts and
peaceful marches).
11.21 It also was pointed out that retaining the concept of ‘seditious
intention’ for the purposes of declaring associations
unlawful under the
‘results in two inconsistent meanings of sedition in
federal law (one in the
and another in the
11.22 Chris Connolly raised a number of objections to Part IIA, including
• does not require any link whatsoever to force, violence or assisting the
• is not subject to any ‘good faith defence’ or humanitarian
• appears to have no link at all to terrorism; and
• is linked to an archaic definition of ‘seditious intention’
that covers practically all forms of moderate civil
disobedience and objection
(including boycotts and peaceful
11.23 During the Senate Committee’s inquiry, the AGD indicated that the
amendment to s 30A was merely a consequential one,
was not intended to
reinvigorate the use of the provision and that ‘the Government has not
fully considered the need for the
retention of section 30A of the
Submissions and consultations
11.24 Issues Paper 30 (IP 30) noted that the unlawful associations
provisions still rely on the concept of ‘seditious intention’
asked whether this was appropriate, given that this concept is no longer used in
connection with the offences in s 80.2 of the
11.25 The use of the concept of ‘seditious intention’ was criticised
by almost every submission that referred to the
11.26 The New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties argues that the
re-enactment of the old definition of seditious intention is
out of step with
the new offence created under
11.27 Victoria Legal Aid (VLA) criticises the retention of the unlawful
associations provisions as contrary to the principle of freedom
of association
under art 22 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
. VLA agrees with the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry and the Gibbs
Committee that Part IIA of the
11.28 ARTICLE 19 also submits that proscribing an organisation on the basis
of ‘seditious intention’ is antithetical
to modern criminal law
provisions and inconsistent with standards under international law for the
protection of the right to freedom
of expression and the right of freedom of
association.
11.29 Other criticisms of the unlawful associations provisions include that the
language of the sections is
and the meaning of
terms such as ‘civilised
are unclear and
the fact that the inserted definition of ‘seditious intention’ does
not include any requirement that
there be any actual violence, disorder or
breach of the peace.
11.30 Consistent with its position during the 2005 Senate Committee inquiry, the
AGD’s submission to this Inquiry indicates
that the definition of
‘seditious intention’ was inserted by the
Anti-Terrorism Act
simply as a consequential amendment to preserve the status quo, not with the
purpose of reinvigorating the unlawful associations
provisions.
organisations under the
Criminal Code
11.31 The Terms of Reference ask the ALRC to consider whether Part IIA, as
amended, is effective to address the problem of organisations
that advocate or
encourage the use of force or violence to achieve political objectives. It has
been suggested to this Inquiry that
the acts covered by the unlawful
associations provisions are now more appropriately dealt by the offences banning
terrorist organisations
Criminal Code.
11.32 In IP 30, the ALRC noted that the enactment in 2002 of a new set of
counter-terrorism measures, including provisions dealing
with acts of terrorism
and terrorist organisations, suggests that the Parliament saw the Part IIA
provisions as inadequate to the
task of dealing with the challenges of modern
Terrorist acts
11.33 Division 100.1 of the
Criminal Code
defines a ‘terrorist
act’ as an action or threat made with the intention both of
‘advancing a political, religious
or ideological cause’ and
‘coercing, or influencing by intimidation’ a governmental authority
in Australia or overseas.
The section then spells out what falls within the
definition of a terrorist act, this being action that:
• causes serious physical harm to a person, causes death or endangers
human life;
• causes serious damage to property;
• creates a serious risk to the health and safety of the public or a
section of the public;
• seriously interferes with, seriously disrupts, or destroys, an
electronic system; and
• is not advocacy, protest, dissent or industrial action, and is not
intended to have the above
consequences.
11.34 Division 101 creates a number of serious associated offences,
• engaging in a terrorist
• providing or receiving training connected with terrorist
• possessing things connected with terrorist
• collecting or making documents likely to facilitate terrorist
• doing other acts in preparation for, or planning, terrorist
Terrorist organisations
11.35 Division 102 of the
Criminal Code
contains a regime for the
Attorney-General to proscribe organisations that have a specified terrorist
connection or that have endangered,
or are likely to endanger, the security or
integrity of the Commonwealth, and to make membership or other specified links
organisations an offence.
11.36 There are two ways in which a group can be identified formally as a
‘terrorist organisation’ under Division 102.
First, a group may
be declared a terrorist organisation by a court, in connection with a conviction
for a terrorist offence. Second,
a group may be ‘listed’ as a
terrorist organisation in a regulation promulgated by the Governor-General.
Before an organisation
can be listed, the responsible Minister (currently the
Attorney-General) must be satisfied on reasonable grounds that the organisation
is directly or indirectly engaged in, preparing, planning, assisting in or
fostering the doing of a terrorist act (whether or not
the terrorist act has
occurred or will occur).
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
added an additional criteria by
which the Attorney-General can find that an organisation is a terrorist
organisation: where the organisation
the doing of a terrorist
act (whether or not a terrorist act has occurred or will occur).
‘Advocating a terrorist act’
is defined as directly or indirectly
counselling or urging the doing of a terrorist act; directly or indirectly
providing instruction
on the doing of a terrorist act; or directly praising the
doing of a terrorist act in circumstances where there is a risk that such
might have the effect of leading a person to engage in a terrorist
11.38 Regulations listing an organisation cease to have effect two years after
their commencement—or earlier if the regulation
is repealed or if the
Minister is no longer satisfied that the organisation is directly or indirectly
engaged in terrorism.
organisation may be re-listed after the initial two-year period by making a new
regulation.
Since 2004,
regulations also are subject to review by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Intelligence and Security—which
may recommend
disallowance.
currently 19 organisations officially listed as terrorist
organisations.
11.39 After an organisation is designated a ‘terrorist
organisation’, it becomes an offence:
• to direct the activities of the
organisation;
• intentionally to be a member of that
organisation;
• to recruit persons to the
organisation;
• to receive training from, or provide training
to, the organisation;
• to receive funds from, or provide funds to, the
organisation;
• to provide support or resources to the
organisation;
• on two or more occasions, intentionally to associate with a terrorist
organisation, or its members or leadership, with the
intention that the
association will assist the terrorist to expand or to continue to
11.40 The Security Legislation Review Committee, chaired by the Hon Simon
Sheller AO, has conducted a review of the operation and
effectiveness of
the counter-terrorism laws, including Divisions 101 and 102. The review is a
statutory requirement of the
Security Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act
(Cth). At the time of writing the findings of the review had not been
released to the public.
Comparing the
unlawful associations and terrorist organisation provisions
Conceptual basis
11.41 Terrorist organisations and unlawful associations are based on different
underlying concepts.
s 103(1), a terrorist organisation is an ‘organisation that is
directly or indirectly engaged in, preparing, planning,
assisting in or
fostering the doing of a terrorist act (whether or not the terrorist act has
occurred or will occur)’ or an
organisation that has been listed, as
described above.
11.42 The definition of a terrorist act under s 100.1(1) is an action or
threat made with the intention both of ‘advancing
a political, religious
or ideological cause’ and ‘coercing, or influencing by
intimidation’ a governmental authority
in Australia or overseas.
11.43 As noted above, an unlawful association is a body of persons who advocates
or encourages overthrow of the Government, or advocates
or encourages the doing
of any act having or purporting to have as an object, the carrying out of a
seditious intention. Unlike a
terrorist organisation, an unlawful association
does not need to act in advancement of a particular cause or with the intention
coerce or influence by intimidation a government, country or section of the
community. The AGD suggests that a circumstance may arise
where it is possible
to show that a group advocated or encouraged one of the acts listed in
s 30A of the
but it is not possible to establish the
intention needed to establish a terrorist
11.44 As noted above, s 30A(1A) requires a body must be declared an
unlawful association by the Federal Court following a ‘show
application by the Attorney-General under s 30AA.
11.45 Prior to the amendments to Division 102, made by the
Criminal Code
Amendment (Terrorist Organisations) Act 2004
(Cth), an organisation could be
listed as a terrorist organisation only if it already had been formally declared
as such by the United
Nations Security Council—or else a dedicated piece
of legislation would have to be passed by the Australian Parliament in each
11.46 The Australian Government argued that this mechanism was too restrictive
and cumbersome to meet Australia’s particular
security needs. For example,
the Security Council might be slow to act in the case of an organisation that
mainly posed a regional,
rather than an international, threat; or the Security
Council might be influenced by political considerations that are not shared
Australia. As noted above, listing now proceeds through the making of a
regulation, and no longer relies on Security Council resolutions.
11.47 Prior to these changes, it could have been argued that there was a need to
retain the unlawful associations provisions in the
, since the
high bar of identification as a ‘terrorist organisation’ by the
Security Council made listing difficult, and
therefore left gaps in the law
which terrorists could exploit. However, the new listing procedures are not
subject to the same constraints.
Submissions and consultations
11.48 IP 30 asked to what extent the unlawful associations provisions
overlap with the more recent terrorist organisations provisions
of Division 102
Criminal Code
, and whether the unlawful associations provisions
were still necessary.
11.49 The Australian Federal Police indicate that, in practice, the unlawful
associations provisions were not considered for use,
and expressed satisfaction
with the framing of the terrorist organisation
The Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions agree that the definition of a terrorist
organisation was likely to be sufficiently
broad to effectively cover the
activities of any group that previously would have been considered for
designation as an unlawful
association.
11.50 VLA agree that there is no longer any need to retain these provisions,
‘given that Division 102 now provides a simple
procedure for protecting
the safety of Australians—by proscribing terrorist organisations and
criminalising specific conduct
in relation to those
organisations’.
11.51 The New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties submit that Part IIA
now seems redundant given the powers enacted under the
anti-terrorism legislation in the
Criminal Code
in recent years with
regard to the prescribing of terrorist
organisations.
This view was
shared by a number of other lawyers and commentators with whom the Inquiry
11.52 ARTICLE 19 note that:
While we have a number of concerns with the provisions relating to the
proscription of ‘terrorist’ organisations introduced
in 2002, we
consider that these provisions to be at least more causally linked to
proscribing on the basis that an association may
pose a threat to national
Furthermore, the scope of the unlawful association provisions have been
progressively eroded by context-specific legislation which
supersedes the
latter’s application, including the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth) and the counter-terrorism amendments to the
Criminal Code
11.53 The AGD notes that ‘circumstances have changed dramatically since
the enactment of Part IIA. The terrorism provisions
address contemporary
threats to the Australian
community’.
11.54 The ALRC agrees that the unlawful associations provisions are outdated and
unnecessary. There has been little disagreement
with the view that the
provisions should be repealed.
11.55 In Chapter 2, the ALRC proposes that, due to its historical
connotations, the term ‘sedition’ should be removed
from the federal
statute book. The ALRC agrees with the submissions to this Inquiry that argue
that preserving an old definition
of seditious intention in Part IIA of the
creates two different and inconsistent meanings of
‘sedition’ in federal law.
11.56 Repeal of the unlawful associations provisions will not leave a gap in
federal criminal law. Both the definition of a ‘terrorist
‘terrorist organisation’ under the
Criminal Code
sufficiently broad in scope to cover the types of organisations that advocate or
urge politically motivated violence. This is
particularly the case now that an
organisation may be proscribed for advocating or praising the doing of a
terrorist act. The link
to the urging of serious violence or serious risk is a
more modern and appropriate framing of the offences than banning organisations
with a ‘seditious intention’.
11.57 It is difficult to imagine a practical circumstance in which a group
advocating the overthrow of the
Constitution
or the established government does
not have an accompanying intention to advance a particular cause or coerce or
influence a governmental
authority. Further, if such a case should arise, the
ALRC agrees with the Gibbs Committee that existing criminal laws covering
assault, abduction, damage to property or conspiracy—or incitement
to any of the above activities—would be sufficient
to deal appropriately
with offenders.
11.58 The ALRC therefore proposes that ss 30A, 30AA, 30AB, 30B, 30D, 30E,
30F, 30FA, 30FC, 30FD, 30G, 30H and 30R of
be repealed.
Sections 30A, 30AA, 30AB, 30B, 30D, 30E, 30F, 30FA, 30FC, 30FD,
30G, 30H and 30R of
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), concerning
unlawful associations, should be
[back to top]
Other offences under
also contains three other offences that do not directly rely
on the concept of an unlawful association.
Section 30C
11.60 Section 30C is another sedition-type provision, making it an offence
punishable by imprisonment for up to two years for any
person, ‘who by
speech or writing advocates or encourages’:
(a) the overthrow of the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth by revolution or
(b) the overthrow by force or violence of an established government of the
Commonwealth or of a State or of any other civilized country
or of organized
government; or
(c) the destruction or injury of property of the Commonwealth or of property
used in trade or commerce with other countries or among
the States.
11.61 This provision is effectively another version of the sedition offence
found in s 80.2(1) of the
Criminal Code
—albeit with a lesser
penalty. In Chapter 8, the ALRC suggests that s 30C is redundant and
proposes that it be repealed.
Sections 30J and 30K
11.62 Sections 30J and 30K are more closely related to emergency or
industrial powers than to the banning of unlawful associations.
Reflecting the
origins of Part IIA in the seamen’s union strike, s 30J provides
that in the event of a ‘serious industrial
disturbance prejudicing or
threatening trade and commerce with other countries or among the States’,
the Governor-General may
issue a proclamation prohibiting persons from taking
part in, inciting, urging, aiding or continuing, a strike or lock-out in
• employment in or connection with, the transport of goods or the
conveyance of passengers in trade or commerce with other countries
or among the
• employment in or in connection with, the provision of any public service
by the Commonwealth or by any Department or public
authority under the
Commonwealth.
11.63 It appears that such a proclamation only has been made once, in
11.64 Section 30K deals with threats or boycotts affecting public services.
A person who by violence, threats, intimidation or boycotts
obstructs or hinders
the performance of public services or hinders trade or commerce between the
States or other countries is guilty
of an offence. The penalty for an offence
under s 30K is imprisonment for one year.
11.65 The justification for ss 30J and 30K at the
time of enactment was ‘that the sanctions are needed to prevent the
dislocation
of interstate and overseas trade and commerce and the working of
Commonwealth services and
authorities’.
that, unlike the state governments, the Commonwealth, largely for constitutional
reasons, does not have comprehensive ‘emergency
powers’ type
legislation.
11.66 The Gibbs Committee noted that the question of the appropriate wording and
operation of ss 30J and 30K should be considered
in the context of
industrial relations legislation, rather than a review of the
The Committee also noted that ‘it may be convenient to remove
sub-sections 30J and 30K from the
and to include any
amended substitution for them in legislation dealing with industrial
relations’.
11.67 In a modern context, serious industrial disputes of this nature almost
certainly would be handled under the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
rather than the
. The Australian Government’s recent
amendments to the
Workplace Relations Act
, as part of the WorkChoices
has seen the inclusion
of provisions under which industrial action may be terminated in certain
circumstances. For example, under
s 498 of the Act, the Minister may make a
declaration terminating access to protected industrial action during a
bargaining period
if, for example, the industrial action threatens the life,
personal safety or health, or the welfare of the population or is causing
serious damage to the Australian economy. If person contravenes such an order, a
civil penalty may be imposed.
11.68 However, there is no direct equivalent of these emergency powers within
the industrial relations legislation, nor any criminal
penalties for incitement
of an illegal strike or lockout. The question of the necessity of criminal
sanctions in this context and
the appropriate prohibitions on serious industrial
action falls outside the terms of reference for this Inquiry.
11.69 The ALRC has proposed elsewhere in this Discussion Paper that the
Australian Government should initiate a review of a range
of offences contained
to determine which warrant retention, relocation to the
Criminal Code
or repeal. Sections 30J and 30K should be
included in this process.
The Australian Government should include
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) in the larger review of the
called for in
Proposal 4–1.
See R Douglas, ‘Keeping the
Revolution at Bay: The Unlawful Associations Provisions of the Commonwealth
[2001] AdelLawRw 4
Adelaide Law Review
Crimes Act 1914
R Douglas, ‘Keeping the
Revolution at Bay: The Unlawful Associations Provisions of the Commonwealth
[2001] AdelLawRw 4
Adelaide Law Review
See discussion in
Crimes Act 1914
s 30AB, with a maximum penalty of imprisonment for six
Ibid s 30B, imprisonment for
up to one year; and see s 30H regarding proof of
membership.
Ibid s 30D, imprisonment
for up to six months.
Ibid ss 30E,
Ibid s 30FC, imprisonment
for up to six months.
‘Keeping the Revolution at Bay: The Unlawful Associations Provisions of
the Commonwealth
[2001] AdelLawRw 4
Adelaide Law Review
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
R Douglas, ‘Keeping the
Revolution at Bay: The Unlawful Associations Provisions of the Commonwealth
[2001] AdelLawRw 4
Adelaide Law Review
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences: Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
R Douglas, ‘Keeping
the Revolution at Bay: The Unlawful Associations Provisions of the Commonwealth
[2001] AdelLawRw 4
Adelaide Law Review
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Fifth Interim Report
[38.2]–[38.9].
R Douglas, ‘Keeping the
Revolution at Bay: The Unlawful Associations Provisions of the Commonwealth
[2001] AdelLawRw 4
Adelaide Law Review
Ibid, 261 and
Ibid, 261 and
Ibid, 261 and
Ibid, 265. This issue was
discussed in the only case on
R v Hush; Ex parte Devanny
[1932] HCA 64
(1932) 48 CLR 487
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
(2005), [5.160]; citing C Connolly,
Submission 56 to
Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
, 7 November
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism
Bill (No 2) 2005
(2005), [5.159]; citing Gilbert & Tobin Centre of
Public Law,
Submission 80 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2)
, 10 November 2005.
C Connolly,
Submission 56 to Senate Inquiry into
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
November 2005.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee—Parliament of Australia,
Provisions of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No 2) 2005
[5.164]–[5.166].
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
Question 18.
See, eg, B Saul,
14 April 2006; National Association for the
Visual Arts,
11 April 2006; Australian Screen
Directors Association Limited,
New South Wales Council for Civil
Liberties Inc,
Victoria Legal Aid,
13 April 2006. This view was shared by others:
National Association for the Visual Arts,
April 2006; B Saul,
ARTICLE 19,
10 April 2006.
Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian Associated Press,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Security Legislation Amendment
(Terrorism) Act 2002
Criminal Code
s 100.1(2), (3).
s 101.1, punishable by a maximum of life
imprisonment.
Ibid s 101.2,
punishable by imprisonment for up to 15 or 25 years, depending upon the
circumstances.
Ibid s 101.4,
punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 or 15 years, depending upon the
circumstances.
Ibid s 101.5,
punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 or 15 years, depending upon the
circumstances.
Ibid s 101.6,
punishable by a maximum of life
imprisonment.
s 102.1(2).
s 102.1(1A).
s 102.1(3)–(4).
s 102.1(3)(c).
The full list may be
found at Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
of Terrorist Organisations
<www.nationalsecurity.gov.au> at 12 March
Criminal Code
s 102.2, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 or 15 years, depending
upon the circumstances.
s 102.3, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10
Ibid s 102.4, punishable by
imprisonment for up to 15 or 25 years, depending upon the
circumstances.
Ibid s 102.5,
punishable by imprisonment for up to 25
Ibid s 102.6, punishable by
imprisonment for up to 15 or 25 years, depending upon the
circumstances.
Ibid s 102.7,
punishable by imprisonment for up to 15 or 25 years, depending upon the
circumstances.
Ibid s 102.8,
punishable by imprisonment for up to three
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Ibid. The AGD made a submission
to the Sheller Committee, in which it called for the removal of the requirement
to prove an intention
to advance a political, religious or ideological cause on
the basis that it makes the definition of a terrorist act overly complicated,
and placed a heavy burden on the prosecution: Attorney-General’s
Department,
Submission to the Security Legislation Review
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Sedition Laws
, IP 30 (2006),
Question 19.
Australian Federal
Consultation
, Canberra, 26 April
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
Consultation
, Canberra, 26 April
Victoria Legal Aid,
New South Wales Council for Civil
Liberties Inc,
R Connolly and C Connolly,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 April 2006; Human Rights Lawyers,
Consultation
, Sydney, 29 March 2006; D Neal,
Consultation
Melbourne, 4 April 2006; M Weinberg,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 3 April
2006; B Saul,
ARTICLE 19,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Offences Relating to the Security and
Defence of the Commonwealth
, Discussion Paper No 8 (1988),
Crimes Act 1914
s 30J(2)(a).
s 30J(2)(b).
1951, 623 and 802.
and H Glasbeek
Labour Law in Australia
(1972), 541, cited in H Lee,
Emergency Powers
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Offences Relating to the Security and
Defence of the Commonwealth
, Discussion Paper No 8 (1988),
Workplace Relations Amendment
(Work Choices) Act 2005
penalty cannot be more than 300 penalty units for a body corporate or 60 penalty
units in any other case:
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Appendix 1. Existing
Criminal Code
security of the Commonwealth
and sedition
Division 80
and sedition
Definition of
organisation
In this Division:
organisation
(a) a body corporate; or
(b) an unincorporated body;
whether or not the body is based outside
Australia, consists of persons who are not Australian citizens, or is part of a
larger organisation.
(1) A person commits an offence, called treason, if the person:
(a) causes the death of the Sovereign, the heir apparent of the Sovereign,
the consort of the Sovereign, the Governor-General or
the Prime Minister; or
(b) causes harm to the Sovereign, the Governor-General or the Prime Minister
resulting in the death of the Sovereign, the Governor-General
or the Prime
Minister; or
(c) causes harm to the Sovereign, the Governor-General or the Prime
Minister, or imprisons or restrains the Sovereign, the Governor-General
Prime Minister; or
(d) levies war, or does any act preparatory to levying war, against the
Commonwealth; or
(e) engages in conduct that assists by any means whatever, with intent to
assist, an enemy:
(i) at war with the Commonwealth, whether or not the existence of a state of
war has been declared; and
(ii) specified by Proclamation made for the purpose of this paragraph to be
an enemy at war with the Commonwealth; or
(f) engages in conduct that assists by any means whatever, with intent to
(i) another country; or
(ii) an organisation;
that is engaged in armed hostilities against the Australian Defence Force;
(g) instigates a person who is not an Australian citizen to make an armed
invasion of the Commonwealth or a Territory of the Commonwealth;
(h) forms an intention to do any act referred to in a preceding paragraph
and manifests that intention by an overt act.
Penalty: Imprisonment for life.
(1A) Paragraphs (1)(e) and (f) do not apply to engagement in conduct by
way of, or for the purposes of, the provision of aid of a
humanitarian
Note 1: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in
subsection (1A). See
subsection 13.3(3).
Note 2: There is a defence in
section 80.3
for acts done in good faith.
(1B) Paragraph (1)(h) does not apply to formation of an intention to
engage in conduct that:
(a) is referred to in paragraph (1)(e) or (f); and
(b) is by way of, or for the purposes of, the provision of aid of a
humanitarian nature.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in
subsection (1B). See
subsection 13.3(3).
(2) A person commits an offence if the person:
(a) receives or assists another person who, to his or her knowledge, has
committed treason with the intention of allowing him or
her to escape punishment
or apprehension; or
(b) knowing that another person intends to commit treason, does not inform a
constable of it within a reasonable time or use other
reasonable endeavours to
prevent the commission of the offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for life.
(5) On the trial of a person charged with treason on the ground that he or
she formed an intention to do an act referred to in paragraph
(1)(a), (b),
(c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) and manifested that intention by an overt act,
evidence of the overt act is not to be admitted
unless the overt act is alleged
in the indictment.
(8) In this section:
means a member or special member of the Australian
Federal Police or a member of the police force or police service of a State or
Urging the overthrow of the
Constitution
or Government
(1) A person commits an offence if the person urges another person to
overthrow by force or violence:
Constitution
(b) the Government of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
(c) the lawful authority of the Government of the Commonwealth.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
(2) Recklessness applies to the element of the offence under
subsection (1) that it is:
Constitution
(b) the Government of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
(c) the lawful authority of the Government of the Commonwealth;
that the first-mentioned person urges the other person to overthrow.
Urging interference in Parliamentary elections
(3) A person commits an offence if the person urges another person to
interfere by force or violence with lawful processes for
an election of a
member or members of a House of the Parliament.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
(4) Recklessness applies to the element of the offence under
subsection (3) that it is lawful processes for an election of a member
members of a House of the Parliament that the first-mentioned person urges the
other person to interfere with.
Urging violence within the community
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person urges a group or groups (whether distinguished by race,
religion, nationality or political opinion) to use force or
violence against
another group or other groups (as so distinguished); and
(b) the use of the force or violence would threaten the peace, order and
good government of the Commonwealth.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
(6) Recklessness applies to the element of the offence under
subsection (5) that it is a group or groups that are distinguished by
religion, nationality or political opinion that the first-mentioned person urges
the other person to use force or violence
Urging a person to assist the enemy
(7) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person urges another person to engage in conduct; and
(b) the first-mentioned person intends the conduct to assist an organisation
or country; and
(c) the organisation or country is:
(i) at war with the Commonwealth, whether or not the existence of a state of
war has been declared; and
(ii) specified by Proclamation made for the purpose of paragraph 80.1(1)(e)
to be an enemy at war with the Commonwealth.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
Urging a person to assist those engaged in armed hostilities
(8) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person urges another person to engage in conduct; and
(b) the first-mentioned person intends the conduct to assist an organisation
or country; and
(c) the organisation or country is engaged in armed hostilities against the
Australian Defence Force.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
(9) Subsections (7) and (8) do not apply to engagement in conduct by way
of, or for the purposes of, the provision of aid of a humanitarian
Note 1: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in
subsection (9). See subsection 13.3(3).
Note 2: There is a defence in section 80.3 for acts done in good faith.
Defence for acts done in good
(1) Sections 80.1 and 80.2 do not apply to a person who:
(a) tries in good faith to show that any of the following persons are
mistaken in any of his or her counsels, policies or actions:
(i) the Sovereign;
(ii) the Governor-General;
(iii) the Governor of a State;
(iv) the Administrator of a Territory;
(v) an adviser of any of the above;
(vi) a person responsible for the government of another country; or
(b) points out in good faith errors or defects in the following, with a view
to reforming those errors or defects:
(i) the Government of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory;
Constitution
(iii) legislation of the Commonwealth, a State, a Territory or another
(iv) the administration of justice of or in the Commonwealth, a State, a
Territory or another country; or
(c) urges in good faith another person to attempt to lawfully procure a
change to any matter established by law, policy or practice
in the Commonwealth,
a State, a Territory or another country; or
(d) points out in good faith any matters that are producing, or have a
tendency to produce, feelings of ill-will or hostility between
different groups,
in order to bring about the removal of those matters; or
(e) does anything in good faith in connection with an industrial dispute or
an industrial matter; or
(f) publishes in good faith a report or commentary about a matter of public
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in
subsection (1). See subsection 13.3(3).
(2) In considering a defence under subsection (1), the Court may have
regard to any relevant matter, including whether the acts were
(a) for a purpose intended to be prejudicial to the safety or defence of the
Commonwealth; or
(b) with the intention of assisting an enemy:
(i) at war with the Commonwealth; and
(ii) specified by Proclamation made for the purpose of paragraph 80.1(1)(e)
to be an enemy at war with the Commonwealth; or
(c) with the intention of assisting another country, or an organisation,
that is engaged in armed hostilities against the Australian
Defence Force;
(d) with the intention of assisting a proclaimed enemy of a proclaimed
country (within the meaning of subsection 24AA(4) of the
(e) with the intention of assisting persons specified in paragraphs
24AA(2)(a) and (b) of the
Crimes Act 1914
(f) with the intention of causing violence or creating public disorder or a
public disturbance.
Extended geographical
Section 15.4 (extended geographical jurisdiction—category D)
applies to an offence against this Division.
Attorney-General’s consent
(1) Proceedings for an offence against this Division must not be commenced
without the Attorney-General’s written consent.
(2) Despite subsection (1):
(a) a person may be arrested for an offence against this Division; or
(b) a warrant for the arrest of a person for such an offence may be issued
and executed;
and the person may be charged, and may be remanded in custody or on bail,
(c) no further proceedings may be taken until that consent has been
obtained; and
(d) the person must be discharged if proceedings are not continued within a
reasonable time.
Division not intended to exclude
State or Territory law
It is the intention of the Parliament that this Division is not to apply to
the exclusion of a law of a State or a Territory to the
extent that the law is
capable of operating concurrently with this Division.
2. Proposed Division 80 of
Criminal Code
[The ALRC’s proposed amendments to
Division 80 are
highlighted.]
security of the Commonwealth
Treason and
offences against political liberty and public
Division 80
Treason and
offences against political liberty and public
Definition of
organisation
organisation
(a) a body corporate; or
(b) an unincorporated body;
or not the body is based outside Australia, consists of persons who are
Australian citizens, or is part of a larger organisation.
(1) A person commits an offence, called treason, if
at the time of
the offence, being an Australian citizen or
the person:
(a) causes the death of the Sovereign, the heir apparent of
the Sovereign,
the consort of the Sovereign, the Governor-General or
Minister; or
(b) causes harm to the Sovereign, the Governor-General or the
Prime Minister
resulting in the death of the Sovereign, the Governor-General
Minister; or
(c) causes harm to the Sovereign, the Governor-General or the
Minister, or imprisons or restrains the Sovereign, the Governor-General
Prime Minister; or
(d) levies war, or does any act preparatory to levying war,
against the
Commonwealth; or
(e) engages in conduct that
, with intent to assist, an enemy
to engage in
war with the Commonwealth
(i) whether or not the existence of a state of war has been
declared; and
(ii) a Proclamation made for the purpose of this paragraph
specifies that
the entity assisted is
an enemy at war with the Commonwealth; or
(f) engages in conduct that
, with intent to assist,
country or an organisation to engage in armed
hostilities
against the Australian Defence Force;
Note: The word
‘materially’ in
paragraphs (e) and (f) is meant to make clear that mere rhetoric or
expressions
are not sufficient; the assistance must enable the enemy or
wage war or engage in armed hostilities, such as through the
troops, arms, or strategic advice or information.
(g) instigates a person who is not an
Australian citizen to make an armed
invasion of the Commonwealth or a Territory of the Commonwealth;
(h) forms an intention to do any act referred to in a
preceding paragraph
and manifests that intention by an overt act.
Penalty: Imprisonment for life.
(1A) Paragraphs (1)(e) and (f) do not apply to
engagement in conduct by
way of, or for the purposes of, the provision of aid of a
humanitarian
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in
relation to the matter in
subsection (1A). See subsection 13.3(3).
(1B) Paragraph (1)(h) does not
apply to formation of an intention to
engage in conduct that:
(a) is referred to in paragraph (1)(e) or (f); and
(b) is by way of, or for the purposes of, the provision of
humanitarian nature.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in
relation to the matter in
subsection (1B). See subsection 13.3(3).
(2) A person commits an offence if the
(a) receives or assists another person who, to his or her
knowledge, has
committed treason with the intention of allowing him or
her to escape
or apprehension; or
(b) knowing that another person intends to commit treason,
does not inform a
constable of it within a reasonable time or use other
endeavours to
prevent the commission of the offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for life.
(5) On the trial of a person charged with treason on the
ground that he or
she formed an intention to do an act referred to in
(1)(a), (b),
(c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) and manifested that intention by an overt
evidence of the overt act is not to be admitted
unless the overt act is
in the indictment.
(8) In this section:
member or special member of the Australian
Federal Police or a member of the police force or police service of a
against political liberty and public order
Urging the overthrow
by force or
Constitution
or Government
(1) A person commits an offence if the person
intentionally
urges another person to
overthrow by force or violence:
Constitution
(b) the Government of the Commonwealth, a State or a
Territory; or
(c) the lawful authority of the Government of the
Commonwealth.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
(2) Recklessness applies to the element of the offence under
subsection (1) that it is:
Constitution
(b) the Government of the Commonwealth, a State or a
Territory; or
(c) the lawful authority of the Government of the
Commonwealth;
that the first-mentioned person urges the other person to
section 80.2(7) regarding proof of
intention that the urged force or violence will occur.
Urging interference in
Parliamentary elections
by force or
(3) A person commits an offence if the person
intentionally
urges another person to
interfere by force or violence with lawful processes for
election of a
member or members of a House of the Parliament
for a referendum on a proposed law for the alteration of the
Constitution
Penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
(4) Recklessness applies to the element of the offence under
subsection (3) that it is lawful processes for an election of
members of a House of the Parliament
referendum on a proposed law for the alteration of the
Constitution
that the first-mentioned person urges the other person to
interfere with.
section 80.2(7) regarding proof of
intention that the urged force or violence will occur.
inter-group
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person
intentionally
urges a group or groups (whether distinguished by race,
religion, nationality,
national origin
or political opinion) to use force or violence against another
group or other groups (as so distinguished); and
(b) the use of the force or violence would threaten the
peace, order and
good government of the Commonwealth.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
(6) Recklessness applies to the element of the offence under
subsection (5) that it is a group or groups that are
distinguished by
religion, nationality,
national origin
or political opinion that the first-mentioned person urges the
other person to use force or violence against.
section 80.2(7) regarding proof of
intention that the urged force or violence will occur.
person to be guilty of an offence under
subsections (1), (3) or (5) the person must intend that the force or
will occur.
In considering whether for the purposes of
subsection (7) a person intends that the urged force or violence will
of fact must take into account whether the conduct was done
in the performance, exhibition or
distribution of an artistic work; or
in the course of any statement, publication,
discussion or debate made or held for any genuine academic, artistic or
purpose or any other genuine purpose in the public interest;
in connection with an industrial dispute or
an industrial matter; or
in publishing a report or commentary about a
matter of public interest;
may have regard to any relevant
(7) Urging a
person to assist the enemy—Repealed.
See s 80.1(1)(e) for the equivalent treason
(8) Urging a
person to assist those engaged in
armed hostilities—Repealed.
See s 80.1(1)(f) for the equivalent treason
Defence—Repealed.
See s 80.1(1A) for the equivalent
humanitarian aid exclusion to the offence
of treason.
80.3 Defence
for acts done in good
See s 80.2(7)–(8) regarding proof
of intention that the urged force
or violence will occur, and the context to be considered.
80.4 Extended geographical
Section 15.4 (extended
geographical
Attorney-General’s consent
required—Repealed
Division not intended to exclude
State or Territory law
It is the intention
of the Parliament that this
Division is not to apply to the exclusion of a law of a State or a
Territory to
extent that the law is capable of operating concurrently with this
Appendix 3. List of
Submissions
Submission Number
10 April 2006
Arts Law Centre of Australia
13 April 2006
Australia Council for the Arts
11 April 2006
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
20 April 2006
Australian Government Attorney-General's Department
12 April 2006
Australian Lawyers for Human Rights
13 April 2006
Australian Major Performing Arts Group
16 April 2006
Australian Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network
17 April 2006
Australian Press Council
13 April 2006
Australian Screen Directors Association
10 April 2006
Australian Society of Authors
18 April 2006
Australian Vice-Chancellors’ Committee
25 April 2006
Australian Writers’ Guild
11 April 2006
22 April 2006
Cameron Creswell Agency Pty Ltd
10 April 2006
Centre for Media and Communications Law
12 April 2006
Civil Liberties Australia
10 April 2006
Combined Community Legal Centres Group (NSW) Inc
13 April 2006
Confidential
4 April 2006
Confidential
10 April 2006
Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic)
10 April 2006
Fitzroy Legal Service Inc
10 April 2006
Free TV Australia
19 April 2006
5 April 2006
S Gurciullo
29 March 2006
28 March 2006
9 March 2006
John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, News Limited and Australian Associated
18 April 2006
24 April 2006
Law Society of Western Australia
28 March 2006
30 March 2006
Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance
10 April 2006
7 April 2006
31 March 2006
National Association for the Visual Arts
11 April 2006
National Legal Aid
20 April 2006
National Tertiary Education Union
10 April 2006
13 April 2006
20 April 2006
New South Wales Bar Association
7 April 2006
New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties Inc
10 April 2006
New South Wales Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee
10 April 2006
Pax Christi
9 April 2006
Public Interest Advocacy Centre
18 April 2006
12 March 2006
10 April 2006
Queensland Council for Civil Liberties
10 April 2006
N Roxon MP, Shadow Attorney-General
28 April 2006
14 April 2006
Screen Producers Association of Australia
11 April 2006
27 March 2006
24 March 2006
10 April 2006
23 March 2006
J Stanhope MLA, Chief Minister ACT
13 April 2006
18 April 2006
10 April 2006
21 March 2006
Victoria Legal Aid
13 April 2006
12 April 2006
21 March 2006
19 April 2006
G Zdenkowski
Appendix 4. List of
Consultations
Anti-Discrimination Board of New South Wales
Australian Federal Police
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department
Australian National University Academics
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
R Connolly & C Connolly
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Human Rights Lawyers
Law Institute of Victoria
Media and Arts Organisations
Media Organisations
New South Wales Bar Association
University of Melbourne Academics
Victorian Bar Human Rights Committee
Appendix 5. List of
Abbreviations
The entities listed below are Australian entities unless otherwise
Australian Associated Press
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Australian Capital Territory
Australian Defence Force
Australian Electoral Commission
Australian Federal Police
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department
Australian Lawyers for Human Rights
Australian Muslim Civil Rights Advocacy Network
Australian Screen Directors Association
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the
People’s Republic of China 1997
Closed circuit television
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial
Discrimination 1966
Community Legal Centres
Council of Australian Governments
Communist Party of Australia
Director of Public Prosecutions
Council of Europe
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms 1950
Gibbs Committee
Committee of Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law
Hope Commission
Hope Royal Commission on Australia’s Security and Intelligence
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
International Covenant Civil and Political Rights 1966
Review of Sedition Laws
(ALRC Issues Paper 30, 2006)
Law Reform Commission of Canada
Model Criminal Code Officers Committee
Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance
National Association for the Visuals Arts Ltd
Office of National Assessments
Public Interest Advocacy Centre
Prisoner of War
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General
Torres Strait Regional Authority
United Nations
United Nations Commission on Human Rights
United Nations Human Rights Committee
Victoria Legal Aid
Related Materials
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (13.4 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter