URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCCP/2010/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:31:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Discovery in Federal Courts [2010] ALRCCP 2
The HTML version of this report has been generated from documents using
optical recognition software, and may
contain errors that do not appear in the
original printed version. Some tables and graphs also may not be accurately
reproduced.
PDF version
is also available.
ALRC Consultation Paper 2
Discovery in Federal Courts
Table of Contents
Terms of Reference
List of Participants
List of Questions and Proposals
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
Scope of the Inquiry
Organisation of this Consultation Paper
Process of reform
Stop Press—National Legal Profession Taskforce Interim Report
2. Legal Framework for Discovery in Federal Courts
Introduction
Legal framework
Issues with the laws of discovery
3. Discovery Practice and Procedure in Federal Courts
Introduction
Procedural framework
Issues with the process of discovery
4. Ensuring Professional Integrity: Ethical Obligations and Discovery
Introduction
Sources of legal ethical obligations
Legal ethical obligations, misconduct and discovery
Disciplinary structures and court imposed sanctions
Legal ethical obligations, misconduct and discovery: issues arising
Legal education
5. Alternatives to Discovery
Introduction
What are pre-action protocols?
Pre-action protocols in the United Kingdom
Implementation issues
The Australian context
Pre-trial oral examinations
Pre-trial oral examinations in the Australian context
Other alternatives
Appendix 1. List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals Consulted
This Consultation Paper reflects the law as at 31 October 2010.
� Commonwealth of Australia 2010
This work is copyright. You may download, display, print and reproduce this material in whole or part, subject to acknowledgement
of the source, for your personal, non-commercial use or use within your organisation. Apart from any use as permitted under the
(Cth), all other rights are reserved. Requests for further authorisation should be directed by letter to the Commonwealth Copyright
Administration, Copyright Law Branch, Attorney-General�s Department, Robert Garran Offices, National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600 or
electronically via www.ag.gov.au/cca.
Australian Law Reform Commission Reference: ALRC Consultation Paper 2
The Australian Law Reform Commission was established on 1 January 1975 by the
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
(Cth) and reconstituted by the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
(Cth). The office of the ALRC is at Level 25, 135 King Street, Sydney, NSW, 2000, Australia.
All ALRC publications can be made available in a range of accessible formats for people with disabilities. If you require assistance,
please contact the ALRC.
within Australia (02) 8238 6333
International +61 2 8238 6333
TTY: (02) 8238 6379<
within Australia (02) 8238 6363
International +61 2 8238 6363
E-mail: discovery@alrc.gov.au
Making a Submission to the Inquiry
Any public contribution to an inquiry is called a submission. The Australian Law Reform Commission seeks submissions from a broad
cross-section of the community, as well as from those with a special interest in a particular inquiry.
The closing date for submissions
to this Inquiry is Wednesday 19 January 2011.
There are a range of ways to make a submission or comment on the proposals and questions
posed in the Consultation Paper. You may respond to as many or as few questions and proposals as you wish.
Online submission tool
The ALRC strongly encourages online submissions directly through the ALRC�s website
, where an online submission form will allow you to respond to individual questions and/or proposals. Once you have logged into the
site, you will be able to save your work, edit your responses, and leave and re-enter the site as many times as you need to before
lodging your final submission.
Further instructions are available on the site. If you have any difficulties using the online submission form, please email web@alrc.gov.au,
or phone +61 2 8238 6333.
Alternatively, written submissions may be mailed, faxed or emailed to:
The Executive Director
Australian Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 3708
SYDNEY NSW 2001
Email: discovery@alrc.gov.au
Facsimile: +61 2 8238 6363
Open inquiry policy
As submissions provide important evidence to each inquiry, it is common for the Commissions to draw upon the contents of submissions
and quote from them or refer to them in publications. Non-confidential submissions are made available to any person or organisation
upon request after completion of an inquiry. For the purposes of this policy, an inquiry is considered to have been completed when
the final Report has been tabled in Parliament. Non-confidential submissions may also be published on the ALRC website.
The Commissions
also accept submissions made in confidence. Any request for access to a confidential submission is determined in accordance with
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth), which has provisions designed to protect sensitive information given in confidence.
In the absence of a clear indication that a submission is intended to be confidential, the Commissions will treat the submission as
non-confidential.
ALRC CP2 Discovery in Federal Courts
TERMS OF REFERENCE
The 2009 report by the Access to Justice Taskforce, A Strategic Framework for
Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
examined access to civil
justice in the federal system from a system-wide, strategic perspective. In
considering barriers to justice
in relation to court based dispute resolution,
the Taskforce noted the high and often disproportionate cost of discovery and
recommended
further enquiry on the issue.
I refer to the Australian Law Reform Commission for inquiry and report
pursuant to
subsection 20(1)
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
• the law, practice and management of the discovery of documents in
litigation before federal courts;
• ensuring that cost and time required for discovery of documents is
proportionate to the matters in dispute, including but
not limited to:
the effectiveness of different types of discovery orders
the effectiveness and enforceability of requiring parties to
identify and disclose critical documents as early as possible
the effectiveness of different costs orders
• to limit the overuse of discovery, reduce the expense of discovery
and ensure key documents relevant to the real issues in
dispute are identified
as early as possible;
• the impact of technology on the discovery of documents.
In conducting its inquiry, the Commission’s objective is to identify
law reform options to improve the practical operation and
effectiveness of
discovery of documents. In particular, the Commission shall have regard to:
• alternatives to discovery;
• the role of courts in managing discovery, including the courts’
case management
• powers and mechanisms to enable courts to better exercise those
powers in the
context of discovery;
• implications of the cost of discovery on the conduct of litigation,
including means to limit the extent to which discovery
gives rise to satellite
litigation and the use of discovery for strategic purposes;
• costs issues, for example cost capping, security for discovery costs,
and upfront
payment; and
• the sufficiency, clarity and enforceability of obligations on
practitioners and parties to identify relevant material as early
Collaboration and Consultation
In undertaking this reference, the Commission should:
• have regard to the experiences of other jurisdictions, including
commonality of
approach that any recommendations can be applied in relation to the federal
courts; and
• consult with key stakeholders including relevant courts and the legal
profession.
The Commission will report no later than 31 March 2011.
ALRC CP2 Discovery in Federal Courts
List of Participants
Commissioners
Legal Officers
Project Assistant
Legal Interns
Advisory Committee Members
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
Commissioners
Professor Rosalind Croucher, President
The Hon Justice Berna Collier, Part-time Commissioner
The Hon Justice Arthur Emmett, Part-time Commissioner (appointed
28 October 2010)
The Hon Justice Susan Kenny, Part-time Commissioner
The Hon Justice Bruce Lander,
Part-time Commissioner (appointed 28 October
Legal Officers
Patrick Collins, Senior Legal Officer
Amanda Alford, Legal Officer (from September 2010)
Jared Boorer, Legal Officer (from October 2010)
Khanh Hoang, Legal Officer (from September 2010)
Christina Raymond, Legal Officer (from November 2010)
Carolyn Kearney
Project Assistant
Tina O’Brien
Legal Interns
Mayuri Anupindi
Kate Nielson
Advisory Committee Members
Robert Alexander, General Counsel, Australian Competition & Consumer
Commission, Canberra
Dr Peter Cashman, Director, Social Justice Program, University of Sydney,
Stuart Clark, Chief Operating Officer, Clayton Utz, Sydney
The Hon Justice Ray Finkelstein, Federal Court of Australia, Melbourne
David Gaszner, Thomsons Lawyers, Adelaide
Sue Laver, General Counsel, Telstra, Melbourne
Catherine Leslie, Special Counsel Tax Litigation, Australian Government
Solicitor, Sydney
The Hon Kevin Lindgren QC, formerly a Judge of the Federal Court of
Bernard Murphy, Maurice Blackburn, Melbourne
Professor Les McCrimmon, School of Law & Business, Charles Darwin
University, Darwin
Associate-Professor Christine Parker, Faculty of Law, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne
Matt Minogue, A/g First Assistant Secretary, International Crime Cooperation
Division, Attorney-General’s Department, Canberra
ALRC CP2 Discovery in Federal Courts
List of Questions and Proposals
List of Questions and Proposals
2. Legal Framework for Discovery in Federal Courts
Question 2–1
What issues, if any, arise in the application of
Peruvian Guano
case to discovery in civil proceedings before the High
Question 2–2
Does the requirement for leave of the court
effectively regulate the use of discovery in civil proceedings in the Federal
Question 2–3
Is the law sufficiently clear on when the Federal
Court should grant leave for discovery of documents in civil proceedings?
Question 2–4
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) be amended to adopt the provisions of
Magistrates Act 1999
in relation to discovery, so that
discovery would not be allowed in the Federal Court unless the court made a
declaration that it
is appropriate, in the interests of the administration of
justice, to allow the discovery? If not, should another threshold test
adopted? What should that threshold test be?
Question 2–5
Are the categories of documents required to be
disclosed under the
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) too broad? If so, where
should the parameters be set?
Question 2–6
Should O 15 r 2 of the
Federal Court Rules
be amended to adopt the categories of documents discoverable in
Fast Track proceedings, so that discovery in the Federal Court is
limited to the
following documents of which the party giving discovery is aware at the time
orders for discovery are made or discovers
after a good faith proportionate
(a) documents on which the party intends to rely; and
(b) documents that have significant probative value adverse to a
party’s case?
Question 2–7
Are the disclosure obligations on parties to
proceedings before the Family Court working well and is the Court adequately
to deal with instances of non-compliance with disclosure
obligations?
Proposal 2–1
Federal Magistrates Act 1999
(Cth), which provides that discovery is not allowed unless the court
declares that it is appropriate in the interests of the administration
should note that disclosure obligations under part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(Cth) (including the obligations to
produce documents under rr 24.04 and 24.05) are not contingent upon compliance
with s 45 of the
3. Discovery Practice and Procedure in Federal Courts
Question 3–1
What issues, if any, have arisen in the procedures
adopted by the High Court for the discovery of documents in civil
proceedings?
Question 3–2
In general, does the amount of money spent on the
discovery process in proceedings before the Federal Court generate:
(a) too much information;
(b) too little information; or
(c) about the right amount of information
to facilitate the just and efficient disposal of the litigation?
Where possible, please provide examples or illustrations of the costs of
discovery relative to the information needs of the case.
Question 3–3
Are there any particular approaches to the
discovery of electronically-stored information that help to save time and cost
in the process?
Do any particular approaches cause inefficiencies or waste?
Question 3–4
Has discovery by categories of documents, or
particular issues in dispute, reduced the burden of discovery in proceedings
Federal Court? If not, what has prevented the parties, their lawyers
and the court from cost-effectively limiting the scope of discovery?
Question 3–5
Has the creation of discovery plans and use of
pre-discovery conferences helped to ensure proportionality in the discovery
of electronically-stored information in Federal Court
proceedings? If not, what
has prevented the court, the parties and their lawyers from establishing
practical and cost-effective discovery
plans in advance of the search for
electronic documents?
In particular, are the expectations stated in
Practice Note CM 6
parties to exchange their best preliminary estimate of the cost associated with
discovery, and to agree on a timetable for discovery,
generally being met in
Proposal 3–1
Following an application for a discovery order, an
initial case management conference (called a ‘pre-discovery
conference’)
should be set down, at a time and place specified by the
court, to define the core issues in dispute in relation to which documents
be discovered. At the pre-discovery conference, the parties should be required
(a) outline the facts and issues that appear to be in dispute;
(b) identify which of these issues are the most critical to the proceedings;
(c) identify the particular documents, or outline the specific categories of
documents, which a party seeks to discover and that
are reasonably believed to
exist in the possession, custody or power of another party.
Proposal 3–2
Prior to the pre-discovery conference proposed in
Proposal 3–1, the party seeking discovery should be required to file and
a written statement containing a narrative of the factual issues that
appear to be in dispute. The party should also be required
to include in this
statement any legal issues that appear to be in dispute. The party should be
required to state these issues in
order of importance in the proceedings,
according to the party’s understanding of the case. With respect to any of
included in this statement and concerning which the party seeks
discovery of documents, the party should be required to describe
each particular
document or specific category of document that is reasonably believed to exist
in the possession, custody or power
of another party.
Proposal 3–3
Prior to the pre-discovery conference proposed in
Proposal 3–1, the parties should be required to file and serve an initial
witness list with the names of each witness the party intends to call at trial
and a brief summary of the expected testimony of each
witness. Unless it is
otherwise obvious, each party’s witness list should also state the
relevance of the evidence of each
Question 3–6
Should parties be required to produce to each
other and the court key documents early in proceedings before the Federal Court?
so, how could such a procedural requirement effectively be imposed?
Question 3–7
Are existing procedures under O 15 rr 10 and 13 of
Federal Court Rules
adequate to obtain production of key
documents to the court or a party? How could these procedures be utilised more
effectively?
Proposal 3–4
In any proceeding before the Federal Court in
which the court has directed that discovery be given of documents in an
electronic format,
the following procedural steps should be required:
(a) the parties and their legal representatives to meet and confer for the
purposes of discussing a practical and cost-effective
discovery plan in relation
to electronically-stored information;
(b) the parties jointly to file in court a written report outlining the
matters on which the parties agree in relation to the discovery
of electronic
documents and a summary of any matters on which they disagree; and
(c) the court to determine any areas of disagreement between the parties and
to make any adjustments to the proposed discovery plan
as required to satisfy
the court that the proposed searches are reasonable and the proposed discovery
is necessary.
If so satisfied, the court may make orders for discovery by approving the
parties’ discovery plan.
Question 3–8
Should special masters be introduced to manage the
discovery process in proceedings before the Federal Court? If so, what model
be adopted?
Proposal 3–5
Part VB of the
Federal Court of Australia Act
(Cth) should be amended to provide the court with broad and express
discretion to exercise case management powers and impose sanctions
in relation
to the discovery of documents, in line with
Procedure Act 2010
Question 3–9
Should there be a presumption that a party
requesting discovery of documents in proceedings before the Federal Court will
estimated cost in advance, unless the court orders otherwise?
Question 3–10
Should the Federal Court have explicit statutory
powers to make orders limiting the costs able to be charged by a law practice to
a client for discovery, to the actual costs to the law practice of carrying out
such work (with a reasonable allowance for overheads,
but excluding a mark up or
profit component)?
Proposal 3–6
The Federal Court should develop and maintain a
continuing judicial education and training program specifically dealing with
management of the discovery process in Federal Court proceedings,
including the technologies used in the discovery of electronically-stored
information.
Proposal 3–7
The Australian Government should fund initiatives
in the Federal Court to establish and maintain data collection facilities, to
data on the costs associated with discovery of documents, as well as
information on the proportionality of a discovery process—in
terms of the
costs of discovery relative to the total litigation costs, the value of what is
at stake for the parties in the litigation,
and the utility of discovered
documents in the context of the litigation.
Question 3–11
What issues, if any, arise in the procedures
prescribed for disclosure of documents in proceedings before the Family
Question 3–12
What issues, if any, arise in the procedures
prescribed for disclosure of documents in proceedings before the Federal
Magistrates
4. Ensuring Professional Integrity: Ethical Obligations and
Question 4–1
In practice, how do lawyers make decisions about
whether to discover a document which falls within the scope of a discovery
or order, but that is not substantially relevant to the issues in
Question 4–2
In practice, how do lawyers make decisions about
whether to discover relevant documents that may potentially fall outside the
of a discovery request or order?
Question 4–3
Is discovery used as a delaying strategy in
litigation before federal courts? If so, how and to what extent?
Question 4–4
Is discovery used to increase legal costs
unnecessarily, either for the profit of law firms, to exhaust the resources of
parties, or for any other reason? If so, how, to what extent, and for
what reasons?
Question 4–5
How does delegation of responsibility for
reviewing and categorising documents relevant to the discovery process affect
the practice
of discovery in litigation before federal courts?
Question 4–6
How does outsourcing discovery overseas affect the
practice, including the cost and efficiency, of discovery in litigation before
federal courts?
Question 4–7
Are relevant and discoverable documents wrongfully
destroyed in anticipation, or in the course, of litigation before federal
If so, how, by whom, and to what extent? If this occurs, are the current
provisions in New South Wales and Victoria effectively addressing
Question 4–8
Is the discovery process deliberately abused by
lawyers working in litigation before federal courts? If so, how and to what
Question 4–9
Are lawyers and litigants properly informed about
their professional and legal responsibilities in relation to discovery? If not,
what are the best ways of ensuring that lawyers and litigants are properly
informed about their professional and legal responsibilities
in relation to
Question 4–10
Are existing general legal ethical obligations in
professional rules sufficiently specific and clear so that lawyers are aware of
their obligations concerning discovery?
Question 4–11
Should professional conduct rules be amended to
include specific legal ethical obligations concerning discovery?
Proposal 4–1
The Law Council of Australia, the Australian Bar
Association and legal professional bodies in each state and territory should
commentary as part of, or as a supplement to, the professional conduct
rules with a particular focus on a lawyer’s legal ethical
obligations with
respect to the discovery of documents.
Proposal 4–2
The Australian Government, state and territory
governments, the Law Council of Australia, the Australian Bar Association and
professional bodies in each state and territory should ensure legal
profession legislation and/or professional conduct rules provide
practice can only charge costs for discovery which are fair and reasonable.
Question 4–12
How should lawyers determine what are fair and
reasonable costs in the context of discovery?
Question 4–13
How might law firms foster a culture of
reasonable and ethical discovery practice?
Question 4–14
What is the best way to ensure clients, lawyers
and courts report allegations of lawyer misconduct to relevant disciplinary
Question 4–15
Should professional conduct rules provide that a
practitioner must promptly disclose to the relevant legal professional body the
of any misconduct arising in the context of discovery?
Question 4–16
If practitioners should be required to disclose
misconduct in accordance with Question 4–15, what conduct should they be
to disclose?
Question 4–17
In practice, how often do costs assessors refer
lawyers to disciplinary bodies for investigation of suspected gross
overcharging?
Question 4–18
Are existing legal professional disciplinary
structures sufficient to deal with allegations of discovery abuse?
Question 4–19
If existing legal professional disciplinary
structures are not sufficient to deal with allegations of discovery abuse, how
lawyers be disciplined for:
(a) a failure to comply with discovery obligations; or
(b) conduct intended to delay, frustrate or avoid discovery of
Question 4–20
What impact, if any, has electronic discovery had
on the legal ethical obligations owed by lawyers?
Question 4–21
Are existing general legal ethical obligations in
professional rules sufficiently specific and clear so that lawyers are aware of
their obligations in the context of electronic discovery?
Question 4–22
Should professional conduct rules be amended to
include specific legal ethical obligations concerning electronic discovery?
Proposal 4–3
The Law Council of Australia, the Australian Bar
Association and the legal professional bodies in each state and territory should
develop commentary as part of, or a supplement to, the professional conduct
rules with a particular focus on a lawyer’s legal
ethical obligations with
respect to the electronic discovery of documents.
Question 4–23
Are law students and lawyers studying the legal
and ethical responsibilities of lawyers with respect to discovery? If so, is
training and education sufficient?
Question 4–24
How should law students and lawyers be trained in
the legal and ethical responsibilities of lawyers with respect to discovery?
Question 4–25
Is discovery abuse and misconduct likely to be
reduced in practice if law students and lawyers are provided with more education
the legal and ethical responsibilities of lawyers with respect to
Proposal 4–4
Providers of legal education should give
appropriate attention to the legal and ethical responsibilities of lawyers in
relation to
the discovery of documents in existing and proposed civil
litigation, case management and ethics subjects that form part of:
(a) law degrees, particularly those required for admission to practice as a
solicitor or barrister;
(b) practical legal training required for admission to practice as a
solicitor or barrister; and
(c) continuing legal education programs, including those required for
obtaining and maintaining a practising certificate.
Proposal 4–5
Legal professional bodies should issue to their
members ‘best practice’ notes about the legal ethical obligations of
with respect to discovery.
5. Alternatives to Discovery
Question 5–1
What measures could be taken to reduce the
front-loading of costs in relation to pre-action protocols?
Question 5–2
What safeguards could be implemented to ensure
that individual litigants are not denied access to justice as a result of
Question 5–3
What requirements can be incorporated into
pre-action protocols to maximise information exchange between parties in civil
proceedings
before federal courts?
Question 5–4
What else should be included in pre-action
protocols for particular types of proceedings to aid parties in narrowing the
Question 5–5
Are cost sanctions an effective mechanism to
ensure that parties comply with pre-action protocols?
Proposal 5–1
The Australian Government and the Federal Court,
in consultation with relevant stakeholders, should work to develop specific
protocols for particular types of civil dispute with a view to
incorporating them in Practice Directions of the Court.
Proposal 5–2
A new pre-trial procedure should be introduced to
enable parties to a civil proceeding in the Federal Court, with leave of the
to examine orally, on oath or affirmation, any person who has information
relevant to the matters in dispute in the proceeding.
Question 5–6
Could cost issues in proceedings before federal
courts be controlled by limiting pre-trial oral examinations to particular types
Question 5–7
What mandatory considerations, if any, should a
court take into account in granting leave for oral examination?
Question 5–8
Is there a need for new procedures for access to
information in civil proceedings, such as interim disclosure orders?
Question 5–9
What is the best way of ensuring that federal
courts consider alternatives to the discovery of documents in civil
proceedings?
ALRC CP2 Discovery in Federal Courts
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
Access to Justice Taskforce
Managing Justice
Other inquiries and reports
Scope of the Inquiry
Terms of Reference
Matters outside the Inquiry
Terminology
Organisation of this Consultation Paper
Process of reform
Consultation processes
Advisory Committee
Community consultation and participation
Written submissions
Stop Press—National Legal Profession Taskforce Interim Report
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
1.1 On 10 May 2010 the Attorney-General of Australia, the Hon Robert
McClelland MP, asked the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC)
options to improve the practical operation and effectiveness of discovery of
documents in proceedings in federal courts.
1.2 The Inquiry was initiated following a recommendation in the report of the
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department’s
Justice Taskforce,
A Strategic Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal
Civil Justice System.
The underlying premise for this Inquiry is that the costs of discovery,
which can be very high, may inhibit access to justice and
generate, in addition,
an undue public cost.
Access to Justice
1.3 The Strategic Framework developed by the Access to Justice Taskforce
included the following ‘Access to Justice Principles’:
accessibility; appropriateness; equity; efficiency; and
effectiveness.
A key objective was
‘ensuring that the cost of and method of resolving disputes is
proportionate to the issues’:
Cost can be a significant barrier to justice. The cost to disputants and the
cost to Government of resolving disputes should be proportionate
to the issue in
Adequate information about costs is essential in assessing proportionality. The
provision of greater information regarding the costs
of the justice system
allows better identification of the most appropriate pathway to resolution and,
in particular, whether litigation
is the most appropriate
management was identified as critical in addressing proportionality of costs:
‘Case management of litigation will help
to ensure that costs incurred are
directed to resolving the dispute, and limit costs from collateral
1.5 In the report,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice
, ALRC Report 89 (2000), the ALRC had pointed similarly to the
importance of control through case management:
In almost all studies of litigation, discovery is singled
out as the procedure most open to abuse, the most costly and the most in
court supervision and control.
1.6 While noting that discovery is ‘an essential
litigation tool’, enabling parties to obtain information relevant to
own and the other party’s cases and to request other parties to produce
relevant documents,
considered that discovery has proved problematic in practice, leading to
consequential increases in costs:
Problems with discovery result from party responses to
discovery requests. Parties may obstruct or subvert disclosure, refusing to
provide or destroy or conceal relevant documentation which might have assisted
the other side. In some circumstances the party requesting
discovery is
‘fishing’—seeking disclosure of significant numbers of
documents, perhaps with the intention of creating
sufficient aggravation or
embarrassment to encourage settlement, or hoping to uncover material which will
remedy a weak case or lead
to new causes of action. In other instances, parties
volunteer vast numbers of documents, not to be helpful and cooperative but as
mechanism to hide a single incriminating document which might now be lost in the
detail. The discovery process is used strategically
by parties. Such tactics can
result in significant costs, involve repeated interlocutory hearings and be very
time consuming.
1.7 One law firm contributing to the
Managing Justice
inquiry submitted that ‘[i]n large scale
commercial litigation, it is our experience that there is no interlocutory
more in need of reform than
discovery’.
inquiries and reports
1.8 Other inquiries that have been of assistance to the ALRC include: the
review of the rules and principles governing the costs of
civil litigation in
England and Wales conducted by Lord Justice Jackson in
the report of the
National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council (NADRAC) in 2009,
including consideration of the greater
use of alternative dispute resolution
(ADR) as an alternative to civil proceedings and during the court or tribunal
the review of the civil
justice system in Victoria by the Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) in
the report of
the British Columbia Civil Justice Reform Working Group in
the report for the Chief
Justice of Hong Kong in relation to reforms to civil proceedings of the High
Court and the District Court
of Hong Kong in
and the review and
consolidation of civil procedure in England and Wales conducted by Lord Woolf in
principles for reform considered in these inquiries are summarised below.
Review of Civil Litigation Costs
1.9 In November 2008, the then Master of the Rolls, Sir Anthony Clarke,
appointed Lord Justice Jackson to lead a fundamental review
of the rules and
principles governing the costs of civil litigation in England and Wales and to
make recommendations in order to
promote access to justice at proportionate
1.10 Commencing on 1 January 2009, Lord Jackson’s preliminary report
was published on 8 May 2009,
identifying relevant issues for consideration during an extensive consultation
period to follow. Among the topics covered, with some
illustrative
• the basic facts—how much civil litigation there is, and what
lawyers earn;
• research and consultation into costs—academic studies, views of
court users and stakeholders, and statistical
• the funding of civil litigation—legal aid, before or after the
event insurance, third party funding, conditional fee
agreements (‘no win,
no fee’), and contingency
• fixed costs—assessing the present
• personal injuries
litigation;
• other specific types of litigation—such as consumer claims,
housing claims, environmental claims, defamation proceedings
and collective
• controlling the costs of litigation—e-disclosure, case management,
cost capping and cost
management;
• regimes where there is no cost shifting—small claims and
employment tribunals;
• the assessment of costs by the
• a review of costs systems in other countries—including
final report was published on 21 December 2009 and set out a coherent package of
interlocking reforms, designed to reduce
litigation costs and to promote access
to justice. The report’s key findings and
recommendations
• proportionality—the costs system should be based on legal expenses
that reflect the nature and complexity of the
• success fees and after the event insurance premiums to be irrecoverable
in ‘no win, no fee’ cases (conditional
fee agreements), as these are
the greatest contributors to disproportionate
• to offset the effects of this for claimants, general damages awards for
personal injuries and other civil wrongs should be
increased by
• referral fees—fees paid by lawyers to organisations that
‘sell’ damages claims but offer no real value
process—should be
• qualified ‘one way costs shifting’—claimants will only
make a small contribution to defendant costs if
a claim is unsuccessful (as long
as they have behaved reasonably), removing the need for after the event
• fixed costs to be set for ‘fast track’ cases (those with a
claim up to £25,000) to provide certainty of
• establishing a Costs Council to review fixed costs and lawyers’
hourly rates annually, to ensure that they are fair
to both lawyers and
• allowing lawyers to enter into contingency fee agreements, where lawyers
are only paid if a claim is successful, normally
receiving a percentage of
actual damages won;
• promotion of ‘before the event’ legal insurance, encouraging
people to take out legal expenses insurance, for
example as part of household
The Resolve to Resolve (NADRAC)
1.12 On 13 June 2008, the Australian Government Attorney-General wrote to
NADRAC requesting that it enquire into and identify strategies
barriers to justice and to provide incentives for greater use of ADR as an
alternative to civil proceedings and during
the court or tribunal process. The
letter of reference asked NADRAC to provide advice on strategies for litigants,
the legal profession,
tribunals and courts, as well as initiatives the
Government might take, including legislative
In particular, NADRAC
was asked to consider:
• whether mandatory requirements to use ADR should be introduced;
• changes to cost structures and civil procedures to provide incentives to
use ADR more and to remove practical and cultural
barriers to the use of ADR
both before commencement of litigation and throughout the litigation
• the potential for greater use of ADR processes and techniques by courts
and tribunals, including by judicial officers; and
• whether there should be greater use of private and community-based ADR
services and how to ensure that such services meet
appropriate
response to its Issues Paper, released on 26 March 2009, NADRAC received over 60
submissions from federal and state government
departments and agencies, ADR
providers, courts, tribunals and individuals. The report,
The Resolve to
Resolve: Embracing ADR to improve access to justice in the federal
was delivered in September 2009. It identifies strategies to
remove barriers to justice and provide incentives for greater use of
federal civil justice system.
Civil Justice Review (Victorian Law Reform
Commission)
1.14 In May 2004, the Victorian Attorney General, the Hon Rob Hulls MP,
issued a ‘Justice Statement’
outlining directions for reform
of Victoria’s justice system. One objective was the reform of the rules of
civil procedure in
order to streamline litigation processes, reduce costs and
court delays, and achieve greater uniformity between different courts.
1.15 On 4 September 2006 the Attorney General asked the VLRC to provide
broad‑ranging advice about civil justice reform. The
Terms of Reference
asked the commission to identify, among other things, ‘the key factors
that influence the operation of the
civil justice system, including those
factors that influence the timeliness, cost and complexity of
litigation’.
1.16 The final report,
Civil Justice Review
, VLRC Report 14 (2008),
was launched on 28 May 2008. The report suggests areas for future law reform and
identifies changes which
will reduce the cost, complexity and length of civil
Effective and Affordable Civil Justice (British
Columbia Justice Review Task Force, Civil Justice Reform Working
1.17 In November 2006, the British Columbia Civil Justice Reform Working
Group produced the report,
Effective and Affordable Civil Justice
Working Group was formed to ‘explore fundamental change to British
Columbia’s civil justice system from the time
a legal problem develops
through the entire Supreme Court litigation
1.18 The report provides three key
recommendations.
recommendation involves the establishment of a ‘central hub’ to
provide information, advice, guidance and other
services required to assist
people in solving their own legal problems. The second recommendation is that
parties personally attend
a case planning conference before they actively engage
the civil justice system beyond initiating or responding to a claim. The case
planning conference would seek to address settlement possibilities and
processes, and also seek to narrow the issues and determine
procedural steps and
deadlines for the conduct of litigation in the event that settlement is not
1.19 The third recommendation has eight components and proposes a complete
rewriting of the Supreme Court Rules. The Working Group
recommended that the
proposed rules:
• create an explicit overriding objective that all proceedings are dealt
with justly and pursuant to the principles of proportionality;
• abolish the current pleading process and instead adopt a new case
initiation and defence process that requires the parties
to accurately and
succinctly state the facts and the issues in dispute and to provide a plan for
conducting the case and achieving
a resolution;
• limit discovery, while requiring early disclosure of key
information;
• limit the parameters of expert evidence;
• streamline motion practice;
• provide the judiciary with power to make orders to streamline the trial
• consolidate all three regulations regarding the Notice to Mediate into
one rule under the Supreme Court Rules; and
• provide opportunities for litigants to quickly resolve issues that
Civil Justice Reform (Hong Kong Chief
Justice’s Working Party)
1.20 In February 2000, a Working Party was appointed by the Chief Justice of
to review the civil rules and procedures of the High Court and to recommend
changes thereto with a view to ensuring and improving
access to justice at
reasonable cost and
publication of an Interim Report and Consultative Paper in November 2001, a
final report,
Civil Justice Reform
was released on 3 March
It set out 150
recommendations in respect of the reforms to be introduced to civil proceedings
of the High Court and the District
Court of Hong Kong. These reforms came into
effect on 2 April 2009, the underlying objectives of which are:
(a) to increase the cost-effectiveness of any practice and procedure to be
followed in relation to civil proceedings before the Court;
(b) to ensure that a case is dealt with as expeditiously as is reasonably
practicable;
(c) to promote a sense of reasonable proportion and procedural economy in the
conduct of proceedings;
(d) to ensure fairness between the parties;
(e) to facilitate the settlement of disputes; and
(f) to ensure that the resources of the Court are distributed
Access to Justice (Lord Woolf’s
1.22 In 1994, the Lord Chancellor of Great Britain instructed
the Master of the Rolls, Lord Woolf, to report on options to
consolidate
the existing rules of civil procedure in England and Wales. On 26
July 1996, Lord Woolf published his
Access to Justice Report
which he identified a number of principles which the civil justice system should
meet in order to ensure access to justice. According
to Lord Woolf’s
Report, the system should:
(a) be just in the results it delivers;
(b) be fair in the way it treats litigants;
(c) offer appropriate procedures at a reasonable cost;
(d) deal with cases with reasonable speed;
(e) be understandable to those who use it;
(f) be responsive to the needs of those who use it;
(g) provide as much certainty as the nature of particular cases
allows; and
(h) be effective: adequately resourced and
report was accompanied by draft rules of practice designed to implement Lord
Woolf’s principles by:
• setting out a detailed fast track procedure for cases up to
£10,000, with a maximum timetable of 30 weeks;
• recommending guideline maximum legal costs at the top of the fast track
of £2,500, excluding disbursements;
• proposing the use of pre-action protocols to encourage a more
cooperative approach to dispute resolution and promote fair
settlements,
avoiding litigation wherever possible; and
• making detailed proposals to increase access to justice in key areas of
litigation (medical negligence, housing, multi-party
actions and judicial
1.24 As a brief introduction to the key themes articulated throughout this
Consultation Paper and informing the Inquiry, this section
summarises the
underlying rationale and development of the doctrine of discovery and provides a
distillation of the tensions that
are evident throughout.
1.25 As noted by Professor Camille Cameron and Jonathan Liberman, discovery
has ‘a long history in common law systems’,
and its centrality to
the fact-finding and decision-making processes ‘have long been
recognised’.
The primary aim of discovery is to ensure that litigants disclose to each other
all relevant, non-privileged documents, whether that
disclosure helps or hurts
their respective cases, so that they will know the case they have to meet and
judges will have the evidence
they need to do their job
effectively.
doctrine of discovery derives from early Chancery
The responsibility of
providing discovery was described in a leading 19
century text on
the subject, by Edward Bray:
However disagreeable it may be to make the disclosure, however contrary to his
personal interests, however fatal to the claim upon
which he may have insisted,
he is required and compelled, under the most solemn sanction, to set forth all
he knows, believes or
thinks in relation to the matters in question ... In fact,
one of the chief purposes of discovery is to obtain from the opponent
admission of the case made against
explained that a party was entitled to discovery for the following purposes:
to ascertain facts material to the merits of his case, either because he could
not prove them, or in aid of proof and to avoid expense;
to deliver him from the
necessity of procuring evidence; to supply evidence or to prevent expense and
delay in procuring it; to save
expense and trouble; to prevent a long enquiry
and to determine the action as expeditiously as possible; whether he could prove
or not; to facilitate proof or save
1.28 Common
law processes were much more limited, and the methods for getting the evidence
of facts in issue before the courts were
rudimentary’.
to grant discovery in aid of proceedings on
the common law
In chancery ... discovery was of the very essence of the bill. Every bill for
relief in equity was, in reality, a bill for
key elements of Chancery’s discovery procedure, as described by Bray, were
to facilitate fact-finding, to save time
and to reduce expense. The modern law
of discovery reflects the same rationale:
The truth-seeking purposes of discovery in the Court of Chancery continue to be
a cornerstone of the modern discovery process. In
addition to this truth-seeking
function, early commentaries and cases show that parties were entitled to
discovery in order to avoid
the expense and delay that would result if they had
to look for the documents themselves. Inclusion of discovery in the
Judicature Acts
rules of civil procedure was intended to reflect and
advance the philosophy behind the Judicature Acts, especially to simplify
to avoid trial by ambush and to increase the prospect of a court
deciding a matter on the merits rather than on a technicality. Among
potentially beneficial attributes of the modern common law discovery process
are: it assists the parties to prepare for trial;
it facilitates settlement; it
can (but often does not) reduce time and expense and provide relief for
overcrowded court dockets;
it may result in narrowing the issues in dispute; and
it ‘may prevent a party being taken by surprise at trial and enable the
dispute to be determined upon its merits rather than by mere
underlying rationale of fairness, even within the context of litigation which is
adversarial, was identified by Lord Donaldson
Davies v Eli Lilly &
in describing the nature of the right to seek discovery:
The right is peculiar to the common law jurisdictions. In plain language,
litigation in this country is conducted ‘cards face
table’. Some people from other lands regard this as incomprehensible.
‘Why’, they ask, ‘should
I be expected to provide my opponent
with the means of defeating me?’ The answer, of course, is that litigation
is not a war
or even a game. It is designed to do real justice between opposing
parties and, if the court does not have
the relevant information, it
cannot achieve this
the contemporary context the rationale of discovery as reflected in its history,
noted above, is captured in
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth), which articulates the ‘overarching purpose’ of civil
practice and procedure in the Court:
(1) The overarching
purpose of the
and procedure provisions is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes:
(a) according to law; and
(b) as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), the overarching
purpose includes the following objectives:
(a) the just determination of all proceedings
before the Court;
(b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources
available for the purposes of the Court;
(c) the efficient disposal of the Court’s
overall caseload;
(d) the disposal of all proceedings
in a timely manner;
(e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the
importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.
practice and procedure
must be interpreted and applied, and any power conferred or duty imposed by them
(including the power to make Rules of
must be exercised or carried out, in the way that best promotes the overarching
1.32 There are several areas of tension that present challenges in this
Inquiry. These arise between policy objectives, parties involved
litigation before federal courts, as well as with respect to the professional
obligations owed by lawyers. For example,
there is an inherent tension between
the party requesting discovery, who seeks to ascertain facts material to the
case, and the party
giving discovery, who bears the burden of retrieving,
reviewing and disclosing documents in response to discovery requests. This
tension is reflected particularly in Chapter 3, which discusses the practice and
procedure of discovery in federal courts.
1.33 There is also a tension between the key obligations owed by a lawyer,
specifically between a lawyer’s duty to a client—to
represent and
protect the best interests of a client—and the overarching duty to the
court in the interests of the administration
of justice. In a broader sense a
tension also arises between the drive to reduce the public costs of justice
through a reduction
in the time that litigation occupies the courts and the
right of a litigant to pursue their rights to achieve justice under the law.
1.34 There is also an overarching challenge that, as information technology
has developed, so too has the exponential growth and storage
of documents in an
electronic format. This has required, in part, the development of document
management policies and practices to
respond to the voluminous nature of
information capture. This creates a tension in practice between appropriate and
legitimate destruction
of documents in accordance with a document management
system or policy, and the deliberate destruction of documents aimed at removing
documents from the jurisdiction of the court.
1.35 The task in this Inquiry is to develop proposals and ultimately
recommendations for reform that balances these tensions fairly
and practically.
The key tensions noted in this section are developed further throughout the
chapters in this Consultation Paper
and will inform the consultation process to
Scope of the
1.36 The Terms of Reference are reproduced at the beginning of this
Consultation Paper. The ALRC is directed to consider four main
• the law, practice and management of the discovery of documents in
litigation before federal courts;
• ensuring that cost and time required for discovery of documents is
proportionate to the matters in dispute;
• to limit the overuse of discovery, reduce the expense of discovery
and ensure key documents relevant to the real issues in
dispute are identified
as early as possible; and
• the impact of technology on the discovery of documents.
1.37 In identifying law reform options to improve the practical operation and
effectiveness of discovery of documents, the ALRC is
directed to have regard to:
• alternatives to discovery;
• the role of courts in managing discovery, including the courts’
case management
• powers and mechanisms to enable courts to better exercise those powers
in the context of discovery;
• implications of the cost of discovery on the conduct of litigation,
including means to limit the extent to which discovery
gives rise to satellite
litigation and the use of discovery for strategic purposes;
• costs issues, for example cost capping, security for discovery costs,
and upfront payment; and the sufficiency, clarity and
enforceability of
obligations on practitioners and parties to identify relevant material as early
as possible.
Matters outside the
1.38 The term ‘discovery’ is often used in the context of civil
court procedure to refer to the various ways in which
one party to litigation is
able to obtain information and documents held by other parties. It can encompass
processes by which parties
disclose relevant documents to their opponents and
make those documents available for inspection. It may also encompass processes
enabling one party to ask the other a series of questions, known as
‘interrogatories’, which the party under interrogation
is required
to answer, usually on oath or affirmation. The questions are designed to obtain
admissions and again to apprise the interrogating
party of the case to be met at
1.39 In some jurisdictions, discovery may extend to documents in the
possession of third parties. For example, under Order 15A rule
Federal Court Rules
(Cth), the court may order that a person who is not a
party, and appears to be in possession of any document which relates to any
question in the proceeding, disclose the document to the party seeking
1.40 It is possible for an applicant to use discovery to assist in
identifying potential respondents to a proceeding. In this context,
discovery is
‘preliminary’ in the sense that it is obtained before a proceeding
for substantive relief is commenced,
and is intended to facilitate the
commencement of such a proceeding. For example, Order 15A rule 3 of the
Federal Court Rules
provides specific procedures for persons to attend
court for oral examination or to produce documents, for the purposes of
identifying
the proper respondent.
1.41 Moreover, there are several other procedures available under court rules
which, although not strictly encompassed by the term
‘discovery’,
further assist in defining the issues in dispute and obtaining evidence for
trial. These include: procedures
for the inspection and testing of
rules which facilitate
the obtaining and tendering of expert
procedures which
assist a party to obtain admissions from an opposing party prior to
and the use of the
subpoena process to compel the attendance of persons to give evidence at the
trial or to produce documents either
pre‑trial or at the
1.42 The Terms of Reference limit the ALRC’s Inquiry to the discovery
of documents in litigation before the federal courts.
The ALRC is therefore
primarily concerned with the disclosure of documents for inspection by one party
to another party in proceedings
for substantive relief conducted in a federal
court. Other discovery procedures—such as interrogatories, preliminary
discovery from non-parties or other means of obtaining information
relevant to a proceeding—are not the central focus of this
1.43 However, consideration of options to improve the practical operation and
effectiveness of discovery of documents in substantive
proceedings may prompt
discussion of discovery in its broader sense. For example, the ALRC has been
asked to give particular consideration
to alternatives to the discovery of
documents. Where discovery, other than the exchange of documents between
parties, is considered
in this Consultation Paper, it is noted at relevant
Terminology
1.44 In this Consultation Paper, the terms ‘discovery’ and
‘disclosure’ are used on occasion to distinguish
between different
procedural requirements for the exchange of documents between parties to civil
litigation, as explained below.
1.45 The term ‘disclosure’ is used to describe an obligation,
falling on a party to proceedings, to provide documents
to another party, which
applies independently of any action by the other party and is not contingent on
any orders or directions
from the court. For example, the
Family Law Rules
impose a general duty of disclosure on the parties to a
family law dispute, from the start of pre-action procedures for the
Outside of the family law
context, in a number of other jurisdictions, parties may be obliged to disclose
documents without any requirement
for another party to request disclosure or the
court to make such orders. For example, in Queensland, South Australia and the
Territory, parties are required to disclose documents within a certain
number of days after the close of
1.46 The term ‘discovery’ is used to describe the obligation
imposed upon a party when another party to the proceeding
requires that party to
give discovery of documents, usually by filing and serving on that party a
notice requiring discovery. In
particular, the process of
‘discovery’ may involve the party requiring discovery to obtain
orders of the court to serve
a notice of discovery. For example, in the Federal
Court, the obligation to making discovery is triggered by the service of a
with leave of the Court, pursuant to O 15 r 1 of the
Federal Court
1.47 The term ‘lawyer’ is used for the purposes of this Inquiry
to include—consistently with s 117 of the uniform
—barristers, solicitors and, unless specifically stated, lawyers
with or without a current practising certificate.
Legal ethical obligations
1.48 The term ‘legal ethical obligations’ is used in this
Consultation Paper to reflect that ethical and legal rules relating
to discovery
practice are not mutually exclusive. It is used as an expression to refer to the
more general professional and ethical
duties placed on lawyers, over and above
those specifically developed to govern legal practice, acknowledging the
distinction often
made between rules that are professionally binding on a
lawyer—ethical rules—and rules that are legally binding—legal
Organisation of this
Consultation Paper
1.49 This Consultation Paper concisely addresses the questions set out in the
Terms of Reference. It is divided into five chapters.
This chapter provides an
introduction to the Inquiry, including the background to the Inquiry, other
relevant inquiries and a description
of the reform process.
1.50 Chapter 2, Legal Framework for Discovery in the Federal Courts,
considers the obligation on a party to discover documents to
another party and
the range of documents discoverable in civil proceedings in the federal courts.
The chapter raises issues about
the need for court control over the availability
of discovery and limitations on the ambit of discovery in the federal courts.
Legislative
provisions, court rules, practice notes and significant cases
dealing with the discovery of documents are also discussed.
1.51 Chapter 3, Discovery Practices and Procedures in the Federal Courts,
examines civil practice and procedure for the discovery
of documents in
proceedings before the federal courts. Issues about the cost of a discovery
process and its proportionality, in terms
of the value of the documents sought
in the context of the litigation, are explored. In particular, the use of
technology in the
process of discovering electronically-stored information is
considered and the need for strong case management of the discovery stage
litigation are considered.
1.52 Chapter 4, Ensuring Professional Integrity: Practitioner Obligations and
Discovery, consists of two parts. The first part begins
with a discussion of the
key sources of legal ethical obligations in Australia. It then examines the
nature and extent of alleged
discovery abuse and professional misconduct,
including identifying the key legal ethical obligations such conduct breaches,
illustrative examples. A range of proposals are discussed aimed at
pre-emptively avoiding such abuse and misconduct. The enforceability
obligations through court and disciplinary procedures is also discussed. The
first part of the chapter also examines the
role and nature of legal obligations
in a changing legal environment, in particular electronic discovery and the
applicability of
obligations outside traditional courtroom processes. The second
part of the chapter examines existing educational requirements in
relation to
the legal ethical obligations owed by lawyers. It proposes a new approach to the
education of lawyers in this area and
highlights the need for cultural
1.53 Chapter 5, Alternatives to Discovery, considers pre-action protocols,
pre-trial oral examinations and other processes that encourage
early settlement,
and the narrowing of the issues in dispute prior to the commencement of
litigation. The chapter draws on recent
works by other law reform bodies, as
well as practices and procedures in overseas jurisdictions.
Consultation
Advisory Committee
1.54 It is standard operating procedure for the ALRC to establish an expert
Advisory Committee to assist with the development of its
In this Inquiry, the
Advisory Committee includes judges, senior officers of Australian Government
agencies, academics and senior
1.55 The Advisory Committee met for the first time on 19 August 2010, and
will meet at least once more during the course of the Inquiry
to provide advice
and assistance to the ALRC. The Advisory Committee has particular value in
issues, as well as in providing quality
assurance in the research and consultation effort. The Advisory Committee will
also assist
with the development of reform proposals as the Inquiry progresses.
However, the ultimate responsibility for the Report and recommendations
with the Commissioners of the ALRC.
consultation and participation
1.56 Under the terms of its constituting Act, the ALRC ‘may inform
itself in any way it thinks fit’ for the purposes of
reviewing or
considering anything that is the subject of an
One of the most
important features of ALRC inquiries is the commitment to widespread community
consultation—a hallmark of best
practice law
1.57 The nature and extent of this engagement is normally determined by the
subject matter of the reference. Areas that are seen to
be narrow and technical
tend to be of interest mainly to experts. Some ALRC inquiries—such as
those relating to the protection
of human genetic information, privacy and
family violence—involve a significant level of interest and involvement
general public and the media.
1.58 To date, consultations for this Inquiry have been held with a number of
government agencies, academics, judges and members of
the legal profession. The
ALRC is based in Sydney but, in recognition of the national character of the
Commission, consultations
are conducted around Australia during inquiries,
dependent on the nature of the matter under consideration and budget. Any
or organisation with an interest in meeting with the Inquiry in
relation to matters raised in this Consultation Paper is encouraged
the ALRC. A list of consultations is included as Appendix 1.
1.59 There are several ways in which those with an interest in this Inquiry
may follow its progress and participate. Individuals and
organisations may
express an interest in the Inquiry by contacting the ALRC by phone or email, or
they can subscribe to the Inquiry
e-newsletter via the website
<www.alrc.gov.au>. Free download of consultation documents is available
via the website, and those
who wish to receive a free CD-ROM of the consultation
documents may request them via an online web form, or by phone.
1.60 In this Inquiry the ALRC is producing a regular e-newsletter to keep
stakeholders informed about progress on a regular basis,
with a calendar of
stakeholder consultations or other key events in the upcoming month, as well as
a summary of consultations and
other work in the past month, and links to
relevant media releases, publications and other materials, such as the Access to
Taskforce’s report. Each e-newsletter also links to the Inquiry
blog, noted below. Any individual or organisation with an interest
inquiry is encouraged to subscribe (via the ALRC website) to receive the
e-newsletter, which is then delivered directly to
their inbox.
1.61 For the duration of this Inquiry the ALRC is hosting a blog at
http://talk.alrc.gov.au/
. The blog offers
interested stakeholders insight into particular issues the ALRC is considering
as it conducts its review, and enables
public discussion of those issues. The
invitation to comment on blog posts is open to all. Individuals and
organisations may also
make written submissions to the Inquiry.
1.62 Finally, the ALRC maintains an active program of direct consultation
with stakeholders and other interested parties, as well
as including regular
briefings to key staff in the Australian Government Attorney-General’s
Department.
submissions
1.63 With the release of this Consultation Paper, the ALRC invites
individuals and organisations to make submissions in response to
the specific
questions and proposals, or to any of the background material and analysis
provided, to help advance the reform process
in this Inquiry.
1.64 There is no specified format for submissions and they may be marked
confidential if preferred. The ALRC prefers electronic communications
submissions, and strongly encourages stakeholders to make use of the online
submission form available on the ALRC website. However,
the ALRC will gratefully
accept anything from handwritten notes to detailed commentary and scholarly
analyses on relevant laws and
practices. Even simple dot-points are welcome.
Submissions will be published on the ALRC website, unless they are marked
confidential.
1.65 The ALRC appreciates that tight deadlines for making submissions places
considerable pressure upon those who wish to participate
in ALRC inquiries.
Given the deadline for delivering the final report to the Attorney-General at
the end of March 2011, and the need
to consider fully the submissions received
in response to this Consultation Paper, all submissions must be submitted on
Wednesday 19 January 2011
1.66 It is the invaluable work of participants that enriches the whole
consultative process of the Commission’s inquiries. The
quality of the
outcomes is assisted greatly by the understanding of contributors in needing to
meet the deadline imposed by the reporting
process itself. This Inquiry is no
In order to ensure consideration for use in the final report, submissions
addressing the questions and proposals in this Consultation
Paper must reach the
Wednesday 19 January 2011
The ALRC encourages stakeholders to use the online submission form available
at <www.alrc.gov.au/inquiries/discovery>.
Submissions not marked confidential will be published on the ALRC
Press—National Legal Profession Taskforce Interim Report
1.67 When this Consultation Paper was in press, as part of the National Legal
Profession Reform Project the National Legal Profession
Reform Taskforce,
established by the Australian Government Attorney-General, at the request of the
Council of Australian Governments,
released its Interim Report on key issues and
In May 2010, the
National Legal Profession Taskforce released its draft National Law and National
Rules for a three-month consultation
The National Law and
National Rules are considered in Chapter 4 of this Consultation Paper. The
proposals in the Interim Report were
not available for consideration at the time
of writing and will be considered in the Final Report in this Inquiry.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department Access to Justice Taskforce,
A Strategic
Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
Ibid, 62–63.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
Ibid, [6.67].
Ibid, [6.68].
[6.68], citing
Arthur Robinson & Hedderwicks,
Submission 189
Review of Civil Litigation
Costs: Final Report
National Alternative Dispute
Resolution Advisory Council (NADRAC),
The Resolve to Resolve: Embracing ADR
to Improve Access to Justice in the Federal Jurisdiction
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008).
British Columbia Justice Review Task
Force, Civil Justice Reform Working Group,
Effective and Affordable Civil
Justice: Report of the Civil Justice Reform Working Group to the Justice Review
Chief Justice’s Working Party on
Civil Justice Reform (Hong Kong),
Civil Justice Reform: Final Report
Lord Woolf,
Access to Justice:
Interim Report to the Lord Chancellor on the Civil Justice System in England and
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Preliminary Report
As summarised in Judicial
Communications Office (UK) ‘Lord Justice Jackson publishes preliminary
findings of his civil litigation
cost review’ (Press Release, 8 May 2009)
<www.judiciary.gov.uk>.
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Preliminary Report
(2009), pt 2.
Ibid, pt 3.
Ibid, pt 4.
Ibid, pt 5.
Ibid, pt 6.
Ibid, pt 7.
Ibid, pt 8.
Ibid, pt 9.
Ibid, pt 10.
Ibid, pt 11.
As summarised in Judicial
Communications Office (UK) ‘Jackson Review calls for a package of reforms
to rein in the costs of
civil justice’ (Press Release, 14 January 2010)
<www.judiciary.gov.uk>.
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Final Report
(2009), chs 3, 35.
Ibid, chs 9, 10.
Ibid, ch 10.
Ibid, ch 20.
Ibid, chs 9, 19.
Ibid, ch 16.
Ibid, ch 6.
Ibid, ch 12.
Ibid, ch 8.
National Alternative Dispute
Resolution Advisory Council,
ADR in the Civil Justice System: Issues
(2009), [1.3].
Ibid, [1.4].
British Columbia Justice Review Task
Force, Civil Justice Reform Working Group,
Effective and Affordable Civil
Justice: Report of the Civil Justice Reform Working Group to the Justice Review
(2006), Executive Summary.
Ibid, viii.
Chief Justice’s Working Party on
Civil Justice Reform (Hong Kong),
Civil Justice Reform: Final Report
(2004), [1].
Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region Government,
Civil Justice Reform
<www.civiljustice.gov.hk/eng/home.html> at 5 November 2010.
Lord Woolf,
Access to Justice:
Final Report
(1996), Overview, [1].
Lord Chancellor’s Department
(UK), ‘Access to Justice—Lord Woolf’s Final Report’
(Press Release, undated,
June 1996).
C Cameron and J Liberman,
‘Destruction of Documents Before Proceedings Commence—What is a
Court to Do?’
[2003] MelbULawRw 12
Melbourne University Law Review
Although its origins can be traced to
civil law: Ibid, 276.
The Principles and Practice
of Discovery
W Holdsworth,
A History of English
(3rd ed, 1945), vol v, 281. William Blackstone identified such
limitations as among the ‘defects’ of the common law,
specifically listed ‘the want of a compulsive power for the production of
books and papers belonging to the parties’,
and the significance of such
evidence in ‘mercantile transactions’: W Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
(1768), vol iii,
W Holdsworth,
A History of English
(3rd ed, 1945), vol v, 332.
The Principles and Practice
of Discovery
C Cameron and J Liberman,
‘Destruction of Documents Before Proceedings Commence—What is a
Court to Do?’
[2003] MelbULawRw 12
Melbourne University Law Review
Davies v Eli Lilly & Co
[1987] All ER 801
Federal Court Rules
Ibid O 10 r 1(xv).
Ibid O 18 r 2.
Ibid O 27A r 2.
Family Law Rules 2004
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) Ch 7;
Supreme Court Civil Rules 2006
(SA) ch 6 pt 3;
of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory of Australia
A list of Advisory Committee members
can be found in the List of Participants at the front of this Consultation
Australian Law Reform Commission Act
B Opeskin, ‘Measuring
Success’ in B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law
(2005) 202.
Submissions provided only in hard copy
might not be published on the website.
National Legal Profession Reform
Interim Report on Key Issues and Funding
National Legal Profession Reform
Legal Profession National Law: Consultation Draft
ALRC CP2 Discovery in Federal Courts
2. Legal Framework for Discovery in Federal Courts
Introduction
Legal framework
High Court of Australia
Federal Court of Australia
Family Court of Australia
Federal Magistrates Court of Australia
Issues with the laws of discovery
High Court of Australia
Federal Court of Australia
Family Court of Australia
Non-compliance with disclosure obligations
Federal Magistrates Court of Australia
2. Legal Framework for Discovery in Federal
Introduction
2.1 This chapter considers the obligation on a party to discover documents to
another party and the range of documents discoverable
in civil proceedings in
federal courts. This chapter raises issues about the need for court control over
the availability of discovery
and limitations on the ambit of discovery in
federal courts. Legislative provisions, court rules, practice notes and
significant
cases dealing with the discovery of documents are discussed here.
Chapter 3 discusses the way parties carry out a discovery process
and the need
for strong case management of the discovery stage in litigation.
Legal framework
2.2 This part of the chapter outlines the current law imposing the obligation
to discover documents and the range of documents a party
may be required to
disclose in the federal civil court system.
High Court of
Obligation to discover documents
2.3 There are no specific provisions in the
High Court Rules 2004
(Cth) about the obligation to make discovery of documents. Should circumstances
arise in proceedings before the High Court that necessitate
the discovery of
documents, a party may apply to the court for
directions.
Scope of discoverable documents
2.4 In the absence of specific provisions or directions to the contrary, the
‘train of inquiry’ test as propounded in
Compagnie Financiere et
Commerciale du Pacifique v Peruvian Guano
Peruvian Guano
adopted in Australia
remains the
test of general application for discovery in the High Court. In the
case Brett LJ stated:
It seems to me that every document relates to the matters in question in the
action, which not only would be evidenced upon any issue,
but also which, it is
reasonable to suppose, contains information which may—not which
must—either directly or indirectly
enable the party requiring the
affidavit either to advance his own case or to damage the case of his adversary.
I have put in the
words ‘either directly or indirectly’ because, as
it seems to me, a document can properly be said to contain information
enable the party requiring the affidavit either to advance his own case or to
damage the case of his adversary, if it is
a document which may fairly lead him
to a train of inquiry, which may have either of these two
consequences
Federal Court of
Obligation to discover documents
2.5 The availability of discovery in the Federal Court is restricted by
provisions in the
Federal Court Rules
(Cth). The rules require that in
all cases a party must have the leave of the court to file and serve a notice
for discovery.
The court must
determine an application for leave for discovery in the way that best promotes
the overarching purpose of civil practice
and procedure, being the just
resolution of disputes according to law, and as quickly, inexpensively and
efficiently as possible.
2.6 Where leave for discovery is granted—and a notice for discovery is
served—the party required to give discovery must
do so within the time
specified in the notice, not being less than 14 days after service, or within
such time as the court directs.
Unless the court otherwise orders, the party must give discovery by serving a
list of documents required to be disclosed and an affidavit
verifying that
2.7 The court may, subject to any question of privilege which may arise,
order a party to produce a document which appears from its
list of documents to
be in the party’s possession, custody or
2.8 However, the rules state that the court shall not make an order for the
filing or service of any list of documents or for the
production of any document
unless it is necessary at the time the order is
‘necessary’ in this context has been interpreted as meaning
‘reasonably necessary in the interests of
a fair trial and of the fair
disposition of the case’.
2.9 In determining whether to make orders for the discovery of documents,
Practice Note CM 5
states that the court will have regard to the issues
in the case and the order in which they are likely to be resolved, the resources
and circumstances of the parties, the likely cost of the discovery and its
likely benefit.
2.10 Where orders for discovery are made by the court, the party’s
discovery obligation is ongoing in the sense that the party
must continue to
discover any documents not previously disclosed which would be necessary to
comply with the order.
Scope of discoverable documents
2.11 In the Federal Court, the
Peruvian Guano
test of relevance has
been replaced with broad categories of documents ‘required to be
disclosed’ pursuant to O 15 r 2(3)
Federal Court
. The documents required to be disclosed in the Federal Court are any
of the following documents of which the party giving discovery
reasonable search, aware at the time discovery is given:
(a) documents on which the party relies;
(b) documents that adversely affect the party’s own case;
(c) documents that adversely affect another party’s case; and
(d) documents that support another party’s
2.12 A number of matters are specified by O 15 r 2(5) as matters
which may be taken into account by a party in making a ‘reasonable
(a) the nature and complexity of the proceedings;
(b) the number of documents involved;
(c) the ease and cost of retrieving a document;
(d) the significance of any document likely to be found; and
(e) any other relevant matter.
2.13 Order 15 r 3 subsequently provides that the court may limit
discovery orders to specific documents or classes of documents, or
in relation
to specific matters in question in the proceeding, to prevent unnecessary
2.14 Orders for discovery of documents as contemplated in O 15 r 2
are referred to as orders for ‘general
discovery’.
The Rules do
not expressly prohibit orders for broader discovery of documents outside these
general categories, for example, orders
for discovery of all relevant documents
Peruvian Guano
However, the court has
held that, not only should discovery be contained by the general categories in
normal course of events, discovery should be limited to the specific documents
or classes of documents contemplated in r 3.
New South Wales v Betfair Pty Ltd
, Buchanan, Jagot and Foster JJ stated
as apparent from Order 15 r 2(3) of the Federal Court
Rules, discovery ordinarily should be limited to the documents on which the
party relies and the documents that adversely affect or support that
party’s case or the case of another party. Moreover, Order
and (2) indicate that, if anything, discovery by order should be restricted
rather than
practice and procedure for formulating limited categories of documents for the
purposes of discovery is considered in Chapter
2.16 If the party does not search for a category or class of document, the
rules require that party to include in their list of discoverable
documents a
statement of the category or class of document not searched for, and the reason
2.17 A party is required by the
Federal Court Rules
to discover
documents which are or have been in that party’s possession, custody or
It is not necessary to
disclose a document if the party giving discovery reasonably believes that the
document is already in the
possession, custody or control of the party to whom
discovery is given.
Federal Court Rules
also exclude from the ambit of discovery
additional copies of documents, which are not discoverable purely because the
original or
any other copy is
discoverable.
2.19 While the rules require a party giving discovery to identify in their
list of discoverable documents any document which they
privileged,
the party can rely
on a privilege claim to refuse production of the document for
inspection.
Family Court of
2.20 In the Family Court, as discussed below, the duty of disclosure is
absolute. This may be a reflection of the court’s jurisdiction.
Briese and Briese
, ‘the need for each party to understand the
financial position of the other party is at the very heart of cases concerning
property and
maintenance’.
Obligation to disclose documents
Family Law Rules
impose a general duty of disclosure on a
party to a family law dispute, whether financial or parenting, independently of
of the Family Court or another party. The duty of disclosure is
imposed from the start of pre-action procedures for a case and runs
case is finalised.
2.22 This means that a party must continue to make disclosures as
circumstances change and as documents are created or come into the
possession or control.
require parties to comply with their duty of disclosure in a timely
Scope of disclosure obligations
2.23 The general duty of disclosure under the
Family Law Rules
requires each party to a case to give full and frank disclosure of all
information relevant to the
The duty of disclosure
applies to each document that is or has been in the possession, or under the
control, of the party disclosing
the document and is relevant to an issue in the
2.24 The rules also impose a duty on parties to produce particular documents
on the first court date for a maintenance application,
on the first court date
for a child support application or appeal, at a conference in a property case
and at trial.
In financial cases
there are specific rules about full and frank disclosure of the party’s
total direct and indirect financial
circumstances.
Federal Magistrates Court
of Australia
2.25 The jurisdiction conferred on the Federal Magistrates Court overlaps
with that of the Family Court and the Federal Court. This
section of the chapter
examines the obligations on parties to disclose information and documents in
financial matters under the court’s
family law jurisdiction. It also
considers the rules which apply in all proceedings before the Federal
Magistrates Court for the
discovery of documents.
Obligation to discover documents
Federal Magistrates Act 1999
(Cth) provides
that discovery in relation to proceedings in the Federal Magistrates Court is
not allowed unless the Court or a Federal
Magistrate declares that it is
appropriate, in the interests of the administration of justice, to allow the
Section 45(2)
of the Act requires the Court or a Federal Magistrate, in
deciding whether to make a declaration for discovery of documents, to have
(a) whether allowing the discovery would be likely to contribute to the fair
and expeditious conduct of the proceedings; and
(b) such other matters (if any) as the Federal Magistrates Court or the
Federal Magistrate considers relevant.
Scope of discoverable documents
2.28 If a declaration for discovery of documents is made under
Federal Magistrates Act
, the Court or Federal Magistrate may make an
order for discovery:
(a) generally;
(b) in relation to particular classes of documents;
(c) in relation to particular issues; or
(d) by a specified date.
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(Cth) provide that a
party may be required to discover documents which are or have been in that
party’s possession, custody
However, a party may
refuse to produce for inspection privileged documents disclosed in their
affidavit of discoverable
Obligation to disclose documents
2.30 Part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
imposes a duty of
disclosure on parties to financial matters in the court’s family law
for the applicant and respondent to
file and serve a financial statement, giving full and frank disclosure of their
financial circumstances,
together with their application or
2.31 The rules also impose an obligation on the respondent, in proceedings
for maintenance, to bring certain categories of documents
to court on the first
court date.
In other financial
matters, the applicant and respondent must file and serve on each other certain
categories of documents within
14 days after the first court
Scope of disclosure obligations
2.32 A financial statement filed and served pursuant to part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
must give full and frank disclosure of
the party’s total direct and indirect financial circumstances, including
details of any
interest in property, income from all sources and other financial
2.33 In proceedings for maintenance, the categories of documents that a
respondent must bring to court include a taxation assessment
and taxation return
for the most recent financial year, bank records for the 12 months before the
application was filed and the respondent’s
most recent pay
2.34 In other financial matters, the categories of documents that the parties
must file and serve on each other include the parties’
three most recent
taxation assessments and taxation returns, copies of the last four business
activity statements (if a party has
an Australian Business Number) and details
of any superannuation plan.
Issues with the laws of
2.35 This part of the chapter discusses the issues that may arise in federal
courts with respect to a party’s obligation to
give discovery and the
scope of discoverable documents. Concerns with these aspects of discovery laws
have been singled out by academic
commentaries, law reform bodies and
stakeholders consulted in the early stages of this Inquiry. This part also
outlines options for
reform to address these issues and the ALRC’s
preliminary views as to directions for reform of the legal framework for
in federal courts. The ALRC welcomes stakeholder suggestions for
reforms to the laws concerning when discovery is available and what
are discoverable in federal courts. In particular, the ALRC seeks feedback on
the following questions and proposals.
High Court of
2.36 The range of documents discoverable in the High Court, under the
Peruvian Guano
test of relevance, is quite broad. In his review of the
civil justice system in England and Wales, Lord Woolf observed that the result
Peruvian Guano
was to make virtually unlimited the range of potentially relevant (and therefore
discoverable) documents, which parties and their
lawyers are obliged to review
and list, and which the other side is obliged to read, against the knowledge
that only a handful of
such documents will affect the outcome of the case. In
that sense, it is a monumentally inefficient process, especially in the larger
cases. The more conscientiously it is carried out, the more inefficient it
train of inquiry test has been narrowed in many Australian and overseas
it was first
In the High Court,
however, the ALRC was told during initial consultations that the need for
discovery arises so rarely that the
application of the
Peruvian Guano
case is unlikely to cause any real problems.
2.38 The nature of the work undertaken in the High Court in its original
Often that work
proceeds by way of stated case under
Judiciary Act 1903
or by demurrer (a plea which, for the purposes of obtaining a ruling on some
question of law, admits the truth of the opponent’s
pleading but asserts
that it does not lead to the conclusion for which the opponent
In these types of
cases, the need for discovery of documents is rarely likely to arise.
2.39 If a proceeding commenced in the original jurisdiction of the High Court
did raise any significant factual issue, the ALRC has
heard that it is likely
the matter would be remitted to another court under
2.40 The ALRC is not aware of any recent cases in the High Court where the
discovery of documents has been problematic but is interested
stakeholder’s views about issues or problems in relation to discovery in
the High Court, particularly with regards
Peruvian Guano
Question 2–1
What issues, if any, arise in the application of
Peruvian Guano
case to discovery in civil proceedings before the High
Federal Court of
2.41 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry indicate that a significant
prompt for a review of discovery laws is ‘the high
disproportionate costs of
discovery’.
consultations, the ALRC heard concerns about the overuse of discovery in
proceedings before the Federal Court and the
excessively voluminous documents
being discovered in Federal Court proceedings, both of which may increase the
costs of discovery.
2.42 In this section of the chapter, the ALRC discusses its preliminary views
on the possibility of a new threshold test that would
further restrict the
availability of discovery in the Federal Court. Here, the ALRC also puts forward
its preliminary views on the
need for greater limitations on the test for
discoverable documents in proceedings before the Federal Court.
Unnecessary discovery of documents
2.43 In Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of
the Civil Justice System, ALRC Report 89
(2000), the ALRC recognised the
need for court supervision and control over the use of discovery in the Federal
Subsequently, in 2002,
Federal Court Rules
were amended to require a party to obtain leave
of the court to file and serve a notice for discovery of
2.44 However, doubts as to whether the leave requirement is working as an
effective control over discovery have emerged. In a conference
paper prepared
for a joint Federal Court/Law Council of Australia (Law Council) workshop on the
court’s case management system
in March 2008, Finkelstein J observed
Although leave is nominally required and general discovery is frowned upon, the
reality is that the leave requirement is a formality
rather than a substantive
limitation on a party’s ability to obtain discovery. That is to say, there
is no general practice
of requiring a party to justify a request for leave to
obtain discovery by showing need or
2.45 Justice Finkelstein took into account comments from
practitioners in the Law Council’s
Final Report in Relation to Possible
Innovations in Case Management
which called for judges to ‘more
strongly’ control
His Honour noted
‘[t]he concern, particularly with respect to large and complex cases, is
that the court has abdicated responsibility,
resulting in excessive costs for
very little return’.
2.46 The same concerns were raised with the ALRC during initial consultations
in this Inquiry. In some cases, parties might seek discovery
as a matter of
course, or just to ‘shake the tree trunk’, rather than out of
necessity with any real prospects of discovering
significantly relevant
documents. At the same time, the judge hearing an application for discovery may
be uncertain about his or
her authority to refuse to make orders for discovery
of documents. Whether leave to issue a notice for discovery is given is left
judicial discretion, although the court cannot make an order for the disclosure
or production of documents unless it is
‘necessary’.
breadth given to the meaning of ‘necessity’ presents a wide scope
for the parties to petition the court for discovery
2.47 The ALRC has heard that a different attitude towards discovery is
adopted in the court’s Fast Track. The Fast Track List
aims to reduce the
costs and time of commercial litigation conducted in that list. By limiting
discovery, introducing scheduled pre-trial
conferences and resolving most
interlocutory disputes on the papers, the Fast Track List is attempting to
respond to commercial disputes
in a more timely and cost effective
At a conference on
International Commercial Litigation and Dispute Resolution in 2009, Justice
Gordon described the Fast Track attitude
towards leave for discovery:
The general presumption is not just that discovery will be limited, but that
there will be no discovery unless a party can identify
with specificity
particular documents or materials (not simply categories) that they require, the
reasons that they require those
documents, and why no alternative, cheaper means
of obtaining the information is available (such as inspection, a summary created
pursuant to
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), a letter or admission
from the other side, or an affidavit from a witness with the relevant
knowledge).
Options for reform
2.48 One way to ensure that judges in the Federal Court scrutinise more
thoroughly whether leave for discovery is justified in the
circumstances of a
proceeding, would be to prescribe a specific threshold test for the granting of
leave. There is precedent for
this approach in
Magistrates Act
, which provides that discovery is not allowed unless the
court declares that ‘it is appropriate, in the interests of the
administration
of justice’.
2.49 Another option was raised by Finkelstein J at the court’s 2008
case management workshop. His Honour discussed the possibility
of imposing
restrictions on the availability of discovery and suggested that a cost-benefit
analysis should be the bedrock principle
and condition precedent to the granting
of any leave for discovery.
Justice Finkelstein based this proposal on the
Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure 2009
(US) r 26(b)(2)(C), which balances the burden or expense
of the discovery against its likely benefit. Justice Finkelstein found it
difficult to avoid the conclusion that the current discovery regime is defective
because it does not explicitly force litigants to
justify discovery requests (by
reference to the costs and benefits) nor does it constrain the trial judge to
reject requests not
2.50 Currently,
the court must determine an application for leave for discovery in the way that
best promotes the overarching purpose
of civil practice and
procedure—namely, the just resolution of disputes according to law, as
quickly, inexpensively and efficiently
consultations, the ALRC sought stakeholder views about imposing specific
restrictions on the availability of discovery
in the Federal Court. The ALRC
discussed with stakeholders the possibility of including a provision similar to
Federal Magistrates Act
Federal Court of Australia
(Cth), so that leave for discovery would not be allowed in the
Federal Court unless the court made a declaration that it was appropriate
interests of the administration of justice to allow the discovery.
2.51 There is a risk that such reform would give rise to disputes between the
parties as to whether the relevant threshold had been
reached, which may lead to
litigation over whether the requirements of the legislation were satisfied in
the circumstances of that
case. Therefore, there may be concerns that the costs
associated with discovery would increase as a result of this satellite
litigation.
2.52 Reforms that impose greater restrictions on the availability of
discovery may also put at risk the benefits of the discovery
of documents in
litigation. Discovery is an important part of the litigation process as it
provides access to information required
to resolve or determine the issues in
dispute. In some cases, litigants might not be in a position to settle their
disputes or present
their cases at trial without discovery. The ALRC made this
Managing Justice
The process needs supervision and control but, in setting such controls courts
should note that discovery is an essential part of
the process. The information
obtainable through discovery is required to facilitate settlement as well as to
its report,
Civil Justice Review
, the Victorian Law Reform Commission
(VLRC) also formed the view that ‘discovery plays a vital role in the
administration of
concluded that discovery in Victorian courts should continue to be available to
the parties as of right.
was despite submissions from some stakeholders that the discovery process should
be viewed as a privilege and maintained for
appropriate cases by leave of the
The Victorian Parliament
has followed the VLRC’s recommendation on this point, in that recent
reforms to discovery laws in
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) made no changes to limit the availability of discovery.
ALRC’s views
2.54 Discovery of documents in proceedings before the Federal Court is
important to ensure that cases are decided on their merits
and on the basis of
all relevant information. In principle, discovery is a legitimate and valuable
mechanism that aids the transparency
of litigation in the Federal Court and
facilitates an informed analysis by the parties of the strengths and weaknesses
of their respective
2.55 The ALRC’s preliminary view is that the introduction of a new
statutory threshold test to limit the availability of discovery
in the Federal
Court is unwarranted. The existing requirement under
Court of Australia Act
, which in effect requires the court to determine an
application for leave for discovery in the way that best promotes the
overarching
purpose of civil practice and procedure, is an appropriate limit on
a party’s ability to obtain discovery. The leave requirement,
requirements of
of the Act, represents a gatekeeper role for the court to
regulate the use of discovery and disallow the unnecessary discovery of
2.56 In the ALRC’s view, introducing new rules to prohibit the court
from granting leave for discovery—unless the party
seeking leave meets a
particular threshold test—is likely to lead to satellite litigation in
relation to the requirements for
leave. In this way, the ALRC expects that the
costs incurred to resolve such discovery disputes would add to overall
litigation expenses.
2.57 The ALRC considers that the inclusive definition of the overarching
Federal Court of Australia Act
suitable guidance to judges considering applications for leave for discovery in
the Federal Court. In particular, the legislative
intent for the court to
resolve disputes ‘at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and
complexity of the matters in
should be taken
into account when the court decides whether to grant leave for discovery. The
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Access to Justice (Civil Litigation Reforms)
Amendment Bill 2009
provides that:
This provision is intended to be a reminder to litigants that costs should be
proportionate to the matter in dispute. It is not only
the cost to the parties
that is relevant. The efficient use of the Court’s resources needs to be
taken into account. However,
at the same time, due process will be observed so
that justice may be done in the individual case. These objectives will support
the intention that both the Court’s and the litigant’s resources are
efficiently.
2.58 Notwithstanding
the ALRC’s preliminary view in this regard, the ALRC is interested in
receiving stakeholder views on whether
existing restrictions on the availability
of discovery are operating effectively to eliminate or reduce the burden of
documents being
discovered unnecessarily in proceedings before the Federal
2.59 A separate issue is how discovery is being used in practice. The terms
upon which leave for discovery is granted by the court
will determine the range
of discoverable documents. The procedures employed to make orders for discovery
are considered in Chapter
Question 2–2
Does the requirement for leave of the court
effectively regulate the use of discovery in civil proceedings in the Federal
Question 2–3
Is the law sufficiently clear on when the Federal
Court should grant leave for discovery of documents in civil proceedings?
Question 2–4
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) be amended to adopt the provisions of
Magistrates Act 1999
in relation to discovery, so that
discovery would not be allowed in the Federal Court unless the court made a
declaration that it
is appropriate, in the interests of the administration of
justice, to allow the discovery? If not, should another threshold test
adopted? What should that threshold test be?
Overbroad discovery of documents
2.60 In 2000, when the ALRC delivered its report,
Managing Justice
the Federal Court had recently amended O 15 to reflect the test of
‘direct relevance’ for the discovery of
That test had been
recommended in Lord Woolf’s final report on the civil justice system in
England and Wales
and had been
incorporated into the
Civil Procedure Rules
(UK) a few months
The ALRC’s report
commented that:
The move away from the
Peruvian Guano
test to the test of ‘direct
relevance’ and discovery by categories of documents are attempts to
streamline the process
of discovery so that discovered documents are directly
relevant to the issues in a case and the costs of discovery proportionate
value of the
the publication of the
Managing Justice
report, and with the rise of what
Sackville J describes as
‘mega-litigation’
Federal Court, the experiences of some judges may have prompted them to query
whether the test of ‘direct relevance’
has achieved its objectives.
Seven Network Limited v News Limited
(the C7 case), Sackville J said
The outcome of the processes of discovery and production of documents in this
case was an electronic database containing 85,653 documents,
comprising 589,392
pages. Ultimately, 12,849 ‘documents’, comprising 115,586 pages,
were admitted into
2.62 Justice
Finkelstein has pointed out that in the C7 case only 15% of the millions of
pages of documents that were searched and
reviewed were put before the court and
only about 15% of those documents ultimately went into evidence. In other words,
the overall
yield of discovery (in terms of the admitted evidence produced) was
well below 5% of the documents
discovered.
Justice Sackville
recently reflected on this, saying that:
far too often, the search for the illusory ‘smoking gun’ leads to
squadrons of solicitors, paralegals and clerks compiling
vast libraries of
materials, most of which is of no significance to the issues in the
proceeding.
2.63 However, the percentage of discovered documents that are not
subsequently relied upon at trial may create a misleading perception
discovery rules are only successful when a substantial proportion of documents
discovered are tendered in evidence. In the context
of certain proceedings, it
is possible that a single document may turn out to be crucial to the
determination of the issues in dispute.
2.64 From 1 January 2011, the Federal Court’s formulation of the
‘direct relevance’ test for discovery will apply
in the Victorian
Supreme Court on commencement of 2010 amendments to the
Supreme Court
(General Civil Procedure) Rules 2005
replacing the
Peruvian Guano
test of relevance. In recommending this amendment, the
VLRC acknowledged that ‘there is little evidence to support the contention
that a narrower test will necessarily confine the scope of discovery, thereby
saving costs and time’.
Nevertheless, the VLRC supported the intention behind a narrower test for
Although narrowing the discovery test will not necessarily reduce the time and
expense incurred in the review of potentially discoverable
documents, it does
reflect an important shift in the approach to discovery and litigation generally
... We believe that a narrower
discovery test, combined with our other discovery
recommendations, will encourage important cultural change and assist parties to
focus their attention on the main purpose of discovery in the litigation
a 2008 workshop on the Federal Court’s case management system, Finkelstein
J made two observations about the ‘direct
relevance’ test for
One obvious point highlighted by the foregoing is that the scope of discovery
being allowed under the current system is overbroad.
If the system is to remain,
the trial judge must actively manage the process, rejecting or restricting
discovery requests in order
to improve the yield of admissible evidence. A
second, though perhaps less obvious, point is that while the cost to the party
discovery might be staggering, the costs and burdens involved in
making the discovery is that much more staggering. Order 15 rule
2 explicitly
recognises that a discovery order effectively places a duty to search for the
materials described in the order. The
duty can be burdensome. If the current
rule is retained the court must in all cases consider the cost and burdens
associated with
the performance of that
general scope of discovery permitted by the test of ‘direct
relevance’ under O 15 r 2 of the
Federal Court Rules
may be limited
by orders pursuant to r 3.
the normal course of proceedings, the Court should not make orders for
‘general discovery’ under r
instead discovery—if
necessary at all—should be limited to particular documents or issues, by
orders under r 3.
However, the
ALRC has been told that most discovery orders in Federal Court proceedings are
for general discovery in accordance with
O 15 r 2—with close to 70% of
discovery orders being made by consent of the parties. This suggests that in
most cases neither
the court nor the parties are making serious attempts at
limiting the ambit of general discovery.
2.67 In initial consultations, the ALRC heard widespread concerns about the
burden of discovering vast categories of documents and
large volumes of
materials in proceedings before the Federal Court, as illustrated in the C7
case. This problem was generally raised
by reference to the increasing quantity
of electronic documents and information generated in contemporary trade and
commerce and
the growing capacity of electronic document storage and management
systems with advancing computer technologies.
2.68 The same problem was noted in the United Kingdom in Lord Jackson’s
Review of Civil Litigation Costs
, where the example was given of
retrieving information from back-up tapes under orders for discovery as a
‘vast expense and
sometimes with no discernable benefit at the
While this was his
final report to the government, it is unclear at this stage which—if
any—of Lord Jackson's recommendations
will be implemented in the United
Options for reform
2.69 One way to eliminate masses of irrelevant documents from discovery would
be to impose greater restrictions on the range of documents
discoverable in the
Federal Court. This approach was adopted in the rules applicable to Fast Track
proceedings, which limit discovery
to the following documents of which the party
is aware or discovers after a good faith proportionate search:
(a) documents on which the party intends to rely, and
(b) documents that have significant probative value adverse to a
party’s case.
2.70 Practice Note CM 8
defines a ‘good-faith proportionate
good-faith effort
to locate discoverable documents, while bearing in mind that
the cost of the search should not be excessive, having regard to the
complexity of issues raised by the case, including the type of relief sought and
the quantum of the claim.
2.71 The ambit of discovery has also been narrowed in the court’s Tax
List where the documents required to be disclosed must
‘material’ adverse affect on the party’s own case or another
party’s case, or ‘materially’
support another party’s
However, this scope of
discovery may be expanded or limited by the Tax List Coordinating Judge or the
judge to whose docket the case
2.72 The concept of ‘materially’ relevant documents is defined in
Practice Note Tax 1
as ‘documents that would enable a judge to
reach a sound, complete and just decision in the
The ALRC has heard
that this concept is not necessarily an easy one for legal practitioners to
interpret, since there is sparse judicial
guidance in judgments, which leaves
uncertain the issue of how it should be applied. The same comment might be made
of ‘significant probative value’ in relation to the
Fast Track List.
2.73 Another model may be found in the
Rules on the Taking of Evidence in
International Arbitration
, which limit discovery to documents that are
‘relevant to the case and material to its
The requirement
in international arbitration for discoverable documents to be ‘material to
the outcome of the case’ imposes
the same limitation as that in the
court’s Tax List and employs a similar concept to that of
‘significant probative value’
in Fast Track discoveries.
2.74 While limiting the range of discoverable documents might alleviate some
of the complication, expense and inefficiency of the
current process, it may
also come with its own set of costs. Parties—particularly those unfamiliar
with rules for more limited
discovery—may litigate over compliance with
narrower discovery obligations. For example, a party in search of the
gun’ may assume it was not disclosed because their opponent
did not search in ‘good faith’ and so apply to court
for additional
discovery. There may also be concerns that narrower discovery obligations
provide parties with an excuse not to disclose
relevant material. For example, a
party might assume their opponent unfairly withheld documents on the unsound
basis that they lacked
the requisite ‘probative value’.
2.75 In some cases, non-disclosure may occur even where the discovering party
acts genuinely and in good faith. The parties might
differ as to how
‘material’ or ‘probative’ a document is to one side's
case, and parties are not always
particular point. At times, parties might agree that their case turns on a
particular issue only to be
told by the court in judgment that the ‘real
issue’ is entirely different—and that one party’s case failed
for lack of evidence going to a point neither party anticipated.
2.76 These kinds of arguments and satellite litigation ensued when the
current rule was introduced. In
Managing Justice
, the ALRC reported with
respect to current
O 15 that practitioners felt ‘the real temptation when documents
adverse to the case are found, to seek to rationalise that
the documents are
outside the discoverable categories and therefore not required to be disclosed
to the other side’.
2.77 However, the 2008 decision in
The University of Sydney v ResMed Ltd
suggests that legal practitioners are not necessarily interpreting or
applying O 15 r 2 on a restrictive basis. In this case, where
Court directed that each party serve on the other a list of categories of
documents of which it would seek discovery, the parties’
categories of documents which were, in the Court’s view, broader than the
four classes of documents referred to in
2.78 There is a risk that confining discovery to documents of
‘significant probative value’ would result in the parties
higher legal fees. A more stringent assessment of the extent of a
document’s relevance may require the involvement
of more senior lawyers
and, if so, costs would increase.
2.79 Such concerns are borne out by findings in Lord Jackson’s
Review of Civil Litigation Costs
, which found that parties in the United
Kingdom who strictly comply with the test of ‘direct relevance’
would disclose
fewer documents, but incur higher costs, as it requires lawyers
to evaluate the relevance of discoverable
Lord Jackson pointed
out that ‘because of the continuing obligation [of discovery], the
exercise may have to be repeated if
the pleadings are
and additional
costs would be incurred. However
Lord Jackson reported that, in practice,
solicitors simply continue to disclose everything that might be relevant:
In other words, they continue to follow the old rules, thus saving costs (on
their own side) but disclosing a greater quantity of
documents than should be
may also be concerns that narrowing the rules that define the ambit of discovery
would have no practical impact unless
the court, the parties and their lawyers
give effect to the limits on discoverable documents. During initial
consultations, the ALRC
heard that nationally the Fast Track List and Tax List
have had mixed results in narrowing the scope of discovery. The ALRC was told
that parties to proceedings in these lists will continue to discover larger
volumes of documents than permitted by the rules when
the court lacks the
capacity or willingness to enforce the limits.
2.81 Such discovery—broader than the rules would suggest—might
also be a consequence of the nature of the proceeding.
For example, some tax
matters may require broad discovery where a question arises as to the nature and
extent of a taxpayer's business
or income-producing activity over a period of
years. In such cases, the ALRC has been told, the parties might need to look at
totality of relevant documents—rather than assess a particular
document in isolation—to determine whether each document
supports or is materially adverse to one side’s case.
ALRC’s views
2.82 At this stage in the Inquiry, the ALRC’s preliminary view is that
reforms to limit the categories of documents discoverable
in proceedings before
the Federal Court are not necessary. The ALRC’s view is that confining the
ambit of discovery in the
Federal Court (to those documents discoverable in Fast
Track proceedings, for example) would be likely to increase the costs of
There is a risk that such reform would create disputes between the
parties about compliance with discovery obligations and parties
would incur the
cost of litigation to resolve those disputes. This would not be consistent with
the Terms of Reference for this Inquiry,
which set the objective of identifying
‘means to limit the extent to which discovery gives rise to satellite
litigation’.
2.83 The VLRC’s
Civil Justice Review
recommended narrowing the
test for discovery in Victorian courts, while acknowledging that it would not
necessarily reduce the time
and expense incurred in litigation. The VLRC’s
reasoning was that ‘a narrower discovery test will encourage important
cultural change and assist parties to focus their attention on the main purpose
of discovery in the litigation
2.84 The ALRC agrees that cultural change is required for the effective
reform of discovery in the Federal Court. However, a better
direction for
cultural reform may be through changes to discovery practice and procedure. The
ALRC is initially inclined to the view
that the best way to focus the scope of
discovery in the Federal Court is through effective judicial case management,
rather than
the laws governing what documents are discoverable. For example,
where the range of issues in dispute is broad and complex, discovery
generates large numbers of documents. Narrowing and clarifying the issues in
dispute may be one way of containing the volume
of discoverable material. These
issues are explored further in Chapter 3.
2.85 Nevertheless, the ALRC welcomes stakeholder views on the appropriate
test for whether a document is discoverable in proceedings
before the Federal
Question 2–5
Are the categories of documents required to be
disclosed under the
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) too broad? If so, where
should the parameters be set?
Question 2–6
Should O 15 r 2 of the
Federal Court Rules
be amended to adopt the categories of documents discoverable in
Fast Track proceedings, so that discovery in the Federal Court is
limited to the
following documents of which the party giving discovery is aware at the time
orders for discovery are made or discovers
after a good faith proportionate
(a) documents on which the party intends to rely; and
(b) documents that have significant probative value adverse to a
party’s case?
Family Court of
Non-compliance with disclosure
obligations
2.86 Based on initial consultations, the ALRC understands that disclosure
obligations on the parties to proceedings in the Family
Court are generally
working well. If there are ever any issues with disclosure in Family Court
proceedings, it is typically a matter
of too little disclosure rather than too
much. However, the ALRC was informed that parties will usually comply with the
duty of full
and frank disclosure and provide the documents required under the
Family Law Rules
. Instances of relevant information and documents being
withheld in proceedings before the Family Court are, on the whole, isolated.
2.87 Where there is non-compliance with disclosure obligations in the Family
Court, the court may deal with this issue in its judgment.
In property matters,
for example, the court may draw adverse inferences from non-disclosure and
distribute assets accordingly. In
Marriage of Weir
the Full Court
commented that:
It seems to us that once it has been established that there has been a
deliberate non-disclosure ... then the Court should not be
unduly cautious about
making findings in favour of the innocent party. To do otherwise might be
thought to provide a charter for
fraud in proceedings of this
court’s ability to deal with non-disclosure was more recently expressed by
the Full Court in
Marriage of Kannis
Whether the non-disclosure is wilful or accidental, is a result of misfeasance,
or malfeasance or nonfeasance, is beside the point.
The duty to disclose is
absolute. Where the Court is satisfied the whole truth has not come out it might
readily conclude the asset
pool is greater than demonstrated. In those
circumstances it may be appropriate to err on the side of generosity to the
might be otherwise be seen to be disadvantaged by the lack of complete
such extraordinary cases where serious breaches of disclosure obligations occur,
the court’s authority to alter proprietary
interests—to ensure a
just and equitable order for property distribution—is illustrated in the
following case study.
LGM & CAM & Ors
[2009] FamCA 251
The applicant commenced proceedings for property settlement in the Family
Court on 4 March 1997. The first respondent was the former
wife of the
applicant. Other respondents to the proceedings were relatives of the first
respondent and private
The final hearing
before O’Ryan J occurred on 6 November 2007 and for a subsequent
non-consecutive period of 68 days, eventually
concluding on 5 September 2008.
His Honour commented that ‘this was an extraordinary case which I describe
as an aberration’.
The history of the marriage and the parties’ shareholdings and
relations with various companies were complex and claims of forgery,
and fraud contributed towards a lengthy and costly
Costs incurred by the
applicant in relation to his dispute with the first respondent in the Family
Court exceeded $1.5m, and the
public cost, according to O’Ryan J, was
‘incalculable’.
In his judgment, O’Ryan J commented on a number of factors that
contributed to the complexity of the case. These included the
and utter failure’ of the first respondent to comply with disclosure
obligations, discovery requirements and
to produce documents to the
In this case, disclosure of documents was essential so as to determine the
value of assets in the matrimonial
However, precise
determination of asset value was hampered by the first respondent’s
failure, amplified by the similar failure
of other respondent family members, to
disclose the existence and/or nature of her financial
circumstances.
The applicant
contended that such non-disclosure, and additional failure to provide discovery,
were deliberate.
applicant further contended that some documents produced were unauthentic and
untruthful.
For example, on 12 November 2007, several days after the commencement date of
the hearing, the second respondent produced documents
on behalf of the third and
fourth respondents.
applicant sought an order for an affidavit explaining the late production of
relevant documents.
O’Ryan J found that the explanations were inconsistent with the second
respondent’s earlier
and later during
cross-examination of the second respondent, his Honour found that she could not
give an adequate
explanation.
O’Ryan J held that only 31 out of the 84 documents produced on 12
November 2007 had been previously
and none of the
produced bank cheques had been previously produced in the
proceedings.
The applicant
submitted that the documents had internal inconsistencies and that monetary and
calculation figures on documents were
fabricated.
His Honour agreed
with the applicant and held that invoices were
fabricated,
copies of bank
cheques had forged signatures,
books had falsified entries,
and stated that the behaviour of the first to fourth respondents were
‘contumacious’.
Honour further recounted instances where he had given express orders for
discovery in favour of the applicant, but the first respondent
had repeatedly
failed to comply.
In considering the value of available assets for the purposes of making
orders, his Honour had to determine whether the applicant
should be granted a
distribution of assets from the matrimonial pool which amounted to more than the
identified value of the pool
respondent’s deliberate non-disclosure and failure to provide discovery
obscured the true value of her assets and
compounded by the fact that first respondent, in anticipation of marriage
break-up, had diverted monies from the matrimonial
business to a private company
incorporated in Taiwan with the first to fourth respondents being the
shareholders.
The applicant therefore submitted that instead of the usual 50% of monies
being used in the calculation of an order for property distribution,
100% of the
diverted monies should be added back to the matrimonial pool as a notional asset
in order to arrive at a just and equitable
order for property
distribution.
Court has the discretionary power to alter property interests pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
O’Ryan J agreed that an alteration of property interests in favour of
the applicant should be made, given that the first respondent
discharge disclosure and discovery obligations, and that this alternation was
the only manner through which a just and
equitable outcome could be
Among other things, orders were made to transfer a property to the
to transfer the
entirety of liquidated monies from the matrimonial business to the
and to transfer
shareholdings of the first respondent to the
Overbroad disclosure of documents
2.90 Currently, the ALRC is not aware of any cause for concern regarding the
amount of information or volume of documents required
to be disclosed in
proceedings before the Family Court. This may be due to the nature of family law
matters, where the parties are
generally familiar with each other’s case
including their respective financial circumstances. Non-court based family
resolution procedures prior to the commencement of proceedings in the
Family Court may also help to draw out the main facts in issue
and focus the
objectives of disclosure obligations.
2.91 Despite the breadth of disclosure obligations in the Family Court, the
transparency of cases in its jurisdiction may help to
disclosure—as explained in the Explanatory Statement for the
The ‘litigation tool’ of complete disclosure is an expensive process
and is therefore still timed to commence only after
the final resolution event.
The purpose of this is that, at that stage, the parties should be in a position
to know what issues need
to be proven and they can therefore concentrate on
obtaining disclosure relevant to those issues ... The court's expectation will
be that parties will not go on a ‘fishing expedition’ or apply for a
general order but will direct their mind to the
higher standard and consider
what is directly relevant to the disputed
ALRC welcomes feedback from stakeholders as to whether disclosure obligations
are working well in the Family Court, particularly
with regards to the
court’s ability to deal with non-disclosure.
Question 2–7
Are the disclosure obligations on parties to
proceedings before the Family Court working well and is the Court adequately
to deal with instances of non-compliance with disclosure obligations?
Federal Magistrates
Court of Australia
2.93 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry suggest that reforms are needed
to ‘reduce the expense of discovery and ensure
that key documents relevant
to the real issues in dispute are identified as early as
2.94 This section of the chapter considers the interaction between
restrictions on discovery under
Federal Magistrates Act
disclosure obligations under part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court
. This section also outlines the ALRC’s proposal for
clarification of disclosure obligations in financial matters under the
Magistrates Court’s family law jurisdiction.
Non-disclosure in family law matters
2.95 During initial consultations, the ALRC heard about a particular issue
with the operation of s 45 the
Federal Magistrates Act
in financial
matters under the Federal Magistrates Court’s family law jurisdiction. In
some cases, parties may take the view
that the obligation to disclose documents
under part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
does not apply
unless the court or a magistrate makes a declaration to allow discovery of
documents pursuant to s 45 of the Act. This
means the party does not disclose
their financial documents voluntarily in the absence of court orders. This
practice requires the
party seeking documents to apply to the court for a
declaration compelling disclosure.
2.96 While views may differ between the Court’s registries, the ALRC
has heard that some magistrates apply s 45 of the Act narrowly
and are generally
inclined to the view that discovery is not in the interests of the
administration of justice. When the court dismisses
an application for discovery
under s 45 of the Act in a family law matter where a party refuses to disclose
their financial circumstances
voluntarily, it may be difficult for other parties
to obtain relevant information and documents—more difficult than it
would have been had the proceeding been commenced in the Family
2.97 On the one hand, it may be argued that the information needs of a case
in the Federal Magistrates Court’s family law jurisdiction
are the same as
proceedings in the Family Court. Disclosure of a party’s financial
circumstances should be as accessible in
the Federal Magistrates Court as it is
in the Family Court. This would mean that parties to proceedings in the Federal
Magistrates
Court are required to disclose relevant information and documents to
each other without the need for court intervention to require
the disclosure.
2.98 On the other hand, s 45 of the Act may be considered an important
provision that helps the Federal Magistrates Court to achieve
the purposes of
being a simple and accessible forum for dispute resolution through informal and
streamlined procedures. Section 45
of the Act sends a clear message that the
court will not allow litigants to abuse discovery for tactical reasons, and so
cases the parties to proceedings before the Federal Magistrates Court
will make appropriate arrangements for informal discovery.
ALRC’s views
2.99 The ALRC’s preliminary view is that
Magistrates Act
, which bars discovery unless the court declares that it is
should be amended to clarify that disclosure obligations in
financial matters under part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
apply independently of any declaration to allow discovery. This could be
achieved by inserting a note to s 45 of the Act that refers
to part 24 of the
2.100 The ALRC seeks to address concerns about instances of non-compliance
with disclosure obligations by parties to financial matters
under the Federal
Magistrates Court’s family law jurisdiction. Specifically, the proposed
reform seeks to eliminate non-disclosure
on the basis that disclosure
obligations under part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court
are contingent upon a court declaration to allow discovery pursuant to
Federal Magistrates Act
2.101 Part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
imposes a general
duty of disclosure (including a duty to produce
independently of
any action of the court or any other party. A general duty of this nature should
not be contingent on compliance
with s 45 of the Act. Otherwise, s 45 would
undermine the objective of disclosure in family law matters (to help parties
genuine issues, reduce cost and encourage
settlement)
by requiring a
party to incur the cost of applying to court for a declaration to allow
discovery and potentially restricting access
to relevant information.
2.102 The ALRC notes that the
Access to Justice (Family Court Restructure
and Other Measures) Bill 2010
(Cth) proposed to remove the Federal
Magistrates Court’s family law jurisdiction and make the Family Court the
single court
dealing with all family law
2.103 Subject to any restructure of the family court system, the ALRC is
interested in stakeholder views on reforms to clarify that
obligations under part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
independently of any declaration to allow discovery pursuant to
Federal Magistrates Act
Proposal 2–1
Federal Magistrates Act 1999
(Cth), which provides that discovery is not allowed unless the court
declares that it is appropriate in the interests of the administration
should note that disclosure obligations under part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(Cth) (including the obligations to
produce documents under rr 24.04 and 24.05) are not contingent upon compliance
with s 45 of the
High Court Rules 2004
Compagnie Financiere et Commerciale du
Pacifique v Peruvian Guano Co
[1883] UKLawRpKQB 95
(1882) 11 QBD 55.
Commonwealth v Northern Land
[1993] HCA 24
(1993) 176 CLR 604.
Mulley v Manifold
[1959] HCA 23
(1959) 103 CLR 341
Compagnie Financiere et Commerciale du
Pacifique v Peruvian Guano Co
[1883] UKLawRpKQB 95
(1882) 11 QBD 55
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) O 15 r
Federal Court of Australia Act
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) O 15 r
Ibid O 15 r 2(2).
Ibid O 15 r 11(1).
Federal Court Rules
University of Western Australia v
Gray (No 8)
[2007] FCA 89
Gray v Associated Book Publishers (Aust)
[2002] FCA 1045
Practice Note CM 5: Discovery
(Federal Court of Australia), [2].
Federal Court Rules (Cth)
Ibid O 15 r 2(3).
Ibid O 15 r 5;
Citrus Queensland
Pty Ltd v Sunstate Orchards Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2006] FCA 1001
S Colbran and others,
Procedure: Commentary and Materials
(4th ed, 2009), [12.1.21].
The University of Sydney v ResMed
[2008] FCA 1020
Australian Competition & Consumer Commission v
Advanced Medical Institute Pty Ltd
[2005] FCA 366
Aveling v UBS Capital
Markets Australia Holdings Ltd
[2005] FCA 415.
Racing New South Wales v Betfair
[2009] FCAFC 119
Federal Court Rules
Ibid O 15 r 6.
Ibid O 15 r 2(4).
Ibid O 15 r 6A.
Ibid O 15 r 6.
Ibid O 15 r 11.
Briese and Briese
Family Law Rules 2004
Family Court of Australia,
<www.familylawcourts.gov.au/> at 27 October 2010.
Family Law Rules 2004
Ibid r 13.01.
Ibid r 13.07.
Ibid r 4.15, 4.26,
and 16 respectively.
Ibid r 13.04.
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
(Cth) r 14.02.
Ibid r 14.04.
Ibid r 14.05.
Ibid rr 24.02–24.03.
Ibid r 24.05.
Ibid r 24.04.
Ibid r 24.03.
Ibid r 24.05.
Ibid r 24.04.
Lord Woolf,
Access to Justice:
Interim Report to the Lord Chancellor on the Civil Justice System in England and
(1995), ch 21, [17].
Civil Procedure Rules
31, ‘Disclosure and Inspection of Documents’, commenced in January
1999 and provides for standard disclosure
which is substantially identical to
the documents required to be disclosed under
Federal Court Rules
S Colbran and others,
Procedure: Commentary and Materials
(4th ed, 2009), 625.
See the Terms of Reference at the
front of this Consultation Paper.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
[6.73], [7.190].
Federal Court Amendment Rules (No
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [4].
Law Council of Australia,
Report in Relation to Possible Innovations to Case Management
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [6].
Federal Court Rules
See Ch 3 for discussion of the court
procedures applying to matters in the Fast Track List.
M Gordon, ‘The Fast Track
Experience in Victoria: Changing and Evolving the Way in Which We Administer
Justice’ (Paper
presented at International Commercial Litigation and
Dispute Resolution Conference, Sydney, 27-28 November 2009).
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [20].
Ibid, [10].
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 466.
Federal Court of Australia Act
s 37M(2)(e).
Explanatory Memorandum,
Justice (Civil Litigation Reforms) Amendment Act 2009
(Cth), [18].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
[7.174]. The amendment to O 15 commenced on 3 December 1999.
Lord Woolf,
Access to Justice:
Final Report
(1996), ch 12, [38].
Civil Procedure Rules
31.6 commenced in April 1999.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
Seven Network Limited v News
[2007] FCA 1062
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [7].
R Sackville, ‘Mega-Lit: Tangible
Consequences Flow from Complex Case Management’
(2010) 48(5)
Society Journal
Supreme Court (Chapter I Amendment
No. 18) Rules 2010
(Vic) inserted r 29.01.1 into the
Supreme Court
(General Civil Procedure) Rules 2005
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 466.
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [8].
Federal Court Rules
Practice Note CM 5: Discovery
(Federal Court of Australia);
Kyocera Mita Australia Pty Ltd v Mitronics
Corp Pty Ltd
[2005] FCA 242
Pasini v Vanstone
[1999] FCA 1271.
Racing New South Wales v Betfair
[2009] FCAFC 119.
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Final Report
(2009), ch 41, [4.2].
Practice Note CM 8 Fast Track
(Federal Court of Australia)
Ibid, [7.2].
Practice Note Tax 1 Tax List
(Federal Court of Australia), [6.1].
Ibid, [6.1].
Ibid, [6.2].
Rules on the Taking of Evidence in
International Arbitration
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
The University of Sydney v ResMed
[2008] FCA 1020
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Final Report
(2009), ch 41, [3.1].
Ibid, ch 41, [3.1].
Ibid, ch 41, [3.2].
The Terms of Reference at the front of
this Consultation Paper
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 466.
In the Marriage of Weir
[1992] FamCA 69
110 FLR 403.
In the Marriage of Kannis
[2002] FamCA 1150
(2003) 30 Fam LR 83.
LGM & CAM & Ors
, [1]–[3]. The second respondent was the sister of the first
respondent. The third and fourth respondents were, respectively,
(deceased) and mother of the first and second respondents. The fifth and sixth
respondents were private companies in which
the first respondent had significant
shareholdings.
Ibid, [38].
Ibid, [27].
Ibid, [23]. The estimated cost borne
by the applicant in relation to all proceedings against the first respondent,
including proceedings
outside the Family Court, amounted to $5.1m.
Ibid, [28].
Ibid, [88].
Ibid, [91].
Ibid, [92] and
[186]–[187].
Ibid, [191] and [462].
Ibid, [464].
Ibid, [464].
Ibid, [464].
Ibid, [468].
Ibid, [473].
Ibid, [485].
Ibid, [480].
Ibid, [483].
Ibid, [486]-[487].
Ibid, [504].
Ibid, [490] and [722].
Ibid, [1388], [1402], [1409] and
Ibid, [2217].
Ibid, [2217].
Ibid, [2230]–[2231].
Ibid, [2231].
Ibid, [2268].
Ibid, [2274].
Ibid, [2364].
Ibid, [2366]–[2367]. There
was a surplus arrangement of monies payable to the first respondent, if the
surplus exceeded $2m.
However, there was likely to be little, if any, surplus.
Ibid, [2373].
Explanatory Statement,
Law Rules 2004
(Cth) ch 13.
The Terms of Reference at the front
of this Consultation Paper
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
(Cth) rr 24.04, 24.05.
Family Law Rules 2004
Explanatory Memorandum,
Access to Justice (Family Court Restructure and Other Measures) Bill 2010
ALRC CP2 Discovery in Federal Courts
3. Discovery Practice and Procedure in Federal Courts
Introduction
Procedural framework
High Court of Australia
Federal Court of Australia
Family Court of Australia
Federal Magistrates Court of Australia
Issues with the process of discovery
High Court of Australia
Federal Court of Australia
Options for procedural reform in the Federal Court
Family Court of Australia
Federal Magistrates Court of Australia
3. Discovery Practice and Procedure in Federal
Introduction
3.1 This chapter examines civil practice and procedure for the discovery of
documents in proceedings before federal courts. Issues
discovery process and its proportionality, in terms of the value of the
documents sought in the context of the
litigation, are explored in this chapter.
In particular, the use of technology in the process of discovering
electronically-stored
information is considered here.
3.2 This part of the chapter outlines the existing court rules and practices
for discovery of documents in federal courts. It covers
the courts’ powers
to make orders for discovery and to enforce those orders, and the processes by
which parties are required
to discover documents.
High Court of
3.3 There are no provisions in the
High Court Rules 2004
setting out a process for the discovery of documents. Where discovery is
necessary in High Court proceedings, the Court or a judge
determines what
procedure is to be adopted and may give
directions.
Federal Court of
Pre-discovery practice
3.4 Practice Note CM 5
implies that practitioners are expected to
consider carefully any application for discovery, before approaching the court
for orders,
with a view to narrowing the scope of discovery.
Practice Note CM
expressly states that the court will expect practitioners to be in a
position to answer the following questions when applying for
orders, designed to
eliminate or reduce the burden of discovery:
• is discovery necessary at all, and if so for what purpose?
• can those purposes be achieved:
by a means less expensive than discovery;
by discovery only in relation to particular issues; or
by discovery (at least in the first instances) only of defined
categories of documents?
• particularly in cases where there are many documents, should
discovery be given in stages, for example, initially on a limited
basis, with
liberty to apply later for particular discovery or discovery on a broader
• should discovery be given in the list of documents (as required by O
15 r 2(2) of the
Federal Court Rules
(Cth)) by general description rather
than by identification of individual
Planning for electronic discovery
3.5 Where discovery involves significant amounts of electronically-stored
information (ESI),
Practice Note CM 6
states that before the court will
make orders for electronic discovery the parties are expected to have discussed
and agreed upon
a practical and cost-effective discovery plan having regard to
the issues in dispute and the likely number, nature and significance
documents that might be discoverable in relation to
3.6 Parties are also expected to reach an agreement on protocols for the
management of electronic documents in
litigation.
Practice Note CM
provides a Default Document Management Protocol which addresses issues
such as page number conventions, document descriptions, file
format and media to
be exchanged. An example of an Advanced Document Management Protocol is also
provided under the practice note.
3.7 The court may order the parties to attend a case management conference,
called a ‘pre-discovery conference’, with
a judge or registrar to
facilitate or mediate resolution of any areas of disagreement between the
parties concerning their discovery
plan or document management
3.8 A checklist of the issues which parties are expected to address at a
pre-discovery conference is annexed to the practice note.
These issues include
strategies for the identification, collection, processing, analysis, review and
exchange of electronic documents,
as well as a timetable and estimate of costs
for discovery.
3.9 If the court requires a pre-discovery conference,
Practice Note CM 6
states that each party may have up to three representatives—including
one representative to act as a single point of contact
for the party in relation
to the matters resolved at the conference, called the ‘Discovery
Liaison’. Parties’ representatives
at a pre-discovery conference are
expected to have sufficient knowledge and access to information to address the
discovery plan and
document management
The parties or the court
may also engage an expert or adviser to attend a pre-discovery conference to
facilitate or mediate resolution
of any of these
Application for discovery
3.10 A party may file and serve a notice for discovery, with leave of the
court, after a directions hearing under O 10 of the
Federal Court Rules
and within any period fixed by the court for this
In practice, the court may
expect the parties to indicate at the first directions hearing or case
management conference whether leave
for discovery will be
3.11 The rules do not explicitly prohibit the giving of a discovery notice
before the close of pleadings. However discovery will not
be enforced prior to
the close of pleadings, except where the party seeking discovery can show that
it is impossible to plead without
Orders for discovery
3.12 Practice Note CM 5
states that the court will not order general
discovery as a matter of course, even where the parties have consented to it,
the court will fashion any order for discovery to suit the issues in a
particular case.
context, general discovery refers to the broad categories of documents required
to be disclosed under
Federal Court Rules
However, r 3 subsequently
provides that the court may limit discovery orders to specific documents or
classes of documents or in
relation to specific matters in question in the
proceeding—to prevent unnecessary
Practice Note CM
suggests that, in the normal course of events, the court will only make
orders for limited discovery under r 3 and not general discovery
The court has confirmed that the basis of ordering discovery in the Federal
Court is that, as a general rule, the Court
will not give general
, Finn J stated that:
As Practice Note 14 [now
Practice Note CM 5
] makes plain, general
discovery will not be ordered as of course, discovery commonly being ordered
only in relation to particular
issues or defined categories of
making orders for discovery, the court must have regard to
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) which provides that the
overarching purpose of civil practice and procedure is to facilitate the just
resolution of disputes:
(a) according to law; and
(b) as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as
Serving a list of documents
3.14 Order 15 r 2(2) of the
Federal Court Rules
requires parties to
give discovery by serving a list of discoverable documents. The list of
documents must be accompanied by an affidavit
verifying the
This must be done within
the time specified in the notice for discovery (not being less than 14 days
after service), or within such
time designated by the
3.15 The contents of the list
must be in accordance with Form 22 prescribed under sch 1 of the Rules, and
conform to the requirements
of O 15 r 6 unless the court otherwise orders. The
list must describe each document or group of documents sufficiently to be
identified,
state the grounds for privilege claimed over any of the documents
and, for documents no longer in the party’s possession, custody
state when the party parted with the document and what has become of
If the party is represented
by a solicitor, the solicitor must certify that the list and the statements in
it are correct.
Production of documents
3.16 Order 15 r 11 provides that the court may, subject to any question of
privilege, order a party to produce any document enumerated
in their list of
discoverable documents for inspection by any other party at a time and place
specified in the order.
party to whom a document is produced may make copies at their own
The court may also
order the party giving discovery to file and serve on any other party a copy of
the whole or any part of the
3.17 Order 15 r 13 provides that the court may, at any stage in a
proceeding, order a party to produce to the court for inspection
any documents
in its possession, custody or control relating to any matter in question, and
the court may deal with the document
as it thinks fit.
3.18 In particular, where a question of privilege or any other objection to
the production of discoverable documents between the parties
arises, the court
may order that the document be produced to court for inspection to decide the
validity of the privilege claim or
Producing electronic documents
3.19 The court may order that documents be produced in electronic format, in
which case the party should provide other parties with
documents in a useable,
are ordinarily maintained.
3.20 The standard process of discovering electronic documents is set out in
the diagram below, and was established by the Electronic
Discovery Reference
Model (EDRM) Project.
3.21 The following is a simplistic and brief description of the stages in the
Information management
3.22 This is the way in which potential litigants organise their electronic
information, so that documents can easily be found. The
obligations on litigants
to preserve relevant documents are considered in Chapter 4.
Identification
3.23 This involves identifying the places or locations to be searched, as
well as the types of documents or information to be searched
for. E-discovery
might pin-point certain sites such as a particular employee’s computer
terminal or cast a broader net, for
example, over an organisation’s entire
email system. Broader still, back-up tapes or disaster recovery systems may be
as potential locales of relevant information.
3.24 The types of electronic documents to be discovered may be identified by
automated searches using keywords appearing in the document
or by specifying
fields such as author or recipient. Documents may also be identified by type of
data, whether email, portable document
format (pdf) or text file.
Preservation/Collection
3.25 This is the process of transferring information from its original
location to a searchable database of potentially discoverable
documents for
review, in a way that does not compromise the integrity of the data. Specialist
software and other forensic tools have
been developed to collect electronic
documents for discovery.
3.26 A particular issue that may arise at this stage in the e-discovery
process is the preservation of metadata. Metadata is information
electronic record, such as how/when/by whom a document was created/amended/sent.
These details can be altered when a document
is accessed during the collection
phase. Metadata can be relevant to the issues in dispute in some cases, for
example, where the
parties disagree as to which record is the final version of a
document. In such cases, technological measures are available to ensure
metadata is preserved in its original form.
Processing/Review/Analysis
3.27 Processing is the stage at which the collected documents are tidied up
and culled. This may involve extracting individual files
from containers, and
converting files into a format that enables word-searches. It may also involve
the process of de-duplication,
which can mean removing additional copies of the
same document or omitting the many links in a chain of emails.
3.28 Analysis, in its simplest form, is the indexing of documents to enable
keyword searching and the production of a contents list.
This involves coding
each document according to a list of fields (such as author, recipient or
3.29 Review is when documents are perused to assess their discoverability.
This can involve coding each document according to the
facts in issue to which
the documents relate, and indicating each document’s level of importance
(whether it is relevant enough
to tender in court, provide in a brief to
counsel, disclose to an opposing party or not relevant enough to include in
discovery).
The review stage may also involve the redaction of privileged
communications or tagging wholly privileged documents to be withheld.
3.30 This is the act of disclosing documents to other parties to the
proceeding. For example, electronic documents may be produced
on a disk or
hosted on a website.
Presentation
3.31 This is when documents are presented to the court. Documents may be
presented on computer screens in electronic format in an
e-courtroom, rather
than producing hardcopies of documents from physical files.
Supplementary discovery
3.32 Orders for discovery impose an ongoing obligation on the party giving
discovery. The
Federal Court Rules
require parties to discover any
document not previously discovered that would otherwise be necessary to comply
with court orders.
Particular discovery
Federal Court Rules
state that the Court may order at any
stage of the proceeding that a party give discovery of some document or class of
documents relating
to any matter in question in the proceeding that—as it
appears from the evidence or from the nature or circumstances of the
from any document filed in the proceedings—may be or may have been in the
possession, custody or power of the
Enforcement of discovery obligations
3.34 The court has broad powers to address a party’s non-compliance
with orders for discovery. This includes the case management
powers prescribed
Federal Court of Australia Act
such as the
power to disallow or reject any evidence or dismiss the proceeding in whole or
in part. The Federal Court, as a superior
also possesses such
inherent power as is necessary to regulate processes such as discovery and to
prevent abuse of process.
3.35 The Federal Court’s power to award costs may also be used to
enforce orders for discovery. This includes the power to make
an award of costs
at any stage in a proceeding and to make different awards of costs in relation
to different parts of the proceeding,
Family Court of
Disclosure procedures
3.36 Chapter 13 of the
Family Law Rules 2004
obligation on each party, from the start of pre-action procedures for a case, to
provide to the court and to the other
party full and frank disclosure of all
relevant information in a timely
In all cases this
includes disclosure of relevant documents in the parties’ possession or
under their control.
3.37 The parties to a financial case must make full and frank disclosure of
their financial circumstances.
This involves filing and serving a financial statement with the application or
3.38 A party to proceedings before the Family Court must give an undertaking
to the court stating that the party has read
Family Law Rules
and is aware of the duty to give full and frank
disclosure, and that to the best of his or her knowledge the party has complied
the duty of disclosure.
This undertaking must be filed at least 28 days prior to the first day before a
3.39 After a case has been allocated a first day before a judge, a party may
request another party to provide a list of documents
to which the duty of
disclosure applies.
must be provided within 21 days of the request and, subject to a claim of
privilege, the party must produce those documents
for inspection on request by
another party.
The court may
make an order directing disclosure of documents by electronic
communication.
3.40 A party who breaches their disclosure obligations in the Family Court
may be in contempt of court and liable to costs
A costs order for breach
of disclosure obligations would be a departure from the usual position that
parties to proceedings before
the Family Court bear their own
A breach of disclosure
obligations is also an offence if the party gave an undertaking in relation to
disclosure that the party knew
or ought to have known was false or misleading in
a material particular.
Federal Magistrates
Court of Australia
3.41 The Federal Magistrates Court’s jurisdiction overlaps with that of
the Federal Court and the Family Court. Procedures for
discovery prescribed in
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2004
(Cth) are similar to the
processes of the Federal Court. Similarly, procedures for disclosure in
financial matters in the Federal
Magistrates Court’s family law
Discovery procedures
3.42 Part 14 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
procedures for the discovery of documents in all proceedings. Rule 14.02
provides that a declaration to allow discovery
may be made on the application of
a party or on the court’s own
If a declaration is
made, the court may order discovery generally or look to fashion orders for
discovery in relation to particular
classes of documents or issues in the
proceeding.
3.43 The rules require the party ordered to give discovery to file an
affidavit of documents.
court may order the party to produce discoverable documents to the court or to
any other party for inspection, subject to any
3.44 Rule 14.09 provides that a party who does not discover documents so
ordered by the court is not entitled to put the document
in evidence or give
evidence of the contents of the document, unless the court gives
Disclosure in financial matters
3.45 Part 24 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
financial matters under the Federal Magistrates Court’s family law
or respondent must file and
serve a financial statement with their application or response at the
commencement of proceedings.
this statement, the party must make full and frank disclosure of their financial
circumstances.
3.46 In proceedings for maintenance, the respondent must bring particular
categories of documents to the court on the first court
date such as tax
returns, pay slips and bank
statements.
In other financial
matters, unless the court orders otherwise, the parties must serve on each other
within fourteen days of the first
court date specific categories of documents
including tax assessments and business activity
statements.
Issues with the process
of discovery
3.47 This part of the chapter looks at the issues that can arise in the
discovery of documents in proceedings before federal courts,
and the current
practices and procedures designed to address them. It also assesses the extent
to which civil practice and procedure
effectively deals with discovery issues,
and explores directions for reform of the discovery process in the federal
High Court of
3.48 During initial consultations, the ALRC heard that there have not been
any obvious problems in managing the process of discovery
in the High Court.
Such comments were made in light of the fact that the need for discovery of
documents rarely arises in the High
3.49 However, the ALRC is interested in hearing from stakeholders about any
issues encountered in relation to the procedures adopted
by the High Court for
the discovery of documents in civil proceedings.
Question 3–1
What issues, if any, have arisen in the procedures
adopted by the High Court for the discovery of documents in civil
proceedings?
Federal Court of
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice
, ALRC Report 89 (2000), the ALRC noted that ‘in almost all
studies of litigation, discovery is singled out as the procedure
most open to
abuse, the most costly and the most in need of court supervision and
The issues of
scale, cost and delay that can plague a discovery process are most likely to
arise in complex cases in the Federal
Court’s jurisdiction. This section
of the chapter looks at the need for strong case management on the part of the
parties and their lawyers, to control the process of discovery in
Federal Court proceedings.
High and disproportionate costs
3.51 The discovery of documents may be considered a critical element of
fact-finding, truth seeking and decision making in civil
litigation.
The advantages of
discovery are said to include:
fairness to both sides, playing ‘with all the cards face up on the
table’, clarifying the issues between the parties,
reducing surprise at
trial and encouraging settlement. Any system of disclosure should have as a
broad rationale the just and efficient
disposal of litigation. It is against
this broad rationale that any reforms should be
considered.
3.52 However,
parties to civil proceedings may find that the benefits of discovery come at a
high cost. Yet, as discussed below, it
is not just the amount of money spent on
discovery that causes concern. Rather, it is the low value for money that
prompts criticism
of the discovery process—in terms of the cost of
discovery relative to the utility of discovered documents in the context of
litigation.
3.53 The high price of a discovery process was noted in the Victorian Law
Reform Commission’s
Civil Justice Review
, which found that
‘the objectives of the [discovery] process are either not being achieved
or can only be achieved at great
A number of other
commentators have also singled out the discovery process as a major litigation
expense. For example, in its
Final Report in Relation to Possible Innovations
to Case Management
, the Law Council of Australia stated that discovery
‘is often the most expensive, or at least one of the most expensive
3.54 Moreover, there are concerns that the high costs of discovery are
pricing litigants out of the court system. Chief Justice James
Spigelman of the
New South Wales Supreme Court has noted that ‘when senior partners of a
law firm tell me, as they have, that
for any significant commercial dispute the
flag-fall for discovery is often $2m, the position is not
sustainable’.
commercial realities of discovery of this order may represent a significant
barrier to justice for many litigants, as the Commercial
Litigation Association
stated in its submission to Lord Jackson’s
Review of Civil Litigation
in the United Kingdom (UK) in 2009:
Indeed the realisation must be if the situation is distilled in to the simple
question ‘justice or costs?’ costs, commercially,
3.55 Despite
such concerns about the high costs of discovery, there has been no systematic
collection of data on discovery costs in
Australia. An extensive survey of the
cost of legal representation was undertaken in 1998-99 for
. In particular, the survey asked solicitors to estimate the total
legal costs of discovery for cases in the Federal Court. The results
showed that
the costs of discovery varied according to the complexity of the issues
involved. For example, the range of costs for
obtaining discovery from another
party was $500–$750,000 for applicants and $200–$311,000 for
respondents, while the
range of costs for complying with discovery requests was
$200–$400,000 for applicants and $300–$120,000 for
respondents.
3.56 Since 1999 the range of material potentially to be discovered has
increased exponentially through advancing computer technologies—with
attended and significant increase in discovery costs. Electronic communications
can be inherently expensive to discover, in part
due to the cost of specialist
service providers with expertise in computer technologies. For example, Lord
Review of Civil Litigation Costs
reported that typical
service charges for e-discovery include: electronic document processing
(extracting metadata, text, attachments
etc, for use on a document review
system) £250–£1,000 per gigabyte of data, document hosting on a
review system at
£20–£150 per gigabyte per month and a user
access fee between £10–£100 per
3.57 E-discovery costs can also include expensive computer software and
hardware. For example, the ALRC heard during initial consultations
discovery of information stored on old back-up tapes can require the
reconstruction of outmoded hardware at great expense
in order to read the tapes
only to discover completely irrelevant information.
3.58 A number of commentators have noted the distorting effect that
technology has had on discovery costs. This includes Acting Justice
Sackville of the New South Wales Supreme Court, formerly a judge of the Federal
Court of Australia, who has remarked on the
discovery process:
It is here that extraordinary and disproportionate costs are frequently incurred
by parties to litigation. Far too often the search
for the illusory
‘smoking gun’ leads to squadrons of solicitors, paralegals and
clerks compiling vast libraries of materials,
much of which is of no
significance to the issues in the proceedings. The problem has been compounded,
not alleviated, by the exponential
growth of electronic communications which can
be tracked and often reconstructed after
sheer volume of data that must be managed in modern trade and commerce can blow
out the cost of searching through electronic
material for the purposes of
discovery, resulting in costs disproportionate to the value of the documents
discovered—in terms
of their use in the litigation. The increasing amount
of information which contemporary litigants must deal with was recently
highlighted
Betfair v Racing New South
In this case, one
source of discoverable documents is ‘an electronic data warehouse
containing the electronic records of over
2.52 million customers and occupying
some 21 terabytes of memory growing at 70 gigabytes per
One terabyte is said
to be the equivalent of 500 million printed
3.60 Concerns about the proportionality of discovery costs—in terms of
the extent to which discovered documents are used to
facilitate the just
disposal of litigation—were taken up by the Access to Justice Taskforce
established by the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department, in
A Strategic Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Civil
Justice System
, which stated that:
The cost of discovery continues to be very high, and often disproportionate to
the role played by discovered documents in resolving
3.61 Proportionality
in this sense may be difficult to measure. The value of discovery is not
necessarily limited to obtaining documents
to tender at trial but may extend to
encouraging settlement and clarifying the issues in dispute. Participants at a
discovery seminar
convened by the Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration (AIJA) in 2007 suggested that the AIJA should undertake a
project to track how many discovered documents are in fact used in
litigation.
However, such
research has not been undertaken as far as the ALRC is aware.
3.62 The ALRC has heard that the vast majority of litigation settles before
trial but not until after discovery of documents. The
ALRC was also told that,
where settlement is not achieved, parties often abandon certain issues in
dispute after discovery is given.
For example, in tax matters, the Commissioner
may be content, on the basis of discovered documents, that a particular
transaction
will not attract the general
anti-avoidance provisions of the tax law—whereas the lack of knowledge
of a particular transaction prior to discovery may drive
disputes over such
issues. In these cases, the time taken at hearing will generally be
significantly reduced, in part as a result
of discovery.
3.63 By comparison, a study of discovery practices in the United States (US)
in 1997 looked at the cost of discovery relative to the
information needs of the
case. This research found that most attorneys surveyed (69%) thought that the
discovery generated by the
parties was about the right amount needed for the
fair resolution of the case.
3.64 In Australia, some weight might be given to obiter dictum in judgment
concerning the futility of discovery as an evidence-gathering
process. For
instance, in
Baulderstone Hornibrook v Qantas Australia Limited
Finkelstein J explained to the parties what use the majority of the documents
gathered in the conduct of the proceedings, and tendered
in evidence, proved to
be in determining their dispute:
BHPL tendered twenty affidavits (which took up three files) and sixteen files of
exhibits. Qantas was not outdone. It tendered two
lever arch folders of
affidavits and eight files of exhibits, many of which were copies of
BHPL’s exhibits and, to make matters
worse, there was no mechanism to
identify which were duplicates. It turned out that much of the evidence put in
by each side was
irrelevant to any fact in issue and should never have been
tendered ... Hundreds of pages were never referred to by counsel. The
seemed to have assumed that it was my task to read all the material and make
such use of it as best I could. At the outset
of this judgment I wish to record
that I have done no such thing. Although I did read most exhibits (including
records of meetings,
diaries and albums of photos) I could not understand all
the terminology and abbreviations employed by the authors of the documents
the relevance of others simply escaped me. To a substantial extent, therefore, I
have only considered those exhibits to which
I was taken by counsel, although I
have no intention of reviewing the voluminous evidence in
3.65 Commentary from judges clearly highlights the expense
wasted on discovery when viewed from the bench, in terms of the
disproportionately
small number of discovered documents referred to by parties
at trial. This concern was voiced by former Chief Justice of the Federal
Michael Black, who considered that courts
need to take a more interventionist role to avoid having trolley loads of
documents being wheeled into court when hardly any of them
are likely to be
referred to and when every page will add to the cost of the
litigation.
Access to Justice Taskforce surmised that ‘the vast majority of documents
obtained through discovery are not of sufficient
relevance to be used in the
3.67 The ALRC is interested in stakeholder experiences in relation to the
value or utility of the discovery process on the whole,
relative to its costs in
general. The ALRC encourages stakeholders to provide examples or illustrations
of the degrees to which discovery
costs weigh against the value of the documents
sought in the context of the litigation.
Question 3–2
In general, does the amount of money spent on the
discovery process in proceedings before the Federal Court generate:
(a) too much information;
(b) too little information; or
(c) about the right amount of information
to facilitate the just and efficient disposal of the litigation?
Where possible, please provide examples or illustrations of the costs of
discovery relative to the information needs of the case.
Discovery of electronic documents
3.68 Electronic technologies have proved necessary to manage the large
volumes of hardcopy documents being discovered in Federal Court
proceedings.
Transforming hardcopy documents into electronic format made vast amounts of
information more manageable. The history
of e-discovery was described as
An early implementation of electronic discovery technology in Australia was to
number the hardcopy documents and manage the index
data (eg document number,
author, date, type, title etc.) in a database. The index data could then be
exchanged electronically by
the parties. This was similar to records management
technologies in use at that time. In 1990, the $1 billion collapse of the Estate
Mortgage Trust led to complex legal proceedings with 12 parties and 750,000
documents. This spurred the development of the Ringtail
software suite where the
index database was linked to images of the documents. Both the index data and
the document images were electronically
discovered by the parties in accordance
with an exchange
3.69 E-discovery
has evolved from a hardcopy document management system to the means by which
documents are discovered from source
to production in electronic format. This
follows contemporary corporate behaviour whereby 98% of documents now exist in
3.70 Electronic discovery has been facilitated by changes to the law. In
particular, the enactment of the
Electronic Transactions Act 1999
affirmed the legal status of electronic records. In addition, proof of
communications contained in electronic records was facilitated
by amendments to
Evidence Act 1995
3.71 The critical issue that arises in an e-discovery process is whether the
conduct of the search for electronic documents carried
out by the party giving
discovery, and the extent of it, was
‘reasonable’.
requirement echoes the concerns discussed above about the need for
proportionality in the cost of a discovery process.
3.72 Whether the search satisfies the threshold of
‘reasonableness’—and is ‘good
as described by
Lord Jackson—will be assessed by the courts weighing the cost and
inconvenience to the party giving discovery
against the value of the documents
sought in the context of the
litigation.
As Mummery J said in
Procter & Gamble Limited (No 3)
The Court takes account of such considerations as the value of the discovery to
the person seeking it and the burden imposed on the
party giving it, with a view
to restricting the volume of documents and the labour and expense involved to
that which is necessary
for fairly disposing of the issues in the
example, in
NT Power Generation Pty Ltd v Power & Water Authority
Mansfield J considered an interlocutory application to restrict discovery to
hardcopies of printed emails. His Honour accepted that
it would be a very
substantial burden on the respondent to search for emails stored electronically
in computer terminals, servers
and backup tapes. However, Mansfield J ultimately
held that those emails were not of sufficiently insubstantial relevance to
simply ignoring
3.74 By comparison, in
Leighton Contractors v Public Transport Authority
of Western Australia
, Le Miere J found that the burden of giving discovery
of deleted emails would have been disproportionate to the potential probative
value of that electronic information—had the defendant not already
embarked upon the course of recovering the deleted emails
from the backup
3.75 A particular issue that can arise in an e-discovery process is the
extent to which it is ‘reasonable’ for a party
to search through
back-up tapes or disaster recovery systems. This is a question of fact and
degree and, therefore, will depend on
the circumstances of each case—which
creates an element of uncertainty for the party giving discovery. For example,
BT (Australasia) Pty Ltd v New South Wales &
Sackville J found
that Telstra failed to comply fully with its discovery obligations in relation
to electronic documents, in a number
of respects including:
First ... Telstra neither disclosed the existence of back-up tapes, nor took any
steps to restore those tapes with a view to ascertaining
whether and how
discoverable electronic material could be identified and presented in usable
form. I accept and appreciate that the
purpose of making and retaining the
back-up was essentially disaster recovery, rather than archival. Nonetheless, as
subsequent events
have demonstrated, it is feasible, albeit difficult and
expensive, for the tapes to be restored and a review process set in place
identify discoverable
limits of a ‘reasonable search’ establish a measure of
‘proportionality’ in the discovery process,
in terms of the
resources that a party must devote to the discovery of relevant electronic
documents. This may be especially important
where litigants store electronic
documents in a vast and complex network of electronic databases located across a
number of countries.
However, a proportionate discovery process will not
necessarily provide full and frank disclosure of all relevant material. This
pointed out by Morgan J of the High Court of England and Wales in
Digicel (St
Lucia) Ltd v Cable & Wireless
The rules do not require that no stone be left unturned. This may mean that a
relevant document, even a ‘smoking gun’
is not found. This attitude
is justified by considerations of
proportionality.
3.77 Therefore
the conduct of a discovery process, especially where extensive electronic
material is involved, gives rise to a volatile
tension between the parties.
Expansive searches are more likely to uncover greater amounts of relevant
information offering some
assistance to the requesting party’s case but
carry a substantial costs burden for the party giving discovery. Reasonable or
proportionate searches are more affordable for the discovering party but will
inevitably bypass unknown quantities of potentially
relevant material sought by
the requesting party. In his
Review of Civil Litigation Costs
Lord Jackson described this as the dilemma of the electronic age:
the existence of a vast mass of electronic documents presents an acute dilemma
for the civil justice system. On the one hand, full
disclosure of all electronic
material may be of even greater assistance to the court in arriving at the truth
than old style discovery
of documents. On the other hand, the process of
retrieving, reviewing and disclosing electronic material can be prodigiously
electronic technologies may be responsible for the sheer volume of potentially
discoverable material in modern litigation,
technological advances may also
offer some assistance in cleaning up the mess it creates for a discovery
process. Advanced software
systems can provide sophisticated means of reducing
time and expense spent on the discovery of electronic documents. The ALRC is
interested in hearing from stakeholders about the technical details of different
approaches to
e-discovery that help to save time and costs in the process.
Question 3–3
Are there any particular approaches to the
discovery of electronically-stored information that help to save time and cost
in the process?
Do any particular approaches cause inefficiencies or waste?
Limiting discovery by categories or
3.79 The Federal Court has sought to prevent unnecessary expense in the
discovery process by limiting discovery obligations in each
case to particular
issues in dispute or specific categories of documents. This policy was first
Practice Note 14
on 12 February 1999, now
replaced by
Practice Note CM 5
considered above. In these practice
notes, the court expresses its intention to avoid general discovery and its
expectation that practitioners
should limit discovery requests. The adoption of
this approach was followed by amendments to the
Federal Court Rules
2004, to clarify that the court may limit discovery by orders under O 15
r 3 on its own initiative rather than on application by
3.80 The principles that should guide parties when drafting descriptions of
categories—as Lindgren J has pointed out—are
found in O 15 of the
Federal Court Rules
. His Honour discussed the relationship between
discovery by ‘categories of documents’ and O 15 of the Rules in
The University of Sydney v ResMed Ltd
, where Lindgren J stated that:
It may be appropriate for parties to describe categories in terms which do not
expressly incorporate the language of O 15 r 2(3),
but that subrule should
nonetheless govern the formulation of the categories. Alternatively, of course,
the categories may be defined
so as to incorporate expressly the terms of the
subrule. Whatever approach is taken, it is important to understand that when, as
happened in the present case, the Court orders discovery by categories to be
notified by one party to another, the Court does not
intend that the notifying
party be at liberty to widen the discovery obligation beyond the four classes of
documents referred to
January 2000, shortly after the Federal Court introduced
Practice Note
, the ALRC’s
Managing Justice
report noted that:
For these changes to the rules of discovery to work effectively, lawyers and
parties have to spend time determining which documents
are to be disclosed and
the Court provide close judicial supervision of discovery. Practitioners have
commented to the Commission
that streamlined discovery with categories of
documents works well if parties give time to the formulation of
categories.
practice, limiting the scope of discovery requires the parties and their lawyers
to make decisions about what it is specifically
that the party wants to
discover. It also requires active judicial case management to ensure that
litigants are controlling their
requests for discovery in the interests of
keeping the process within manageable bounds.
3.83 Limited discovery might not have proved as successful as it may have
been wished. There are concerns that in many cases parties
and their legal
representatives are not exercising due diligence in narrowing the scope of
discovery, instead seeking overbroad categories
of documents. The Law Council of
Australia’s 2006
Final Report in Relation to Possible Innovations to
Case Management
described this as the ‘gaming’ process of the
categories stage in litigation; whereby the requesting party rolls the
hopes for a winner:
It is not uncommon to receive lists of categories sought by a party which are 10
to 20 pages long where parties seek to formulate,
in the most minute detail,
every conceivable sort of document which might possibly, on a fine day with a
following breeze, be of
remote assistance in the conduct of the litigation (and
which almost inevitably will impose an enormous cost and work burden to the
party required to
are also concerns that the court has abdicated its responsibility for
supervising the parties and managing the development
of categories for
discovery. The absence of judicial case management was commented upon by the
Intellectual Property Committee of
the Law Council, in the Law Council’s
report on case management innovations:
although not currently a common practice, it is highly desirable that the docket
judge take an active role in working with practitioners
in identifying the
gaming process that occurs between parties, in the absence of firm judicial case
management, can lead to costly and incidental
litigation over the limits of
discovery by categories. Justice Finkelstein, at a workshop on the court’s
case management system
in 2008, summarised the current position as follows:
It is also time for the court to admit that the idea of staged category
discovery contained in Practice Note 14, to the extent it
has been implemented
at all, does not work. Although the idea was introduced with the goal of saving
costs and reducing burdens,
in practice it seems to have the opposite effect ...
Parties now incur great expense in formulating and disputing appropriate
of discoverable documents, and a good deal of court time is taken up
hearing the disputes. So much time and cost is involved that
there is a view,
shared by many, that discovery by categories is a failure and that it is more
efficient to provide for general discovery
rather than engage the Practice Note
3.86 However,
the ALRC has also heard that most discovery orders in Federal Court proceedings
are for general discovery in accordance
with O 15 r 2—with close to
70% of discovery orders being made by consent of the parties. This suggests that
in most cases
disputes do not arise over the categories of discoverable
documents, since the parties agree to the general categories in O 15 r
It also tends to confirm that the court is not making serious attempts to limit
the ambit of discovery to specific documents or
issues in dispute, by orders
under O 15 r 3.
3.87 In view of such concerns, the ALRC seeks feedback from stakeholders on
the extent to which limited discovery has been successfully
implemented in the
Federal Court and whether this has reduced the burden of discovery.
Question 3–4
Has discovery by categories of documents, or
particular issues in dispute, reduced the burden of discovery in proceedings
Federal Court? If not, what has prevented the parties, their lawyers
and the court from cost-effectively limiting the scope of discovery?
Discovery plans and pre-discovery
conferences
3.88 The Federal Court has sought to ensure proportionality in the search for
electronically-stored information by imposing an expectation
on litigants to
discuss and agree upon a practical and cost-effective discovery
In addition, the court may
require the parties to attend a pre-discovery conference to address these
The former Chief
Justice, Michael Black, first issued these directions on 29 January 2009 under a
Practice Note 17
. This followed a comprehensive review of the
practice note starting in 2007, with the assistance of a consultant and in
consultation
with litigants, the legal profession and
3.89 Similar procedures have been established in other Australian and
overseas jurisdictions,
achieving agreement between the parties under the supervision of the court as to
the conduct of an electronic discovery
process. In the US, parties are required
to ‘meet and confer’ under r 26 (f)
Rules of Civil Procedure 2009
(US) to develop a proposed discovery plan. A
report outlining the plan must then be submitted to the court within 14 days of
the conference.
Following receipt of the report, the court is required to hold a pre-trial
conference under r 16 (b) including for the purposes of
scheduling order setting down a timeframe for carrying out the discovery plan.
At this point, the court may modify the
extent of the proposed discovery or
include other appropriate
3.90 In the UK,
Practice Direction 31B
issued under the
Procedure Rules 1998
(UK) requires the parties to discuss the disclosure of
electronic documents before the first case management conference or even before
proceedings are commenced in complex cases. To assist this discussion, an
Electronic Document Questionnaire is available for the
parties to complete and
exchange ‘in order to provide information to each other in relation to the
scope, extent and most suitable
format for disclosure of Electronic
Documents’.
The parties
are required to submit to the court a summary of the matters on which the
parties agree in relation to disclosure of
electronic documents as well as any
areas of disagreement.
court may then give directions in relation to electronic disclosure at the first
case management
conference.
3.91 The Federal Court’s practice note was reported to be operating
satisfactorily, shortly after it was revised, when Lord
Jackson spoke with
Federal Court judges in March 2009 during his
Review of Civil Litigation
During initial
consultations in the present Inquiry, the ALRC has heard that parties often
attempt to make informal agreements as
to the scope of an electronic discovery
process. The ALRC was told that in some cases the parties may be able to agree
on a discovery
plan, but in many cases the parties will disagree as to the
appropriate conduct of an electronic discovery process—with disputes
arising over the expected burden to the discovering party, and bearing in mind
the adversarial nature of litigation. Moreover,
the ALRC was informed that
parties typically discuss a discovery plan only after the parties have
established the relevance of their
own electronically-stored information through
extensive searches, as parties need to review all of their own documents to
draft their
pleadings and to position themselves in negotiations with other
parties as to the conduct of the discovery process.
3.92 The ALRC also heard that the extent to which judges are actively
involved and interested in resolving disputes between parties
as to the conduct
of an electronic discovery process, and determining the existence and
appropriateness of a discovery plan before
making orders for electronic
discovery, varies between individual judicial officers as well as court
registries. The ALRC was similarly
informed that parties might or might not be
required to address the terms of any arrangements for
e-discovery at a directions hearing or case management conference, depending
on the preferences of the particular judge to whose docket
the case is assigned.
Despite the expectation stated in
Practice Note CM 6
that parties will
have discussed and agreed upon a discovery plan before the Court makes an order
for electronic discovery, there
were suggestions that judges are generally
reticent to get into the detail of the mechanics of a discovery process. One
stakeholder
went so far as to adapt a quote often attributed to Otto von
Bismarck, comparing the discovery process to a sausage factory, suggesting
‘judges are happy to eat the sausages but don’t want to know how
they are made’.
3.93 In many cases, the party giving discovery may be doing so with some
degree of uncertainty as to whether its search techniques
are legally sound or
defensible. The ALRC has heard that litigants in this situation will often make
sure their searches are more
than ‘reasonable’ to avoid challenges
from another party and possible rebuke by the court. However this can result in
discovery of more electronic material than is necessary, which burdens the other
party with the task of trawling through masses of
documents, possibly only
distantly related to the proceeding—or entirely irrelevant. This outcome
may also be a consequence
of time and budgetary constraints on the parties, as
vetting irrelevant documents is a lengthy and costly process, or the result
simple lack of due diligence on the part of litigants and their lawyers.
3.94 In cases where the requirements of a ‘reasonable search’
have not been determined in advance, the discovering party’s
understanding
of its obligations may fall short of that held by the requesting party and the
court. Both parties to
Galati v Potato Marketing Corporation of Western
Australia (No 2)
discovery in this case. However the respondent identified a number of categories
of documents for which it did not search, on
the basis that it would be
‘very onerous, time consuming and
expensive’.
was not satisfied that searching for those documents would have been so
burdensome that non-disclosure should be allowed
and for that reason ordered
further discovery.
3.95 In some cases, the party giving discovery might seek court directions to
clarify the extent of its search obligations where no
agreement had previously
been made with the requesting party. A recent example of this scenario is
Police Federation of Australia v
In this case,
Victoria Police applied for a declaration that ‘[Victoria Police] is not
required to conduct further searches
for electronic documents stored on
court made the order sought in this case, as Ryan J was persuaded that:
the expense and trouble which would be incurred would far outweigh any potential
assistance to the applicants’ case which they
might derive from further
3.96 The time and
expense that parties and courts must spend addressing often extensive side
litigation about electronic discovery
issues can be significant. So much so that
‘the mere availability of such vast amounts of electronic information can
a situation of the ESI-discovery-tail wagging the poor old
merits-of-the-dispute
3.97 The ALRC seeks feedback from stakeholders on the extent to which the
model espoused in
Practice Note CM 6
has been successful in guiding the
proportionate discovery of electronic material—in terms of the
parties’ obligation
to finalise a practical and cost-effective discovery
plan and the court’s use of pre-discovery conferences to address these
issues—before orders for electronic discovery are made. In particular, the
ALRC is interested in hearing from stakeholders
whether the expectations stated
Practice Note CM 6
parties to exchange their best preliminary estimate of the cost associated with
discovery, and to agree on a timetable for discovery,
are being met in practice.
Question 3–5
Has the creation of discovery plans and use of pre-discovery conferences helped to ensure proportionality in the discovery
of electronically-stored
information in Federal Court proceedings? If not, what
has prevented the court, the parties and their lawyers from establishing
and cost-effective discovery plans in advance of the search for
electronic documents?
In particular, are the expectations stated in
Practice Note CM 6
parties to exchange their best preliminary estimate of the cost associated with
discovery, and to agree on a timetable for discovery,
generally being met in
Options for procedural
reform in the Federal Court
Managing Justice
, the ALRC found that ‘badly managed
discovery is widely regarded as the cause of significant cost, delay and
unfairness to
This part of
the chapter considers a number of ways to procure better management of the
discovery process. It looks at various options
for reform, some developed in
previous reviews of discovery and others suggested by stakeholders during
initial consultations in
this Inquiry. It also outlines the ALRC’s
preliminary views on directions for reform of the discovery process.
Stronger judicial case management
3.99 Stronger judicial control over the scope and process of discovery has
been singled out by a number of commentators as a critical
element of any reform
in this area. For example, in its 2006 report on case management innovations in
the Federal Court, the Law
Council of Australia recommended that
‘discovery should be dealt with at the Case Management Conference with the
Docket Judge
taking an active role in the speedy resolution of issues as to the
scope and timetable for
discovery’.
aspirations were taken up by Finkelstein J in 2008 at a workshop on case
management reforms:
The key to discovery reform lies in active and aggressive judicial case
management of the process. The most effective cure for spiralling
voluminous productions of documents is increased judicial willingness to just
3.100 Other
Australian jurisdictions, most recently Victoria, have also tied discovery
reform to stronger judicial case management.
The VLRC stated in its
Justice Review
report, that ‘increased judicial management of the
disclosure process ... will greatly assist in keeping the scope of disclosure
focused and reduce delay and
Other nations,
too, have concluded that improvements to the discovery process are a matter for
judicial case management. For example,
the Hong Kong Chief Justice’s
Working Party on Civil Justice Reform found ‘a broad consensus that the
excesses of discovery
ought to be tackled by appropriate case management by the
3.101 However, the efficiency and effectiveness of a discovery process does
not necessarily result entirely from the degree of control
that individual
judges are willing to exercise in their capacity as case managers. There may be
a number of obstacles that need to
be removed—or changes made—to
enable stronger judicial control over the discovery process, including:
• clearer definition of the real issues in dispute, in relation to
which discovery obligations may be limited;
• procedural obligations on the parties and the court to ensure that
practice and cost-effective discovery plans are in place
prior to the search for
discoverable documents stored in electronic format;
• clearly delineated case management powers with respect to discovery,
including the power to impose sanctions for discovery
abuse or default;
• the employment of a ‘special master’ to case manage the
discovery process;
• the use of costs powers to control discovery requests and voluminous
production of documents, by requiring payment in advance
and limiting legal fees
for discovery work; and
• education and training for judges to enhance skills and capabilities
in case management of the discovery process, including
the technologies used to
discover electronic documents.
3.102 The potential for reform in these areas is explored below.
Clearer definition of the real
3.103 For the court to case manage the discovery process effectively, the
issues in a particular case need to be clearly defined.
The responsibility for
containing the discovery process, therefore, lies both on the court and the
parties through their legal representatives.
This was recognised at the
AIJA’s discovery seminar in 2007, which reported:
a widely held view from the profession that the courts need to exercise more
control over the discovery process, and a parallel view
from the courts that in
order to do so, they need to have more information about the case that would be
presented to the
3.104 Pleadings
are supposed to define the issues in each case and, in doing, so limit the ambit
of discovery and the evidence which
needs to be prepared for
However, as the ALRC
commented in
Managing Justice
, pleadings in Federal Court proceedings are
often too general in scope and inadequately particularised so that there is no
Pleadings couched in broad, vague or general terms, those which rely on numerous
causes of action or defences or plead the case in
a number of alternative ways,
have the consequential effect of setting broad boundaries for the discovery of
3.105 Amendments to pleadings, particularly when introduced late in civil
proceedings, may be another cause of excessive discovery.
In an article aptly
Turning Mountains into Molehills – Improvements to Formal Dispute
, Andrew Stephenson explained that:
It simply does not pay to be too surgical in removing documents from
consideration if the issues are likely to change. It is better
to discover more
(perhaps irrelevant documents) so when the case does change, discovery does not
3.106 Initial
consultations in the present Inquiry revealed a widely held view that in most
cases significant improvements could be
made in the discovery process if the
real issues in dispute were more clearly defined beforehand. As Stephenson put
it is important at the outset, before any preparation in relation to discovery
is done, that the scope of the controversy be properly
3.107 The following sections of this chapter explore a number of
ways in which the core issues in dispute could be more clearly defined,
view to limiting the ambit of discovery in Federal Court proceedings,
• imposing an obligation on the parties to outline their case at an
early directions hearing or case management conference;
• requiring parties to submit a written statement of the issues in
dispute, in relation to which documents may be discovered;
• requiring the parties, prior to discovery, to produce an outline of
the evidence and key documents on which they intend to
rely at trial.
Initial directions hearing or case management
3.108 The Federal Court has introduced specific procedures for matters in its
Fast Track List
respect to tax matters. Both
Practice Note CM 8
Practice Note Tax
impose an obligation on the parties to proceedings in the Fast Track List
and Tax List respectively to outline the issues and facts
that appear to be in
dispute, at an initial directions hearing called the ‘scheduling
conference’.
3.109 A similar procedure, called the ‘case planning conference’,
was introduced in the Supreme Court of British Columbia
This mechanism was
suggested by the Civil Justice Reform Working Group in 2006, which recommended
that the parties should be required
to ‘personally attend a case planning
conference before they actively engage the system, beyond initiating or
responding to
The Working Group identified key objectives of the case planning conference to
include the narrowing of issues and directions for
3.110 The same objectives are sought to be achieved in the US through
‘Pre-Trial Conferences’ under r 16 of the
Federal Rules
of Civil Procedure
. The Pocket Guide for Judges in the US explains that,
‘the primary objective of the r 16 conference is for the judge and
lawyers to discern what the case is really
3.111 In her account of the Fast Track experience, Gordon J explained the
profound effect that the early identification of issues
has in relation to
[t]he users of the list have anecdotally reported a substantial improvement in
relation to discovery with their corporate clients.
There are certain questions
that members of the legal profession are used to being asked—why do I need
to search for those
documents? How can those documents be relevant? In Fast
Track, such questions are more easily answered because they are discussed
the scheduling conference and the obligations narrowed to only those issues
really in dispute. In colloquial terms, the parties
own the result because they
are involved in
3.112 While
this practice is not as explicitly required outside of the Fast Track List and
Tax List, any party seeking discovery in
a Federal Court proceeding is
to specify the issues in relation to which discovery is sought.
Practice Note CM 5
applies generally to applications for discovery in the
Federal Court and states that parties are expected to answer the question:
discovery necessary at all, and if so for what
3.113 However, in practice, the parties or their legal representatives might
not always be forthcoming with admissions as to which
of the issues in dispute
really matter most—at least not in the interlocutory stages. This was
Seven Network Ltd v News
where, according to
Mallesons Stephen Jacques partner Roger Forbes, representing Telstra in this
case, the parties did not want to
give away ‘points’ too early:
They would say ‘we’re entitled to run all the points we want to and
we don’t have to, at the outset, decide which
are the best ones and which
are the bad
3.114 During
initial consultations, the ALRC was told that, in effect, the judge or registrar
presiding at a directions hearing or
scheduling conference is required to
interrogate the parties to determine the crucial issues in dispute. The need for
active judicial
participation in this context is noted in the case management
pocket guide for judges in the US:
Detecting the underlying issues in dispute sometimes requires vigorous
questioning of the attorneys by the judge to get beyond the
pleadings. Parties
may raise assorted causes of action or defenses that create the impression of a
complex lawsuit when, upon probing,
it turns out that the entire case hinges on
a straightforward factual or legal dispute—or no triable issue at
approach which judges in the UK have adopted to achieve a narrowing of issues
was aptly summarised by the Mercantile Judge
Simon Brown QC:
What I want to know, is this: what is this case about? Which of the ... issues
really matter in getting to the heart of the dispute?
Can we split the case up
and limit disclosure to the subjects which matter, or which matter
all judges in the Federal Court may be entirely comfortable in pressing the
parties or their lawyers to limit the issues
in dispute, with a view to focusing
tightly the scope of discovery. In initial consultations, the ALRC heard that
varied levels of
effectiveness amongst judges in this regard have prompted some
litigants to ‘forum shop’ between registries—that,
occasion, litigants have sought to commence or transfer proceedings to a
registry where they are less likely to be as restricted
on the matters in
relation to which discovery may be sought.
3.117 Therefore there may be concerns that clarifying the obligation on
parties to outline the issues in dispute when seeking orders
for discovery would
not, itself, achieve any significant efficiency in the process. Unless the court
effectively enforces this obligation
by interrogating the parties as to the
nature of their case, such reform might not result in any meaningful
clarification of the
issues in dispute. As discussed below, additional measures
may be required to minimise the dependence on judges to extract a clear
definition of the case from the parties and to put the onus to do so more
squarely on the parties to limit their own requests for
Statement of issues in dispute
3.118 One way to clarify the real issues in a particular case, in relation to
which discovery may be limited, would be to introduce
a requirement on the party
seeking discovery to submit a written statement of the issues. This could mean,
for example, filing and
serving a statement of issues for discussion at an
initial directions hearing or case management conference as discussed above.
3.119 The statement could set out in narrative form the factual issues that
appear to be in dispute between the parties, as well as
any legal issues and the
conclusions that the parties wish the court to draw. To identify which of these
issues matters most to the
party seeking discovery, the statement could be
tiered in order of importance. This statement may give a better indication than
pleadings of which are the main facts in issue and which are subordinate or
collateral facts in issue, as well as the essential ingredients
in the cause of
action or defence.
3.120 The party seeking discovery could also be required to include in this
statement a description of the specific documents or categories
of documents
which it expects to discover from another party. This may indicate how the scope
of discovery could be limited to key
documents or expanded to other documents
relating to less critical issues, or indeed whether documents are even necessary
certain issues.
3.121 This statement of issues could then form the basis of discussion at an
early directions hearing or case management conference.
Under the supervision of
the court, the party requested to give discovery would have this opportunity to
confirm whether the issues
so stated are actually in dispute, provide their own
views on which are the critical issues in the proceeding or comment on whether
the stated categories of documents are appropriately fashioned to suit the
issues in the case. The presiding judge or registrar may
be guided by the
statement of issues, and assisted by discussion of the core issues at the
hearing or conference, to direct the parties
in formulating the range of
documents that may be subject to discovery orders.
3.122 An obvious concern with this approach may be the legal costs incurred
in drafting a statement of issues. Significant lengths
of time may be required
to draft a clear and considered statement of the case, particularly in complex
cases concerning involved
factual and legal issues. While it may eventually help
to limit the scope of discovery and minimise that expense, this mechanism
carry its own cost burden and might
‘front-load’
civil proceedings in the Federal Court.
3.123 In practice, litigants and their lawyers might take shortcuts in a
statement of issues to minimise the time and cost burden.
In effect, the
statement may simply repeat the pleadings without any narrowing of the
controversy. The utility of this statement
might therefore be contingent upon
the diligence of legal practitioners to give effect to its objective of defining
the real issues
in dispute.
3.124 A separate issue is the effect of this statement on the formal
pleadings. Pleadings play a much larger role in civil litigation
demarcating the ambit of discovery. Pleadings provide a record of all the
matters involved in the action, and in that way
prevent further actions between
the same parties in relation to
There may be concerns
that putting less important issues to one side, for the purposes of limiting
discovery, would prevent a party
from seeking judicial determination of the
Production of testimonial and documentary
evidence prior to discovery
3.125 Another way to clarify the real issues in dispute, so that discovery
can focus on them, may be to require production of evidence,
or at least an
outline of the evidence, prior to discovery of documents. The Fast Track List
and Tax List provide models for such
a procedural requirement.
3.126 Practice Note CM 8
Practice Note Tax 1
each party must bring to the scheduling conference an initial witnesses list
with the names of each witness the party intends
to call at trial. The list is
to include a very brief summary of the expected testimony of each witness and,
unless it is otherwise
obvious, must state the relevance of the evidence of each
3.127 Another model for this approach is found in Rule 7–4 of the
Supreme Court Civil Rules
(BC). This rule requires parties to proceedings
before the Supreme Court of British Columbia to file and serve on every other
a list of witnesses the party may call at
The introduction of
this rule was recommended by the Civil Justice Reform Working Group in 2006,
which considered that:
in order to encourage the early exchange of information, we recommend that the
parties exchange a list of the witnesses that each
party intends to call at the
trial of the action, along with a summary of the evidence that the party
believes the witness will give
3.128 Consideration
of discovery issues in light of the parties’ evidence—or at least an
outline of any expected testimonial
evidence—might result in limiting the
need for or narrowing the scope of discovery. Once the parties and the court
an opportunity to consider the evidence, it may become easier to
identify the areas where discovery is necessary and to assess whether
documents are likely to be discovered.
3.129 The idea of producing evidence prior to discovery was considered by the
Law Council in 2006, which generally opposed this idea
but conceded that in some
cases it may be useful for parties to file their evidence in chief in support of
a claim (and perhaps cross
claim) prior
to any discovery:
there was general opposition to the proposition that discovery should be
preceded by either all or some of the evidence in chief.
A number of submissions
commented that this was likely to lead not only to a duplication of work on
evidence in chief, but also to
delays in the making of genuine discovery. There
may be some cases where although the facts are likely to be substantially
uncontentious
they may be also substantially in the knowledge of only one party.
It is perhaps possible that in those cases the parties might find
the filing of
evidence prior to discovery a useful
3.130 Whereas
the model considered by the Law Council might have involved the filing of
evidence, perhaps in the form of an affidavit,
the witness list in Fast Track or
Tax List proceedings requires only an outline of the evidence. Nevertheless,
concerns about the
time and expense incurred to draft an outline of testimony
might arise in cases involving large numbers of witnesses or lengthy examination
of those witnesses.
3.131 In addition to an outline of testimony, key documents may also be
produced at a scheduling conference in Fast Track and Tax
List proceedings.
While there is no express requirement in
Practice Note CM 7
Practice Note Tax 1
for the parties to produce key documents at a
scheduling conference, Gordon J has said that this practice is often adopted or
in the Fast Track as a matter of course:
core documents relevant to the case are provided to the trial judge at this
point. If the dispute is about the proper construction
of a contract, a copy of
the contract is provided to the judge. No more decisions on interlocutory issues
can already be achieved by the court making orders under O 15 r 13 of
Federal Court Rules
, for production of any document in a party’s
possession, custody or power relating to any issue in the
proceeding.
At the same time,
a party may require any other party to produce for inspection any document
referred to in a pleading or affidavit
filed by that
However a number of
commentators have suggested that parties should be required to produce the core
documents relevant to their case,
without being asked to do so.
3.133 For example, at the AIJA discovery seminar, Peter Gordon of the law
firm Slater and Gordon, suggested that ‘[t]here should
be processes to
identify and exchange the critical documents at an early date, which might spare
much of the other
discovery’.
of such a process, Applegarth J, in his work for the Queensland Supreme
Court’s Better Resolution of Litigation
Group, has argued that the early
exchange of key documents between the parties would enhance the delivery of
By the time litigation is commenced, usually after pre-action disputes in which
parties have consulted lawyers and obtained advice,
most parties should know the
critical documents upon which they intend to rely at any trial, and also know
some, if not most, of
the documents upon which the other party intends to rely
and which are adverse to the first party’s case. If the critical documents
are identified and exchanged in a suitable format at a relatively early stage in
litigation then this should facilitate the early
resolution of cases which are
capable of settlement, and the supervision of those that do not settle and which
require case
management.
3.134 However,
Finkelstein J canvassed a number of practical and theoretical problems with this
approach at the Federal Court’s
case management workshop in 2008. In
particular, he pointed to a tension with the nature of the adversarial
it is hardly to be expected that ... parties will produce documents in such a
distilled manner as to announce for practical purposes,
‘Here is my case
and here are the holes in
3.135 Justice
Finkelstein expected that disputes would inevitably arise over whether such a
rule has been properly complied with,
for instance, what documents should be
In light of his concerns, Finkelstein J considered that ‘there must be
real doubt whether mandatory discovery, even of a theoretically
limited nature,
would reduce the burden on the court or
litigants’.
ALRC’s views
3.136 The need for clearer definition to the issues in dispute to narrow the
scope of discovery was highlighted in
Managing Justice
, where the ALRC
reported that:
discovery by categories works well if the parties take the time and expense to
define the categories carefully and sort the disclosed
documents into the
correct categories and if the issues in dispute are sufficiently well defined
that the documents are amenable
classification.
ALRC’s preliminary view in this Inquiry is that reforms to ensure clearer
definition of the real issues in dispute,
prior to discovery, would have the
greatest practical impact on limiting the ambit of discovery and reducing the
overall burden of
the discovery process. The following proposal describes a new
court procedure aimed at narrowing the issues in dispute for the purposes
limiting discovery obligations.
3.138 This proposal is prefaced by noting that reforms to the rules on
pleadings, to enhance the clarity with which the issues in
a proceeding are
presented to the court, may have the complementary effect of narrowing the scope
of discovery. While the ALRC considers
the rules on pleadings generally to be
outside its current Terms of Reference, this area of civil litigation would
merit further
consideration.
3.139 The ALRC also notes that the procedural reforms proposed below might be
best suited to complex cases involving large-scale discoveries.
That is, the
resources required of the parties and the court to implement these procedures
could be unnecessarily burdensome for
the discovery of documents in small or
straightforward cases. However, the ALRC’s preliminary view is that a
sufficiently large
proportion of discoveries in the Federal Court are of such
magnitude to warrant general implementation of these procedures. The ALRC
proposes that the court’s existing power to waive or vary any of its
will ensure that
more suitable pre-trial management strategies are adopted in other cases. In
small cases, for example, where the
issues are contained and clear, the parties
might seek limited discovery by consent and forego the proposed procedures.
3.140 In cases where the procedures proposed below are applied, the ALRC
expects that proceeding in this fashion will come at a cost
to the parties and
the taxpayer in terms of the court resources required. However, the ALRC’s
preliminary view is that these
procedures are likely to result in savings to the
overall cost of litigation—both private and public—which would
the expense incurred and at the same time open up access to justice in
a broad sense.
Proposal 3–1
Following an application for a discovery order, an
initial case management conference (called a ‘pre-discovery
conference’)
should be set down, at a time and place specified by the
court, to define the core issues in dispute in relation to which documents
be discovered. At the pre-discovery conference, the parties should be required
(a) outline the facts and issues that appear to be in dispute;
(b) identify which of these issues are the most critical to the proceedings;
(c) identify the particular documents, or outline the specific categories of
documents, which a party seeks to discover and that
are reasonably believed to
exist in the possession, custody or power of another party.
Proposal 3–2
Prior to the pre-discovery conference proposed in
Proposal 3–1, the party seeking discovery should be required to file and
a written statement containing a narrative of the factual issues that
appear to be in dispute. The party should also be required
to include in this
statement any legal issues that appear to be in dispute. The party should be
required to state these issues in
order of importance in the proceedings,
according to the party’s understanding of the case. With respect to any of
included in this statement and concerning which the party seeks
discovery of documents, the party should be required to describe
each particular
document or specific category of document that is reasonably believed to exist
in the possession, custody or power
of another party.
Proposal 3–3
Prior to the pre-discovery conference proposed in
Proposal 3–1, the parties should be required to file and serve an initial
witness list with the names of each witness the party intends to call at trial
and a brief summary of the expected testimony of each
witness. Unless it is
otherwise obvious, each party’s witness list should also state the
relevance of the evidence of each
3.141 The ALRC notes that the proposal above would not require the parties to
produce or exchange the core documents relevant to the
case. The ALRC’s
preliminary view is that existing procedures under O 15 rr 10 and 13 are
sufficient to achieve this outcome.
A notice under r 10 or an order under
r 13 is, in the ALRC’s preliminary view, necessary to limit the
production to particular
documents which the court or party considers critical
in the proceeding. A general obligation to produce ‘key’ documents
in the early stages of proceedings would be too vague and ambiguous to expect
strict compliance and is likely to breed satellite
litigation. It would also be
conducive to inefficiencies in cases where each party already possesses a copy
of the core documents,
such as the contract in a contractual dispute.
3.142 However, the ALRC is interested in stakeholder views on whether a
procedure requiring the parties to act on their own initiative
in identifying
and exchanging core documents early in a proceeding could be successful
established. This would be distinct from O
15 rr 10 and 13 which require the
other party to issue a notice or the court to make orders. Alternatively, the
ALRC welcomes suggestions
from stakeholders on ways to encourage greater use of
existing procedures under O 15 rr 10 and 13.
Question 3–6
Should parties be required to produce to each other
and the court key documents early in proceedings before the Federal Court? If
so, how could such a procedural requirement effectively be imposed?
Question 3–7
Are existing procedures under O 15 rr 10 and 13 of
Federal Court Rules
adequate to obtain production of key
documents to the court or a party? How could these procedures be utilised more
effectively?
Discovery plan and pre-discovery
3.143 As discussed above, a number of jurisdictions (including the Federal
Court, the US and the UK) have come to rely on the creation
of discovery plans
as an effective way to handle electronic discovery processes.
3.144 In contrast to the ‘meet-and-confer’ obligations on
litigants in the US and the UK, for the purposes of devising
a discovery plan,
the language of
Practice Note CM 6
is more permissive than mandatory.
Parties to Federal Court proceedings may be ‘expected’ to have
devised a discovery
plan before the court makes an order for electronic
The parties might
also be expected to inform the court of how these issues are to be addressed (if
the judge asks) at a directions
hearing or case management
conference.
However, there is
no positive legal obligation on the parties to do so, nor is there any
prohibition on the court from making orders
in cases without a discovery
3.145 By comparison, litigants in the UK ‘must’ discuss the
disclosure of electronic documents before the first case management
conference.
proceedings in the US are ‘jointly responsible ... for attempting in good
faith to agree on the proposed discovery
plan, and for submitting to the court
within 14 days after the conference a written report outlining the
3.146 The Rules and Directions in these jurisdictions may provide suitable
models for reform to Federal Court procedures, to impose
positive and legally
enforceable obligations on the parties to: (a) meet and confer, for the purposes
of discussing a discovery plan;
and (b) submit their plan to court for approval
or resolution of any areas of disagreement.
3.147 A corresponding obligation on the court to satisfy itself that the
proposed discovery plan is reasonable or proportionate—before
orders for discovery—could also be introduced. To this end, the court
might exercise its existing discretion to schedule
a pre-discovery conference
with the parties to inform the judge or registrar of the issues addressed in the
proposed discovery plan.
Pre-discovery conferences would also be available to
the court to determine any areas of disagreement between the parties.
3.148 This process may be assisted by an initial case management conference,
as outlined in Proposal 3–1, where the core issues
in dispute are
clarified and particular documents or specific categories of documents relating
to those issues are
identified.
The outcome of
that procedure may form the basis of plans for limiting the scope of electronic
documents to be discovered.
3.149 A proposed discovery plan, which the parties would be required to
develop, might address such issues as whether and the extent
to which the party
giving discovery will search through back-up tapes or disaster recovery systems
for particular classes of electronic
documents identified in the plan. In
particular, as expected by the provisions of
Practice Note CM 6
proposed discovery plan may also provide a preliminary estimate of the cost
associated with discovery and a timetable for carrying
out the proposed
discovery process.
3.150 The terms of a discovery plan approved by the court may then be entered
as orders for discovery of documents. This means discovery
would be limited both
in terms of the scope of documents and the extent of searches. Carrying out the
court approved plan according
to its terms would discharge a party of its
discovery obligations.
3.151 The benefits of this approach may be that it promotes certainty and
efficiency in the discovery process by determining in advance
what searches will
be good enough. The same objectives are sought to be achieved in the US, as
noted in a practitioner’s guide
to planning a discovery process:
By coming together early, defining what is important and what is not, and
working with your adversary, not against them, means less
risk, less cost and
general concern with this approach may be its impact on the court’s
ability to determine the merits of the case. A rigid
and a priori determination
of a party’s duty to search for electronic documents may discard the
flexibility of the current
Practice Note CM 6
approach. When
was revised in January 2009, Seamus Byrne warned that
‘the Practice Note is not intended to serve as a process to overtake
restraining the amount of electronically-stored information available to the
parties and the court should not impede ‘the
just resolution of disputes,
according to law’.
3.153 A more commercial concern may be the cost involved in the laborious
forward planning of an e-discovery process. Litigants who
possess vast masses of
electronically-stored information across a complex network of electronic
considerable time with their lawyers and IT
experts to determine what would amount to a reasonable search. The same concerns
been raised in the UK, where
lawyers will effectively need to carry out ‘data mapping’ exercises
with their clients and IT experts so that they understand
their client’s
IT systems and data management
cost of drafting a discovery plan to file in court would also add to the
up-front expense of litigation. This may be a particularly involved document
in complex cases where sophisticated software is used
to search through vast
to lengthy questionnaires
the general form of the
complaint is that there is already too much pre-issue and pre-trial paperwork
and that the questionnaire merely
adds to the
utility of a discovery plan might therefore depend on litigants and their
lawyers allocating sufficient resources to its
development. In practice,
economic and time constraints on a party giving discovery may lead to
insufficient consideration of what
ill-considered or under-developed plan might simply fall back on broad searches
in vague or general
terms, and provide little assistance to the court in
overseeing a proportionate and timely electronic discovery process.
3.156 This has been the experience in the US, at times, where ‘the
meet-and-confer is too often treated as a perfunctory “drive-by”
exchange’, which then means that ‘the Rule 16 conference may
accomplish little more than setting a few
Grimm has confirmed that, in his experience, ‘courts seldom receive
discovery plans from the parties that reflect
meaningful efforts to drill down
on the issues they are supposed to discuss at the r 26(f)
conference’.
same time, legal practitioners in the US have noted that judges themselves may
fail to exercise the broad power that r 16
gives them to order conferences,
control timing, and discourage
ALRC’s views
3.157 Commentators on e-discovery universally acknowledge project management
as the key to success. For example, the Sedona Conference
emphasises project
management as the first principle of an e-discovery process:
Principle 1. In cases involving ESI [electronically-stored information] of
increasing scope and complexity, the attorney in charge
should utilize project
management and exercise leadership to ensure that a reasonable process has been
followed by his or her legal
team to locate responsive
ALRC’s preliminary view is that the clear expectation laid down in
Practice Note CM 6
for parties to have agreed upon a practical and
cost-effective discovery plan, and to inform the court of how these issues are
be addressed before it makes orders for electronic discovery, can be an
effective means of project managing a discovery process when
fulfilled in
practice. However—subject to feedback from stakeholders—there seems
to be reluctance on the part of the
court, the parties and their lawyers to
collaborate as project managers of an electronic discovery process, to keep the
and the process as efficient and proportionate as possible.
3.159 In the ALRC’s preliminary view, the introduction of positive
procedural obligations on the parties to develop a discovery
corresponding obligations on the court to satisfy itself that the proposed
discovery plan is proportionate or reasonable—may
participation by all involved in civil litigation to manage an e-discovery
3.160 The following proposal describes a new court procedure aimed at
engaging the parties, their lawyers and the court in the management
electronic discovery process. The objectives of this procedure include limiting
the scope of discovery and instilling certainty
in the discovery process, by
determining the extent of a ‘reasonable search’ for discoverable
documents stored in an
electronic format, as far as possible in advance of any
scope and conduct of an e-discovery process may improve the predictability of
discovery costs and enable preliminary costs estimates
to become more accurate.
3.161 The ALRC does not intend for the proposed procedure to obstruct the
overarching purpose of civil procedure in achieving ‘the
just resolution
of disputes’.
the adoption of a discovery plan yield an unhelpfully limited amount of
information relevant to the proceeding, the court
should not be prevented from
making further orders for discovery where necessary.
3.162 The ALRC expects that the procedures proposed below will require
parties to incur the cost of drafting a discovery plan and
attending any court
hearing to finalise its terms. The ALRC also acknowledges that the proposed
procedure will require the expenditure
of public resources by involving the
court in the management of an electronic discovery process. However, the
ALRC’s preliminary
view is that overall the public and private costs of
discovery of electronic documents would decrease with closer management of the
process on the part of litigants, their lawyers and the court.
Proposal 3–4
In any proceeding before the Federal Court in which
the court has directed that discovery be given of documents in an electronic
the following procedural steps should be required:
(a) the parties and their legal representatives to meet and confer for the
purposes of discussing a practical and cost-effective discovery
plan in relation
to electronically-stored information;
(b) the parties jointly to file in court a written report outlining the
matters on which the parties agree in relation to the discovery
of electronic
documents and a summary of any matters on which they disagree; and
(c) the court to determine any areas of disagreement between the parties and
to make any adjustments to the proposed discovery plan
as required to satisfy
the court that the proposed searches are reasonable and the proposed discovery
is necessary.
If so satisfied, the court may make orders for discovery by approving the
parties’ discovery plan.
Special masters, discovery masters and
3.163 A number of commentators have expressed a desire for the introduction
of ‘special staff to manage discovery issues in
often cited is the role of Masters in American courts under r 53 of the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
. This section of the chapter considers a
number of proposed or implemented models for the appointment of independent
persons to assist
the court in case management of discovery issues.
Rule 53 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
3.164 Under r 53 of the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
courts may appoint masters to perform any duties to which the parties consent,
to ‘hold trial proceedings and make or recommend
findings of fact’
in certain circumstances and handle pre- or post-trial issues that a judge
cannot handle in a timely or effective
Special masters are
appointed by an order of the court that states the master’s duties, any
limits on the master’s authority,
the nature of permitted ex parte
communications, how the master’s findings will be reviewed and the terms
of the master’s
compensation.
compensation must be paid either by the parties or funded by the subject matter
of the action.
A master may
regulate the proceedings and ‘take all appropriate measures to perform the
assigned duties fairly and
efficiently’,
also impose a range of
3.165 Before the court acts on a master’s recommendations, the parties
have an opportunity to
The court reviews
findings of fact de novo (unless the parties have agreed they will be reviewed
for clear error),
findings of law de novo
reviews procedural rulings ‘only for an abuse of
discretion’.
3.166 Rule 53 contemplates the use of masters at all three stages of a trial:
pre-trial, trial and
post-trial.
different stages, masters may fill any of a number of different roles:
settlement master; decision-making master; or case
3.167 The settlement master attempts to mediate and facilitate
negotiation.
decision-making master may decide non-dispositive motions (any motion other than
those in which a party requests that the court
dispose of some or all of the
claims asserted in a complaint, petition, counterclaim or cross-claim) usually
in the context of discovery.
The case management master is less involved with the merits of the dispute and
has no decision-making authority. Instead, a case
management master is like an
administrator who establishes or oversees procedures to expedite the case.
Victorian Law Reform Commission
3.168 The VLRC’s 2008
Civil Justice Review
recommended the use
of special masters in three contexts:
• as one of a number of options within an alternative dispute
resolution framework;
• as part of the discovery
• in helping self-represented
3.169 In the context of alternative dispute resolution, the VLRC discussed a
special master’s role as being similar to that
of a special referee under
O 50 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2005
Here, ‘the court would retain jurisdiction ... and remain responsible for
the final adjudication’ but the special
referee or master would make a
‘provisional determination’, if the parties failed to reach a
settlement.
It is likely that
O 72A of the
Federal Court Rules
, described further below, would allow
for this role for referees in the Federal Court.
3.170 The VLRC also recommended provision for a special master ‘to be
appointed by the court to assist in the case management
of discovery issues in
complex cases’.
VLRC’s model special master would:
• provide court supervised intervention in the discovery aspect of the
• actively endeavour to case manage and assist in the resolution of any
dispute between the parties in relation to discovery;
• investigate and report to the court on any issue in relation to
3.171 The costs of an externally appointed special master under the
VLRC’s model would be set at the discretion of the court
and paid for by
the parties or ordered by the court to be costs in the
When appointing a
special master in the Victorian context, the court would have to consider
whether the financial stakes or resources
of the parties justify imposing the
expense of managing discovery issues on the
3.172 Therefore, the VLRC contemplated both the introduction of special
masters and the increased use of special referees. As conceived
in the VLRC
report, the primary difference between a referee and a master appears to be the
level of intervention in the discovery
process itself. A referee may be able to
report on particular discovery issues when they are referred but a special
master could
play an ongoing and continuing role, working with the parties
rather than merely as a form of adjudicator. While referees answer
questions and ‘are required to give reasons for their determinations and
the principles governing whether such reasons
masters could explain the parties’ duties, investigate and help the
parties to identify appropriate discovery management
strategies, facilitate
discussion and hear interim
applications.
Adopting the
language of r 53 commentators, it appears that a referee can be a
decision-maker but the VLRC’s special master
would also be a case
Justice Finkelstein’s proposed O
3.173 At a joint Federal Court/Law Council workshop on case management in
2008, Finkelstein J outlined a proposal for the introduction
of discovery
masters in the Federal Court. This included a draft of proposed amendments to
Federal Court Rules
, introducing a new O 72A, which Finkelstein J
prepared along the lines of r 53 of the
Federal Rules of Civil
3.174 However, there were three differences. First, r 53 allows a master to
impose sanctions
proposed O 72A made no such provision. Secondly, r 53 allows a party 20 days in
which to file objections to a Master’s
whereas Finkelstein J
only allowed 7 days.
Finkelstein J limited a discovery master’s rulings to the realm of
managing pre-trial
3.175 This last distinction about the scope of a master’s powers is
most relevant. Rule 53 is broader in allowing a master to
be involved at any
stage. The VLRC’s proposal is also broader, in that special masters may
play a role in alternative dispute
resolution proceedings. However, within the
realm of pre-trial discovery, Finkelstein J would allow masters to direct the
proceedings.
findings, a discovery master’s factual findings and legal conclusions
would be reviewed de novo (although the parties
may stipulate that factual
findings should only be reviewed for clear
Also consistent with
r 53, the costs of a discovery master in a particular case would be paid for by
the parties, rather than the
Federal Court Rules current O 72A
Federal Justice System Amendment (Efficiency Measures) Act (No.
(Cth) amended the
Federal Court of Australia Act
courts to refer ‘a proceeding ... or one or more questions arising in a
proceeding ... to a referee for inquiry and
Reading Speech for this amendment affirmed that the purpose of this provision is
to ‘enable the court to more effectively
and efficiently manage large
litigation’.
Contemplated benefits included the ‘procedural flexibility with which a
referee can deal with a question’ and a referee’s
expertise’, which may allow a referee to ‘more quickly get to the
core of technical
3.177 Federal Court Rules
O 72A, introduced pursuant to this
amendment, allows the court to make a referral ‘[a]t any stage of a
proceeding’ for
inquiry and report into ‘questions or issues arising
in a proceeding, whether of fact or law or both, and whether raised by
pleadings, agreement of parties or
otherwise’.
of a referee appear to be paid for by the parties, as the court may make
directions for a party to give security for a
referee’s costs or otherwise
deal with a referee’s remuneration under the powers of the court as to
Unless otherwise
ordered by the court, the referee must give his or her opinion in a report which
the court may then choose to adopt
in whole, adopt in part, vary or
3.178 A referee’s determinations are not automatically binding on the
parties as ch III of the Australian
Constitution
precludes anyone
other than a judicial officer from exercising judicial
While the concept of
judicial power is affected by many variables, which makes it incapable of
exhaustive definition, dispensing
with discovery applications in litigation may
arguably fall within it.
Nicholas v The Queen
, Gaudron J stated that:
The difficulties involved in defining ‘judicial power’ are well
known. In general terms, however, it is that power which
is brought to bear in
making determinations as to rights, liabilities, powers, duties or status put in
issue in justiciable controversies,
and in making adjustments of rights and
interests in accordance with legal
Referees as discovery masters
3.179 In the three models of special masters discussed above, each may engage
in case management activities, such as clarifying the
issues in dispute and
focusing the discovery process. Justice Finkelstein, for example, describes how
a discovery master could help
in ‘crafting discovery orders, creating a
confidentiality regime, [and] monitoring production and
compliance’.
3.180 The VLRC was also of the view that a special master should be able to
investigate and identify appropriate strategies in relation
to the management of
discovery, and facilitate discussion between the parties in relation to
electronic discovery.
3.181 As described by a US judge, a special master can facilitate
collaborative tasks such as preparing parties for meetings, negotiating
discovery procedures or developing search
3.182 By contrast, the primary role of a referee in the Federal Court appears
to be that of an adjudicator, rather than case manager.
In particular, referees
are intended to adjudicate matters
where technical expertise is required and it is neither cost effective nor an
appropriate use of a judge’s time to gain the
necessary in-depth expertise
in a particular science or trade, or where detailed examination of accounts or
other financial records
is necessary to assess
3.183 Parties
are required to cooperate with referees, but their cooperation is aimed toward
ensuring that the referee ‘can
form a just opinion’ rather than
shape a discovery process.
Referees are explicitly freed from evidentiary rules in their adjudicative role,
but this does not appear to be intended to allow
them to perform a broader range
of case management functions.
3.184 It is unlikely that existing mechanisms in the Federal Court for
referral of questions or issues to a referee could be used
to the same extent as
those that allow special masters to case manage a discovery process. If a
position of a special master was
required to manage discovery in Federal Court
proceedings, legislative amendments may be required to introduce this element
the court’s case management procedures. Models for reform along these
lines include amendments to O 72A as proposed by Finkelstein
provisions of r 53 in the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
this proposal is based, as discussed above.
Advantages and disadvantages of discovery masters
in the Federal Court
3.185 One US District Court judge identified four primary reasons for a judge
to appoint a special master:
1. Time commitment—When a party asserts privilege over thousands,
sometimes in the tens of thousands, of pages of material,
a special master may
review the documents to determine the validity of the assertion of
2. Knowledge and expertise—In
Re: Seroquel Products Liability
, the Master supervised the process of discovering
electronically-stored information:
No particular discovery dispute was referred to the Master; instead, he was
directed to review all discovery requests and employ
his skills to determine
‘where such information is stored and how it can most effectively be
accessed and made
available’.
3. Resources—Some
disputes require a panel of professionals such as investigators, accountants,
economists, and computer experts
working in a coordinated manner to gather
information. In such situations, a special master may act as a ‘project
to coordinate these professionals.
4. Neutrality—A special master may be able to conduct settlement
discussions to avoid the judge losing any appearance of
neutrality.
3.186 Preserving the neutrality of judges was particularly compelling for the
VLRC in its proposal for a special master to manage
discovery issues:
the use of special masters will greatly assist the court to adopt a more
interventionist approach to discovery, without compromising
judicial objectivity
independence.
desire for discovery masters may also be a matter of finding the right person
for the job, as Finkelstein J put it:
the master can be selected with an eye to specialization (prior expertise in the
relevant field of law) and available time (if discovery
is expected to be a
full-time or expedited affair, consideration of potential appointees can be
limited to retired judges or others
who can guarantee a clear
3.188 Another
reason for the VLRC to advocate the use of special masters was to save on public
resources, arguing that special masters
assist to free up judge time, which may otherwise be consumed by complex and
protracted discovery
3.189 This point was also taken up by Finkelstein J in his
arguments for appointing discovery masters in large or complex cases:
it is unfair to other judges, and to other litigants with cases before that
judge, when the judge must devote a disproportionate
amount of time to one case,
and even close his or her docket in extreme
corollary to this, however, is the increase in litigation costs for the parties
who would bear the expense of a discovery
master. This is likely to be a higher
cost to the parties than court fees spent on judicial case management, which are
essentially
a public cost. A case manager with greater expertise in discovery
than the docket judge may save the parties time and money through
more efficient
discovery processes but comes with his or her own set of costs.
3.191 A key concern against the introduction of discovery masters in the
Federal Court may be its impact on the court’s docket
management system.
In the Federal Court, each case is allocated to the docket of a judge who is
then responsible for managing the
case until final disposition. The docket
judge’s familiarity with the case is intended to promote the just, orderly
and expeditious
resolution of
outsourcing case management to a discovery master may detract from the
judge’s involvement and familiarity with cases
in his or her docket. This
may undermine the advantages of the docket system in relation to discovery,
which were outlined by Heerey
J in his submission to the ALRC’s
Managing Justice
[t]he docket system will promote (and already has, in my experience) a more
interventionist and practical approach to discovery,
tailored to the individual
case and the real issues in
There may also be concerns that discovery masters would add a layer of
inefficiency to the discovery process, in that their
decisions would have to be
reported to the court for action and subject to objections from the parties. It
may be more efficient
for the docket judge to deal with any objections from the
parties at the time of making orders for discovery.
ALRC’s views
3.193 Subject to feedback from stakeholders, the ALRC’s preliminary
view is that management of the discovery process should
be primarily the
responsibility of the judge under the court’s docket system. The use of a
discovery master may obstruct active
judicial case management which, in the
ALRC’s preliminary view, is required to control the scale and cost of
discovery in the
Federal Court.
3.194 The ALRC is also concerned about the additional expense to the parties
which would be incurred by the employment of a discovery
master. As discussed in
this chapter, the high cost of discovery has been singled out as a major
criticism of this stage in civil
litigation. The ALRC’s preliminary view
is that the expected costs of discovery masters, and the potential impact of
this approach
on case management by judicial officers in the Federal Court,
render such reform less practical than the reforms proposed above.
3.195 However, the ALRC welcomes stakeholder views on the merits of special
masters to manage the discovery process in Federal Court
proceedings. The ALRC
is interested in stakeholders’ proposals for any particular mechanism to
introduce discovery masters
in the Federal Court.
Question 3–8
Should special masters be introduced to manage the
discovery process in proceedings before the Federal Court? If so, what model
be adopted?
Case management powers
3.196 The VLRC’s
Civil Justice Review
recommended ‘the
introduction of more clearly delineated and specific powers to facilitate
proactive judicial case management
in relation to
discovery’.
Accordingly, the report included draft provisions based in part on the
of the Supreme Court 1971
(WA) and the
Supreme Court Civil Rules 2006
(SA). The substance of these provisions was enacted by the Victorian Parliament
Civil Procedure Act 2010
provides an
extensive but non-exhaustive list of directions which Victorian courts may give
in relation to discovery.
3.197 This degree of particularisation is not found in the Federal
Court’s legislation. While the
Federal Court of Australia Act
not include this level of detail, the Federal Court does have authority to make
such orders in relation to discovery. However,
the source of the Federal
Court’s power to make discovery orders is largely found in subordinate
legislation—O 15 of
Federal Court Rules
inherent jurisdiction.
Federal Court of Australia Act
was amended to give statutory
form to the court’s case management powers in broad
These amendments were
intended to ‘provide clear legislative direction and support to judges so
that they can confidently employ
active case management
While the Act
does not specify the kinds of orders the court may make in relation to
discovery, it relevantly provides that the court
may ‘require things to be
3.199 Greater specification of the court’s case management powers in
legislation would not necessarily increase the court’s
authority to
control the discovery process, or create new powers without which it has been
ill-equipped to manage discovery. Rather,
the intent would be to raise awareness
of the ways in which the discovery process can be managed and encourage greater
and more effective
use of case management powers. As the VLRC reasoned in its
Civil Justice Review
Expanding discovery case management powers should encourage the judiciary and
the parties to be more proactive in confining the scope
of discovery and
ensuring that the process assists rather than hinders the administration of
The same argument can be made with respect to the court’s power to
sanction non-compliance with discovery orders. The
Civil Procedure
sets out a range of orders the court may make, without limiting the
court’s power to sanction a failure to comply with discovery
obligations
or other conduct amounting to abuse of the discovery
The VLRC argued
More clearly defined sanctions will also encourage parties to work towards the
efficient resolution of discovery issues and discourage
the use of discovery as
an adversarial
3.201 However,
there may be doubts as to whether clearer statutory prescription of the Federal
Court’s power to case-manage,
including through the use of sanctions,
would itself have much practical impact on the discovery process. Unless the
court actually
uses its case management powers or the parties actively petition
the court to control the discovery of documents—and unless
the court, on
its own initiative, imposes sanctions on parties abusing the discovery process,
or the abused party actively seeks
those court sanctions—the behavioural
changes envisaged by the VLRC are unlikely to materialise.
ALRC’s views
3.202 The ALRC considers that legislative reforms to clarify and strengthen
the Federal Court’s existing statutory powers to
case manage the discovery
process are desirable. The ALRC’s preliminary view is that by setting out
in primary legislation
some detail of the court’s case management powers
with respect to discovery, it may encourage the judiciary, the parties and
lawyers proactively to confine the scope of discovery and reduce the burden of
litigation.
3.203 Express statutory authority to direct the conduct of a discovery
process, and to sanction discovery default and abuse, may help
culture within the Federal Court that promotes a focused and efficient discovery
process. However, the ALRC acknowledges
that such cultural change takes time to
develop and may fail to eventuate unless the court, litigants and practitioners
the rationale of such law reform in practice. Judicial officers may be
encouraged and better equipped to utilise legislative case
management powers
through education and training, discussed further below. To this end, clearer
statutory prescription of the court’s
powers to manage a discovery process
more than motherhood statements if they are used to achieve cultural change. It
gives a basis for the bench to say to people ‘this
is how we do
litigation.
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
should be amended to provide the court with broad and express discretion to
exercise case management powers and impose sanctions
in relation to the
discovery of documents, in line with
Civil Procedure Act
Costs powers
3.204 This section of the chapter considers the use of costs powers to
maintain proportionality in a discovery process. Specifically,
the power to
order payment of discovery costs in advance and the power to limit legal fees
for discovery are discussed.
Payment of discovery costs in
3.205 One way to ensure that discovery requests are proportionate to the
information needs of the case may be to require payment of
costs in advance of
discovery by the requesting party. This approach was recommended by the Access
to Justice Taskforce.
court’s existing costs powers, including those prescribed in
Federal Court of Australia Act
, already allow judges to order payment of
discovery costs in advance. A number of judges consulted by the ALRC in this
Inquiry recalled
cases in which they had made such orders, with the effect of
limiting a party’s request for discovery. The Taskforce suggested
there should be a presumption in favour of making such orders in all cases
unless the court exercises its discretion not to
do so, for example, where a
meritorious litigant would be denied access to justice through a lack of
capacity to pay for discovery
3.206 A requesting party could also be denied justice if, having been
required to pay the costs of discovery in advance, it is ultimately
in the litigation but unable to recover those costs—whether this is due to
the other party’s inability to
satisfy a costs order in favour of the
successful party, or because the order for payment of discovery costs in advance
that such costs cannot be recovered.
3.207 The Taskforce suggested that over-inflated costs estimates, attempting
to intimidate a party not to persist with their discovery
request, may be
addressed by judges assessing the reasonable costs of
However, in
practice, judges might not be adequately informed to assess the reasonable costs
of discovery. This point was made at
the AIJA’s discovery seminar, where
the issue of costs capping was discussed. The seminar concluded that judges
often do not
have sufficient information to fix costs caps at an appropriate
3.208 In any event, it appears that the parties are more likely to
underestimate the costs of discovery rather than over-inflate costs
The ALRC was told on separate occasions in consultations with General Counsel
for a large corporation and a litigation
funder that a budget is usually drawn
up at the start of a proceeding, including a component for discovery, but the
actual litigation
costs will invariably exceed initial estimates.
3.209 It may also be argued that a presumption in favour of payment in
advance for discovery costs does not reflect the commercial
realities faced by
most litigants. In the vast majority of cases, the parties would be denied
justice by a lack of capacity to pay
for discovery in advance. In these
circumstances, almost all cases would involve an interlocutory application
seeking orders to overturn
the presumption of costs on the requesting party. In
this way, the enactment of such a presumption could result in satellite
and an increase in costs.
Limiting the costs of discovery
3.210 The high cost of discovery is often attributed to the army of junior
solicitors, paralegals and clerks required to work through
a request for
discovery of documents. The plight of ‘discovery soldiers’
conscripted in
Trade Practice Commission v Santos Limited & Sagasco
Holdings Limited
later remarked upon by the trial judge, Heerey J:
Practitioners were recruited into a burgeoning army engaged in discovery,
inspecting, filing, listing, copying, storing, carrying
dealing with 100,000 documents which had been accumulated for the purposes of
the litigation. An expression that
developed amongst junior practitioners who
had been ensnared in the discovery process was ‘I have been
Santossed’.
firms have been criticised for using an army of employees to generate profits
from the discovery process. The VLRC’s
Civil Justice Review
explained that:
In some instances, clerks or law students may be engaged to assist in connection
with document review. They may be paid at a relatively
low hourly rate (eg, $30
per hour) but charged to clients at significantly higher hourly rates (eg,
between $150 and $250 per hour).
It has been suggested that this is one of the
major reasons for the very large costs associated with
VLRC recommended that Victorian courts be given the power to limit the costs
charged to clients for discovery to the actual
cost to the law practice of such
work, including a reasonable allowance for overheads, but excluding a mark up or
profit component
being added to the actual
3.213 Currently, where a party to Federal Court proceedings has concerns
client may apply for
taxation of its lawyer’s fees under the Legal Profession Act of the
relevant jurisdiction.
Federal Court Rules
also give the court express power to disallow costs
as between a lawyer and their client where the costs are incurred improperly or
without reasonable cause.
3.214 Introducing costs powers to limit legal fees may be criticised on the
basis that there is no widespread over-charging for discovery
in the Federal
Court. On the other hand, if law firms are charging for discovery work without
any mark up, then such costs orders
would not have any effect other than to
prevent potential overcharging.
3.215 The ALRC heard during initial consultations that some lawyers may
charge fees for discovery work at a fixed or flat rate. This
fee structure is
commonly used for certain types of legal services, such as conveyancing or
drafting a contract. The costs of litigation,
particularly the discovery stage,
may be more difficult to estimate or quote. However, if procedural reform (such
as Proposals 3–2
and 3–3) is able to instil greater certainty in the
discovery process, the costs of discovery may become more predictable.
ALRC’s views
3.216 The ALRC acknowledges that costs orders can be useful strategies to
a discovery process
proportionate to the information needs of the case.
3.217 In particular, the power to order payment for discovery in advance may
be utilised by the Federal Court to manage the discovery
of documents. The
ALRC’s preliminary view is that such costs powers should continue to be
available to the court and exercised
in its discretion in the circumstances of
each case. At this stage of the Inquiry, the ALRC is not inclined to the view
that up-front
payment should be required of a party requesting discovery by
default, unless the court orders otherwise. The ALRC expects that such
would be unbearable for most litigants and would typically result in parties
incurring additional costs through litigation
to overturn that presumption.
3.218 While the ALRC is not aware of any widespread overcharging for
discovery costs, the ALRC accepts that discovery has the potential
to serve as a
profit centre for law firms. However, the ALRC’s preliminary view is that
the amount charged to clients for discovery
is generally a matter for cost
assessment or review under existing Legal Profession Acts. Where court orders
are necessary to restrict
discovery costs to those actually incurred by the firm
for such work, the ALRC’s preliminary view is that O 62 of the
Court Rules
adequately equips the court to make those orders. Firms which
inappropriately profit from the discovery process might also be dealt
existing disciplinary frameworks, which are considered in Chapter 4.
3.219 The ALRC is, however, interested in stakeholder views on the ways in
which the Federal Court might make greater use of costs
powers to ensure
proportionality in the discovery process.
Question 3–9
Should there be a presumption that a party
requesting discovery of documents in proceedings before the Federal Court will
estimated cost in advance, unless the court orders otherwise?
Question 3–10
Should the Federal Court have explicit statutory
powers to make orders limiting the costs able to be charged by a law practice to
a client for discovery, to the actual costs to the law practice of carrying out
such work (with a reasonable allowance for overheads,
but excluding a mark up or
profit component)?
Judicial education and training
3.220 As discussed above, the key to discovery reform may lie in more active
judicial case management of the process. Effective case
management skills are
necessary for judges effectively to narrow the issues in dispute and control the
scope and process of discovery.
The need for judicial education and training in
case management skills was recognised by the Access to Justice Taskforce in
recommending
The Attorney-General should work with the courts and the National Judicial
College of Australia (NJCA) to ensure that judicial education
includes measures
aimed at enhancing the understanding and use of ... case management
techniques.
particular issue that needs managing in the discovery process is the use of
computer technologies in the production of electronically-stored
information.
The need for effective training for judges managing an e-discovery process was
specifically targeted in the UK by Lord
Jackson in his
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs
. In his final report, Lord Jackson recommended that:
E-disclosure as a topic should form a substantial part of … the training
of judges who will have to deal with e-disclosure
3.222 Currently,
there are a number of avenues open to judges for training in case management
skills. The National Orientation Program
for new judges conducted by the NJCA
includes a session on case management, examining ‘the role of judges
dealing with busy
application lists, the identification of cases requiring
management and the referral of cases for alternative dispute
resolution’.
3.223 Continuing education for judges includes modules on pre-trial case
management, under the national curriculum for professional
development for
Australian judicial officers.
This program covers the challenges and problems that can arise from discovery
and using alternative dispute resolution techniques
in the management of cases,
including settlement of
3.224 While the curriculum includes a module on information and other
technologies, there is currently no inclusion of e-discovery
in the national
curriculum.
Programs in this
module are focused on technologies used in the court room (the design of
electronic courtrooms, the use of audio/visual
technologies and electronic
filing, for example) and computers as a research tool for writing judgements,
rather than those used
in the discovery process.
3.225 Judicial education at a national level may be lacking a particular
focus on the management of large-scale discoveries that involve
electronically-stored information. This might reflect the fact that such
discovery processes are largely confined to the
Federal Court, and a few state
Supreme Courts, rather than the majority of jurisdictions. It may also be
difficult to take a national
approach to this topic, since each court has its
own case management system to deal with discovery issues.
3.226 Professional development specifically for Federal Court judges may be
provided through the Federal Court itself via its Judicial
Education Committee
or Practice Committee. The Practice Committee, together with the Law Council of
Australia, was jointly responsible
for organising the workshop held in 2008 on
the Federal Court’s case management system—which paid particular
to the management of discovery
The ALRC was told
that plans for a further case management workshop are in train.
3.227 From time to time, the AIJA holds conferences and seminars for judicial
officers. In the past, some of these have covered discovery
issues; including
the use of computer technologies. In 2008, the AIJA held the
4th AIJA Law
& Technology Conference
where several sessions focused on
e-discovery.
Previously, in
2007, the AIJA held a discovery seminar which canvassed case management and the
rise of e-disclosure.
3.228 The ALRC has heard that case management, including management of the
discovery process, can be a topic of conversation at regular
meetings in the Federal Court. This kind of peer-to-peer education may be an
effective way to inform Federal Court
judges about the case management needs of
the discovery process.
3.229 Another source of information on case management for Federal Court
judges is the court’s Benchbook. It includes a chapter
on discovery which
covers the general principles and rules for making discovery orders, as well as
sample orders for discovery of
documents. The ALRC understands that this chapter
was last updated in 2002. In particular it does not refer to the requirements of
Practice Note CM 6—
specifically, the need to agree upon a discovery
plan before the court makes orders for discovery of documents in electronic
format—which
was in substance issued in January 2009. Due to the Benchbook
falling out of date, the ALRC has heard that it is not widely used
among Federal
Court judges.
3.230 However, the ALRC was told that work is progressing in the Federal
Court on a replacement handbook. This may be an opportunity
dissemination of up-to-date information across the Federal Court with a
particular focus on effective case management of
the discovery process.
ALRC’s views
3.231 As outlined above, there are already many opportunities for Federal
Court judges to develop their case management knowledge
and skills (including
those required to effectively manage the discovery process) through education,
training and the information
resources of the court. However, the ALRC’s
preliminary view is that existing case management training and education for
Court judges should give greater focus to the issues arising in a
discovery process—including the technologies used to discover
electronically-stored information.
3.232 In the ALRC’s preliminary view, there is a particular need for
Federal Court judges to be provided frequent and continuing
education in
electronic discovery due to the constant advancement of information and
communication technologies. This may be an especially
important aspect of
judicial education, if judges are to be more involved in planning the conduct of
an e-discovery process as suggested
Proposal 3–2.
Proposal 3–6
The Federal Court should develop and maintain a
continuing judicial education and training program specifically dealing with
management of the discovery process in Federal Court proceedings,
including the technologies used in the discovery of electronically-stored
information.
Discovery data collection
3.233 As mentioned earlier in this Chapter, statistical data on discovery
costs in Australia—and research measuring the extent
to which discovered
documents are used in the disposal of litigation before Australian
courts—has not been collected or recorded
in a systematic or ongoing
manner. Consequently, accurate and up-to-date information as to the
proportionality of discovery processes
in federal courts—in terms of
discovery costs relative to the utility of discovered documents in the context
of the litigation—is
not readily available.
3.234 The collection of such data may provide an informative measure of the
concerns associated with discovery in Federal Court proceedings.
information may help to guide the direction of reform in this area of civil
litigation. It may also enable a basis for comparison
to measure the
effectiveness of the pre-discovery procedures outlined above, in Proposals
3–1 and 3–2, should they be
implemented. Reliable statistics would
be helpful to accurately assess whether these proposed procedures are successful
in achieving
the expected goals of reducing litigation expenses overall.
3.235 In particular, data on discovery costs may provide an indication as to
whether the procedures proposed above, if implemented,
achieve a greater level
of certainty in the conduct of a discovery process—in terms of planning in
advance the types of searches
that are ‘reasonable’. For example,
data which allowed a comparison of estimated discovery costs with the actual
of discovery may indicate the level of certainty in a discovery
3.236 The collection of accurate and meaningful data on the proportionality
of discovery processes would likely present significant
challenges. It may
require the cooperation and input of all those involved in a civil proceeding,
including the court, the parties,
their lawyers, any litigation support service
providers and financiers such as insurers or litigation funders. Establishing a
point for the collection of data from every participant in a civil
proceeding, with respect to discovery costs, may present logistical
issues, for
example, the protection of confidential information.
3.237 Quantifying the utility of discovered documents may also raise a
particular challenge in the collection of this data. As discussed
chapter, recording the number of discovered documents tendered in evidence or
relied upon at hearing may misrepresent the
utility of discovery—since the
objectives of discovery extend to clarifying the issues in dispute and testing
the strength
of the parties’ case. Discovered documents, therefore, may
have value in facilitating settlement of the proceeding or shortening
of the trial by encouraging parties to agree on certain issues. This may suggest
that the extent to which discovered documents
are actually used in the disposal
of litigation could only be measured by the impressions of the parties or their
lawyers, rather
than exact numerical or monetary terms.
ALRC’s views
3.238 The ALRC’s preliminary view is that accurate and up-to-date data
on the costs associated with discovery in Federal Court
proceedings, and the
extent to which discovered documents are used in the resolution of those
proceedings, is necessary to identify
and act upon concerns relating to the high
and disproportionate costs of the discovery process. The collection of such data
in the ALRC’s preliminary view, necessary to measure the success
of the new court procedures proposed in this Chapter, if implemented.
3.239 The type of data that may assist to evaluate and track the
proportionality of discovery processes in the Federal Court may include:
• The total litigation costs and the amount of costs associated with
discovery, as well as the items of expenditure on discovery,
for example, legal
fees and court filing fees for discovery applications, the cost of time spent at
trial considering discovered
documents, the cost of litigation support services
in the discovery process and the cost to the parties of employees engaged in a
discovery process. This may indicate where costs are incurred in discovery, and
those aspects which are most costly, in the context
of litigation costs
• The value of what is at stake for the parties in the litigation, for
example, the amount of damages awarded in judgement,
the sum of compensation
paid by way of settlement, or the approximate value of non-pecuniary relief such
as a declaration or injunction.
This may provide context to discovery costs, as
a proportion of the value of the case.
• The number of discovered documents that are tendered in evidence, and
the number of documents relied upon at trial, as well
as the judge’s
impression of the extent to which discovered documents were crucial in
determining the proceeding.
• Whether settlement was achieved after discovery, and the
parties’—and their lawyers’—impression of
the extent to
which discovered documents were crucial in resolving the dispute.
• Whether certain issues in dispute were narrowed or agreed upon after
discovery, and the parties’—and their
lawyers’—impression
of the extent to which discovered documents were
crucial in clarifying or resolving those issues.
3.240 At this stage of the Inquiry, the ALRC considers that the Federal Court
would be best placed to collect such data. However,
the participation of the
parties, their lawyers and others involved in the proceeding would be required
to effectively gather this
data. The ALRC also acknowledges that the court may
require additional funding to establish and maintain data collection facilities
to measure the proportionality of discovery processes.
Proposal 3–7
The Australian Government should fund initiatives
in the Federal Court to establish and maintain data collection facilities, to
data on the costs associated with discovery of documents, as well as
information on the proportionality of a discovery process—in
terms of the
costs of discovery relative to the total litigation costs, the value of what is
at stake for the parties in the litigation,
and the utility of discovered
documents in the context of the litigation.
Family Court of
3.241 During initial consultations in this Inquiry, the ALRC heard that
disclosure procedures in the Family Court are generally working
mentioned in Chapter 2, this may be in part due to the nature of family law
proceedings, as the issues in family law matters
are relatively contained and
largely well-known to the parties. The ALRC has heard that pre-litigation
requirements in family law
proceedings also help to clarify and refine the
issues in dispute between the parties. Disclosure in proceedings before the
Court, therefore, may have a particularly narrow focus that is amenable
to an efficient disclosure process.
3.242 Based on initial consultations, the ALRC understands that parties are
generally compliant with disclosure obligations in Family
Court proceedings. The
ALRC is not aware of any particular issues arising in the process of disclosure
in proceedings before the
Family Court. However, the ALRC welcomes feedback from
stakeholders on any difficulties encountered in a disclosure process in Family
Court proceedings.
Question 3–11
What issues, if any, arise in the procedures
prescribed for disclosure of documents in proceedings before the Family
Federal Magistrates
Court of Australia
3.243 As discussed in Chapter 2, the ALRC is aware of concerns relating to
the operation of
Federal Magistrates Act 1999
prohibits discovery unless the court declares that it is appropriate in the
interests of the administration of justice.
This issue is considered in detail
in Chapter 2.
3.244 The ALRC is not aware of any other particular issues arising in the
discovery process in proceedings before the Federal Magistrates
Court. The ALRC
has heard that in many cases before the Federal Magistrates Court, the parties
will make appropriate, informal arrangements
for the disclosure of documents.
This may be possible due in part to the nature of the smaller, less complex
matters which the court
is intended to handle in its jurisdiction.
3.245 In the Federal Magistrate Court’s family law jurisdiction, as in
Family Court proceedings discussed above, the issues
in dispute may be
sufficiently clear and contained to facilitate a focussed and efficient
disclosure process.
3.246 Nevertheless, the ALRC welcomes feedback from stakeholders on any
issues arising in the process of disclosure in Federal Magistrate
proceedings—in addition to stakeholder views on
issues discussed in
Question 3–12
What issues, if any, arise in the procedures
prescribed for disclosure of documents in proceedings before the Federal
Magistrates
High Court Rules 2004
Practice Note CM 5: Discovery (Federal
Court of Australia)
Practice Note CM 6: Electronic
Technology in Litigation (Federal Court of Australia)
Federal Court Rules
(Cth), O 10 r
Practice Note CM 6: Pre-Discovery Conference Checklist (Federal
Court of Australia)
Practice Note CM 6: Pre-Discovery
Conference Checklist
(Federal Court of Australia).
Ibid, [9.1].
Federal Court Rules
(Cth), O 10 r
1, O 15 r 1.
Practice Note CM 6: Pre-Discovery
Conference Checklist
(Federal Court of Australia), [1.2].
Latec Finance Pty Ltd v Jury
77 WN (NSW) 674.
Practice Note CM 5: Discovery
(Federal Court of Australia), [1(a)–(b)].
Federal Court Rules
Citrus Queensland Pty Ltd v Sunstate Orchards Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2006] FCA 1001
Federal Court Rules
(Cth), O 15
Kyocera Mita Australia Pty Ltd v
Mitronics Corp Pty Ltd
[2005] FCA 242
Pasini v Vanstone
Federal Court of Australia Act
Federal Court Rules
(Cth), O 15
Ibid, O 15 r 2(1).
Ibid, O 15 rr 6(3),(4),(6).
Ibid, O 15 r 6(8).
Ibid, O 15 r 11(1).
Ibid, O 15 r 12.
Ibid, O 15 r 11(1)(e).
Ibid, O 15 r 14.
Practice Note CM 6: Electronic
Technology in Litigation
(Federal Court of Australia), [5.1].
EDRM: The Electronic Discovery
Reference Model
(2010) <www.edrm.net> at 25 October 2010.
Federal Court Rules
(Cth), O 15
Ibid, O 15 r 8.
Federal Court of Australia Act
Riley McKay Pty Ltd v McKay
[1982] NSWLR 264.
Federal Court of Australia Act
(3)(a), (b).
Family Law Rules 2004
Ibid, r 13.07.
Ibid, r 13.05.
Ibid, r 13.15. This does not apply to
an independent children’s lawyer.
Ibid, r 13.16.
Ibid, r 13.20. This applies to all
Initiating Applications (Family Law) except: an application for an order that a
marriage is a
nullity or a declaration as to the validity of a marriage, divorce
or annulment; a maintenance application; a child support application
and an application seeking interim, procedural, ancillary or other incidental
Ibid, r 13.20.
Ibid, r 13.24.
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Rules 2004
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
(Cth), r 14.02 (1).
Ibid, r 14.02 (2).
Ibid, r 14.03.
Ibid, r 14.05.
Ibid, r 14.09.
Ibid, r 24.02.
Ibid, r 24.03.
Ibid, r 24.05.
Ibid, r 24.04.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
C Cameron and J Liberman,
‘Destruction of Documents Before Proceedings Commence—What is a
Court to Do?’
[2003] MelbULawRw 12
Melbourne University Law Review
P Matthews and H Malek,
(2007), 4, [1.03].
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 434.
Law Council of Australia,
Report in Relation to Possible Innovations to Case Management
J Spigelman, ‘Access to Justice
and Access to Lawyers’
Australian Bar Review
Phase 2 Submission, Commercial
Litigation Association, cited in R Jackson,
Review of Civil Litigation Costs:
Final Report
(2009), ch 37, [3.5].
T Matruglio,
The Costs of
Litigation in the Federal Court of Australia
(1999), prepared for the
Australian Law Reform Commission.
Review of Civil Litigation
Costs: Final Report
(2009), ch 40, [6.3].
R Sackville, ‘Mega-Lit: Tangible
Consequences Flow from Complex Case Management’
(2010) 48(5)
Society Journal
Betfair v Racing New South
[2010] FCA 603.
Ibid, [331].
Expert Explodes Page
Equivalency Myth
(2007) <www.law.com/> at 8 November 2010.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department Access to Justice Taskforce,
A Strategic
Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration,
AIJA Discovery Seminar
(2007) <www.aija.org.au/> at
8 November 2010.
T Willging, J Shapard, D Striensta and
D Miletich,
Discovery and Disclosure Practice, Problems, and Proposals for
Change: A Case-Based National Survey of Counsel in Closed Federal Civil
Baulderstone Hornibrook v Qantas
Australia Limited
[2003] FCA 174
Quoted in M Pelly,
‘Snail’s pace of corporate justice’,
The Australian
(Sydney), 29 June 2007, 31.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department Access to Justice Taskforce,
A Strategic
Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
Australian E-Discovery
Industry Grows Up
http://idm.net.au/
at 9 November 2010.
S Byrne, ‘E-Discovery: Where
Information Management and Litigation Meet’ (Paper presented at Institute
for Information
Management Conference, Melbourne, 27 April 2010).
Evidence Amendment Act 2008
(Cth), s 68 commenced 1 January 2009. This provision was recommended in
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law,
(2005), Rec 6–3.
Federal Court Rules
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Preliminary Report
(2009), ch 40, [3.20].
NT Power Generation Pty Ltd v Power
& Water Authority
[1999] FCA 1623.
Molnlycke AB v Procter & Gamble
[1990] RPC 498
Ibid, [9]-[10].
Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd v
Public Transport Authority of Western Australia
[2007] WASC 65
(22 March 2007).
BT (Australasia) v New South Wales
& Anor (No 9)
[1998] FCA 363.
Digicel v Cable & Wireless
[2008] EWHC 2522
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Preliminary Report
(2009), ch 40, [1.1].
Federal Court Amendment Rules 2004
(No 1) 2004
(Cth), item 24.
The University of Sydney v ResMed
[2008] FCA 1020
Australian Competition & Consumer Commission v
Advanced Medical Institute Pty Ltd
[2005] FCA 366
Aveling v UBS Capital
Markets Australia Holdings Ltd
[2005] FCA 415.
The University of Sydney v ResMed
[2008] FCA 1020
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
Law Council of Australia,
Report in Relation to Possible Innovations to Case Management
Ibid, [85].
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [9].
Practice Note CM 6: Electronic
Technology in Litigation (Federal Court of Australia)
Practice Note CM 6:
Pre-Discovery Conference Checklist
(Federal Court of Australia), [9].
Formal Update: Federal
Court of Australia Practice Note 17
(2008) <www.elitigation.com.au/>
at 9 November 2010.
See: New South Wales Supreme Court,
Practice Note SC Gen 7: Use of Technology
<www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/> at 5 November 2010;
Practice Direction No 8
of 2004: Electronic Management of Documents (Qld);
Practice Direction No
2.1 of Supreme Court Practice Directions 2006: Guidelines for the Use of
Electronic Technology (SA)
; Supreme Court of Victoria,
Guidelines for the
Use of Technology in Any Civil Matter
<www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/> at 5 November 2010;
Practice Direction
No 2 of 2002: Guidelines for the Use of Technology in any Civil Matter (NT);
Civil Procedure Rule Committee (UK),
Practice Direction 31B: Disclosure of
Electronic Documents
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
(US), r 26.
Federal Rules of Civil
(US), r 26(f)(2).
Ibid, r 16(b)(3).
Civil Procedure Rule Committee (UK),
Practice Direction 31B: Disclosure of Electronic Documents
Ibid, [14].
Ibid, [15].
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Preliminary Report
(2009), ch 40, [7.9].
Galati v Potato Marketing
Corporation of Western Australia (No 2)
[2007] FCA 919.
Ibid, [11].
Ibid, [58]-[61].
Police Federation of Australia v
[2010] FCA 315.
Ibid, [33].
Moody v Turner
(Unreported,
SD Ohio 1:07-cv-692, 21 September 2010).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
Law Council of Australia,
Report in Relation to Possible Innovations to Case Management
Proposal 5(a).
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [27].
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 470.
Chief Justice’s Working Party
on Civil Justice Reform (Hong Kong),
Civil Justice Reform: Final Report
(2004), [500].
Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration,
AIJA Discovery Seminar
(2007) <www.aija.org.au/> at
8 November 2010.
S Colbran and others,
Procedure: Commentary and Materials
(4th ed, 2009), 440.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
A Stephenson,
Turning Mountains
into Molehills: Improvements to Formal Dispute Resolution
unpublished, 16.
This issue was raised in Ch 2.
Practice Note CM 8 Fast Track
(Federal Court of Australia)
Practice Note Tax 1 Tax List (Federal
Court of Australia)
Supreme Court Civil Rules
(BC, Canada), pt 5.
British Columbia Justice Review
Task Force, Civil Justice Reform Working Group,
Effective and Affordable
Civil Justice: Report of the Civil Justice Reform Working Group to the Justice
Review Task Force
(2006), Rec 2.
W Shwarzer and A Hirsch,
Elements of Case Management: A Pocket Guide for Judges
M Gordon, ‘The Fast Track
Experience in Victoria: Changing and Evolving the Way in Which We Administer
Justice’ (Paper
presented at International Commercial Litigation and
Dispute Resolution Conference, Sydney, 27-28 November 2009), 8.
Practice Note CM 5: Discovery
(Federal Court of Australia)
Seven Network Limited v News
[2007] FCA 1062.
Lawyers Weekly,
Necessity? Lawyers Reflect on C7 Litigation
<www.lawyersweekly.com.au> at 21 July 2010.
W Shwarzer and A Hirsch,
Elements of Case Management: A Pocket Guide for Judges
(2nd ed, 2006),
Quoted in C Dale, ‘CaseMap
Issue Linking in UK Civil Proceedings’ (Paper presented at Second
International Workshop
on Supporting Search and Sense Making for Electronically
Stored Information in Discovery, London, 25 June 2008)), [2].
Lord Woolf,
Access to Justice:
Final Report
S Colbran and others,
Procedure: Commentary and Materials
(4th ed, 2009), 440.
Practice Note CM 8 Fast Track
(Federal Court of Australia), [6.4].
Supreme Court Civil Rules
(BC, Canada), r 7–4(1), came into force on 1 July 2010.
British Columbia Justice Review
Task Force, Civil Justice Reform Working Group,
Effective and Affordable
Civil Justice: Report of the Civil Justice Reform Working Group to the Justice
Review Task Force
(2006), 28.
Law Council of Australia,
Report in Relation to Possible Innovations to Case Management
Proposal 5(c), [94]–[96].
M Gordon, ‘The Fast Track
Experience in Victoria: Changing and Evolving the Way in Which We Administer
Justice’ (Paper
presented at International Commercial Litigation and
Dispute Resolution Conference, Sydney, 27-28 November 2009).
Federal Court Rules (Cth)
Ibid, O 15 r 10.
Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration,
AIJA Discovery Seminar
(2007) <www.aija.org.au/> at
8 November 2010.
‘The Devil is in the
Documents’,
(online), 1 March 2010,
<www.hearsay.org.au/>.
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [14].
Ibid, [16].
Ibid, [17].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
Federal Court of Australia Act
Practice Note CM 6: Electronic
Technology in Litigation
(Federal Court of Australia), [6].
Practice Note CM 6:
Pre-Discovery Conference Checklist
(Federal Court of Australia), [1].
Civil Procedure Rule Committee
Practice Direction 31B: Disclosure of Electronic Documents
This practice direction came into force on 1 October 2010 and replaced
Practice Direction 31.2A
, which suggested that: ‘The parties
, prior to the first Case Management Conference, discuss any issues
that may arise regarding searches for and the preservation of
documents’: [2A.2].
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
r 26(f)(2).
See Proposal 3–1.
J Rosenthal and M Cowper, ‘A
Practitioner’s Guide to Rule 26(f) Meet & Confer: A Year After the
Amendments’
Practising Law Institute: Litigation
ALSP Update
<www.alsponline.org/> at 9 November 2010.
Federal Court of Australia Act
D Kavan and T Streeton, ‘A
Change in Direction on E-disclosure’,
Law Society Gazette
1 October 2010, <www.lawgazette.co.uk/>.
Over-Estimating Both
Costs and Risks in the eDisclosure Practice Direction
http://chrisdale.wordpress.com/2010/09/28/over-estimating-both-costs-and-risks-in-the-edisclosure-practice-direction
at 25 October 2010.
L Rosenthal, ‘A Few Thoughts
on Electronic Discovery After December 1, 2006’ (2006) 116(176)
Law Journal Pocket Part
The State of Discovery
Practice in Civil Cases: Must the Rules be Changed to Reduce Costs and Burdens,
Or Can Significant Improvements
be Achieved Within the Existing Rules?
http://civilconference.uscourts.gov/
at 25 October 2010.
Walking the Plank,
Looking Over Your Shoulder, Fearing Sharks Are in the Water:
E-Discovery in Federal Litigation?
http://civilconference.uscourts.gov/
at 25 October 2010.
The Sedona Conference,
Commentary on Achieving Quality in the E-Discovery Process
Federal Court of Australia Act
Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration,
AIJA Discovery Seminar
(2007) <www.aija.org
.au> at 8 November 2010.
Federal Rules of Civil
(US), r 53(a)(1).
Ibid, r 53(b)(2).
Ibid, r 53(g)(2).
Ibid, r 53(c)(1).
Ibid, r 53(c)(2).
Ibid, r 53(f)(1), (f)(2).
Ibid, r 53(f)(3).
Ibid, r 53(f)(4).
Ibid, r 53(f)(5).
Ibid, r 53; M Fellows,
‘Federal Court Special Masters: A Vital Resource in the Era of Complex
Litigation’
William Mitchell Law Review
M Fellows, ‘Federal Court
Special Masters: A Vital Resource in the Era of Complex Litigation’
William Mitchell Law Review
, 1280. See also ‘Special
Masters Conference: Transcript of Proceedings’ (2005) 31
Mitchell Law Review
1193, 1220–1221 (transcript of a conference where
special masters discuss the difference between working in an
‘adjudicative’
or ‘settling’ role and the role of
‘managing the case’).
Ibid, 1282.
Ibid, 1283.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 219.
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, Annexure E.
Federal Rules of Civil
(US), r 53(c)(2).
Ibid, r 53(f)(2).
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, Annexure E, Rule 6(2).
Ibid, Annexure E, Rule 1(1).
Ibid, Annexure E, r 6(5).
Ibid, Annexure E, r 6(3), (4).
Ibid, Annexure E, r 7(2).
Federal Court of Australia Act
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 3 December 2008, 12296
(R McClelland—Attorney-General), 12296.
Ibid, 12296.
Federal Court Rules
Ibid, O 72A r 5.
Federal Court of Australia Act
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the
and Related Legislation
, Report 92 (2001).
S Ratnapala,
Constitutional Law: Foundations and Theory
(2002), 120.
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
193 CLR 173.
, [70]. See also
Huddart Parker & Co v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [41].
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 470.
S Scheindlin and J Redgrave,
‘Special Masters and E-Discovery: The Intersection of Two Recent Revisions
to the Federal Rules
of Civil Procedure’
Cardozo Law Review
Explanatory Memorandum, Federal
Justice System Amendment (Efficiency Measures) Bill (No 1) 2009 (Cth).
Federal Court Rules (Cth)
72A r 7(7).
S Scheindlin, ‘We Need Help:
The Increasing Use of Special Masters in Federal Courts’
DePaul Law Review
Re Seroquel Products Liability
(Unreported, M.D. Fla., 5 October 2007), O 1.
S Scheindlin, ‘We Need Help:
The Increasing Use of Special Masters in Federal Courts’
DePaul Law Review
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 470.
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [40].
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 470.
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australia, [37].
Federal Court of Australia,
Individual Docket System
<www.fedcourt.gov.au/> at 20 October
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice
, Report 89 (2000), [7.181].
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 470.
Section 37P
Federal Court
of Australia Act
was enacted by the
Access to Justice (Civil Litigation
Reforms) Amendment Act 2009
Explanatory Memorandum,
Justice (Civil Litigation Reforms) Amendment Bill 2009
Federal Court of Australia Act
s 37P(3)(a)
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 471.
Civil Procedure Act 2010
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 473.
Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration,
AIJA Discovery Seminar
(2007) <www.aija.org.au/> at
8 November 2010.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department Access to Justice Taskforce,
A Strategic Framework for
Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
(2009), Rec 8.3.
A Cannon, ‘Discovery Show and
Tell Notes’ (Paper presented at AIJA Discovery Seminar, Melbourne, 24
August 2007).
Trade Practices Commission v
[1992] FCA 523
(1992) 38 FCR 382.
P Heerey, ‘Some Lessons from
Santos’ (1994) 29
Australian Lawyer
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), ch 6, 473.
Ibid, Rec 90.
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Legal Profession Act
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic) Pt 3.4, Div
Legal Profession Act 2008 (WA)
Pt 10, Div 8;
Legal Profession Act
(ACT) Div 3.2.7;
Legal Profession Act 2006
Federal Court Rules
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department Access to Justice Taskforce,
A Strategic
Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Final Report
(2009), Rec 4.1(i).
National Judicial Conference of
National Judicial Orientation Program
(2010), Session 13B.
Report: A Curriculum
for Professional Development for Australian Judicial Officers
prepared for the National Judicial College of Australia, Program 2.1.
Ibid, Program 2.1.
Ibid, Module 7.
R Finkelstein,
Discovery Reform:
Options and Implementation
(2008), prepared for the Federal Court of
Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration,
AIJA Law & Technology Conference 2008 [Program]
<www.aija.org.au/> at 8 November 2010.
Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration,
AIJA Discovery Seminar
(2007) <www.aija.
org.au/> at 8 November 2010.
ALRC CP2 Discovery in Federal Courts
4. Ensuring Professional Integrity: Ethical Obligations and Discovery
Introduction
Legal ethical obligations
Sources of legal ethical obligations
General law
Statute and delegated legislation
Professional rules
Legal ethical obligations, misconduct and discovery
‘Trolley load litigation’ and defensive legal practice
Withholding documents—misleading conduct
Other issues
Disciplinary structures and court imposed sanctions
The National Legal Services Board and National Legal Ombudsman
State and territory disciplinary structures
Court-imposed sanctions
Legal ethical obligations, misconduct and discovery: issues arising
Lack of awareness and the broad nature of legal ethical obligations
Narrow application of legal ethical obligations
Difficulties in enforcement and responding to misconduct
Legal education
Academic qualifications
Practical legal training
Continuing legal education
Guidance from legal professional associations
Legal education: issues arising
ALRC’s views
4. Ensuring Professional Integrity: Ethical
Obligations and Discovery
Introduction
4.1 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry direct the ALRC to inquire into
and report on, among other things, ‘the law, practice
and management of
discovery of documents in litigation before federal courts’ and the
questions of the overuse and expense
The Terms of Reference
also direct the ALRC to have regard to ‘the sufficiency, clarity and
enforceability of obligations on
practitioners and parties to identify relevant
material as part of the discovery process as early as possible’. The
and professional obligations of lawyers, and how these obligations are
exercised in practice, directly concern the practice and management
of discovery
of documents in litigation before federal courts. Such obligations have a role
to play in limiting the overuse, and
reducing the cost, of discovery.
Accordingly, this chapter considers the ethical and professional obligations of
lawyers in the context
of discovery.
4.2 The first part of this chapter outlines the key sources of legal ethical
obligations in Australia and provides an illustrative
overview of the nature and
extent of several key forms of potential discovery abuse and misconduct,
including identifying the key
legal ethical obligations such conduct may
contravene. It also outlines the current professional and court imposed
disciplinary structures
and mechanisms in place to enforce those obligations.
4.3 The second part discusses the overarching issues that arise with respect
to legal ethical obligations and misconduct in the context
of discovery,
including: lack of awareness about, and the broad nature of, legal ethical
obligations; the limited application of
such obligations; and difficulties in
enforcement. This part also includes a brief examination of the role and nature
of legal obligations
in a changing legal environment, in particular in the
context of electronic discovery and the applicability of obligations outside
traditional courtroom processes.
4.4 The final part of the chapter examines existing educational requirements
in relation to the legal ethical obligations owed by
lawyers and proposes a new
approach to the education of lawyers in this area.
Legal ethical
obligations
4.5 The preceding chapters discuss legal obligations imposed on parties to
litigation by disclosure requirements or court orders for
discovery, procedures
prescribed to determine the extent of those discovery obligations, and the
practices employed to discharge
4.6 At the same time, lawyers owe a series of concurrent legal ethical
obligations to the administration of justice, including the
court, their clients
and other lawyers. This framework of legal ethical obligations may be
characterised as a ‘duty
and is the focus of
this chapter.
4.7 The ethical and legal rules relating to discovery practice are not
mutually exclusive, and the ‘ethical’ rules are
no less important
than the ‘legal’ rules. As Professor Gino Dal Pont has
the phrase ‘legal ethics’... is an oxymoron to the extent that
‘legal’ implies mandatory laws, whereas ‘ethics’
many connotes discretionary rules. In this latter sense, some use the term
‘ethics’ to distinguish rules that are
professionally binding on a
lawyer (ethical rules) from rules that are legally binding (legal rules). But
such a practice conveys
the incorrect impression that the ethical and legal
rules are mutually exclusive, and that legal rules are more important than
4.8 To reflect this, the ALRC refers to the duties discussed in
this chapter as ‘legal ethical obligations’. That said,
distinction can be useful, and so this chapter considers the more general
professional and ethical duties placed on lawyers—duties
or rules over and
above those specifically developed to govern discovery practice. These ethical
duties—and crucially, the
enforcement mechanisms—are also more
clearly directed to lawyers, as opposed to other parties, than the other legal
rules discussed
4.9 The nature and practical effect of these obligations on the behaviour of
legal practitioners has evolved over time, which in part
reflects the
increasingly diverse practice of law and the evolution of the Australian legal
system. For example, the growth of in-house
legal counsel; the public listing of
law firms; the rise of multidisciplinary firms; and the increasing role played
by litigation
funders may be seen to have ‘muddied’ the legal
ethical waters.
Sources of legal ethical
obligations
4.10 In Australia, the key sources of lawyers’ professional
responsibilities are general law, statute and professional rules—sometimes
collectively referred to as the ‘law of
lawyering’.
4.11 As outlined above, the focus of this Inquiry is on discovery in the
context of the federal civil justice system. However, to
the extent that lawyers
practising in the federal system are subject to regulation at a state and
territory level, this chapter necessarily
considers sources of obligations under
state and territory legislation and professional
4.12 Of particular relevance in this context is that, in early 2009 the
Council of Australian Governments (COAG) embarked on a project
to nationalise
regulation of the legal profession in Australia, referred to as the National
Legal Profession Reform Project. At the
request of COAG, the Australian
Government Attorney-General established a taskforce (the Taskforce) to consider
options for the establishment
of a ‘national legal profession and national
regulatory framework, while retaining State and Territory involvement and
by professional
associations’.
In April 2010
a consultation package was released, which included a draft
Legal Profession
National Law
(Draft National Law) and accompanying draft
Legal Profession
National Rules
(Draft National
At the time of writing a
three-month public consultation period on the consultation package had closed
and the Taskforce was considering
submissions received.
4.13 While the obligations articulated and imposed by substantive legislation
and rules provide an important framework on a professional
level, the ethical
practice of law also involves lawyers deciding ‘on a personal level ...
what the rules mean, how to obey
them [and] what to do when there are gaps or
conflicts in the rules’.
issue is addressed further with respect to approaches to the education of
lawyers about legal ethical obligations.
General law
4.14 General law—in particular the law of contract, torts and
equity—governs ‘most incidents of lawyers’ relationships
their clients, the court and third
For example, a
lawyer’s duty to their client arises in the context of the
lawyer–client relationship, which is essentially
a contractual
relationship. Also arising in the context of that relationship is the
lawyer’s duty of care arising in tort and
of confidentiality arising in
4.15 Further, while statute and rules largely govern the discovery process,
‘the substantive right to discovery still exists
as a principle of equity
... and recourse is had to equity where the rules are
4.16 However, to the extent that the key obligations relevant to the
discovery context arise from statute and professional rules,
the focus of this
chapter is on those sources of legal ethical obligations, rather than general
law duties.
Statute and delegated
legislation
4.17 There are several statutory sources of legal ethical obligations in
Australia, including: the legal profession and civil procedure
legislation in
each jurisdiction; model laws; and other specific pieces of legislation.
4.18 The legal profession legislation in each jurisdiction outlines general
requirements for engaging in legal practice and obligations
with respect to
trust accounting and costs, as well as establishing regulatory bodies and
processes for handling complaints against,
and the discipline of, practitioners
in the jurisdiction.
4.19 The basis for legal profession legislation in all jurisdictions, except
South Australia, is the
Legal Profession Model Laws
Project Model Provisions
(Model Laws), developed by the Standing Committee
of Attorneys-General (SCAG), with the Law Council of Australia (Law
The Model Laws were
initially released in 2004 and revised in July 2006.
4.20 In February 2006, SCAG also released the
Legal Profession Model Laws
Project Model Regulations
(Model Regulations), a revised edition of which
was released in June 2007.
4.21 The core provisions of the Model Laws and the Model Regulations that are
of relevance to this Inquiry relate to standards for
legal education,
definitions of misconduct, costs disclosures and the regulation of legal
4.22 In addition, as part of the National Legal Profession Reform Project,
COAG, with the support of the Australian Government Attorney-General,
the Draft National Law and accompanying Draft National Rules. The Draft National
Law encompasses those areas currently dealt
with in legal profession legislation
in each jurisdiction.
4.23 There is also civil procedure legislation in some jurisdictions which
regulates the conduct of participants in civil litigation
and includes several
provisions of relevance to the discovery
For example, the
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) implemented a series of recommendations
from the Victorian Law Reform Commission’s (VLRC)
Civil Justice
to improve the standard of conduct of participants in civil
litigation and reduce costs and delay, including several measures applicable
Of particular
relevance to this Inquiry are the ‘overarching
obligations’—the content and effect of which are discussed
this chapter— imposed by the
Civil Procedure Act
on all parties to
litigation and their legal representatives.
4.24 The statutory sources of legal ethical obligations outlined above are
augmented by obligations—both legal and ethical—imposed
specific pieces of legislation. These are discussed in this chapter only to the
extent that they impose legal ethical obligations,
rather than practice-directed
obligations. For example, these include:
• the obligation to
and assist their clients to
consistently with the
overarching purpose of the
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
There is a similar
obligation under various other pieces of
legislation;
• the obligation not to proceed unless there are reasonable prospects
of success under legislation introduced to consolidate
tort law and procedural
changes in civil actions to encourage quicker and cheaper resolution of civil
4.25 Finally, the
Legal Services Directions 2005
(Cth) are a set of
binding rules issued under
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) by the
Attorney-General about the performance of legal work for the Commonwealth. The
Legal Services Directions
were first issued in 1999 and were revised and
reissued in 2005 as a statutory instrument. Appendix B of the
Legal Services
outlines the obligation of the Commonwealth and its
agencies—and by extension, lawyers working for the Australian
Government—to
behave as model litigants in the conduct of
litigation.
Professional rules
4.26 In Australia, the legal profession is essentially regulated on a state
and territory basis. Traditionally, the legal profession
was divided into
solicitors and barristers. In many jurisdictions, the profession is now
combined—either formally, or in practice.
For most purposes, however,
solicitors and barristers are regulated separately by professional bodies such
as law societies and bar
associations. Legal profession rules are binding on
Australian legal practitioners and Australian-registered foreign lawyers to whom
4.27 As is the case with legal profession legislation, while there are no
national professional conduct rules in force, the professional
conduct rules
that apply to Australian legal practitioners are now largely uniform. Most
of the Law Council’s
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
developed in
4.28 In line with a recommendation made by the ALRC in
Justice—A Review of the Federal Civil Justice System
(ALRC Report
and as part of the COAG
National Legal Profession Reform Project, the Law Council and the Australian Bar
Association (ABA) respectively
have developed the
Legal Profession National
Rules: Solicitors’ Rules 2010
(Draft National Solicitors’ Rules)
Legal Profession National Rules: Barristers’ Rules 2010
National Barristers’
At the time of
writing, public consultation on these rules had closed and the Law Council and
ABA were considering submissions received.
Legal ethical
obligations, misconduct and discovery
4.29 In ALRC Report 89, the ALRC commented that: ‘in almost all studies
of litigation, discovery is singled out as the procedure
most open to abuse, the
most costly and the most in need of court supervision and
An overarching concern is that discovery may be used as a tactical tool to
exhaust the resources of the other party or encourage
settlement.
4.30 As indicated throughout this Consultation Paper, the primary concerns
with regard to the discovery process in Australia centre
on expense, scale and
4.31 While the ALRC is not aware of any evidence of chronic abuse or
misconduct arising in relation to discovery, allegations of misconduct
in the context of discovery concern the following issues: charging unreasonable
costs; making unnecessarily broad discovery
requests or flooding the other party
with voluminous irrelevant documents; withholding relevant documents; and
4.32 These concerns are examined below against the backdrop of legal ethical
obligations owed by lawyers to the administration of
justice, including to the
court, the client, other lawyers and third parties. Potentially, there is a
range of other forms of discovery
abuse that may occur, encompassing ethically
objectionable practices ranging from discourtesy to harassment, however this
is illustrative and is not intended to provide an exhaustive overview
of the ways in which discovery abuse may conflict with legal
obligations.
4.33 The ALRC notes that the challenge in this Inquiry is to disentangle
issues arising from perceptions of abuse, from those of valid
practice, to
assess what should be appropriate responses to actual instances of misconduct.
‘Trolley load litigation’ and defensive
legal practice
4.34 On admission to practice, lawyers become
officers of the court. Accordingly, lawyers owe an overriding duty to the court
prevails over all other duties, including the duty to the client. The
preamble to the Advocacy and Litigation Rules, contained within
the Model Rules,
relevantly states:
Practitioners, in all their dealings with the courts, whether those dealings
involve the obtaining and presentation of evidence [or]
the preparation and
filing of documents ... should act with competence, honesty and candour.
Practitioners should be frank in their
responses and disclosures to the court,
and diligent in their observance of undertakings which they give to the court or
Model Rules also incorporate an expression of the general standard of conduct
expected of practitioners:
A practitioner must not engage in conduct, whether in the course of practice or
otherwise, which is:
... calculated, or likely to a material degree, to:
(a) be prejudicial to the administration of justice;
(b) diminish public confidence in the administration of
4.36 Despite
this duty to the administration of justice and, in particular, to the court, in
initial consultations the ALRC heard
concerns about what has been referred to as
‘trolley load litigation’, ‘trial by avalanche’, or
4.37 These practices essentially involve lawyers providing the opponent with
vast numbers of documents.
Former Chief Justice Black of the Federal Court has observed the need to
avoid having trolley loads of documents being wheeled into court when hardly any
of them are likely to be referred to and when every
page will add to the cost of
the litigation.
4.38 There are many reasons put forward to explain the
phenomenon of trolley load litigation. First, it might be argued that the
of vast numbers of documents is simply a consequence of the
exponential growth in documents in the wake of computer technology; secondly,
the adversarial nature of the system and attempts by lawyers to do what is seen
to be in the best interests of their client; thirdly,
an attempt to ‘wear
down’ the other party; and finally, where the scope of required discovery
is unclear, in order to
avoid disciplinary action for professional misconduct if
documents are withheld.
Legal rules
4.39 Legislation and court
rules increasingly contain an overarching purpose to facilitate the ‘just
resolution of disputes’,
‘according to law’ ‘as quickly,
inexpensively and efficiently as
expressly stated, lawyers applying due diligence to reduce the volume of
potentially discoverable documents to those directly
relevant to the proceeding
is clearly consistent with such purposes. Accordingly, practices such as trolley
load litigation may constitute
a breach of the duty to conduct proceedings in a
way which is consistent with those overarching
Legal ethical obligations
Duty to the administration of justice and the
4.40 Practices such as trolley load litigation may be inconsistent with the
legal ethical obligations owed by lawyers to the court
and the administration of
justice. More specifically they raise issues with respect to:
• the duty of fairness, in particular not to abuse court processes
(discussed in more detail in relation to misconduct involving
unreasonable
expense and delay);
• the duty to narrow the issues in dispute and identify relevant
material and thereby reduce the volume of potentially discoverable
• the obligation of lawyers to appraise the case and exercise personal
judgment about the existence and relevance of documents
proceedings.
Duty to the client
4.41 The lawyer’s duty to the client forms another important aspect of
the ‘duty matrix’ and arises in the context
lawyer–client relationship, the basis of which is the
‘retainer’. As a result, the duty to the client arises
under general
law (in particular contract, torts and equity) as well as relevant legislation
and professional rules.
4.42 For example, while the retainer is contractual in nature, the
relationship is also fiduciary and, accordingly, lawyers owe a
duty of care to
exercise reasonable competency and skill in the conduct of the client’s
4.43 In a general sense, the Model Rules articulate a lawyer’s duty to
the client. The preamble to the ‘Relations with
Clients’ section
Practitioners should serve their clients competently and diligently. They should
be acutely aware of the fiduciary nature of their
relationship with their
clients, and always deal with their clients fairly, free of the influence of any
interest which may conflict
with a client's best interests ... Practitioners
should not, in the service of their clients, engage in, or assist, conduct that
is calculated to defeat the ends of justice or is otherwise in breach of the
specifically, the Model Rules provide that a practitioner must
seek to assist the client to understand the issues in the case and the
client’s possible rights and obligations, if the practitioner
instructed to give advice on any such matter, sufficiently to permit the client
to give proper instructions.
4.45 Accordingly, a lawyer’s duty to the client
encompasses a duty to advise, that is subject to the overriding duty to the
court. The duty requires that, for example, lawyers advise their clients about
the purposes of discovery, their rights and obligations
with respect to the
discovery process, and which documents are relevant for the purposes of
4.46 Judicial discussion of the duty has emphasised the obligation to take
positive steps to ensure that clients are aware of the
and to take
responsibility for ensuring that clients comply with those duties. While not
specifically articulated in the professional
rules, other cases have also
suggested that lawyers have an obligation to work with clients to understand and
interrogate document
management systems in order to satisfy discovery search
obligations.
4.47 In the preceding chapter, the ALRC proposed greater judicial control
over the discovery process, including in relation to the
scope of discoverable
documents. Even where the scope of discovery is more strictly controlled,
however, the role of lawyers and
parties to litigation in making decisions about
how much to disclose, and at what stage, remains of central importance in
to address the expense, scale and delay currently associated with
4.48 For example, lawyers and their clients still face decisions about which
documents to discover where they are aware of documents
that fall within the
scope of a request or order but that are not substantially relevant to the
issues in dispute and where disclosure
will only burden their opponent with the
task of vetting useless material.
Question 4–1
In practice, how do lawyers make decisions about
whether to discover a document which falls within the scope of a discovery
or order, but that is not substantially relevant to the issues in
Withholding
documents—misleading conduct
4.49 The duty to act with candour, including not to mislead the court, is
articulated in legislation and professional rules, and reflects
the position at
common law. The duty—both proscriptive and prescriptive—is a central
obligation owed by lawyers and necessarily
has general application to the
conduct of matters by lawyers.
4.50 However, in the context of discovery it also has application to the
extent that in some instances, parties do not provide adequate
discovery through
failing to disclose the existence of relevant documents, or by destroying
4.51 Under professional rules, lawyers must not knowingly make—either
in oral or written submissions—‘a misleading
statement to a
court’, ‘a false statement to the opponent in relation to the
case’, or ‘deceive or knowingly
or recklessly mislead the
court’; and they have an obligation to correct any misleading
statements.
4.52 This duty encompasses an obligation not to mislead the court with
respect to the facts of the case or to misinterpret the law,
to be aware of the
applicable rules and procedure as well as to draw the court’s attention to
authorities which support or
act against their client’s
4.53 The Model Rules incorporate an expression of the general standard of
conduct expected of practitioners, providing that ‘a
practitioner must not
engage in conduct, whether in the course of practice or otherwise, which is ...
dishonest’.
4.54 Specific legislative articulations of the duty of candour are broad,
often included within the scope of overarching obligations.
For example, the
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) contains overarching obligations including
to act honestly.
4.55 In the context of discovery, such an obligation is likely to arise most
frequently where lawyers and their clients are making
decisions about which
documents falls within the terms of a discovery request or order, particularly
where those decisions lead to
a failure to discover relevant documents.
4.56 Such decisions raise a dilemma which lawyers often need to consider,
that is where their obligation to their client and the duty
to the court may
come into conflict.
Question 4–2
In practice, how do lawyers make decisions about
whether to discover relevant documents that may potentially fall outside the
of a discovery request or order?
4.57 As outlined above, there is increasing legislative articulation of the
duty owed by lawyers to facilitate the just, quick, efficient
and inexpensive
resolution of proceedings.
many respects, these legislative articulations reflect judicial criticism of
practitioner conduct causing unreasonable expense
or delay. For example, in
White Industries (Qld) Pty Ltd v Flower & Hart,
Goldberg J of the
Federal Court made the following comments:
The time has passed when obstructionist and delaying tactics on the part of
parties to proceedings in the court can be countenanced
by the court ... It is
not proper ... to adopt a positive or assertive obstructionist or delaying
strategy which is not in the interests
of justice and inhibits the court from
achieving an expeditious and timely resolution of a dispute. Court resources are
so are the resources of most litigants and the court should not
countenance a deliberate strategy of obstruction and delay. If a
party instructs
its legal advisers to adopt such a strategy the legal adviser should inform the
party that it is not proper to do
so and if the party insists, then the legal
adviser should withdraw from acting for that
respect to delay, the Model Rules provide that:
A practitioner will not have breached the practitioner's duty to the client ...
simply by choosing ... to exercise the forensic judgments
called for during the
case so as to ... present the client’s case as quickly and simply as may
be consistent with its robust
advancement.
Draft National Laws impose an obligation on law practices to ‘act
reasonably to avoid unnecessary delay’ where
it results in increased legal
4.60 Under the National Barristers’ Rules, barristers are required to
complete work in sufficient time in order to comply with
orders, directions,
rules or practice notes of the
4.61 In Victoria, Western Australia and Tasmania, the professional rules make
specific reference to the duty of practitioners to use
their best endeavours to
‘complete legal work as soon as reasonably
unnecessary expense and waste of the court’s
and ‘complete
a client’s business within a reasonable
4.62 In NSW, both the
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
Barristers’ Rules
require lawyers to complete work in sufficient
time in order to comply with court rules and
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) contains overarching
obligations, including the specific obligation to ‘disclose the existence
of documents which the
person reasonably considers are critical to the
proceedings, at the earliest possible time after becoming aware of their
existence’.
4.64 Delay may arise in part as a result of other forms of alleged discovery
abuse, for example, where trolley load litigation delays
proceedings while
parties examine large volumes of discovered documents. However, delay itself may
also constitute a form of discovery
abuse that contravenes lawyers’ legal
ethical obligations.
4.65 Commentators and stakeholders have indicated that the primary causes and
means of delay in the context of discovery in Australia
• the failure to disclose the existence of documents at the earliest
possible time;
• delay in responding to requests or orders for discovery;
• delay arising as a result of parties questioning the scope of
discovery requests or orders; and
• other forms of satellite litigation about matters such as the
assertion of legal professional privilege over
4.66 Delay is an area in which there is considerable overlap in regulation
between legal and ethical rules. For example, under legal
rules there is a duty
to complete work in sufficient time to comply with court timetables and to act
consistently with the overarching
purpose of specific legislation. Accordingly,
where the conduct of lawyers or other parties unduly delays the discovery
the progress of litigation more broadly, such conduct is in breach of
legal rules and lawyers may be subject to personal costs orders,
an enforcement
mechanism discussed later in this
Question 4–3
Is discovery used as a delaying strategy in
litigation before federal courts? If so, how and to what extent?
4.67 The Terms of Reference note the ‘high and often disproportionate
cost of discovery’. Complaints made to legal service
disciplinary bodies commonly relate, at least in part, to legal costs.
4.68 In the context of discovery, the ALRC has heard that there are two
primary forms of cost-related complaint that contribute to
the concern that
discovery may be used as a ‘profit centre’. These are: using
discovery as a tactical tool to increase
legal costs and thus exhaust the
resources of the other party; and charging excessive costs for work performed,
including for work
performed at a certain level.
4.69 Chief Justice Spigelman of the NSW Supreme Court has noted that the
difficulty with legal costs is that a lawyer ‘does
not have a financial
incentive’ to complete the legal work as quickly as possible. However, he
argues, ‘the control is
of course, the practitioner’s sense of
professional
responsibility’.
4.70 Under legal profession legislation in most jurisdictions, once retained
in a matter, lawyers are under various obligations to
provide to the client a
written disclosure of costs, including an estimate which outlines the possible
contingencies that may affect
that estimate and which details the way in which
costs are calculated.
4.71 Existing legal professional legislation does not require that lawyers
charge their clients reasonable fees. In many jurisdictions
only where there is
no costs agreement or applicable scale of costs are legal costs recoverable
according to the ‘fair and
reasonable value of the legal services
mandatory criteria included for determining what is fair and reasonable only
apply to costs assessors making a costs
assessment.
4.72 However, under the Draft National Laws, a law practice would be under an
obligation not to charge more than fair and reasonable
Legal costs would be
considered fair and reasonable if they:
(a) are reasonably incurred and are reasonable in amount; and
(b) are proportionate in amount to the importance and complexity of the issues
involved in a matter, the amount or value involved
in a matter, and whether the
matter involved a matter of public interest; and
(c) reasonably reflect the level of skill, experience, specialisation and
seniority of the lawyers concerned; and
(d) conform to any applicable requirements of this Part, the National Rules
and fixed costs legislative
provisions.
4.73 The Draft National Laws also impose an obligation on law
practices to avoid increased legal costs. Specifically, a ‘law
must not act in a way that unnecessarily results in increased legal costs
payable by a client, and in particular must act
reasonably to avoid unnecessary
delay resulting in increased legal
4.74 Generally professional rules do not explicitly require that lawyers
charge their clients reasonable fees. However, jurisdictions
vary in relation to
the obligations owed by lawyers with respect to costs. For example, under the
draft professional conduct rules
in Western Australia
a practitioner may only charge costs which are no more than is reasonable for
the practitioner’s services having regard to
the complexity of the matter,
the time and skill involved, any scale of costs that might be applicable and any
agreement as to costs
between the practitioner and the
Queensland, commentary included in the professional rules states that, in
agreeing to act for a client, a lawyer ‘should
not take steps or perform
work in such a manner as to unnecessarily increase costs to the
4.76 In South Australia, the professional rules provide that in relation to
contingency fees:
A practitioner or firm of practitioners shall not charge fees which are unfair
or unreasonable or enter into a costs agreement the
terms of which are unfair or
unreasonable.
considering whether the fees or the terms of a cost agreement are unfair or
unreasonable there is a range of factors to which
regard is had. These include:
the nature of the matter; the amount at stake; jurisdiction; the client; and the
experience and reputation
4.78 The overarching obligations of the
Civil Procedure Act 2010
also include the obligation to ensure that costs are reasonable and
proportionate.
4.79 As discussed in Chapter 3, the often high cost of discovery is sometimes
attributed to the array of junior solicitors, law clerks
and paralegals who may
work through a request for discovery of documents. Abuse of discovery through
the use of non-legally qualified
‘paralegals to perform tasks which
progress the matter which are billed as if they involve the exercise of legal
is alleged.
4.80 Submissions to the VLRC
Civil Justice Review
, including
submissions by the Victorian Bar, suggested that there is a culture in the
Australian legal system of leaving no stone
unturned, and continually searching
for the ‘smoking
However, where such
approaches result in gross or excessive overcharging, such conduct may
constitute professional misconduct under
legal profession legislation.
Legislation across jurisdictions provides that professional misconduct includes
‘charging of
excessive legal costs in connection with the practice of
4.81 Courts also have jurisdiction to supervise legal costs charged by
lawyers to their clients, as well as to supervise the ethical
conduct of lawyers
in this respect.
4.82 The vexed question is deciding what is undue or excessive with respect
to costs. The focus of this Inquiry is on proposing steps
which may assist in
preventing such questions arising.
Question 4–4
Is discovery used to increase legal costs
unnecessarily, either for the profit of law firms, to exhaust the resources of
parties, or for any other reason? If so, how, to what extent, and for
what reasons?
Other issues
Delegation and outsourcing
4.83 In consultations, stakeholders expressed their concern about the
practice of delegating responsibility for reviewing and categorising
relevant to the discovery process to junior lawyers and paralegals and having
more senior lawyers check only a small sample
of documents and potentially not
providing adequate supervision.
4.84 A similar concern was also raised with respect to the increasing
practice of outsourcing this type of discovery work overseas,
utilising lower
labour costs as a means of reducing the costs of working through discovery
requests and retrieving electronic data.
4.85 In consultations, it was suggested that a further issue arising from
delegation and outsourcing is the extent to which such practices
duplication. Specifically such duplication may arise where a senior lawyer
re-does the work completed by a more junior lawyer
or paralegal, in part in
order to ensure they comply with their legal ethical and professional
obligations.
4.86 The ALRC is interested in hearing from stakeholders about the potential
impact such practices may have on ensuring that lawyers
comply with their legal
ethical and professional obligations.
Question 4–5
How does delegation of responsibility for reviewing
and categorising documents relevant to the discovery process affect the practice
of discovery in litigation before federal courts?
Question 4–6
How does outsourcing discovery overseas affect the
practice, including the cost and efficiency, of discovery in litigation before
federal courts?
Preservation or destruction of documents
4.87 The case of
McCabe v British American Tobacco Australia Services
overturned on appeal in
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v
illustrates
the tension in practice between appropriate and legitimate destruction of
documents in accordance with a document management
system, and the deliberate
destruction of documents aimed at removing ‘documents from the
Professor Peta Spender has commented,
although a good document management policy may involve the destruction of
documents, at some point the routine destruction of corporate
documents rises to
the level of spoliation of evidence. The trick is to determine at what point
this convergence takes place.
4.88 In light of the tensions revealed by such litigation,
articulations of this duty were introduced in two jurisdictions. In NSW,
Legal Profession Regulations
provide that lawyers must not advise clients
to destroy, or be a party to the destruction of documents that are of relevance
or anticipated litigation, contravention of which amounts to
professional misconduct. The regulations state:
177 Advice on and handling of documents
(1) An Australian legal practitioner must not give advice to a client to
the effect that a document should be destroyed, or should
be moved from the
place at which it is kept or from the person who has possession or control of
it, if the practitioner is aware
(a) it is likely that legal proceedings will be commenced in relation to which
the document may be required, and
(b) following the advice will result in the document being unavailable or
unusable for the purposes of those proceedings.
(2) An Australian legal practitioner must not destroy a document or move
it from the place at which it is kept or from the person
who has possession or
control of it, or aid or abet a person in the destruction of a document or in
moving it from the place at which
it is kept or from the person who has
possession or control of it, if legal practitioner is aware that:
(a) it is likely that legal proceedings will be commenced in relation to
which the document may be required, and
(b) the destruction or moving of the document will result in the document
being unavailable or unusable for the purposes of those
proceedings.
4.89 Following
the wrongful destruction of documents was inserted as an offence
Crimes Act 1958
4.90 In the United States (US), the duty to preserve documents of potential
relevance to anticipated litigation—particularly
in the context of
electronically stored information—has led to the development of what is
referred to as a ‘legal hold’.
Legal holds are implemented by
interrupting a company’s ordinary document management system—which,
for example, might
delete emails after 30 days—to ensure relevant material
is preserved.
The expectation of
US courts is that lawyers should be actively involved in the implementation of a
legal hold, including taking
‘affirmative steps’ to ensure the hold
is being correctly implemented.
Question 4–7
Are relevant and discoverable documents wrongfully
destroyed in anticipation, or in the course, of litigation before federal
If so, how, by whom, and to what extent? If this occurs, are the current
provisions in New South Wales and Victoria effectively addressing
this problem?
4.91 Overall, it is possible to discuss the nature of discovery abuse in a
general sense, and to examine some select examples of such
abuse. However, the
actual nature and extent of discovery abuse in Australia remains unclear. In the
course of this Inquiry stakeholders
have expressed differing views as to the
extent of alleged abuse by lawyers in the context of discovery. In light of
this, the ALRC
welcomes further submissions on this issue—and particularly
destruction.
Question 4–8
Is the discovery process deliberately abused by
lawyers working in litigation before federal courts? If so, how and to what
Disciplinary structures
and court imposed sanctions
4.92 Practitioner obligations arise largely from jurisdiction-specific
legislation or professional rules. Consequently, misconduct
and breaches of
legal ethical obligations by lawyers are largely dealt with by law societies or
committees and bodies such as the
legal services commissions or boards and the
ombudsman in each jurisdiction.
4.93 Significant reform, including to disciplinary structures, the ability of
consumers of legal services to be involved in the complaints
process, and the
range of sanctions available, has occurred across jurisdictions in recent
4.94 Following the implementation of the Model Laws, misconduct is primarily
characterised as ‘professional misconduct’
or ‘unsatisfactory
professional conduct’, other than in South Australia where the distinction
is made between ‘unsatisfactory
conduct’ and ‘unprofessional
4.95 Professional misconduct at common law is conduct by a lawyer in their
‘professional capacity which would be reasonably
regarded as disgraceful
or dishonourable by [the lawyer’s] professional brethren of good repute
and competency’.
4.96 While professional misconduct is also defined under legal profession
legislation, the statutory concepts are ‘neither exhaustive
nor intended
to restrict the meaning and application of misconduct at common
Under the legal
profession legislation, professional misconduct includes:
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
where the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner whether occurring in
connection with the practice of law or occurring otherwise
than in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and
proper person to engage in legal
4.97 Unsatisfactory professional conduct includes:
Conduct of an Australian legal practitioner occurring in connection with the
practice of law that falls short of the standard of
competence and diligence
that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonable competent
Australian legal practitioner.
4.98 Traditionally, other forms of constraining the conduct of
lawyers, for example liability under general law to clients for breach
duty of competence, care and skill, have complemented, and in some instances
acted as an alternative, to the regulatory framework
provided by the courts and
professional bodies.
consideration of those more general mechanisms for enforcing a lawyer’s
duty to the client are a matter for individual
clients and the ALRC’s
focus in this part of the chapter is in on systemic mechanisms for responding to
alleged breaches of
legal ethical obligations.
The National Legal Services Board and National
Legal Ombudsman
4.99 As part of the National
Legal Profession Reform Project, the Australian Government has proposed a new
national framework to regulate
the profession.
4.100 The proposed regulatory framework consists of a National Legal Services
Board (the Board) and a National Legal Ombudsman (the
Ombudsman). These bodies
would ‘operate within a delegated model, with many of the functions of the
national bodies to be performed
in practice by local
representatives’.
many of the functions of Board and Ombudsman would be delegable, the bodies
would be responsible for monitoring of the functions
and where necessary could
assume control over special
4.101 The Board would be responsible for making National Rules to give effect
to the National Law, except with respect to rules governing
legal practice,
conduct and continuing professional
development.
These rules would
be developed by the Law Council and ABA, subject to approval by the
4.102 The Ombudsman would be established as an independent body responsible
for determining complaints about practitioners, ensuring
compliance with the
National Law and National Rules and serving an educative
4.103 The Ombudsman’s compliance role would encompass prosecution of
practitioner misconduct
powers to undertake complaint, audit and compliance
investigations
and a role in
administering the penalties regime envisaged under the National Law. Failure to
comply with the National Law or National
Rules would be capable of constituting
unprofessional conduct or professional
misconduct.
4.104 In cases of unprofessional conduct or professional misconduct the
Ombudsman may impose the following possible sanctions:
• caution or reprimand a practitioner;
• require an apology from the practitioner;
• order the practitioner to attend training;
• impose conditions on a practising certificate;
• order the work to be redone; or
• fine the practitioner (up to
4.105 The Ombudsman may also initiate proceedings in the designated
disciplinary tribunal of the relevant jurisdiction. The designated
tribunal’s powers include: the power to make orders requiring the
practitioner to do or refrain from doing something in connection
practice of law; the ability to recommend that the practitioner be removed from
the roll; and the power to have the practitioner’s
practising certificate
State and territory disciplinary
4.106 Legal professional disciplinary structures and processes vary across
as part of the
National Legal Profession Reform Project.
4.107 Currently, complaints about the conduct of practitioners can be made by
a number of parties and are lodged with a central legal
services commission, a
practitioner’s complaints committee or conduct board, or the relevant law
4.108 Generally, it is then open to the relevant body to dismiss, investigate
or initiate disciplinary proceedings in relation to
Complaints in some
referred directly to the relevant
disciplinary tribunal in that
4.109 Following a finding that a practitioner’s conduct constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct,
sanctions may be imposed, which range in severity from a caution to being struck
off the roll of practitioners. Available
sanctions include:
• removing the practitioner’s name from the local or interstate
• suspending, cancelling, or imposing conditions upon the
practitioner’s practising
certificate;
• cautioning or reprimanding the
practitioner;
• fining the practitioner, with the maximum allowable fine ranging from
$10,000–$100,000;
• requiring the practitioner to comply with a compensation, costs, or
other payment order;
• requiring the practitioner to
• requiring the practitioner to seek advice or complete a course in
legal education;
• requiring the practitioner to seek counselling or medical
• imposing conditions or limitations on the practitioner or the
practitioner’s legal practice, such as periodic inspections
under supervision.
4.110 In addition to these listed sanctions, there is also a certain degree
of flexibility—in most jurisdictions at least one
disciplinary body can
impose any order that it considers
appropriate.
4.111 The Supreme Court in each jurisdiction has inherent jurisdiction over
all practising lawyers and hears appeals from the relevant
disciplinary
Court-imposed sanctions
4.112 A lawyer’s primary duty to the court is supervised and enforced
by the court, which ‘retains an inherent supervisory
officers, directed at preserving the proper administration of
In addition
to this inherent jurisdiction of the court, jurisdiction is also conferred under
statute by way of judicial appeal from
disciplinary tribunals.
4.113 Courts possess a range of discretionary powers to discipline parties
and lawyers for breach of both procedural rules and legal
ethical obligations.
This includes costs orders, which can be made personally against a lawyer under
a range of legislation including
the legal profession and civil procedure acts
and various court rules.
Relevantly, such power may be exercised where lawyers act in a manner contrary
to their legal ethical obligations, for example, by
unduly delaying litigation
or failing to obey court directions or
4.114 By way of example, under the
Civil Procedure Act 2010
broad range of sanctions are available to enforce the overarching
obligations.
Contraventions
can be taken into account in a court exercising any of its powers, including its
discretion as to costs.
court can also make compensatory
and any order it
considers to be in the interests of a person prejudicially affected by the
contravention.
Sanctions can
be imposed on the court’s own motion or on application by a person with
sufficient interest in the
proceedings.
Legal ethical
obligations, misconduct and discovery: issues arising
4.115 A range of factors, illustrated by the key forms of discovery abuse and
misconduct outlined above, currently have an impact
upon the occurrence and
prevalence of such abuse and enforcement of relevant legal ethical obligations.
As discussed below, these
include the adversarial nature of the civil justice
system, and more specifically:
• lack of knowledge about, and the broad nature and articulation of,
legal ethical obligations;
• narrow application of legal ethical obligations; and
• limited enforcement of such obligations.
4.116 In many respects, the ALRC’s proposals in other chapters of this
Consultation Paper, encouraging a more active case management
approach to
discovery, will assist in countering potential discovery abuse
4.117 In addition, however, the ALRC considers that the proposals made below
concerning: the need for greater awareness of legal ethical
obligations; clearer
articulation and explanation of obligations with respect to discovery; and wider
application of the obligations
and greater enforcement, will address the key
legal ethical concerns expressed in relation to the discovery process.
Lack of awareness and
the broad nature of legal ethical obligations
4.118 Lawyers operate within a duty matrix. However, the ALRC has heard that
in some cases lawyers are not aware of their legal ethical
obligations, other
than in a general sense; or, more specifically, that lawyers may face
difficulties in applying broad legal ethical
obligations and concepts to
specific circumstances arising in practice.
4.119 This difficulty appears to arise in part as a result of limited legal
education about the practical application of ethics to
practices such as
discovery; the overly broad nature of the obligations; and lack of uniformity in
the obligations across jurisdictions.
4.120 The impact of this lack of awareness is illustrated through the
examples of alleged discovery abuse and misconduct outlined
earlier in the
chapter which demonstrate the difficulties which may arise in applying broad
legal ethical in the context of discovery
4.121 Professional conduct rules, as the primary site of articulated legal
ethical obligations, fulfil a number of important roles
within the Australian
civil justice system. In particular they provide
a base for education, practical guidance to practitioners, and an agreed
standard of behaviour to which disciplinary bodies can refer.
For professional
practice rules to be useful, the rules should represent attainable aims and be
useful in dealing with the continuing
ethical dilemmas of professional life,
command respect and be
enforceable.
4.122 However, legal ethical obligations contained in
professional rules in Australia, which are likely to arise in the context of
discovery, may be overly broad and lack clarity. In particular, there are no
obligations of specific application to the discovery
process, but rather they
have general application to the full range of activities undertaken by lawyers
in their professional capacity.
4.123 The general obligations include: facilitating the administration of
justice; not abusing court processes; narrowing the issues
in dispute; properly
advising clients; completing work as soon as possible; not misleading the court;
and not destroying documents.
4.124 However, in many instances the rules do not contain a positive or
specific duty, and lawyers are required to apply broad concepts
to specific
scenarios which arise in everyday practice. This may contribute to
lawyers’ uncertainty about their obligations
because, aside from those
cases involving blatant professional misconduct, it is often difficult to
establish where lawyers’
behaviour amounts to discovery abuse in a broad
sense or, more specifically, where misconduct is sufficient to attract sanctions
or disciplinary action.
4.125 For example, to the extent that the Model Rules provide that by
choosing to confine a matter to the issues in dispute a lawyer
will not have
breached their duty to the client, the Rules have been criticised for not
imposing a positive duty. This may be particularly
relevant to the practice of
trolley load litigation.
4.126 Similarly, with respect to delay, the Model Rules provide that a lawyer
will not have breached their obligation to the client
where they exercise
forensic judgment so as to present the client’s case as quickly and simply
as is consistent with its robust
advancement.
However, this
rule has been criticised on the basis that it does not impose a positive
obligation on a lawyer to conduct a matter
quickly and simply but merely
a lawyer to do so, operating in a ‘passive, defensive role
(primarily for the benefit of the advocate) rather than in active
support of the
Options for reform
4.127 There has been much debate surrounding the form that professional
conduct rules should take and whether such rules should be
positive or
aspirational and the appropriate level of detail.
4.128 In this instance there appear to be two possible approaches to ensuring
that legal ethical obligations articulated in professional
sufficiently specific and clear so that lawyers are aware of their obligations
concerning discovery.
4.129 The first approach is to articulate specific legal ethical obligations
that apply in the context of the discovery. Such an approach
would draw together
existing broad legal ethical obligations and make them more relevant to the
discovery process, and impose new
obligations such as disclosure of the
existence of all documents considered relevant to the proceedings at the
earliest practicable
4.130 The other approach is through the adoption of a
principle–rule–commentary approach to professional conduct
In ALRC Report 89 the
ALRC recommended that the Law Council convene a working group to coordinate the
drafting of commentary to legal
practice standards, to be issued as part of, or
as a supplement to, national model professional conduct
As the ALRC has noted,
such an approach to professional rules
combines appropriate features of these varied publications in one document,
provides a more accessible and authoritative guide to
professional conduct and
improves the relevance of professional practice rules to the daily work of
practitioners.
inclusion of commentary as part of, or as a supplement to, professional rules
would provide guidance for the practical interpretation
of the obligations in
the context of discovery.
ALRC’s views
4.132 The ALRC has heard that in some cases lawyers are not aware of their
legal ethical obligations other than in a general sense,
or that they face
difficulties in applying broad legal ethical obligations to specific
circumstances arising in practice. The ALRC
is interested in stakeholder views
on this matter.
4.133 If lawyers are not fully aware of their legal ethical
obligations—either generally or as they apply in the context of
discovery—then the ALRC welcomes stakeholder feedback on the best way of
ensuring that lawyers and litigants are properly informed
professional and legal responsibilities in relation to the discovery of
4.134 The ALRC currently considers that the best way
to raise awareness of the existence and practical application of legal ethical
obligations is through legal education at a university level, and on a
continuing basis. The ALRC has made a number of proposals
with respect to this
in the final part of this
4.135 In addition, the ALRC considers that the current regulation of the
legal profession on a state and territory basis is likely
to contribute to any
uncertainty about legal ethical obligations with respect to discovery. In light
of the National Legal Profession
Reform Project, consideration should be given
to ensuring that lawyers and litigants are properly informed about their legal
obligations under any new uniform regulatory regime.
4.136 Legislation and professional rules in some instances contain overly
broad or unclear statements of legal ethical obligations.
In order to address
discovery abuse there is a need for more clearly articulated obligations. In
particular, standards of conduct
expected in the context of the discovery
process should be outlined more explicitly. The ALRC is interested in hearing
stakeholders about whether existing general legal ethical obligations
in professional rules are sufficiently specific and clear so
that lawyers are
aware of their obligations concerning discovery, and if they are not, about the
best way to reform this.
General options for reform
4.137 The ALRC has considered two possible approaches to ensuring that legal
ethical obligations in professional rules are sufficiently
specific and clear so
that lawyers are aware of their obligations concerning discovery.
4.138 The principle–rule–commentary approach appears preferable.
The inclusion of commentary as part of, or as a supplement
to, professional
rules would provide guidance for the practical interpretation of the obligations
in the context of discovery, as
is the case under the
Legal Profession
(Solicitors) Rule 2007
4.139 While acknowledging the merits of articulating specific obligations
concerning discovery, the ALRC considers that almost all
general legal ethical
obligations have relevance to the discovery process and that a clear explanation
of their application to discovery
would be sufficient to ensure lawyers are
aware of their obligations.
4.140 In addition, the ALRC considers that the creation of obligations which
only apply in the context of discovery may detract from
the force of general
legal ethical obligations on lawyers’ conduct outside this process. The
links between such commentary
and the role and form of legal education are
discussed in the final part of this chapter.
Question 4–9
Are lawyers and litigants properly informed about
their professional and legal responsibilities in relation to discovery? If not,
what are the best ways of ensuring that lawyers and litigants are properly
informed about their professional and legal responsibilities
in relation to
Question 4–10
Are existing general legal ethical obligations in
professional rules sufficiently specific and clear so that lawyers are aware of
their obligations concerning discovery?
Question 4–11
Should professional conduct rules be amended to
include specific legal ethical obligations concerning discovery?
The Law Council of Australia, the Australian Bar Association and
legal professional bodies in each state and territory should develop
as part of, or as a supplement to, the professional conduct rules with a
particular focus on a lawyer’s legal ethical
obligations with respect to
the discovery of documents.
Costs specific reforms
4.141 One area in which lack of awareness, clarity and specificity of legal
ethical obligations is particularly evident is with respect
to costs. While the
ALRC is not aware of any widespread overcharging for discovery costs, discovery
has the potential to serve as
a ‘profit centre’ for law firms.
4.142 The preceding chapters have considered ways in which to limit the use
and scope of discovery, and thereby the associated costs.
Similarly, the means
by which the ALRC proposes to address abuse of discovery procedures, including
trolley load litigation and delay,
both of which increase the costs of
discovery, will also address costs concerns.
4.143 In attempting to reduce the costs of discovery, the VLRC in its
Civil Justice Review
, recommended that courts be given the power to limit
the costs incurred in connection with discovery to those which represent the
actual cost of carrying out necessary
However, as discussed
in Chapter 3, in the ALRC’s preliminary view, the amount charged to
clients for discovery should generally
a matter for cost assessment or review
under existing legal profession legislation.
4.144 While arguably it is implicit in the context of the legal profession
rules with respect to costs that lawyers should do
the ALRC has formed the
preliminary view that all legal profession legislation or professional rules
should include an obligation
to charge no more than fair and reasonable legal
4.145 The Draft National Law provides an instructive model and would require
that a law practice only charge costs which are reasonable
having regard to a
number of factors. In particular, under the Draft National Law costs are fair
and reasonable if they:
• are reasonably incurred and are reasonable in amount; and
• are proportionate in amount to the importance and complexity of the
issues involved in a matter, the amount or value involved
in a matter, and
whether the matter involved a matter of public interest; and
• reasonably reflect the level of skill, experience, specialisation and
seniority of the lawyers concerned; and
• conform to any applicable requirements of legal profession
legislation, professional conduct rules and fixed costs legislative
provisions.
4.146 The ALRC also considers it important that overcharging is capable of
constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct—in line with recommendations made in ALRC Report 89 and
subsequently incorporated into professional
Proposal 4–2
The Australian Government, state and territory
governments, the Law Council of Australia, the Australian Bar Association and
professional bodies in each state and territory should ensure legal
profession legislation and/or professional conduct rules provide
practice can only charge costs for discovery which are fair and reasonable.
Question 4–12
How should lawyers determine what are fair and
reasonable costs in the context of discovery?
Narrow application of
legal ethical obligations
4.147 A central issue that affects the operation of the discovery process and
the abuse of the process, highlighted by the VLRC in
Civil Justice
, is the limited application of legal ethical obligations on
participants in the civil justice system other than
4.148 This issue arises in the context of legal ethical obligations and
discovery given the control exerted by participants other
than lawyers on the
discovery process, and the role played by legal culture in shaping the behaviour
of individual lawyers.
Expansion of legal ethical
obligations
4.149 Throughout the discovery process, control is exercised by a range of
participants other than lawyers—by clients, but also
by insurers,
litigation funders and other third parties, for example electronic discovery
service providers—over decisions
affecting the discovery process itself,
and influencing the operation of the civil justice system more broadly.
4.150 In a submission to the VLRC’s
Civil Justice Review
IMF Australia, a litigation funder, acknowledged that such parties
‘have a greater capacity than most to systemically assist
court processes.
4.151 However, current legislation and professional rules impose obligations
on the conduct of lawyers, or in the case of recently
introduced overarching
purpose clauses in some legislation, on the courts, rather than other
4.152 For example, the
Federal Court of Australia Act
obligation on litigants to act consistently with the overarching purpose of
civil practice and procedure. However, this
is only a secondary responsibility,
in the sense that the court has primary responsibility and the parties are only
under an obligation
to assist the court. It does not impose any obligation
directly on a party to take proactive steps.
Options for reform
4.153 There are two models of relevance in discussing the potential expansion
of legal ethical obligations beyond lawyers.
4.154 The first is the model recommended by the VLRC in its
Civil Justice
and subsequently enacted in the
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic), which contains provisions directly defining overriding obligations and
duties imposed on all key participants in civil proceedings
before Victorian
courts. The overarching obligations apply to parties, lawyers, law practices,
and ‘any person who provides
financial assistance or other
assistance’ to a party where that person exercises either direct or
indirect control over the
conduct of the civil proceeding or of a party,
including but not limited to insurers and litigation
The court can make a
range of orders where a participant contravenes the overriding
obligations.
4.155 The second model is that imposed by the model litigant obligations,
which are contained in the
Legal Services Directions
. Under the
Services Directions
, the Commonwealth and its agencies—and by
extension, lawyers working for the Australian Government—are required to
as model litigants in the conduct of litigation. Relevantly the
obligation includes, for example, endeavouring to avoid, prevent
and limit the
scope of legal proceedings and keeping costs to a
In essence, being a model litigant requires that the Commonwealth and its
agencies, as parties to litigation, act with complete propriety,
fairly and in
accordance with the highest professional
4.156 Indeed,
the obligations contained in the
Legal Services Directions
‘beyond the requirement for lawyers to act in accordance with their
ethical obligations’ under the legal profession
acts and professional
ALRC’s views
4.157 The control that all participants in civil litigation exercise together
over the conduct of proceedings is significant. As a
result, in order to avoid
discovery abuse there is a need to impose legal ethical obligations on all key
participants in civil proceedings.
4.158 To the extent that the
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) imposes
obligations on all key participants in civil proceedings, the ALRC favours that
approach. At a federal level, in order
to impose obligations on parties other
than lawyers it would be necessary to amend a range of federal legislation
concerning civil
procedure and the courts. While proposing such a review is
beyond the scope of this
the ALRC suggests
that any such review by the Government should consider the extension of legal
ethical obligations beyond lawyers
to other legal players, such as clients,
insurers, litigation funders and electronic discovery (e-discovery) service
Cultural change
4.159 Like many professionals, lawyers are influenced by the culture in which
they work—by how their colleagues make decisions
and what they believe
their supervisors and clients expect of them. The Queensland Legal Services
Commissioner, John Britton, has
commented on the role of law firm culture and
the ‘reality that individual lawyers conduct themselves in ways that are a
in part at least of the workplace cultures of the law firms within
which they work’.
4.160 Similarly, in addressing the weaknesses of the current regulatory
regime, Associate Professor Christine Parker and others have
been vocal in
recognising the difficulties associated with identifying individuals within firm
structures who are responsible for
misconduct, particularly where behaviour that
runs contrary to legal ethical obligations may be an entrenched part of
workplace culture.
4.161 Further, as outlined above with respect to issues arising from
delegation, the ALRC has heard some concerns arising from instances
paralegals and junior lawyers exercise judgment with respect to discovery under
minimal supervision by senior lawyers where
they may not have sufficient
experience to balance competing issues and interests.
4.162 The growth of commercial alliances between firms and corporations and
the public listing of law firms has also increased the
importance of ensuring
that regulatory structures are responsive to the role played by firms and third
parties in shaping the behaviour
of individual lawyers, particularly where such
structures may create tension between lawyers’ legal ethical obligations
those owed, for example, to a company’s shareholders.
4.163 Parker and her colleagues have argued that, although the values of
individual lawyers influence their behaviour, ‘law
firms and work teams
structure and frame individual lawyer’s ethical decisions and
behaviours’ and they do this in three
(a) limiting individual lawyers’ capacity to ‘see’ ethical
(b) constraining or creating options and opportunities for individual lawyers
to make ethical judgments and act on them; and
(c) creating internal incentives, or magnifying external ones, that pressure
individual lawyers to choose certain ethical
behaviours.
4.164 Parker
and her colleagues argue for ‘organisational level bulwarks to counteract
organisational level pressures for unethical
conduct’. This is broadly
described as an ‘ethical infrastructure’:
A law firm ethical infrastructure means formal and informal management policies,
procedures and controls, work team cultures, and
habits of interaction and
practice that support and encourage ethical behaviour. It might include the
appointment of an ethics partner
and/or ethics committee; written policies on
ethical conduct in general, and in specific areas such as conflicts of interest,
trust accounting, opinion letters, litigation tactics and so on;
specified procedures for ensuring ethical policies are not breached
encourage the raising of ethical problems with colleagues and management; the
monitoring of lawyer compliance with policies
and procedures; and, ethics
education, training and discussion within the
4.165 Others
have proposed that firms could engage in various forms of ‘ethical
Departments and work-groups could be asked to formulate plans that would
articulate standards or practice and propose mechanisms
for ensuring compliance.
On a rotating basis, departments, workgroups, and individual lawyers could be
evaluated in terms of their
performance with respect to these standards ...
It is time to begin to charge lawyers with responsibility for designing systems
that regularly and actively analyse professional
4.166 Legal Services Commissions in both NSW and Queensland have
developed voluntary questionnaires to encourage consideration of
ethical issues
by lawyers and law firms.
has been suggested, in consultations, that the development of a questionnaire
around legal ethical obligations arising in the
context of discovery may be
useful in promoting discussion and agreement about ethical discovery practice
within law firms.
ALRC’s views
4.167 The ALRC considers that law firms could assist in improving discovery
process and minimising discovery abuse by training their
own lawyers, setting
strict ethical and practice standards, closely monitoring compliance with those
standards, and insisting that
discovery is pursued honestly, ethically, and in
accordance with the letter and spirit of the rules. Law firms might, in this
foster a culture of responsible litigation and ethical discovery practice.
Such a culture should affect how litigation is conducted
and focus on real
decisions rather than mere ‘symbolic or formalistic ethics management
initiatives that do not make any difference
to everyday actions and
behaviours’.
4.168 Further, to significantly improve the efficiency and ethical practice
of discovery, a shift in culture in the wider legal community
is necessary.
While such a culture shift might be fostered by stricter discovery laws and a
more rigorous enforcement of those laws,
the ALRC welcomes stakeholder comment
on the best ways to ensure legal ethical obligations are observed by both
individual lawyers
and by other legal participants such as large firms.
Question 4–13
How might law firms foster a culture of reasonable
and ethical discovery practice?
Difficulties in
enforcement and responding to misconduct
4.169 Despite reforms to the disciplinary and court-based structures for
enforcement of legal ethical obligations, ‘there are
still few cases of
disciplinary action being taken against lawyers for breach of their duty to the
court or the law’.
Parker and Associate Professor Adrian Evans have commented that ‘it is
hard to believe that there really are so few cases in
each of these categories
where disciplinary action might be
warranted’.
4.170 It appears that this is due to a number of factors related to
identification and reporting of misconduct and the general nature
disciplinary model, rather than specific legal professional disciplinary
structures.
4.171 In particular, the weaknesses of enforcement appear to arise from: lack
of awareness about what conduct constitutes misconduct
(dealt with earlier in
the chapter); failure to report misconduct; and a disciplinary model which is
reactive rather than proactive
and focuses on individual behaviour rather than
on more systemic causes of misconduct. Each of these are considered in turn
Failure to report misconduct
4.172 A large proportion of disciplinary matters brought to the attention of
the relevant disciplinary body arise as a result of client
complaints.
However, courts,
costs assessors and other lawyers also have a role to play in reporting alleged
misconduct.
4.173 There is limited recognition of the obligation owed by lawyers to
report the misconduct of other lawyers under the legal profession
legislation
and professional rules in Australia. Indeed, there is no obligation under legal
profession legislation for lawyers to
report misconduct that may arise in the
context of discovery.
4.174 Under professional rules in Victoria and South Australia, lawyers have
an obligation to disclose conduct which is contrary to
the general standards of
conduct expected of lawyers—not to engage in conduct that is dishonest; or
calculated or likely to
a material degree to be prejudicial to the
administration of justice or diminish public confidence in the administration of
justice—and
any conduct or event which may adversely impact on a
lawyer’s ability to practise according to the professional
Whether such an
obligation applies to lawyers reporting the conduct of other lawyers is unclear.
It is arguable, however, that the
obligation is restricted to self-reporting.
4.175 In addition, courts both as guardians of the administration of justice
and in upholding their obligations under various pieces
of legislation—the
purposes of which are to facilitate the just, quick and inexpensive resolution
of disputes—are charged
with responsibility for responding to alleged
lawyer misconduct. However, the ALRC understands that court-initiated
enforcement action,
other than through the imposition of costs orders, is rarely
taken in response to alleged legal ethical misconduct.
4.176 Finally, under the Draft National Law and in some jurisdictions, where
a matter is subject to a costs assessment or review and
the costs assessor
considers that the legal costs charged are grossly excessive, they are under an
obligation to refer the matter
to the Legal Service Commission, or an equivalent
body, to consider whether disciplinary action should be taken against the
Similarly, however,
the ALRC understands that this occurs rarely.
Options for reform
4.177 The approach taken in New Zealand (NZ), the United Kingdom (UK) and the
US to ensuring lawyers report the misconduct of other
lawyers provides for what
has been referred to as ‘lawyer
whistleblowing’.
4.178 In these jurisdictions, rules require lawyers to report where they
consider another lawyer’s conduct raises a ‘substantial
question as
to that lawyer’s honesty, trustworthiness or fitness as a lawyer in other
constitutes
misconduct’,
there are reasonable grounds to suspect the other lawyer is guilty of
misconduct.
4.179 There are difficulties associated with imposing such an obligation on
lawyers, in particular with respect to the need to support
and, in some cases,
protect lawyers who make such
and mechanisms for
safeguarding against vexatious reports. In addition, in consultations,
stakeholders expressed concerns about the
impact such a requirement would have
on the costs of discovery.
4.180 The ALRC is not aware of any suitable models, aside from judicial
education, for addressing court-initiated enforcement
ALRC’s views
4.181 Consumers of legal services as well as the courts, costs assessors and
other lawyers play an important role in reporting misconduct,
and as a result,
in the effectiveness of means by which misconduct is brought to the attention of
the relevant bodies.
4.182 In a self-regulated profession, another way of ensuring that misconduct
is reported to relevant disciplinary bodies is imposing
mandatory reporting
obligations on lawyers. In the ALRC’s preliminary view, imposing mandatory
obligations on lawyers to report
the misconduct of other lawyers would assist in
the better enforcement of legal ethical obligations.
4.183 The ALRC considers the formulation currently included in the
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules 2005
(Vic) if expanded, and the
approaches in NZ, UK and US, to be useful models.
4.184 Consequently, the ALRC is interested in stakeholder feedback on whether
professional rules should provide that a practitioner
must promptly disclose the
occurrence of possible misconduct by either themselves or another lawyer in the
course of discovery and,
if so, what conduct. For example, misconduct may
constitute conduct that a practitioner considers to be: dishonest; or calculated
(or likely to a material degree) to be prejudicial to, or diminish public
confidence in, the administration of justice; or prejudice
practitioner’s ability to practise.
4.185 As proposed with respect to the specificity and clarity of legal
ethical obligations if such a reporting obligation were introduced,
development of commentary to accompany any such reporting obligation would be
4.186 However, given the difficulties associated with any such obligation,
the ALRC is interested in stakeholder feedback on other
ways to ensure alleged
misconduct is reported to relevant disciplinary bodies, and whether imposition
of a mandatory reporting obligation
on lawyers would be an effective mechanism
through which to achieve this.
4.187 With respect to the role of costs assessors in reporting misconduct,
the ALRC is interested in hearing how often, in practice,
costs assessors comply
with requirements to refer matters to the legal disciplinary bodies where they
consider that the legal costs
charged are grossly excessive.
4.188 The ALRC is interested in stakeholder views on the best way to address
the apparent infrequency with which judges report possible
misconduct with
respect to discovery in matters before them to legal professional bodies.
Question 4–14
What is the best way to ensure clients, lawyers
and courts report allegations of lawyer misconduct to relevant disciplinary
Question 4–15
Should professional conduct rules provide that a
practitioner must promptly disclose to the relevant legal professional body the
of any misconduct arising in the context of discovery?
Question 4–16
If practitioners should be required to disclose
misconduct in accordance with Question 4–15, what conduct should they be
to disclose?
Question 4–17
In practice, how often do costs assessors refer
lawyers to disciplinary bodies for investigation of suspected gross
overcharging?
Reactive regulatory system
4.189 As John Britton, the Queensland Legal Services Commissioner has
commented, current regulatory systems and sanctions are
almost entirely reactive rather than proactive and preventative in character.
They address past and not future behaviour, and they
are all stick and no
carrot. They do no more to encourage high standards of conduct than threaten
disciplinary consequences for conduct
that falls short of the
4.190 However, in some jurisdictions the Offices of Legal
Services Commissioners (OLSC) have attempted to play a more proactive and
educative role in the enforcement of legal ethical obligations. For example, in
NSW, the OLSC’s approach is ‘regulating
for professionalism’
within the framework of ‘education towards
compliance’.
strategy involves working with lawyers to engender the development of an ethical
legal culture, including requiring firms to
‘self-assess and report on
their implementation of appropriate management systems’ as well as
addressing individual misconduct
complaints.
ALRC’s views
4.191 In addressing the reactive nature of regulatory structures, the ALRC
commends the ‘education towards compliance’
concept and considers
that bodies such as the OLSC in each jurisdiction have a vital role to play in
ensuring legal ethical obligations
are observed and enforced.
4.192 The ALRC considers this issue and makes several proposals related to
the role of education in the final part of this chapter.
Focus on individual misconduct
4.193 The primary focus of the current disciplinary framework in Australia is
on protection rather than punishment, and on the behaviour
of individual lawyers
rather than the systemic causes of misconduct.
4.194 Commentators such as Parker have criticised this individual focus,
arguing that the current disciplinary approach
is one that can easily lead to making a scapegoat of an individual practitioner
for character failure rather than systemic change
to address public concerns
4.195 Britton has suggested that the system ‘puts the
spotlight on individual lawyers’ and ‘lets law firms almost
off the hook’.
issue is considered earlier in this chapter in discussing the need for cultural
ALRC’s views
4.196 The ALRC considers moves towards extending obligations to all parties
in the civil justice system, for example as envisaged
Procedure Act 2010
(Vic), would assist in addressing the individual focus of
currently regulatory structures and in holding law firms responsible where
workplace culture, management and firm structures had a role in the alleged
misconduct of individual lawyers.
4.197 The other key reforms which are likely to refocus current regulatory
structures and thereby enhance the effectiveness of enforcement
of legal ethical
obligations are discussed above in the context of the need for change to the
legal culture in Australia.
4.198 Overall, it appears that weaknesses in enforcement of legal ethical
obligations arise as a result of factors such as failure
to identify and report
misconduct, and the general nature of the disciplinary model rather than
specific legal professional disciplinary
structures. However, the ALRC is
interested in hearing from stakeholders about whether existing legal
professional disciplinary structures
are sufficient to deal with discovery
abuse, and if not, how they might be reformed.
Question 4–18
Are existing legal professional disciplinary
structures sufficient to deal with allegations of discovery abuse?
Question 4–19
If existing legal professional disciplinary
structures are not sufficient to deal with allegations of discovery abuse, how
lawyers be disciplined for:
(a) a failure to comply with discovery obligations; or
(b) conduct intended to delay, frustrate or avoid discovery of documents?
The changing legal
context and future challenges
4.199 The changing nature of the Australian legal system and the changing
context within which existing professional obligations arise
increasingly
impacts on discovery.
4.200 A number of emerging issues are of particular relevance, including the
rise of e-discovery and the applicability of practitioner
obligations outside
traditional courtroom processes.
Electronic discovery
4.201 The increasing frequency with which documents are stored electronically
adds a new dimension to lawyers’ legal ethical
obligations with respect to
4.202 For example, e-discovery brings into focus the obligations owed by
lawyers to the client and the court, which in part involve
a duty to advise
clients about their discovery obligations and exercise personal judgment about
the existence and relevance of documents
in the proceedings.
4.203 To some extent the ALRC’s proposal with respect to discovery
plans, which would specify the scope of discovery, including
the parameters of
electronic searches, provides an articulation of lawyer’s
obligations.
4.204 However, the extent of a lawyer’s obligation to ensure that a
client preserves documents and is aware of a client’s
document retention
policy and electronic document management systems is largely unclear.
4.205 As discussed earlier in the chapter, the ALRC considers there are two
possible ways to ensure professional rules are sufficiently
clear so that
lawyers are aware of their obligations—in this instance—concerning
e-discovery. These are either through
the articulation of specific legal ethical
obligations which apply in the context of e-discovery; or through the adoption
of a principle–rule–commentary
approach to professional rules, which
would provide guidance about the application of general legal ethical
obligations in the specific
context of e-discovery.
4.206 In the context of e-discovery, lawyers could also be held responsible
for implementing a legal hold when litigation is anticipated,
as occurs in the
ALRC’s views
4.207 The ALRC is interested in feedback from stakeholders on the impact of
e-discovery on the legal ethical obligations of lawyers.
4.208 As outlined above, in the ALRC’s view, a
principle–rule–commentary approach is the best approach to providing
guidance for lawyers to assist them in the practical interpretation of their
obligations in the context of discovery. The ALRC considers
clarification would also be useful in the context of e-discovery. However, the
ALRC welcomes submissions on this point
and with respect to the potential
application of obligations similar to those arising from a legal hold in an
Australian context.
Question 4–20
What impact, if any, has electronic discovery had
on the legal ethical obligations owed by lawyers?
Question 4–21
Are existing general legal ethical obligations in
professional rules sufficiently specific and clear so that lawyers are aware of
their obligations in the context of electronic discovery?
Question 4–22
Should professional conduct rules be amended to
include specific legal ethical obligations concerning electronic discovery?
Proposal 4–3
The Law Council of Australia, the Australian Bar
Association and the legal professional bodies in each state and territory should
develop commentary as part of, or a supplement to, the professional conduct
rules with a particular focus on a lawyer’s legal
ethical obligations with
respect to the electronic discovery of documents.
Legal ethical obligations and alternative
4.209 Another emerging issue is the applicability of traditional legal
ethical obligations outside courtroom processes, for example
during pre-action
protocols, pre-trial management and alternative dispute resolution processes.
4.210 Currently, professional rules define ‘court’ broadly to
encompass: courts and tribunals; investigations or inquiries
established or
conducted under statute or by a Parliament; Royal Commissions; and arbitrations,
mediations or any other form of dispute
resolution.
4.211 However, significant debate exists with respect to the imposing of
legal ethical and conduct obligations on such processes,
an issue recently
considered by the National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council
4.212 NADRAC has suggested that examination of the issue involves
consideration of: which participants should be subject to the obligations;
ambit and framing of obligations; when the obligations would apply; and
enforcement.
ALRC’s views
4.213 The ALRC considers that COAG, the Law Council and legal professional
bodies in each state and territory should consider the
application of legal
ethical obligations outside traditional courtroom processes in formulating or
revising professional rules. These
bodies should also consider issuing
clarification about the legal ethical obligations of lawyers in these new
Legal education
4.214 Education is vital to ensuring lawyers are aware of their legal ethical
obligations and are able to consider and apply their
obligations in practice. It
also plays a key role in shaping legal culture.
4.215 Clearly then it is important that good discovery
practice—grounded in consideration of legal ethical obligations—is
incorporated into legal education at a university level, through the practical
legal training that Australian lawyers must undertake
before they may be
admitted to practice, and in continuing legal
qualifications
4.216 In all Australian jurisdictions, admission to practise as a lawyer
requires the study of 11 areas of knowledge (known as the
These are the
core subjects studied by law students in Australia.
4.217 Discovery is usually taught in universities as part of civil procedure,
one of these core subjects. Civil procedure in NSW,
for example, includes the
study of ‘obtaining evidence—discovery of documents,
interrogatories, subpoena and other
4.218 Legal ethics is also taught at universities. For example, in NSW, law
students must study:
Professional and personal conduct in respect of practitioner’s duty:
(a) to the law;
(b) to the Courts;
(c) to clients, including basic knowledge of the principles of trust
accounting; and
(d) to fellow
practitioners.
the ALRC’s knowledge, ethics classes in Australian law schools do not
routinely consider ethical discovery practice.
Exceptions to this appear to be
the content of a course called ‘Dispute Resolution and Ethics’
offered at the University
of Adelaide, and parts of civil procedure and
litigation subjects at the Australian National University and the University of
which appear to include teaching focused on practical examples. The ALRC
welcomes submissions that identify other courses or subjects
that consider legal
ethical obligations in the context of discovery.
legal training
4.220 Civil procedure and ethics are studied again, with a different focus,
as part of the practical legal training that must be completed
before a person
may be admitted to practice as a solicitor.
4.221 To be admitted in NSW, for example, applicants must be competent in a
set of skills, practice areas and values prescribed in
Legal Profession
Admission Rules 2005
(NSW). Applicants must have achieved competence in,
among other things, ‘civil litigation practice’ and ‘ethics
and professional
responsibility’.
4.222 Civil litigation practice refers to the ability of an entry-level
lawyer to ‘conduct civil litigation in first instance
matters in courts of
general jurisdiction, in a timely and cost-effective
This involves
the ability to identify the issues likely to arise in a hearing and gather the
necessary evidence. One of the listed
means of gathering evidence is
4.223 Ethics and professional responsibility, the Rules state, includes:
• acting ethically;
• discharging the legal duties and obligations of legal practitioners;
• complying with professional conduct rules;
• complying with fiduciary duties;
• complying with rules relating to the charging of fees; and
• reflecting on wider
legal education
4.224 Following admission to practice, in order to retain a practising
certificate legal practitioners are required to complete a
course of continuing
legal education (CLE) or continuing professional development (CPD) each year.
4.225 In October 2007, the National Continuing Professional Development
Taskforce issued a set of national CLE
Guidelines,
which arose in
part ‘from a concern that legal practitioners were not receiving
sufficient ongoing education in legal and practical
professionalism’.
4.226 The Guidelines recommend that practitioners be required to complete ten
of CPD activity each
year, including at least one unit in each of the following ‘core
• practical legal ethics;
• practice management and business skills;
• professional
• substantive law (in some
4.227 The Guidelines include a non-exhaustive, illustrative list of topics,
arranged by these core areas. Topics listed under the
practical legal ethics
core area include ‘lawyer’s duties to the court’ and
‘ethics within a technical legal
4.228 While discovery is not specifically referred to in the list of examples
of activities, in the ALRC’s view, a suitable
study activity related to
discovery could count towards a unit in the practical legal ethics core area,
the professional skills core
area or be studied as substantive
4.229 New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and the ACT have either adopted
the guidelines, or substantially based their scheme on
guidelines.
Western Australia
also requires practitioners to complete courses on ethics and professional
responsibility, and legal skills and
4.230 Barristers in the ACT must also complete activities in ‘ethics
and regulation of the profession’; and in substantive
law and professional
4.231 In the Northern Territory, practitioners are required to complete a
certain number of activities related to developing substantive
law and legal
practice competencies, but does not require particular courses in
4.232 General legal ethics courses are
However, few CPD or
CLE courses specifically cover ethical obligations in the context of
from legal professional associations
4.233 Guidance from legal professional associations—in particular,
state and territory bar associations and law societies—also
plays a role
in legal education. Where such guidance exists, it may be given in the form of
individualised responses to
published ethics
committee rulings,
collections of articles and advice on certain
4.234 Earlier in the chapter, the ALRC proposed
that the Law Council and law societies and bar associations in each state and
develop commentary as part of, or as a supplement to, the professional
conduct rules with a particular focus on the legal ethical
obligations of
lawyers in relation to
Such commentary
would also play an important role in educating lawyers about their legal ethical
obligations.
4.235 Finally, legal professional associations also maintain a register of
disciplinary actions open for public inspection, the availability
and content of
which serves an important educative
Legal education: issues
4.236 There are concerns that current legal education with respect to legal
ethical obligations often ‘does not equip ... lawyers
to know how to put
ethics into action in real-life ... contexts, or even to recognise ethical
issues when they
Such commentary
highlights that it is important for legal ethical obligations to be taught using
a range of teaching methods that
encompass their practical application,
including through case studies and skills courses.
4.237 Significant decisions about discovery in civil litigation before
federal courts are likely to be made by experienced lawyers.
If education is to
play a significant role in improving discovery practice, particularly in the
short to medium term, it is likely
to be through CLE undertaken by practising
lawyers who work in litigation and understand the real conflicts and
difficulties that
parties face in obtaining and disclosing relevant documentary
4.238 This may require that providers of CLE pay particular attention to the
ethical discovery practices in relevant programs, such
as those concerning civil
litigation, ethics and management and consider the development of subjects
specifically addressing ethical
discovery practices.
4.239 Another way to educate practising lawyers in ethical discovery
practices may be for all legal professional associations to issue
practice’ notes about the legal and ethical responsibilities of lawyers
with respect to discovery. These practice
notes would ideally be updated
regularly to respond to practitioners’ questions or evolving technological
developments.
4.240 Ongoing legal professional education about legal ethical obligations
generally, as well as those concerning discovery, may be
essential to fostering
professional integrity, as in order to act consistently with such obligations
lawyers must have ‘current
knowledge and awareness of the ethical
framework within which they
4.241 In the ALRC’s preliminary view, the study of a lawyer’s
legal and ethical duties in relation to discovery should
be incorporated, or
expanded upon, in existing university curricula, through practical legal
training, and in programs that form
part of a lawyer’s continuing legal
4.242 Admission rules across jurisdictions appear suitably broad and
therefore should not need to be changed in order for universities
providers of legal education to pay closer attention to ethical discovery
4.243 In the ALRC’s view, though the topic might usefully be considered
in subjects or programs dedicated to legal ethics, the
ethics of good discovery
practice should also be taught in core civil litigation subjects. Students and
lawyers should understand
that ethical discovery is intrinsic to good legal
Question 4–23
Are law students and lawyers studying the legal
and ethical responsibilities of lawyers with respect to discovery? If so, is
training and education sufficient?
Question 4–24
How should law students and lawyers be trained in
the legal and ethical responsibilities of lawyers with respect to discovery?
Question 4–25
Is discovery abuse and misconduct likely to be
reduced in practice if law students and lawyers are provided with more education
the legal and ethical responsibilities of lawyers with respect to
Proposal 4–4
Providers of legal education should give
appropriate attention to the legal and ethical responsibilities of lawyers in
relation to
the discovery of documents in existing and proposed civil
litigation, case management and ethics subjects that form part of:
(a) law degrees, particularly those required for admission to practice as a
solicitor or barrister;
(b) practical legal training required for admission to practice as a
solicitor or barrister; and
(c) continuing legal education programs, including those required for
obtaining and maintaining a practising certificate.
Proposal 4–5
Legal professional bodies should issue to their
members ‘best practice’ notes about the legal ethical obligations of
with respect to discovery.
See the Terms of Reference at the front
of this Consultation Paper.
A Lamb and J Littrich,
(2007), 185.
G Dal Pont,
Professional Responsibility
(4th ed, 2010), 4.
See, eg, C Parker and A Evans,
Lawyers’ Ethics
A person who is entitled to practise as a
barrister or solicitor in the Supreme Court of a state or territory is entitled
to practise
in any federal court, provided his or her name also appears in the
Register of Practitioners kept by the Chief Executive and Principal
Registrar of
the High Court:
Judiciary Act 1903
National Legal Profession Reform
Regulatory Framework
National Legal Profession Reform Project,
Legal Profession National Law: Consultation Draft
(2010); National Legal
Profession Reform Project,
Legal Profession National Rules: Consultation
C Parker and A Evans,
Lawyers’ Ethics
G Dal Pont,
Professional Responsibility
(4th ed, 2010), 15.
See discussion below in relation to
civil liability laws which have consolidated tort law.
Australian Civil
(8th ed, 2009), 336.
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legal Practitioners Act
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legal Profession Act
Legal Profession Act 2008
Legal Profession Act
Legal Profession Act 2006
Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Legal Profession Model Laws
(2nd ed, 2006).
Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Legal Profession Model Regulations
(2nd ed, 2007).
National Legal Profession Reform
Legal Profession National Law: Consultation Draft
National Legal Profession Reform Project,
Legal Profession National Rules:
Consultation Draft
Civil Procedure Act
Civil Procedure Act 2010
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008). The reforms will take effect on
1 January 2011.
Federal Court of Australia Act
The overarching
purpose provisions took effect on 1 January 2010.
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) rr 1.04, 1.08(1);
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 5(1);
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(ACT) s 56(1). See: J Spigelman, ‘Just, Quick and Cheap: A New
Standard for Civil Procedure’ (2000) Special Edition 6
Note also that the
Civil Dispute Resolution Bill 2010
(Cth), which was being
considered by the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee
due to report on 22 November
2010, includes a similar overarching purpose
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act
Legal Services Directions 2005
(Cth). At the time of writing, these Directions were under review.
Legal Profession Act
Law Council of Australia,
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
The Model Rules form the basis for the
following professional conduct rules:
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rule 2007
of Professional Conduct and Practice
Professional Conduct and
Practice Rules 2005
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rules
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(NT). The Western Australian
and Tasmanian rules have yet to follow:
Legal Profession Rules 2009
Rules of Practice 1994
(Tas), however the ALRC understands that Western
Australia is currently in the process of revising its professional conduct rules
and has previously indicated it will adopt the Model Rules following the current
revision by the Law Council and Australian Bar Association:
Professional Conduct Rules 2010
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
Council of Australia,
Legal Profession National Rules: Solicitors’
(2010); Australian Bar Association,
Legal Profession National
Rules: Barristers’ Rules
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000)
Law Council of Australia,
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(2002) r 12.
Ibid r 30.1.
The phrase ‘trolley load
litigation’ was used by Einstein J of the New South Wales Supreme Court in
Michael Wilson and Partners Ltd v Nicholls
[2009] NSWSC 669.
‘Defensive legal practice’ was a term used by a stakeholder in
consultations.
The focus of this Inquiry is on
trolley load litigation that arises as a result of the discovery process, as
opposed to arising
from, eg, the filing of unnecessary material as exhibits to
affidavits.
As cited in Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 434.
Federal Court of Australia
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) rr 1.04, 1.08(1);
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(Qld) r 5(1);
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(ACT) s 56(1).
Federal Court of Australia
Civil Procedure Act 2005
The obligation is owed under Law
Council of Australia,
Model Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(2002) r 13.2.1, as well as by all parties under the
Civil Procedure Act
, 34(1). Conversely, only lawyers owe the obligation under:
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules 1995
(NSW) r 23-A.15A;
South Wales Barristers’ Rules
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) ss 34(1), 34(2);
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) s 23.The obligation
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) to take ‘reasonable
steps’ is discussed in Ch 5.
For an illustrative discussion of a
disciplinary proceeding in which a lawyer was disciplined for inadequate
discovery, see: M Costello,
‘The Legal Practitioners Disciplinary
Tribunal: A Solicitor’s Duty Regarding Discovery’ (1996) 23(10)
Rogers v Whitaker
[1992] HCA 58
Law Council of Australia,
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
Ibid r 12.2.
Rockwell Machine Tool Co
Ltd v E P Barrus (Concessionaires) Ltd
[1968] All ER 98, 99. See also: M
Costello, ‘The Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal: A
Solicitor’s Duty Regarding
Discovery’ (1996) 23(10)
This obligation is discussed later in
this chapter in relation to document destruction and the duty to preserve
documents. See also
the seminal case in the US:
Qualcomm v Broadcom
(Unreported, USDC Cal., 05cv1958, 3 August 2007).
See, eg, Law Council of
Model Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
14.1, 14.2. See also: Solicitors’ rules—Law Council of Australia,
Model Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(2002) rr 14.1, 14.2;
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules 1995
(NSW) rr 23-A.21,
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rule 2007
(Qld) rr 14.1, 14.2;
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(SA) rr 14.1, 14.2;
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules 2005
(Vic) rr 14.1, 14.2;
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(NT) r 17.6, 17.7;
Profession (Solicitors) Rules
(ACT) rr 18.1, 18.2. Barristers’
rules—Australian Bar Association,
Legal Profession National Rules:
Barristers’ Rules
(2010) rr 26, 27;
New South Wales
Barristers’ Rules
rr 21, 22, 51, 52;
Barristers Rule 2007
Barristers’ Conduct Rules 2010
(SA) rr 26, 27, 48,
Victorian Bar Practice Rules
(Vic) rr 19, 20;
Conduct Rules
(WA) rr 20, 21;
Legal Profession (Barristers) Rules 2008
(ACT) rr 21,
Law Council of Australia,
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(2002), r 14.6. Solicitors’
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules 1995
(NSW) r 23-A.25;
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rule 2007
(Qld) r 14.6;
Professional Conduct and Practice
(SA) r 14.6;
Professional Conduct and
Practice Rules 2005
(Vic) r 14.5;
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rules
(ACT) r 18.6;
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
17.11; Barristers’ Rules—Australian Bar Association,
Profession National Rules: Barristers’ Rules
(2010) r 31;
Wales Barristers’ Rules
Barristers Rule 2007
(Qld) r 27;
Barristers’ Conduct Rules 2010
Victorian Bar Practice
(Vic) r 24;
Conduct Rules
Legal Profession
(Barristers) Rules 2008
(ACT) r 25. See also
Rondel v Worsley
AC 191, 227–228.
Law Council of Australia,
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(2002) r 30.1.
Civil Procedure Act 2010
Federal Court of Australia
Civil Procedure Act 2005
specific obligation to minimise delay under the
Civil Procedure Act 2010
White Industries (Qld) Pty
Ltd v Flower & Hart
[1998] FCA 806
(1998) 156 ALR 169.
Law Council of Australia,
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(2002) r 13.2.2. See also: Law
Council of Australia,
Legal Profession National Rules: Solicitors’
(2010) r 17.2.2; Australian Bar Association,
Legal Profession
National Rules: Barristers’ Rules
(2010) r 42(b);
Professional
Conduct and Practice Rules 1995
(NSW) r 23-A.15A(e);
New South Wales
Barristers’ Rules
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rule
(Qld) r 13.2.2;
Barristers Rule 2007
(Qld) r 21(b);
Professional Conduct and Practice
(SA) r 13.2.2;
Barristers’
Conduct Rules 2010
(SA) r 42(b);
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
(Vic) r 13.2.2;
Victorian Bar Practice Rules
(Vic) r 17(b);
Conduct Rules
(WA) r 18(b);
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rules
(ACT) r 17.2(b);
Legal Profession (Barristers) Rules 2008
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(NT) r 17.4(b).
National Legal Profession Reform
Legal Profession National Law: Consultation Draft
Australian Bar Association,
Barristers’ Conduct Rules
Professional Conduct and Practice
(Vic) r 1.2.
Legal Profession Rules 2009
(WA) r 14.4.
Rules of Practice 1994
Australian Bar Association,
Profession National Rules: Barristers’ Rules
(2010) r 56(a);
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules 1995
(NSW) r 23-A.15(a);
South Wales Barristers’ Rules
r 41. This is also a requirement under
Barristers’ Conduct Rules 2010
Civil Procedure Act 2010
See, eg, G Dal Pont,
Professional Responsibility
(4th ed, 2010); Y Ross,
Ethics in Law:
Lawyers’ Responsibility and Accountability in Australia
2010); Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14
(2008); A Lamb and J Littrich,
Lawyers in Australia
(2007). While lawyers
owe legal ethical obligations in relation to the responsible use of privilege
this issue is not discussed in
this chapter. For discussion of privilege in the
specific context of federal investigations, see Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in Federal
Investigations
, Report 107 (2008).
White Industries (Qld) Pty
Ltd v Flower & Hart
[1998] FCA 806
(1998) 156 ALR 169.
, 249 affirmed in
Hart (a firm) v White Industries (Qld) Pty Ltd
(1999) 87 FCR 134.;
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 76C(1).
J Spigelman, ‘Opening of the Law
Term’ (2004)
(Speech to the Law Society of New South Wales Opening of
the Law Term Dinner, Sydney, 2 February 2004)
Legal Profession Act
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic) s 3.4.9;
Legal Profession Act
(WA) s 260;
Legal Profession Act 2006
Legal Profession Act
Legal Profession Act 2007
s 319(1)(c)
Profession Act 2007
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession Act 2008
(WA) s 271;
Legal Profession Act
Legal Profession Act
Legal Profession Act 2007
Profession Act 2007
Legal Profession Act 2008
Legal Profession Act 2006
The inclusion of criteria is
in line with a rec
ommendation
made in Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the
Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000), Rec 27.
National Legal Profession Reform
Legal Profession National Law: Consultation Draft
s 4.3.4(2).
Draft Professional Conduct Rules
(WA) r 15.4. As noted earlier, Western Australia is revising its
professional conduct rules, for the existing rule see:
Legal Profession Rules
(WA) r 5.8.
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rule
(Qld) guidelines to r 2.1.
Rules of Professional Conduct and
(SA) r 42.2.
Civil Procedure Act 2010
B Bartley, ‘Fair Trade? Why We
Need to Rethink Time Billing’ (2010) 30(8)
12. See also
Council of the Queensland Law Society v Roche
[2004] Qd R 574
disciplinary action arose as a result of a solicitor’s gross overcharging,
including most notably for 24 minutes
spent, and $156 charged, for discussing
and wrapping a box of chocolates for a reporting doctor’s secretary,
although the case
did not arise in a discovery-specific context.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 435.
Legal Profession Act
Legal Profession Act 2007
Profession Act 2007
Judiciary Act 1903
High Court Rules 2004
(Cth) O 71, r 1;
Federal Court
of Australia Act 1976
McCabe v British American Tobacco
Australia Service Ltd
[2002] VSC 73.
British American Tobacco Australia
Services Ltd v Cowell
[2002] VSCA 197
(2002) 7 VR 524.
The Victorian Court of Appeal found
that ‘there was no evidence to justify the finding that, in giving advice
as requested
[the lawyers involved] “devised a strategy” by which
the defendant might destroy damaging documents while pretending
to innocent
intention’:
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v
[2002] VSCA 197
(2002) 7 VR 524
A Lamb and J Littrich,
(2007), 260.
P Spender, ‘McCabe: Unresolved
Questions about Truth and Justice’
Torts Law Journal
Legal Profession Regulations
(NSW) reg 177(1), (2).
Crimes Act 1958
Legal holds have developed through the
common law. For a key articulation see: The Sedona Conference, ‘Commentary
Holds: The Trigger & The Process’ (2010) (11)
Conference Journal
265, 277, 282–283, 286.
Zubulake v UBS Warburg
229 FRD 422 (SDNY
Ethics in Law:
Lawyers’ Responsibility and Accountability in Australia
2010), 217.
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Allinson v General Council of
Medical Education and Registration
[1984] 1 QB 750
G Dal Pont,
Professional Responsibility
(4th ed, 2010), 523.
Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Legal Profession Model Laws
(2nd ed, 2006) s 4.2.2.
Ibid, s 4.2.1.
See, C Parker, ‘Regulation of
the Ethics of Australian Legal Practice: Autonomy and Responsiveness’
[2002] UNSWLawJl 38
University of New South Wales Law Journal
National Legal Profession Reform
Consultation Report
(2010), Executive Summary, 2.
National Legal Profession Reform
Legal Profession National Law: Consultation Draft
1.3.6(1), 1.3.7. See also National Legal Profession Reform Taskforce,
Consultation Report
(2010), 8 for a discussion of circumstances in which
the Ombudsman would take over special functions—for example, where the
relevant case may set a precedent.
National Legal Profession Reform
Legal Profession National Law: Consultation Draft
Ibid, s 9.1.3.
Ibid, ss 8.3.5, 8.3.3.
National Legal Profession Reform
Consultation Report
National Legal Profession Reform
Legal Profession National Law: Consultation Draft
Ibid, s 5.4.4.
Ibid, s 5.4.5.
Ibid, s 5.4.9.
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession Act 2007
Practitioners Act 1981
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic) s 4.4.8;
Profession Act 2008
(WA) ss 410(2), 555;
Legal Profession Act 2006
Legal Profession Act 2006
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession Act 2007
Practitioners Act 1981
Legal Profession Act 2007
, 65A, 65B, 65C;
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic) s 4.4.13;
Legal Profession Act 2008
(WA) ss 421(3)(a), 415(1)(a)–(c);
s 415(2)(b). See also:
Legal Profession Act 2008
(WA) ss 415(1)(d),
415(2)(a), 415(2)(c), 416(7), 417(1), 418;
Legal Profession Act 2006
ss 399(1)(a)
Profession Act 2006
(1)(a)–(h),
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
ss 89(2)(d)
Profession Act 2007
Legal Profession Act
(Vic) s 4.4.37(2);
Legal Profession Act 2008
ss 444(2)(b), 463(2);
Legal Profession Act 2006
ss 431(3)(b)
Legal Profession Act 2006
Legal Profession Act 2004
ss 540(2)(d)
(2)(b)–(d),
(3)(b)–(d),
Legal Profession Act 2007
ss 456(2)(b)
(3)(b)–(d),
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
ss 77AB(1)(d),
(6)(a)(iii)–(iv),
(2)(b)–(c),
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legal Profession Act
(Vic) ss 4.4.17(b)–(d), 4.4.18(b)–(d), 4.4.19(j);
Profession Act 2008
(WA) ss 439(a)–(c), 440(b)–(d), 441(m);
Legal Profession Act 2006
ss 425(3)(b)
(4)(b)–(d),
Legal Profession Act 2006
(4)(b)–(d),
Legal Profession Act 2004
ss 540(2)(a)
Legal Profession Act
ss 456(2)(e)
Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) ss 77AB(1)(c),
Profession Act 2007
ss 454(2)(a)
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic) s 4.4.19(k);
Legal Profession Act
(WA) ss 426(2)(a), 439(d);
Legal Profession Act 2006
ss 413(2)(a)
Legal Profession Act 2006
ss 499(2)(a)
Legal Profession Act 2004
ss 562(4)(a)
Legal Profession Act 2007
ss 456(4)(a)
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
ss 82(6)(a)(ii)
(6)(b)–(c);
Legal Profession Act 2007
ss 454(2)(b)
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic) s 4.4.19(b);
Legal Profession Act
(WA) ss 426(2)(b), 441(a);
Legal Profession Act 2006
ss 413(2)(e)
Legal Profession Act 2006
Legal Profession Act 2004
ss 540(2)(c)
(5), 566(1),
Profession Act 2007
ss 456(4)(b)
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) ss 77AB(1)(e),
Profession Act 2007
ss 454(2)(d)
Legal Profession
(Vic) ss 4.3.17(1)(a)–(e);
Legal Profession Act
(WA) ss 426(2)(c), 429(1), 441(c)–(e), 444(3);
Profession Act 2006
ss 413(2)(c)
Profession Act 2006
Legal Profession Act 2007
s 456(7)(b).
Legal Profession Act 2004
s 562(4)(b)
Legal Profession Act 2007
ss 456(4)(c)
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
79AB(1)(d)(ii), (6)(a)(iii)(B),
(2)(b)(ii);
Legal Profession Act 2007
ss 454(2)(h)
Legal Profession
(Vic) s 4.4.19(c), 4.4.19(i);
Legal Profession Act 2008
(WA) ss 426(2)(d), 441(b), 441(l);
Legal Profession Act 2006
413(2)(d)(iii)
Legal Profession Act
ss 525(5)(b)
Legal Profession Act 2004
s 562(4)(h)
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) ss 77AB(1)(d)(ii),
(6)(a)(iii)(B),
(2)(b)(ii);
Legal Profession Act 2007
ss 454(2)(h)
Legal Profession Act 2008
Legal Profession Act 2004
ss 562(4)(c)
Legal Profession Act 2007
ss 456(2)(f)
(4)(d)–(h),
(2)(d)–(f);
Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) ss 77AB(d)(i), 77AB(e),
(6)(a)(ib),
(6)(a)(iii)(A),
Legal Profession Act 2007
(2)(k)–(l),
Legal Profession Act 2004
ss 4.4.17(d)–(h), 4.4.19(l)–(m);
Legal Profession Act
(WA) ss 441(f)–(i), 441(k);
Legal Profession Act 2006
ss 413(2)(d)(i)
(5)(c)–(g),
Profession Act 2006
ss 525(5)(c)
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic) ss 4.3.17(f), 4.4.19(n);
Profession Act 2006
s 425(1)(b)
Legal Profession Act 2006
G Dal Pont,
Professional Responsibility
(4th ed, 2010), 370.
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) O 62, r 36(1);
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Chapter 3 considered the use of
costs powers to maintain proportionality in a discovery process, including the
power to order payment
of discovery costs in advance and the power to limit
legal fees for discovery as well as the courts power to make costs orders.
Civil Procedure Act 2010
s 29(1)(c).
s 29(1)(f).
See, eg, Proposals 3–1,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the Federal Civil Justice System
, Discussion Paper 62 (1999),
See, eg, C Parker and A Evans,
Inside Lawyers’ Ethics
(2007), 89.
Law Council of Australia,
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(2002) r 13.2.2. See also: Law
Council of Australia,
Legal Profession National Rules: Solicitors’
(2010) r 17.2.2; Australian Bar Association,
Legal Profession
National Rules: Barristers’ Rules
(2010) r 42(b);
Professional
Conduct and Practice Rules 1995
(NSW) r 23-A.15A(e);
New South Wales
Barristers’ Rules
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rule
(Qld) r 13.2.2;
Barristers Rule 2007
(Qld) r 21(b);
Professional Conduct and Practice
(SA) r 13.2.2;
Barristers’
Conduct Rules 2010
(SA) r 42(b);
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
(Vic) r 13.2.2;
Victorian Bar Practice Rules
(Vic) r 17(b);
Conduct Rules
(WA) r 18(b);
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rules
(ACT) r 17.2(b);
Legal Profession (Barristers) Rules 2008
Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(NT) r 17.4(b).
C Parker and A Evans,
Lawyers’ Ethics
(2007), 89.
This was one of the overarching
obligations recommended by the VLRC and enacted in the
Civil Procedure Act
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
Ibid, Rec 14. To date, only the
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rule 2007
(Qld) features commentary.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
See, eg, Proposal 4–4,
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), Rec 90.
For example, this was the Law
Council’s argument in its submission to Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89
National Legal Profession Reform
Legal Profession National Law: Consultation Draft
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 149, 153–155.
IMF Australia,
Submission by IMF
to Victorian Law Reform Commission Civil Justice Review
<www.imf.com.au/> at 24 October 2010.
Civil Procedure Act 2010
Legal Services Directions
(Cth) Appendix B,
Ibid, Appendix B, Note 2.
Ibid, Appendix B, Note 3.
Note the ALRC undertook a review of
the civil justice system in 2000: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000).
J Britton, ‘Rethinking the
Regulation of Lawyer Conduct: The Centrality of Law Firm Management and Ethical
Infrastructures’
(Paper presented at Australian Legal Practice Management
Association National Conference, Gold Coast, 15 August 2009), 7. See also:
Parker and others, ‘The Ethical Infrastructure of Legal Practice in Larger
Law Firms: Values, Policy and Behaviour’
[2008] UNSWLawJl 6
(2008) 31(1)
University of New
South Wales Law Journal
; C Parker and L Aitken, ‘The Queensland
Workplace Culture Check: Learning from Reflection on Ethics Inside Law
forthcoming in Georgetown Journal of Legal Ethics, 2011
See, eg, S Le Mire and C Parker,
‘Keeping it In-house: Ethics in the Relationship between Large Law Firm
Lawyers and their
Corporate Clients through the Eyes of In-house Counsel’
Legal Ethics
C Parker and others, ‘The
Ethical Infrastructure of Legal Practice in Larger Law Firms: Values, Policy and
[2008] UNSWLawJl 6
(2008) 31(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Ibid, 172 (citations omitted).
R Nelson, ‘The Discovery
Process as a Circle of Blame: Institutional, Professional, and Socio-economic
Factors that Contribute
to Unreasonable, Inefficient, and Amoral Behavior in
Corporate Litigation’
Fordham Law Review
See, eg, C Parker and L Aitken,
‘The Queensland Workplace Culture Check: Learning from Reflection on
Ethics Inside Law Firms’
forthcoming in Georgetown Journal of
Legal Ethics, 2011
C Parker and others, ‘The
Ethical Infrastructure of Legal Practice in Larger Law Firms: Values, Policy and
[2008] UNSWLawJl 6
(2008) 31(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
C Parker and A Evans,
Lawyers’ Ethics
(2007), 47.
G Dal Pont,
Professional Responsibility
(4th ed, 2010), 535.
See, eg, Law Council of Australia,
Model Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
(2002) r 31.
See, eg, National Legal Profession
Reform Project,
Legal Profession National Law: Consultation Draft
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic) s 3.4.46;
Legal Profession Act 2008
(WA) s 307;
Legal Profession Act 2006
G Dal Pont,
Professional Responsibility
(4th ed, 2010), 536.
American Bar Association,
Rules of Professional Conduct
(2010) r 8.3(a).
Any conduct involving dishonesty or
deception or a serious criminal offence: Solicitors Regulation Authority (UK),
The Guide to the Professional Conduct of Solicitors
, cl 20.06.
Lawyers and Conveyancers Act
(Lawyers: Conduct and Client Care) Rules
(NZ) rr 2.8, 2.9.
See G Dal Pont,
Professional Responsibility
(4th ed, 2010), 537.
Judicial education is discussed in
J Britton, ‘The Business of
Ethics’ (Paper presented at University of Queensland Alumni Lunchtime
Lecture, Brisbane,
12 May 2010).
S Mark, ‘Regulating for
Professionalism: The New South Wales Approach’ (Paper presented at
American Bar Association
Annual Meeting, San Francisco, 5 August 2010).
C Parker, T Gordon and S Mark,
‘Regulating Law Firm Ethics Management: An Empirical Assessment of an
Innovation in Regulation
of the Legal Profession in New South Wales’
Journal of Law and Society
C Parker, ‘Regulation of the
Ethics of Australian Legal Practice: Autonomy and Responsiveness’
[2002] UNSWLawJl 38
University of New South Wales Law Journal
J Britton, ‘The Business of
Ethics’ (Paper presented at University of Queensland Alumni Lunchtime
Lecture, Brisbane,
12 May 2010).
See discussion in Ch 3 and in
particular Proposal 3–2.
The use of legal holds is discussed
earlier in this chapter.
See, eg, Law Council of Australia,
Model Rules of Professional Conduct and Practice
National Alternative Dispute
Resolution Advisory Council (NADRAC),
The Resolve to Resolve: Embracing ADR
to Improve Access to Justice in the Federal Jurisdiction
(2009), sch 2.
Ibid, sch 2.
Judicial education in discovery is
discussed in ch 3.
In NSW for example, these subject
are set out in the
Legal Profession Admission Rules 2005
r 95(1)(b), sch 5. The Draft National Rules propose that approved areas of
academic knowledge continue to reflect the Law Admissions
Consultative
Committee’s prescribed areas of knowledge, and that the list of recognised
tertiary academic courses continue
to reflect existing recognised academic
courses: National Legal Profession Reform Project,
Legal Profession National
Rules: Consultation Draft
(2010), ch 3, schs 1, 2.
Legal Profession Admission Rules
(NSW), sch 5.
Ibid, sch 5.
Ibid, sch 6. The Draft National
Rules propose that the competency standards for entry level lawyers reflect the
Law Admissions Consultative
Committee’s existing competency standards and
that the list of recognised courses of study also reflect the existing
practical legal training courses: National Legal Profession Reform
Legal Profession National Rules: Consultation Draft
3, schs 3, 4.
Legal Profession Admission Rules
(NSW), sch 6.
Ibid, sch 6, Civil Practice,
Explanatory Note.
Ibid, sch 6, Ethics and
Professional Responsibility.
National Continuing Professional
Development Taskforce,
A Model Continuing Professional Development Scheme for
Australian Lawyers
(2007), [3.5].
Competing Duties:
Ethical Dilemmas in Practice
(presentation to Newcastle Law Society,
19 October 2009).
In some jurisdictions the current
requirement is completion of seven units, which will increase to ten units for
practising certificates
commencing on or after 1 July 2011: ACT Law
A Continuing Professional Development Scheme for Canberra’s
Solicitors (MCPD Guidelines)
National Continuing Professional
Development Taskforce,
A Model Continuing Professional Development Scheme for
Australian Lawyers
(2007), [3.5].
See, eg, Law Institute of Victoria,
Continuing Professional Development Rules
(2008) r 5.2;
Profession Rules 2009
, div 2, r 10(2)–(4). Note, the Draft
National Rules also propose that Australian legal practitioners must complete 10
of CPD activity each year including one unit relating to each of these
first three core areas: practical legal ethics, practice management
and business
skills, and professional skills: National Legal Profession Reform Project,
Legal Profession National Rules: Consultation Draft
(2010), ch 11.
National Continuing Professional
Development Taskforce,
A Model Continuing Professional Development Scheme for
Australian Lawyers
See, eg, Law Institute of Victoria,
Continuing Professional Development Rules
(2008) r 5.2.
Professional Conduct and
Practice Rules 1995
(NSW) r 42.1.6; Law Institute of Victoria,
Professional Development Rules
(2008) r 5.2;
Queensland Law Society
Administration Rule 1995
(Qld) r 47(4); ACT Law Society,
A Continuing
Professional Development Scheme for Canberra’s Solicitors (MCPD
Guidelines)
Legal Profession Rules 2009
(WA) r 10. The Northern Territory has mandatory CPD requirements, but does not
mandate the study of ethics:
Legal Profession Regulations 2007
Legal Profession (Barristers)
(ACT) r 113; Australian Capital Territory Bar Association,
Continuing Professional Development
<www.actbar.com.au/> at 28
October 2010.
Legal Profession Regulations
(NT) sch 2,
, div 1, r 2(2).
See, eg, College of Law (NSW),
Ethics & Professional Responsibility; Practice Management &
Business Skills; and Professional Skills [Face to Face Seminar]
<www.collaw.edu.au/> at 1 November 2010.
, Legalwise Seminars,
Legal Skills and Legal Ethics for All Lawyers [seminar]
<www.legalwiseseminars.com.au/> at 30 September 2010.
See, eg, New South Wales Bar
Association,
Urgent Ethical Guidance for Members
<www.nswbar.asn.au/> at 25 October 2010; Queensland Law Society,
Queensland Law Society Ethics Centre
<www.qls.com.au/> at 1
November 2010; Bar Association of Queensland,
From the President: Ethical
Enquiries—Ethical Counsellors
<www.qldbar.asn.au/> at
25 October 2010.
See, eg, Law Institute of Victoria
Ethics Committee,
Ethics Committee Rulings
<www.liv.asn.au/> at
1 November 2010.
See, eg, Queensland Law Society,
Ethics FAQs
http://ethics.qls.com.au/faq
at 1 November 2010; Law
Society of South Australia,
Professional Standards: Ethics and Professional
Responsibility
<www.lawsocietysa.asn.au/> at 1 November 2010; Law
Institute of Victoria Ethics Committee,
Ethics Resources
<www.liv.asn.au/> at 1 November 2010.
Proposal 4–1.
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legal Profession
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic) ss 4.4.26,
Legal Profession Act 2008
(WA) s 452;
Legal Profession
Legal Profession Act 2006
C Parker and A Evans,
Lawyers’ Ethics
(2007), 217.
Competing Duties:
Ethical Dilemmas in Practice
(presentation to Newcastle Law Society,
19 October 2009).
ALRC CP2 Discovery in Federal Courts
5. Alternatives to Discovery
Introduction
What are pre-action protocols?
Advantages and disadvantages of pre-action protocols
Pre-action protocols in the United Kingdom
Specific pre-action protocols
General pre-action protocol
Compliance and enforcement
Implementation issues
Front-loading of costs
Information exchange and narrowing the issues in dispute
Compliance, enforcement and satellite litigation
The Australian context
Civil Dispute Resolution Bill 2010
Civil Procedure Act 2010
New South Wales
The need for a tailored approach?
Pre-trial oral examinations
Oral depositions in the United States
Advantages and disadvantages of oral depositions
Pre-trial oral examinations in the Australian context
Oral deposition-like processes in Australia
Corporations Act 2001
A case for oral depositions in Australia?
Other alternatives
Interim disclosure orders
Civil jurisdictions
Current courts processes
5. Alternatives to Discovery
Introduction
5.1 The Terms of Reference direct the ALRC, in conducting its inquiry, to
have regard to alternatives to
The ALRC is also to
consider issues to limit the overuse of discovery, and ensure key documents
relevant to the real issues in dispute
are defined as early as possible. This
chapter considers pre-action protocols, pre-trial oral examinations and other
processes that
encourage early settlement, document exchange and the narrowing
of the issues in dispute between parties prior to the commencement
proceedings. The chapter draws upon recent works by other law reform bodies, as
well as practices and procedures in overseas jurisdictions.
are pre-action protocols?
5.2 An alternative to discovery are pre-action protocols—a series of
procedural requirements that are a pre-requisite to commencing
litigation—generally aimed at encouraging settlement, and where settlement
is not achieved, narrowing the issues in dispute
to facilitate a more efficient
and cost-effective trial
5.3 Pre-action protocols can cover a spectrum of procedural requirements that
may include:
• the need to disclose information or documents in relation to the
cause of action;
• the need to correspond, and potentially meet, with the person or
entity involved in the dispute;
• undertaking, in good faith, some form of alternative dispute
resolution (ADR); and
• conducting genuine and reasonable negotiations with a view to
settling without recourse to court
proceedings.
5.4 Pre-action protocols may be prescribed in legislation or in court
practice rules. For example, the
Civil Procedure Rules
(CPR) in the
United Kingdom (UK) mandatorily require a prospective claimant in a personal
injury proceeding to send a letter to a
prospective defendant, containing a
clear summary of the facts on which a prospective claim is based, along with a
description of
the nature of the injuries and the financial loss
The prospective defendant
is then required to send a reply within 21 days, and to ensure that a copy of
the letter is sent to the
insurer (if any is
identified).
The prospective
defendant is then required to formulate a position on his/her/its liability and
send a reply to the prospective claimant
within three
and disadvantages of pre-action protocols
5.5 In jurisdictions where they have been implemented, pre-action protocols
have been met with some criticism. However, their potential
to promote access to
justice, efficiency, and promote cultural change has also gained
Advantages of pre-action protocols
5.6 In many instances pre-action protocols place obligations on parties to
disclose relevant information and documents with the aim
of facilitating
settlement. Where no settlement is reached, the procedures aim to narrow the
issues in dispute between the parties
in a manner that expedites the trial
In principle, this should
aid in reducing the need for, and cost of, any subsequent discovery of
5.7 Moreover, the simplification and standardisation of the claims process
may offer consistency for litigants, and help to promote
a culture of
cooperation and settlement of cases at an earlier stage. Paula Gerber and Bevan
Mailman note in relation to pre-action
protocols in construction disputes
Pre-action protocols represent a philosophical shift in the way litigation is
commenced and conducted ... towards a full consideration
of alternative means of
resolving differences. Pre-action protocols do this by forcing parties to fully
investigate the merits of
their claims and defences as a condition precedent to
filing a law
pre-action protocols also play an important role in encouraging parties to
pursue ADR. Where ADR is successful, it results
in cost savings to both
individuals, and to the public in terms of reduced burden on the courts.
Alternatively, it has been argued
that proper pre-action protocols should reduce
the need for ADR.
Disadvantages of pre-action protocols
5.9 A major concern with pre-action protocols relates to
‘front-loading’ of costs by requiring parties to spend more
at an early stage of the process. For example, in complex cases where
the parties are unlikely to reach early settlement, imposing
onerous pre-action
requirements may do no more than add to delay and costs for both parties in
complying with the pre-action
5.10 Pre-action protocols also raise a number of access to justice issues,
especially for individual litigants. For example, individuals
necessarily have the monetary resources to comply with relevant protocols, or
may be pressured into settlement for fear of
having adverse cost orders made
against them for non-compliance with the
5.11 Additionally, pre-action protocols may open up a battlefield for
‘satellite litigation’, by way of interlocutory
applications as to
whether a party has or has not complied with the relevant
This becomes more
likely if parties risk adverse cost orders for not complying with the protocol,
and has an obvious impact for courts
and the judiciary, as well as adding to
delay and the cost of
litigation.
5.12 Finally, some have argued that pre-action protocols may be challenged on
human rights grounds, if their effect is to impede an
individual’s right
of access to the courts.
protocols in the United Kingdom
pre-action protocols
5.13 Pre-action protocols were established in the UK in 1999, following Lord
Access to Justice
report (the Woolf Report) in 1996, in
which he identified a need to enable
parties to a dispute to embark on meaningful negotiations as soon as the
possibility of litigation is identified, and ensure that
as early as possible
they have the relevant information to define their claims and to make realistic
offers to settle.
5.14 The Woolf Report recommended that:
• pre-action protocols should set out codes of sensible practice which
parties are expected to follow when faced with the prospect
of litigation;
• when a protocol is established for a particular area of litigation,
it should be incorporated into a relevant practice guide;
• unreasonable failure by either party to comply with the relevant
protocols should be taken into account by the court, for
example in the
allocation of costs or in considering any application for an extension of the
timetable; and
• the operation of protocols should be monitored and their detailed
provisions modified as far as is necessary in light of practical
experience.
5.15 Subsequently, pre-action protocols relating to specific types of claims
were adopted by way of practice directions. There are
currently 10 pre-action
protocols in the UK covering a wide range of
as set out in the
following table:
Pre-action protocol
Came into force
Personal Injury
26 April 1999
Clinical Disputes
26 April 1999
Construction and Engineering
2 October 2000
2 October 2000
Professional Negligence
16 July 2001
Judicial Review
4 March 2002
Disease and Illness
8 December 2003
Housing Disrepair
8 December 2003
Possession Claims Based on Rent Arrears
2 October 2006
Possession Claims Based on Mortgage Arrears
19 November 2008
5.16 These specific pre-action protocols vary from imposing mandatory
procedural obligations on parties, to simply acting as a general
guide to good
practice. The Victorian Law Reform Commission notes that the more detailed and
lengthy protocols in the UK have, in
some ways, constituted their own procedural
For example, the Personal
Injury Claims Protocol sets out steps that must be taken by both parties, and
includes draft templates
that can be tailored to meet the circumstances of the
particular claim.
On the other
hand, the pre-action protocol for Disease and Illness Claims provides that:
This protocol is not a comprehensive code governing all steps in disease claims.
Rather it attempts to set out a code of good practice
which parties should
pre-action protocol
5.17 For actions where no specific pre-action protocol applies, the Practice
Direction —Pre-Action Conduct (the Direction) sets
out the conduct a court
would normally expect of prospective parties prior to the start of the
proceedings.
5.18 The Direction provides that, unless the circumstances make it
inappropriate, the parties should:
• exchange sufficient information about the matter to allow them to
understand each other’s position and make informed
decisions about
settlement and how to proceed; and
• make appropriate attempts to resolve the matter without starting
proceedings, and in particular consider the use of an appropriate
form of ADR to
5.19 The Direction provides guidance on the nature and the extent of the
information to be provided in the letter by the claimant,
and the response by
the defendant.
It also provides
that documents disclosed by either party in accordance with the Direction may
not be used for any purpose other
than resolving the dispute, unless the other
party agrees in writing.
5.20 The Direction also recognises that there are some types of applications
where pre-action protocols ‘clearly cannot and
These include, but
are not limited to: applications for consent orders; applications where there is
no other party for the applicant
to engage with; most applications for
directions by a trustee or other fiduciary; and applications where telling the
other potential
party in advance would defeat the purpose of the application
(for example, an application for an order to freeze
and enforcement
5.21 The CPR enables the court to take into account compliance (or
non-compliance) with the Direction and applicable protocols when
direction on the management of proceedings and when making orders as to
The protocols are not
intended to be exhaustive, but rather:
Protocols are codes of best practice, to be followed generally but not slavishly
... Reasonableness is a watch word. The court is
much more interested in
compliance with the spirit of the protocol than the exact
considering the extent of compliance, the court will take into account:
• the extent to which the parties have complied in substance with the
relevant principles and requirements and is not likely
to be concerned with
minor or technical shortcomings;
• the proportionality of the steps taken compared to the size and
importance of the matter; and
• the urgency of the
5.23 Relevant examples of non-compliance by a party include: not providing
sufficient information to enable the other party to understand
the issues; not
acting within a time limit, or within a reasonable period; unreasonably refusing
to consider ADR; or without good
reason, not disclosing documents requested to
be disclosed.
5.24 If the court is of the opinion that there has been non-compliance, the
following sanctions are available:
• staying the proceedings until the steps that ought to have been
taken, have been taken;
• an order that the party at fault pay the cost of the proceedings, or
part of those costs of the other party;
• an order that the party at fault pay those costs on an indemnity
• if the party at fault is the claimant in whose favour an order for
the payment of damages or some specified sum is subsequently
made, an order that
the claimant is deprived of interest on all or part of that sum, and/or awarding
that interest at a lower rate
than that at which interest would otherwise have
been awarded; and
• if the party at fault is the defendant, and an order for the payment
of damages or some other specified sum is subsequently
made in favour of the
claimant, an order awarding interest on such sum and in respect of such period
as may be specified at a higher
rate, not exceeding 10% above the base rate,
than would otherwise have been
Implementation
Front-loading
5.25 A central criticism of pre-action protocols in the UK is that, by
requiring more work to be done up front, the protocols have
front-loaded cost
for litigants and, in some cases, increased the total cost of
litigation.
For example, one
comprehensive cross-section and time-series data study concluded that ‘it
seems overall case costs have increased
substantially over pre-2000 costs for
cases of comparable value’, with the Woolf reforms being a plausible
explanation.
5.26 Professor Michael Zander suggests, in relation to the Woolf reforms,
that cases subjected to pre-action protocols can be divided
categories:
• cases that prior to the introduction of pre-action protocols would
have gone to trial, and still go to trial;
• cases that would have gone to trial prior to the introduction of
pre-action protocols, but are settled as a result of work
done in the protocol
period; and
• cases that would have settled anyway and compliance with pre-action
protocols have only added to the
5.27 While Zander notes that the data is unclear, he suggests that if the
majority of cases lie in the third category (where extra
work is required which
brings little or no benefit) instead of the second category (where there are
obvious cost savings), then the
Woolf reforms have not met the objective of
reducing litigation costs.
accords with some views that pre-action protocols in the UK ‘provided
quicker, although not necessarily cheaper, justice
and sensible, effective case
5.28 While studies that have examined the impact of the Woolf reforms have
found positive changes in the culture of litigation marked
cooperation and increases in
settlement,
the problems of cost
were still intractable.
5.29 In a 2009 review of the costs of civil litigation in the UK, Lord
Justice Jackson was of the opinion that general pre-action
protocols lead to
substantial delay and additional costs, and recommended that the general
protocol be repealed, because ‘one
size does not fit
In addition, in
relation to specific pre-action protocols, it was noted that
there is a clear majority view amongst commercial litigators and counsel, shared
by Commercial Court judges, that pre-action protocols
are unwelcome in
commercial litigation. They generate additional costs and delay to no useful
purpose at all.
5.30 These sentiments were echoed in 2004 in a report by the
Hong Kong Chief Justice’s Working Party on Civil Justice Reform,
cautioned that:
Pre-action protocols should only be adopted where such front-loading is
considered justifiable in that the benefits of early settlement
resulting from
the protocol are likely to outweigh the disadvantages from such
front-loading.
number of Australian legal professional bodies have also expressed similar
concern about the front-loading of costs. For example,
the New South Wales (NSW)
Law Society is of the opinion that:
what constitutes ‘cost effective’ [pre-action protocols] will vary
greatly depending on the nature of the disputes and
the parties involved.
However, mandatory pre-action protocols will effectively increase the cost of
litigation by adding another
layer of costs to the litigation process ...
Pre-action protocols are also inappropriate for low value claims because of the
cost involved, and in many cases are completely
unnecessary.
5.32 Others
argue that the front-loading of costs is justified where the protocols reduce
the total cost of litigation.
For example, in cases where compliance with pre-action protocols successfully
narrows the issues in dispute, there may be cost savings
associated with a more
expedited, less complex and shorter
As Lord Woolf
foreshadowed in his report:
[t]here are practitioners who fear that the use of pre-action protocols will
lead to unnecessary front-loading of costs. While the
protocols will certainly
bring work forward by comparison with the usual present practice, this is to be
welcomed. The work has to
be done to enable cases to be resolved, and bringing
the work forward will enable some cases to settle
while pre-action protocols may have the effect of front-loading costs,
it does so in a controlled manner while increasing the possibility of settlement
... [This] is preferable to the failure to fully
pursue settlement, and
ultimately incur significant costs during the course of litigation, where they
can escalate in an unrestrained
ALRC is interested in stakeholder views on how front-loading of costs can be
reduced, and what safeguards can be implemented
to ensure that individual
litigants are not denied access to justice as a result of the operation of
pre-action protocols.
Question 5–1
What measures could be taken to reduce the
front-loading of costs in relation to pre-action protocols?
Question 5–2
What safeguards could be implemented to ensure that
individual litigants are not denied access to justice as a result of pre-action
Information
exchange and narrowing the issues in dispute
5.35 As noted above, where settlement is not achieved as a result of
compliance with pre-action protocols, a secondary aim of the
protocols is to
facilitate relevant information exchange and narrow the issues in dispute.
Pre-action protocols can impose requirements
for information exchange that range
from a simple letter of demand to requiring a detailed narrative and legal
analysis, coupled
with the provision of documents and information essential to
5.36 For example, information exchange may be looked at in the context of
international arbitration. Under the
International Bar Association Rules on
Taking Expert Evidence in International Arbitration
(IBA Rules), each party
must ‘within a time specified by the Arbitral Tribunal, submit to it and
to all other parties all documents
available to it on which it relies ... except
documents that have already been submitted by another
Parties may also
submit a Request to Produce, containing a description of each document requested
and statements as to how the documents
are relevant to the case and material to
its outcome.
The responding
party must then produce such documents, or state an objection in writing to the
Arbitral Tribunal. The Tribunal may
then make a ruling, and would only compel
disclosure where, among other things, ‘the issues that the requesting
party wishes
to prove are relevant to the case and material to its
5.37 Prior to proceedings, the parties submit a claims memorial which
contains not only a summary of the facts but also their legal
analysis and
attaches any documents on which the party intends to rely, including in some
instances, witness statements.
The ALRC heard in consultations that requiring parties to provide a kind of
‘narrative’ as a pre-litigation step would
aid in narrowing the
issues in dispute. One early submission to the Inquiry suggested that the
‘the IBA rules and the hybrid
approach to discovery should be considered
as an alternative to the current regime of
discovery’.
5.38 There may be concerns that pre-action protocols governing information
exchange cannot operate with sufficient flexibility to
take account of the
principle of proportionality. In cases where the issues are less complex and the
number of relevant documents
is small and easily identified, allocating
resources to the disclosure of such documents may be cost-effective. In larger,
more complex
cases, the extent of the obligations imposed on the parties by
pre-action protocols might not take into consideration both the nature
dispute and the usefulness of detailed information exchange, having regard to
the front-loading of costs. A measure of flexibility
may be necessary to ensure
access to justice for all
5.39 The ALRC is interested in stakeholder views on how pre-action protocols
might be best designed to facilitate information exchange
between the parties,
and whether principles from international arbitration would be instructive in
this regard. Further, the ALRC
seeks views about what else should be included in
pre-action protocols for particular types of proceedings that would aid parties
in narrowing the issues in dispute.
Question 5–3
What requirements can be incorporated into
pre-action protocols to maximise information exchange between parties in civil
proceedings
before federal courts?
Question 5–4
What else should be included in pre-action
protocols for particular types of proceedings to aid parties in narrowing the
Compliance,
enforcement and satellite litigation
5.40 Pre-action protocols have also been criticised for creating a
battleground for ‘satellite
litigation’,
arising from
disputes as to whether a party has complied with the relevant protocol. It
appears important, therefore, that courts
play an active role in the enforcement
of pre-action protocols, and for sanctions to be clear and effective.
5.41 Indeed, non-compliance with the protocols
and the lack of
proper enforcement of sanctions are among the chief criticisms of the Woolf
For example, it has
been noted that while some courts are willing to strictly enforce compliance
with the pre-action protocols, this
is by no means
As Gerber and Mailman
note in relation to the Technology and Construction Court in England:
There have been instances reported where courts have asked parties at case
management conferences whether they have complied with
the requirements of the
relevant protocols, and the parties have responded ‘yes’ even when
they have not. The courts
in these cases did not look behind this, or seek
compliance.
Peysner and Mary Seneviratne have identified that some practitioners in the UK
post-Woolf reforms ‘thought that the
overriding objective gave too much
discretion to the courts’,
resulting in a lack of guidance and inconsistent interpretation of the rules.
Views were also expressed that the certainty of the
old system resulted in cost
This may be a symptom
of a lack of education of the judiciary and the legal profession in complying
with any proposed pre-action
protocols, and the relative lack of case law in the
5.43 Further, sanctions in the form of cost orders may have substantial
adverse impacts on self-represented litigants, who would require
legal advice in
the pre-litigation process.
There may be concerns that pre-litigation requirements would place further
burdens on community legal centres and other such organisations
that are already
under-resourced. The prospect of an adverse cost order might also pressure some
litigants into abandoning a claim,
thus denying them access to
Question 5–5
Are cost sanctions an effective mechanism to ensure
that parties comply with pre-action protocols?
Australian context
5.44 The possibility of introducing pre-action protocols similar to those
suggested by the Woolf Report has attracted attention in
reports by:
• the Access to Justice Taskforce of the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department in
A Strategic Framework for Access to
Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
(Access to Justice
• the National Alternative Dispute Resolution Council in The Resolve to
Resolve—Embracing ADR to Improve Access to Justice
in the Federal
• the Victorian Law Reform Commission in
Civil Justice Review 2008
(VLRC Report).
5.45 These reports have informed a less prescriptive approach in
Australia— culminating in recent and proposed reforms—that
instead focused on general pre- litigation steps, rather than specific
pre-action protocols. The
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) requires parties
to take ‘reasonable steps’ to resolve their disputes before
commencing litigation. Similarly,
Civil Dispute Resolution Bill 2010
proposes that parties should take ‘genuine steps’ to resolve
disputes before commencing litigation.
Dispute Resolution Bill 2010 (Cth)
Civil Dispute Resolution Bill 2010
(Cth) was reintroduced
into Parliament on 20 September
The overall aims of the
• to change the adversarial culture often associated with disputes;
• to have people turn their minds to resolution before becoming
entrenched in a litigious position; and
• where a dispute cannot be resolved and the matter proceeds to court,
the issues are identified reducing the time required
for a court to consider the
5.47 The Bill seeks to achieve these aims by requiring parties to file a
‘genuine steps statement’ at the time of filing
the application to
commence a civil proceeding.
statement must specify the steps the party has taken to resolve the issues, or
if no steps were taken, an explanation as to why
no steps were
Non-compliance is not a
bar to commencing proceedings, but the court may, in the circumstance of
non-compliance by any party, award
costs in favour of the complying
5.48 The ‘genuine steps’ formulation implemented a recommendation
made in the NADRAC Report that:
The legislation governing federal courts and tribunals require genuine steps to
be taken by prospective parties to resolve the dispute
before court or tribunal
proceedings are
‘genuine steps’ formulation was preferred over other formulations,
such as ‘genuine effort’ or ‘good
faith’ requirements.
NADRAC considered that the reference to ‘effort’ was a subjective
concept that may be misinterpreted
as applying a standard of conduct to some ADR
processes that is inappropriate.
A further concern was that such formulations might ‘open the door for
satellite litigation about the conduct of the parties
5.50 The Bill does not define ‘genuine steps’. Rather, the
non-prescriptive approach is intended to ‘ensure that
the focus is on
resolution and identifying the central issue without incurring unnecessary
upfront costs, which has been a criticism
of pre-action
protocols’.
Australian Government Attorney-General notes in his second reading speech:
The Bill does not introduce a mandatory alternative dispute resolution or
prescriptive or onerous pre-action protocols, nor does
it prevent a party from
commencing litigation. It is deliberately flexible in allowing parties to tailor
the genuine steps they take
in the circumstances of the
the consideration of ‘genuine steps’ is primarily left to the
parties, a number of illustrative examples are
given in clause 4, including:
• notifying the other person of the issues that are, or may be, in
dispute, and offering to discuss them, with a view to resolving
the dispute;
• responding appropriately to such notification; and
• providing relevant information and documents to other persons to
enable the other person to understand the issues involved
and how the dispute
might be resolved.
5.52 Under the proposed law, lawyers will have an obligation to advise their
clients about the requirements and assist them to
A lawyer may be ordered
to bear adverse costs orders personally, for failing to meet this
obligation.
5.53 The Bill also provides that the rules of court under the
Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) or the
Federal Magistrates Act 1999
(Cth) may make provisions for or in relation to:
• the form of genuine steps statements;
• the matters to be specified in genuine steps statements; and
• the time limits relating to the provisions of copies of genuine steps
statements.
Procedure Act 2010 (Vic)
Civil Procedure Act
(Vic) was enacted on 12
August 2010,
and adopted
recommendations in the VLRC Report that a general pre-action protocol should be
implemented in Victoria.
requires that ‘each person involved in a civil dispute must comply with
the pre-litigation requirements prior to the
commencement of any civil
proceeding in a court in relation to that
The requirements
are to take ‘reasonable steps’ to resolve the dispute by agreement
or to clarify or narrow the issues
5.55 As in the
Civil Dispute Resolution Bill 2010
(Cth), the meaning of
‘reasonable steps’ is not defined in the
Civil Procedure Act
Rather, the Act gives illustrative examples, such as:
• exchanging appropriate pre-litigation correspondence, information and
• considering options for resolving the dispute without recourse to
civil proceedings including resolution through genuine and
negotiations or appropriate dispute
resolution.
5.56 Similar to the UK pre-action protocols, documents exchanged pursuant to
pre-action requirements are subject to protection and
their use is limited to
resolution of the civil dispute.
Further, non-compliance is not a bar to commencing the proceedings, although the
court may, on its own motion or by application by
any party, take such
non-compliance into account in making cost orders or any other
The court may also order
that the representative of a party, rather than the party itself, is to bear the
cost of compliance if the
court has determined that the representative’s
conduct resulted in another party incurring unnecessary
5.57 Subject to court orders to the contrary, the costs of compliance with
pre-action requirements are borne by each
This is notably different
from the costs of discovery, which are typically borne by the party producing
the documents (at least,
at first instance) and not the requesting party.
5.58 However, the Act is less prescriptive than the VLRC’s
recommendations in that it provides no guidance in relation to the
letters of claims/response and timeframes for response for the purposes of
reasonable steps.
South Wales
5.59 In April 2009, the NSW Department of Justice and Attorney General issued
a Discussion Paper raising the introduction of pre-action
protocols in the ADR
In addition to the
general pre-action protocol, two further options were canvassed—specific
protocols in relation to particular
cases and the incorporation of the main
elements of pre-action protocols into guidelines that a court could take into
account when
asked to adjudicate a civil
Serious failure to
comply with the guidelines may result in adverse cost
5.60 A Draft Recommendations Report followed in September 2009. It proposed
four types of matter that require participation in ADR
before proceedings in a
court or tribunal can be commenced: tenancy disputes, farm debt mediation,
strata disputes and common law
work injury
5.61 The draft recommendation would amend or add to the overriding purpose
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) to require the
• people in a civil dispute to take all reasonable steps (such as
negotiation, mediation and other ADR processes) to resolve
the dispute without
litigation; and
• if litigation is necessary, before proceedings are commenced the
parties are to take all reasonable steps to agree to the
real issues required to
be determined by a court.
5.62 In Queensland, the majority of personal injury claims are now governed
by pre-action procedures after the
Personal Injuries
Proceedings Act 2002
(Qld) amended other legislation to provide a framework
for pre-action protocols. The legislation is aimed at providing a speedy
for the resolution of claims and promoting
settlement.
Parties are required
to—within a certain timeframe—disclose information and
contributors
and provide formal
notification of claims.
compulsory conference must be held on completion of the pre-action
requirements,
and parties are to
exchange final offers at the conclusion of the
conference.
5.63 In 2003, the Queensland Attorney-General appointed a stakeholder
reference group to consider the possibility of common pre-action
procedures for
personal injury claims. The group issued its report in 2004 and proposed a
revised general pre-action protocol that
would apply to all cases of personal
injury other than dust-related diseases, medical negligence and claims from
The ALRC is not aware
that these recommendations in relation to a general pre-action protocol have
been implemented.
5.64 Some have suggested that, as a result of the specific pre-action
procedure being introduced, ‘most personal injury litigation
disappeared’ in Queensland. Statistical data confirms a drop in
proceedings initiated, however, it is difficult to confirm
that this is
attributable to pre-action
need for a tailored approach?
5.65 The above issues concerning implementation have led to considerable
support for ‘bespoke’ or tailored pre-action
protocols for specific
applicable protocol.
the relative success of the specific pre-action protocols compared to the
general protocol in the UK suggests that their
implementation in Australia
warrants further consideration.
5.66 Lord Woolf recognised the importance of targeted protocols, stating that
pre-action protocols ‘are not intended to provide
a comprehensive code for
all pre-action behaviour, but will deal with specific problems in specific
Indeed, Lord
Jackson’s review found that general pre-action protocols lead to
substantial delay and additional costs, and recommended
that the general
protocol be repealed, because ‘one size does not fit
5.67 The Hong Kong Chief Justice’s Working Party on Civil Justice
Reform considered that pre-action protocols might have a bigger
role to play in
specialist lists, rather than general litigation in other
The Working Party did
not make any recommendations for the adoption of a general pre-action protocol,
and concluded that any specific
pre-action protocols introduced in specialist
lists should be at the discretion of the
5.68 Similarly, the Access to Justice Report cautioned that not all matters
that appear before courts will be suitable for pre-action
protocols. For
in the migration jurisdiction, claims have already been through an extensive
merits review process, and there is a high volume of
relatively simple
proceedings ... Introducing additional pre-action steps in this process is
likely to extend the process and increase
5.69 Rather, it considered that pre-action protocols might best
be targeted at categories identified as complex and time consuming,
taxation, competition law, consumer protection law, human rights and
intellectual property
5.70 The report cautioned that, in designing pre-action protocols, the
challenges identified in the UK had to be taken into account,
effective enforcement mechanisms/sanctions; avoiding excessive front-loading of
costs; and safeguards to avoid their misuse
as a litigation strategy to
inconvenience or intimidate the other
The report recommended
that the Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department should work
with federal courts to determine
5.71 As Michael Legg and Dorne Boniface note:
The task is to identify the appropriate categories of case and the pre-action
steps that will be beneficial. It should also be noted
that pre-action protocols
may be the victim of their own success. If the role of the protocol in securing
more speedy resolution
of dispute is not identified then it may be assumed that
the dispute would have resolved without the
ALRC’s views
5.72 While the Australian approaches centred on pre-litigation steps provide
a non-prescriptive mechanism encouraging parties to attempt
resolution before
instituting civil proceedings, there appears to be a strong case for
consideration of specific pre-action protocols
for particular types of dispute.
5.73 The ALRC considers that the adoption of specific protocols for
particular types of dispute should be explored. Given the implications
front-loading of costs, it is imperative that the benefits of pre-action
protocols be leveraged efficiently and that the requirements
are flexible
depending on the size, complexity and nature of the dispute. At the same time,
they ought to achieve a measure of efficiency
and streamlining of the litigation
process. The experience of specific pre-action protocols in the UK suggests
that, if tailored
properly, they have the potential to be effective in promoting
a more cooperative culture based around the early exchange of relevant
and the narrowing of the issues in dispute. This may have benefits in limiting
the overuse of discovery and reducing costs,
but also aids in creating ripe
conditions for successful ADR.
5.74 The ALRC notes that the genuine/reasonable steps formulation
underpinning the
Civil Dispute Resolution Bill 2010
(Cth) and the
Procedure Act 2010
(Vic) is intended to encourage parties to attempt to
resolve their disputes outside the court system. However, in a discovery
specific pre-action protocols might prescribe more directly the conduct
expected of prospective litigants when it comes to information
disclosure and
document exchange. For example, the ‘genuine steps’ taken by the
parties may involve exchanging brief
notice of a claim and acceptance and offers
to negotiate, rather than turning their minds to the issues in dispute, or
ensuring the
early disclosure of relevant documents. To achieve the particular
objectives of discovery earlier in the dispute-resolution process,
pre-action protocols that are tailored and prescriptive—operating
alongside a genuine/reasonable steps requirement—may
impose express
requirements to disclose relevant documents and information.
5.75 The ALRC further recognises that the adoption of specific pre-action
protocols will need to be coupled with education and support
for both the
judiciary and the legal profession.
Proposal 5–1
The Australian Government and the Federal Court, in
consultation with relevant stakeholders, should work to develop specific
protocols for particular types of civil dispute with a view to
incorporating them in Practice Directions of the Court.
oral examinations
5.76 Pre-trial oral examinations are used predominantly in United States (US)
parties and witnesses. A
pre-trial oral examination is simply ‘an out-of-court question and answer
session under oath, conducted
in advance of a lawsuit as part of the discovery
oral examinations are also referred to as oral depositions, oral discovery,
pre-trial oral examination, examinations for
discovery and depositions on oral
examinations.
5.77 The purpose of pre-trial examinations, is among other things, to:
• discover evidence and the identity of documents;
• discover how a witness will testify at trial and commit that witness
to a version of testimony prior to trial;
• assess the credibility and suitability of the witness;
• preserve testimony in a case where witnesses are unable to testify at
• test out the strengths or weaknesses of a party’s case so as to
encourage earlier settlement
negotiations.
5.78 Generally speaking, pre-trial oral examinations do not replace the need
for oral evidence to be given at
However, the content
of oral examinations may be relevant in corroborating the testimony and
credibility of witnesses at trial. The
procedure can be seen as an alternative
to the Australian discovery process, as parties seek disclosure of information
and documents
without any orders from the court or the necessity of an
interlocutory process.
depositions in the United States
5.79 The use of oral depositions is an important element of civil procedure
in the US, where it is seen as
the factual battleground where the vast majority of litigation actually takes
place. It may be safely said that
[of the US Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure governing depositions] has spawned a veritable cottage industry. The
significance of
depositions has grown geometrically over the years to a point
where their pervasiveness now dwarfs both the time spent and the facts
at the actual trial—assuming there is a trial, which there usually is not.
The pre-trial tail now wags the trial
Framework for oral depositions
5.80 The framework for discovery, including oral depositions, in civil
litigation in the US is governed by the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 2009
(US) (FRCP).
depositions are preceded by an initial disclosure regime, whereby a party to the
proceedings, on its initiative, is to provide
certain information to the
opposing party.
disclosures must be made at or within 14 days after a pre-trial
conference,
which is held as
soon as is practicable after the commencement of
proceedings.
At the pre-trial
conference, issues relating to discovery phases, disclosure timing, electronic
material, and privilege claims are
A report of the
discovery plan is to be lodged with the court within 14 days of the
conference.
5.81 Parties may object to disclosure or discovery requests, and seek a
protective order from the court whereby that party is protected
‘annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or
there is an obligation imposed on the court to limit the extent of discovery if
it determines that it is ‘unreasonably
cumulative or duplicative, or
obtainable from other source that is more convenient, less burdensome, or less
expensive’, or
if the requesting party already had ample opportunity to
obtain the requested information, or the cost of the proposed discovery
outweighs its likely
Who may be examined
5.82 After initial disclosure, a party to the proceedings may depose
‘any person’ without leave of the
However, among other
things, leave of the court is required where the taking of the deposition would
mean that more than 10 depositions
had been taken by any party to the
proceedings, or if the deponent had already been
5.83 A deponent may be compelled by subpoena to attend an oral deposition, at
which the time, the place and production of documents
is to be clearly
If the subpoena is
directed at an organisation, then the organisation’s name may be used
generally and the matters for examination
must be specified with reasonable
particularity in order for the organisation to designate an employee to testify
on its behalf.
Procedural requirements
5.84 Reasonable written notice advising of the deposition must be sent to
every other party to the
proceeding.
5.85 There is a requirement that each deposition is to be no longer than
seven hours in duration, although a court must allow an extension
needed to fairly examine a deponent, or if the deponent, another person, or any
other circumstance impedes or delays the
examination.
5.86 A deposition must be conducted in the presence of someone who is
‘authorised to administer oaths either by federal law
or by the law in the
place of examination; or ... appointed by the court where the action is
authorised officer is responsible for ensuring that the deposition as recorded
on any medium is accurate and
and the witness was
duly sworn.
In more complex
matters, depositions are usually conducted before special masters or magistrates
so that a judicial officer can rule
on objections and
Examination and objections
5.87 Generally, examination and cross-examination of witnesses giving oral
depositions proceed as they do at trial under the
Federal Rules of Evidence
(US) (FRE), although the character of a deposition is necessarily less
formal than giving evidence in
5.88 Objections may be raised in the course of the examination of witnesses
giving oral depositions. Objections are noted on the record,
and must be stated
succinctly and in a non-argumentative
Once the objection
has been recorded, the deponent must answer the question, or may be instructed
not to answer by counsel ‘only
when necessary to preserve privilege, to
enforce a limitation ordered by the court, or to present a motion under Rule
of the FRCP.
5.89 Under Rule 30(d)(3), a party or deponent may apply to a court to cease
or limit the deposition on the ground that ‘it is
being conducted in bad
faith or in a manner that unreasonably annoys, embarrasses, or oppresses the
deponent or party’.
5.90 Pursuant to Rule 37 of the FRCP, a court may provide for orders and
sanctions for breach of deposition
obligations.
A failure by a
deponent to answer a question, or to give complete disclosure, answers or
responses, can be the subject of a motion
The deposition can be
suspended immediately for the purposes of the motion. In considering a motion to
compel, the court must have
regard to, among other things, whether the
information sought is relevant and whether it is protected under
5.91 If the court grants a motion, an order compelling discovery or
disclosure is made, and should the order not be complied with,
the court is able
to impose sanctions including the striking out of pleadings in whole or in part,
staying proceedings, dismissing
the action, entering default judgement, or
treating the non-compliance as contempt of
5.92 If an order to compel is made, the court will, in appropriate cases,
require the party necessitating the motion, the party or
attorney advising that
conduct, or both to pay the movant’s reasonable expenses incurred in
making the motion.
and disadvantages of oral depositions
5.93 There is scant empirical evidence as to the effectiveness of oral
depositions in the US. However, commentators broadly agree,
in principle, on the
benefits and disadvantages to oral depositions.
5.94 Those who champion depositions argue that they can be the most effective
device available to litigators, and the most influential
to case development and
It is argued that
depositions promote efficiency by facilitating settlement and, where no
settlement is achieved, narrowing the issues
in dispute if a trial is
5.95 The principal disadvantage of depositions relates to
Parties incur the cost
of having a lawyer defend a deposition and preparing affidavits for each of
their witnesses, as well as conducting
examination of the opposing party’s
witnesses. Where the amount in dispute is small, the expense of conducting a
may not be reasonable, proportional or affordable, especially for
individuals and the self- represented. On the other hand, depositions
particularly costly for large corporations or governments where the number of
possible deponents is large.
5.96 Others, however, highlight that depositions are vulnerable to egregious
abuse without court
supervision.
extend to scheduling of depositions for ‘mere witnesses’, or those
with only peripheral involvement in the
dispute. Lawyers may frame questions in
a manner to create costs and seek informational advantage over the other
Concerns have also
been raised that lawyers have coached witnesses, adopted obstructive behaviour
in depositions, and used insulting
and discriminatory
5.97 In sum, the literature suggests the following advantages and
disadvantages of oral depositions.
Advantages of oral depositions
• Helping to efficiently define the issues in dispute and focusing the
parties’ attention on the real issues. Deponents
may be asked about the
content of documents and not just their location and identity.
• Preventing ambush tactics of producing surprise evidence or witnesses
in a trial. Oral depositions ensure that any relevant
issues or persons are
identified and can be explored prior to trial.
• Reducing the cost of discovery—including undue financial
burdens placed on requesting parties who have no foreknowledge
of where key
documents are held, and on respondent parties to categorise or synthesise vast
quantities of information.
• Reducing cost in relation to obtaining witness statements, which may
be very costly in large scale litigation.
• Enabling parties to test the strengths and weaknesses of their case
before the hearing. This may lead to earlier settlement
of the dispute, or if
settlement does not occur, matters in dispute may be significantly narrowed.
• Locking a version of witness testimony in to place, and where it is
inconsistent at trial, the deposition can serve as evidence
to challenge witness
credibility.
• Witness testimony can be a substitute for giving evidence where the
witness cannot attend court or has passed away.
Disadvantages of oral depositions
• Potential for increase cost and delay by adding an extra
interlocutory step in relation to contested oral depositions.
• Potential for the process to be used as a ‘fishing
expedition’—oral discovery could lead to more abuse than
on documents alone. Parties may depose those with only peripheral involvement in
the dispute, or examine topics beyond
those in issue.
• The informality of an examination could exacerbate power imbalances
between the parties and/or witnesses. Depending on how
the deposition is
conducted, witnesses may be more or less cautious and subsequently have their
versions of events discredited in
• The financial outlay required to conduct an oral
deposition—including payment of witness expenses, transcription costs
addition to counsel fees—may not be met by some litigants.
• The potential for oppressive tactics to be used against vulnerable
witnesses, including preventing a witness from answering,
threats of physical
violence, insults and discriminatory language.
oral examinations in the Australian context
deposition-like processes in Australia
5.98 A number of legislative provisions exist in Australia that allow a court
or a government agency to make orders or compel a person
to be subject to oral
examination. Some of these are discussed below.
Federal Courts
5.99 Under the
Federal Court Rules
(Cth), the court is empowered to
make orders ‘for the attendance of any person for the purposes of being
examined’, or
for ‘the production by him of any document or thing
specified or prescribed in the
The court is
also empowered ‘for the purposes of proceedings in the Court’ to
make orders for the examination of any
person on oath or affirmation before a
judge or other appointed
5.100 Similarly, the
Family Law Rules
(Cth) gives power to a court
with jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to request, at any
stage in a case, the examination on oath of any person before a court or court
officer, or to authorise
a person to conduct an
examination.
Corporations Act 2001 (Cth)
5.101 Under
sections 596A
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), ‘eligible
applicants’
are able to
request that a court issue a summons for the examination of a person concerning
‘examinable
5.102 During the examination, the court may give directions concerning, among
other things: matters to be inquired into; the procedure
of the examination; the
presence of any other persons at an examination; and access to the records of
the examination.
also has power to consider whether questions put to the summoned person is
‘appropriate’.
Generally, the examination should be held in public unless the court considers
that there are special
circumstances.
5.103 The purpose of such an examination was expressed by the authors of
Australian Corporations Law Principles and Practice
, and quoted by the
VLRC, as ‘not in the nature of legal proceedings before a court; they are
more in the nature of investigative
procedures where the court has a presence
for the purpose, basically, of seeing fair play between the persons
interrogating and the
persons being
interrogated’.
Government agencies
5.104 A number of government agencies—largely regulatory and
investigatory bodies—have powers to compel a person to appear
examination under oath in a setting other than in court at
For example:
• the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission may issue a notice
requiring persons to appear before it to give evidence
on oath or affirmation,
in relation to purported breaches of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
• the Australian Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC), in
investigating suspected breaches of the
Corporations Act
, can compel a
person to appear before an ASIC member for examination on oath if ASIC ‘on
reasonable grounds, suspects or believes
that a person can give information
relevant to a
• the Commissioner of Taxation can give notice compelling a person to
give oral evidence on oath or affirmation, in connection
with the administration
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
• the Commonwealth Ombudsman may, in the course of conducting an
investigation, require a person to appear before him or her
or an appointee for
the purposes of answering relevant
• the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity can summon a
person to give evidence (including to produce documents
or things) as part of a
‘hearing’ directed either to investigating a ‘corrupt
issue’ or conducting a public
• the Australian Communications and Media Authority may require a
person to appear before its delegate for examination on oath
or affirmation in
connection with an investigation it is
conducting.
case for oral depositions in Australia?
5.105 The possibility of adopting US style deposition into the Australian
civil justice system has been raised in reports by the VLRC,
the Law Council of
Australia, the litigation funder
as well as some in
academic circles.
5.106 The ALRC in its 2000 report,
Managing Justice: A Review of the
Federal Civil Justice System
(ALRC Report 89), noted the following in
respect of depositions:
Some practitioners argued for the introduction of depositions in representative
proceedings ... The Commission heard that depositions
potentially could add
significant cost and delay. The Commission notes that the judge may order
depositions to be taken if it is
considered necessary in a particular case,
pursuant to the general discretion in s 33ZF of the Federal Court Act to
order the Court thinks appropriate or necessary to ensure that
justice is done in the proceeding’ or the provision dealing
examination of witness in Order 24 of the Federal Court Rules. The Commission is
not disposed to make any recommendation in
relation to the introduction of
depositions at this stage. However, it is a subject which also could be
considered in a review of
Part IVA of the Federal Court
5.107 Oral depositions were also considered in the Federal Court
Liaison Committee (the Committee) of the Law Council of Australia’s
Final Report in Relation to Possible Innovations in Case Management
Committee proposed that ‘the Court be at liberty to permit oral
depositions, limited by number, witness, length and subject
The Committee
commented that:
This proposal proved very controversial. A widespread reaction to it was adverse
on the grounds that it would be likely to be productive
of unnecessary expense
and even that it would constitute a reversal of the current policy of
discouraging interrogation. Most practitioners
opposed the proposal with support
coming primarily from those with practical experience of both US depositions and
5.108 However,
it was also noted that ‘based on the American experience, it would seem
clear that, potentially, in addition
to any function which oral depositions may
perform in promoting settlement, they may have a valuable role in relation to
and the limitation on evidence and dealing with
particular, ‘oral depositions offer an alternative to interminable
document discovery ... in relation to certain documents,
issues can be quickly
dealt with by some questions of a witness which would otherwise be difficult to
track through a paper
The Committee
concluded that:
Depositions would not be appropriate in many cases. Where cases are complex and
the evidence of key witnesses may be significant,
they may be, however, a very
effective case management
5.109 The Committee recommended that ‘the Court introduce,
on a trial basis, an entitlement for the parties to examine on oath
individuals
employed by or on behalf of a party or witnesses proposed to be relied upon by
that party’.
proposal has not been implemented.
5.110 In its 2008
Civil Justice Review Report
, the VLRC undertook
detailed analyses of oral depositions in Canada, the US and UK
concluded that, subject to appropriate safeguards to curb potential abuse of the
process and the escalation of costs, provisions
ought to be made for pre-trial
oral examinations.
particular, it recommended that pre-trial examinations only be permitted with
leave of the court. This would give the court an
opportunity to determine
whether examination is necessary or desirable in a given case and, if so, allow
the court to set the conditions
for the examination to ensure that the process
is not abused, control cost and protect vulnerable
5.111 In many other respects, the model recommended bears similarities with
the procedure set out in the US. The VLRC summarised the
key features of its
proposal in the following way:
• examinations would only be possible by consent, with leave of the
• parties would be expected to attempt to agree on the details of the
examinations;
• the court would have the power to make directions limiting the number
and duration of examinations;
• it should not be necessary to require examinations to be conducted
before an independent third party in most instances, but
in appropriate cases,
examinations may be held before an examiner who is not a judicial officer
(including an independent legal practitioner);
• there would be a process for identifying appropriate corporate
• examinees would be entitled to refuse to answer questions on the
ground of legal professional privilege, and protected against
disclosure or
future use of self-incriminating information revealed in response to a question;
• objections to particular questions asked during the course of an
examination would be noted on the record for determination
by the court in the
event that the answer is later sought to be introduced into evidence;
• the transcript of the examination would be able to be introduced into
evidence at trial in a number of circumstances; and
• subject to certain limits, the costs of examinations should be
recoverable as costs of the
proceedings.
5.112 The VLRC’s recommendations for pre-trial oral examinations were
not implemented in the
Civil Procedure Bill 2010
Rather, s 57 of the
Civil Procedure Act
provides for oral examination in the context
of discovery only where documents have already been produced by way of subpoena,
pursuant to leave being granted by the court, a party may cross-examine or
conduct an oral examination of a deponent of an affidavit
of documents prepared
by or on behalf of any party to a
proceeding.
The ground for
application for leave must be that there is a reasonable belief that the party
to be examined may be misinterpreting
their discovery obligations, or failing to
disclose discoverable
5.113 Legg has argued that the use of depositions in Australia would aid in
promoting settlement, or if no settlement occurs, a narrowing
of the issues in
The deposition is an opportunity for a party to test its view of the facts with
opposing witnesses. Consequently, the opposing witness
will be required to say
which facts they agree with and why. In a complex case, those points of
disagreement may be numerous but
there will be many points of agreement which do
not need to be dealt with before the court. The trial can therefore focus on the
key issues and be conducted more
efficiently.
introduction of depositions, Legg notes, would result in ‘a major
transformation of civil procedure in
Australia’,
affidavit evidence would be substantially reduced or replaced by depositions.
This has both practical and cultural implications
for the profession:
Legal practitioners would need to move from drafting affidavits with only the
witness present to the adversarial deposition... The
deposition requires
practitioners to have a skill-set that is often split between solicitors
(witness preparation) and barristers
(witness examination) which will likely
need to be reconciled ... This may impact law school and professional
qualification
ALRC’s views
5.115 The ALRC has heard uniformly in consultations that narrowing the issues
in dispute prior to discovery, or prior to the commencement
of litigation, is
essential to limiting the cost of litigation. The ALRC agrees with the VLRC that
the primary object of oral examinations
is not preparation for trial, but the
narrowing of issues in dispute in order to facilitate settlement, or if the
matter proceeds
to hearing, to restrict or eliminate the need to call or test
particular evidence.
5.116 The ALRC recognises that the introduction of depositions would have a
significant impact on legal culture in Australia, in particular,
the need for
lawyers to be educated and trained in the use of oral depositions. However, the
ALRC notes that the process of oral
examination is not entirely new; such powers
for oral examination are available to the Federal Court and courts exercising
Law jurisdiction, as well as federal regulatory bodies.
5.117 The experience in the US suggests that there are benefits to
depositions in terms of promoting settlement and narrowing the
dispute. The challenge lies in leveraging these benefits, while ensuring the
procedure is not subject to abuse by parties,
and controlling cost implications.
The ALRC agrees with the VLRC that a necessary safeguard is that depositions
only be taken with
leave of the court, and allowing the courts to set the limits
and parameters in which depositions take place.
5.118 The ALRC is interested in stakeholder views about whether cost issues
could be controlled by limiting oral examinations to particular
disputes, and which, if any, mandatory considerations a court should take into
account in granting leave for oral examinations.
Proposal 5–2
A new pre-trial procedure should be introduced to
enable parties to a civil proceeding in the Federal Court, with leave of the
to examine orally, on oath or affirmation, any person who has information
relevant to the matters in dispute in the proceeding.
Question 5–6
Could cost issues in proceedings before federal
courts be controlled by limiting pre-trial oral examinations to particular types
Question 5–7
What mandatory considerations, if any, should a
court take into account in granting leave for oral examination?
alternatives
Interim disclosure orders
5.119 The VLRC Report recommended another alternative to traditional
discovery, which it called ‘interim disclosure
proposal, in order to reduce the delays and costs arising from discovery, a
court would have the discretion to order a
party to provide another party with
access to all documents in the first party’s possession, custody or
control that fall within
a general category or general description of issues in
dispute in the proceedings, subject to:
• the documents falling within a category of documents where such a
category or description is approved by the courts;
• the documents are able to be identified and located without
unreasonable burden or unreasonable cost to the first party;
• the cost of the first party differentiating documents within such a
general category or description which are (i) relevant
or (ii) irrelevant to the
issues in dispute between the parties are in the opinion of the court excessive
or disproportionate;
• access to irrelevant documents is not likely to give rise to any
substantial prejudice to the first party which is not able
to be prevented by
way of court order or agreement between the parties; and
• access is to facilitate the identification of documents for the
purpose of obtaining discovery of such identified documents
proceedings.
5.120 Access does not allow the other party to copy, produce or make records
of, photograph or otherwise use—either in connection
with the proceedings
or in any other way—documents or information examined as a result of such
inspection, except to the extent
that would allow the other party to describe or
identify an examined document for the purposes of obtaining discovery of such an
identified document in the
proceedings.
5.121 Other safeguards include that, access would be limited to lawyers for a
party, and any disclosure to this provision does not
give rise to a waiver of
5.122 The VLRC considered that such interim access would: facilitate access
to documents quickly; avoid the party in possession spending
time reviewing such
documents prior to the determination of what documents should be produced by way
of discovery and the necessity
of preparing a list of documents; and transfer
the cost of initially reviewing the documents to the party seeking the
Civil jurisdictions
5.123 The ALRC also notes that there is some suggestion that reforms should
also consider civil law jurisdictions, such as that in
Germany, as one possible
alternative to discovery in federal
However, the ALRC
considers that a review of the civil law system, and how it deals with
discovery, is beyond its Terms of
Current courts processes
5.124 The VLRC’s recommendation bears similarities to the Practice Note
SC Eq 3, which applies in the Commercial List and Technology
and Construction
List in the NSW Supreme Court’s Equity
Under the practice
direction, parties may ‘take a peek’ at their opponents database of
documents on a without prejudice
The parties may then
call for the production of particular non-privileged documents they wish to
obtain, and the court may grant
5.125 The ALRC notes that creative judicial case management can initiate the
use of alternatives to discovery. For example, the ALRC
heard in consultations
that instead of granting leave for discovery of documents relating to the
corporate structure of an organisation,
judicial officers can ask the party to
tender an affidavit outlining the structure of the organisation. Further
examples include
that, under the
Federal Court Rules
, the court has the
power to order the production of documents for inspection where it appears on a
list of documents filed by a party
or where a document is referred to in the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), where the parties make agreement as to facts in
then discovery in
relation to those issues is not required.
5.126 Such powers, when used in conjunction with other case management
processes discussed in Chapter 3—such as pre-trial conferences,
the parties to tender a list of issues in dispute, or a ‘discovery
plan’ setting out where and how a search
for documents relating to those
issues is to be conducted—may achieve the same aims of facilitating quick
access to documents,
and identifying which documents are to be discovered.
5.127 The ALRC is interested in stakeholder views about whether there is a
need for a new procedure for access to information in civil
proceedings, such as
interim disclosure orders. If the current alternatives are adequate, the ALRC is
interested in view about the
best way of ensuring that the federal court
considers such alternatives.
Question 5–8
Is there a need for new procedures for access to
information in civil proceedings, such as interim disclosure orders?
Question 5–9
What is the best way of ensuring that federal
courts consider alternatives to the discovery of documents in civil
proceedings?
See the Terms of Reference at the front
of this Consultation Paper.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 103. See also Lord Woolf,
Justice: Final Report
(1996), 110.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 109; M Legg and D Boniface,
‘Pre-action Protocols in Australia’
Journal of Judicial
Administration
Civil Procedure Rules, Pre-action
Protocol for Personal Injury Claim
(UK), [2.7].
Ibid, [2.6].
Ibid, [2.7].
See, eg, R Byron, ‘An Update on
Dispute Resolution in England and Wales: Evolution or Revolution?’
Tulane Law Review
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 109.
P Gerber and B Mailman,
‘Construction Litigation: Can We Do It Better?’
[2005] MonashULawRw 10
University Law Review
I Judge, ‘The Woolf Reforms
after Nine Years: is Civil Litigation in the High Court Quicker and
Cheaper?’ (Presentation
at the Anglo-Australian Lawyers Society), 16
August 2007 <
www.vicbar.com.au
25 October 2010.
See M Legg and D Boniface,
‘Pre-action Protocols in Australia’
Journal of Judicial
Administration
See, eg, Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 140–41 where a
number of submissions are summarised making this point.
M Legg and D Boniface,
‘Pre-action Protocols in Australia’
Journal of Judicial
Administration
, 55; National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory
Council (NADRAC),
The Resolve to Resolve: Embracing ADR to Improve Access to
Justice in the Federal Jurisdiction
(2009), 31.
See, eg, National Alternative Dispute
Resolution Advisory Council (NADRAC),
The Resolve to Resolve: Embracing ADR
to Improve Access to Justice in the Federal Jurisdiction
(2009), 31.
See Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 109–110. The VLRC Report
identified that the implementation of pre-action protocols may be challenged on
the basis that such protocols are a barrier to accessing the courts, and
therefore incompatible with the right to ‘... have
the charge heard or
proceeding decided ... after a fair trial’ pursuant to
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic). However,
this concern was dismissed on the grounds that pre-action protocols: would not
bar the commencement of proceedings;
are triggered before the commencement of
proceedings; and support the facilitation of a fair hearing.
Lord Woolf,
Access to Justice:
Final Report
(1996), 107.
Ibid, Ch 10 Recommendations.
Pre-action Protocols
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 113.
Civil Procedure Rules, Pre-action
Protocol for Personal Injury Claim (UK),
Civil Procedure Rules, Pre-action
Protocol for Disease and Illness Claims
Civil Procedure Rules, Practice
Direction: Pre-action Conduct
(UK), [2.1].
Ibid, [6.1]. While ADR is not
compulsory, the Direction gives some options for resolving disputes through:
discussion and negotiation;
mediation; early neutral evaluation by an
independent person or expert; and arbitration.
Ibid, Annex A.
Civil Procedure Rules, Practice
Direction: Pre-action Conduct
(UK), [9.2].
Ibid, [2.2].
Ibid, [2.2].
Ibid, [3.1].
Lord Justice Waller (ed),
Book Service 2009
(2009), 2308.
Civil Procedure Rules, Practice
Direction: Pre-action Conduct
(UK), [4.3].
Ibid, [4.4].
Ibid, [4.6].
Judging Civil Justice (The
Hamlyn Lectures)
(2009), 56.
P Fenn, N Rickman and D Vancappa,
‘The Unintended Consequences of Reforming Civil Procedure: Evidence from
the Woolf Reforms
in England and Wales’ (Paper presented at 26th Annual
Conference of European Association of Law and Economics, Roma, Italy),
M Zander, ‘Where Are We Heading
with the Funding of Civil Litigation?’
Justice Quarterly
R Byron, ‘An Update on Dispute
Resolution in England and Wales: Evolution or Revolution?’
Tulane Law Review
See P Abrams, T Goriely and R
More Civil Justice? The Impact of the Woolf Reforms on Pre-action
(2002), prepared for the Law Society and Civil Justice Council,
xiii: The study was mainly qualitative and was based on in-depth
interviews with
54 lawyers, insurers, and claim managers. See also J Peysner and M Seneviratne,
The Management of Civil Cases: The Courts and the Post-Woolf Landscape
(2005) prepared for the Department for Constitutional Affairs (UK).
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Final Report
(2009), 343.
Chief Justice’s Working Party on
Civil Justice Reform (Hong Kong),
Civil Justice Reform: Final Report
(2004), 65–66.
Law Society of NSW,
Submission to A
Strategic Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Justice System
(2009), 2–3.
M Legg and D Boniface,
‘Pre-action Protocols in Australia’
Journal of Judicial
Administration
P Gerber and B Mailman,
‘Construction Litigation: Can We Do It Better?’
[2005] MonashULawRw 10
University Law Review
Lord Woolf,
Access to Justice:
Final Report
(1996), 113.
P Gerber and B Mailman,
‘Construction Litigation: Can We Do It Better?’
[2005] MonashULawRw 10
University Law Review
International Bar Association,
Rules on Taking Evidence in International Arbitration
(2010), Art 3(1).
Ibid, Art 3(a)–(b).
Ibid, Art 7.
International Commercial
Arbitration: Commentary and Materials
(2001), 459.
Monash University Law Students’
Society ‘Just Leadership’ Program,
October 2010.
See Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department Access to Justice Taskforce,
A Strategic
Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
M Legg and D Boniface,
‘Pre-action Protocols in Australia’
Journal of Judicial
Administration
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Final Report
(2009), 396.
P Gerber and B Mailman,
‘Construction Litigation: Can We Do It Better?’
[2005] MonashULawRw 10
University Law Review
Ibid, citing C McKenna and C Cummins,
The Construction and Engineering Pre-action Protocol
<www.law-now.com/> at 25 October 2010. This paper was based on responses
from practitioners and judges to a survey evaluating
the success of pre-action
protocols in the UK.
J Peysner and M Seneviratne,
Management of Civil Cases: The Courts and the Post-Woolf Landscape
prepared for the Department for Constitutional Affairs (UK), iii.
See Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 141 where a number of submissions
are summarised addressing these issues.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department Access to Justice Taskforce,
A Strategic
Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
National Alternative Dispute
Resolution Advisory Council (NADRAC),
The Resolve to Resolve: Embracing ADR
to Improve Access to Justice in the Federal Jurisdiction
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008).
The Bill was originally introduced
into Parliament on 16 June 2010, and then referred to the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs
Committee for inquiry and report by 30 July 2010.
However, due to the federal election, the Parliament was prorogued, and the
ceased its inquiry on 19 July 2010. The Bill was again referred to the
Committee on 30 September 2010. The Committee is due to report
on 22 November
Explanatory Memorandum,
Civil Dispute
Resolution Bill 2010
Civil Dispute Resolution Bill 2010
(Cth) cl 6(1).
Ibid cl 6(2).
Ibid cl 12(1).
National Alternative Dispute
Resolution Advisory Council (NADRAC),
The Resolve to Resolve: Embracing ADR
to Improve Access to Justice in the Federal Jurisdiction
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 30 September 2010, 270
(R McClelland—Attorney-General).
Civil Dispute Resolution Bill 2010
(Cth) cl 4(1).
Ibid cl 12(3).
Ibid cl 18.
The Act is due to commence on 1
January 2011.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 142.
Civil Procedure Act 2010
Ibid s 34(1).
Ibid s 34(1)(a).
Ibid s 34 (1)(b).
Ibid s 35(1).
Ibid s 38(2). This provisions
appears to be wider than the
Civil Dispute Resolution Bill 2010
(Cth), under
which only a ‘lawyer’ may be ordered to pay costs for
non-compliance.
See Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 143–144 outlining matters
to be included in such letters. It was also recommended that where a person in
dispute makes an offer of compromise before any legal proceedings are commended
the court may, after the determination of the court
proceedings, take that into
consideration on the question of costs in any proceedings.
Department of Justice and Attorney
General (NSW),
ADR Blueprint: Discussion Paper
Department of Justice and Attorney
General (NSW),
ADR Blueprint Draft Recommendations Report 1: Pre-action
Protocols & Standards
(2009), 8–9.
Personal Injuries Proceedings Act
Stakeholder Reference Group,
Review of the Possibility of a Common Personal Injuries Pre-Proceedings Process
for Queensland
B Cairns, ‘A Review of Some
Innovations in Queensland Civil Procedure’ (2005) 26
Australian Bar
184. See also, E Wright,
National Trends in Personal Injury
Litigation: Before and After the IPP
(2006), prepared for the Law Council of
Australia, 20–21. Figure 10 suggests that the combined number of personal
injury actions
commenced in Queensland Supreme and District Courts (Brisbane
Registries) fell from 1176 to 293 for the period 2002–2003.
M Legg and D Boniface,
‘Pre-action Protocols in Australia’
Journal of Judicial
Administration
, 50. See also Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department Access to Justice Taskforce,
A Strategic
Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
Lord Woolf,
Access to Justice:
Final Report
(1996), 111.
Review of Civil
Litigation Costs: Final Report
(2009), 343.
Chief Justice’s Working Party
on Civil Justice Reform (Hong Kong),
Civil Justice Reform: Final Report
(2004), 68.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department Access to Justice Taskforce,
A Strategic
Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
Ibid, Rec 8.1.
M Legg and D Boniface,
‘Pre-action Protocols in Australia’
Journal of Judicial
Administration
P Kerley, J Hames and P Sukys,
Civil Litigation
(5th ed, 2009), 247.
See Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 394–395
reproducing LexisNexis, Moore’s Civil Practice, vol 7 (2006) § 30.41,
reproducing a list
Schwarzer, Pasahow and Lewis,
Civil Discovery and Mandatory Disclosure: A Guide to Efficient Practice
ed, 1994), 3–3.
See Ibid, 395. However, in the US,
when a witness is unable to attend a hearing a deposition may be used as a
substitute. Further,
depositions may replace live testimony, subject to court
findings that the witness is not available due to death, age, illness,
imprisonment, being outside the court’s jurisdiction, or where
exceptional circumstances make it desirable to permit the deposition
to be used:
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
(US), r 32(a)(4).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 386.
Moore’s Federal
(3rd ed, 1997) § 30.02[2].
Federal Rules of Civil
(US) rr 26–37.
Ibid r 26(a)(1)(A). Such
information includes: the name and addresses of each individual likely to have
discoverable information;
a copy, or a description by category and location, of
all documents relevant to supporting the party’s defences; a computation
of damages and documents with respect to a party’s computations; and any
insurance agreements. Initial disclosure provisions
do not apply to certain
administrative review proceedings, habeas corpus proceedings, proceedings
commenced by a person in custody,
or arbitration award enforcement proceedings:
r 26(a)(1)(B).
Ibid r 26(a)(1)(C).
Ibid r 26(f)(1).
Ibid r 26(f)(2) and (3). If
material is withheld due to privilege claims, the objecting party must expressly
make a privilege claim
and describe the nature of the documents, communications
or tangible things not produced or disclosed: r 26(b)(5).
Ibid r 26(f)(2).
Ibid r 26(c)(1).
Ibid r 26(b)(2)(C). The obligation
on the court is of its own motion or can be raised by a party to proceedings by
way of motion.
Ibid r 30(a)(1).
Ibid r 30(a)(2). Other
circumstances include where the party seeks to take the deposition before the
conclusion of the pre-trial
conference, or where the deponent is confined to
Ibid r 30(a)(1), r 45(a).
Ibid r 30(b)(6).
Ibid r 30(b)(1). The notice must
state the time and place of the deposition, and if known, the name and address
of the deponent.
If the name of the deponent is unknown, a general description
sufficient to identify the person, or a class of person to which the
belongs must be stated.
Ibid r 30(d)(1).
Ibid r 30(b)(5).
Ibid r 30(f)(1).
Moore’s Federal
(3rd ed, 1997) § 30.2[3].
Federal Rules of Civil
(US) r 30(c)(1).
Federal Rules of Evidence
r 103 (dealing with objections and court rulings on evidence) and r 615
(governing sequestration of witnesses) do not apply
at a deposition.
Federal Rules of Civil
(US) r 30(c)(2).
Ibid r 30(c)(2).
Ibid r 30(d)(3).
Ibid r 37(a)(1).
Moore’s Federal
(3rd ed, 1997) § 37.22.
Federal Rules of Civil
(US) r 37(b)(1) and (2).
Ibid r 37(a)(5)(A).
See P Hoffman and M Malone,
Effective Deposition
(2nd ed, 1996);
Hall v Clifton Precision
District Ct, Penn., 1993); See also J Moore,
Moore’s Federal
(3rd ed, 1997) § 30.02[2].
M Legg, ‘The United States
Deposition: Time for Adoption in Australian Civil Procedure?’ (2007) 6
Melbourne University Law Review
J Kerper and G Stuart, ‘Rambo
Bites the Dust: Current Trends in Deposition Ethics’ (1998) 22
of the Legal Profession
M Legg, ‘The United States
Deposition: Time for Adoption in Australian Civil Procedure?’ (2007) 6
Melbourne University Law Review
See J Cary, ‘Rambo
Depositions: Controlling an Ethical Cancer in Civil Litigation’
Hofstra Law Review
Federal Court Rules
Family Law Rules 2004
r 15.72(1).
Corporations Act 2001
as: the Australian Securities and Investments
Commission (ASIC); a liquidator or provisional liquidator; an administrator of
the corporation;
an administrator of a deed of company arrangement executed by
the corporation; or a person authorised by ASIC to make such an application.
Corporations Act 2001
as the promotion, formation, management,
administration or winding up of the corporation; any other affairs of the
corporation; or
the business affairs of an entity connected with the corporation
that appear to be relevant.
Corporations Act 2001
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 392 citing LexisNexis
Butterworths,
Australian Corporations Law Principles and Practice
[5.7B.0010], citing
Re Monadelphous Engineering Associates (NZ) Ltd (in liq);
Ex parte McDonald
(1988) 7 ACLC 220
This is not an exhaustive list of
agencies that have such powers. For a more a detailed consideration of agencies
with deposition-like
powers, see Ibid, 392–394.
Trade Practices Act 1975
(Cth) s 155.
Australian Securities and
Investment Commission Act 2001
(Cth) s 19(2).
Income Tax Assessment Act
(Cth) s 264.
Ombudsman Act 1976
Law Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner Act 2006
Broadcasting Services Act
IMF Australia,
Submission by IMF
to Victorian Law Reform Commission Civil Justice Review
<www.imf.com.au/> at 24 October 2010.
M Legg, ‘The United States
Deposition: Time for Adoption in Australian Civil Procedure?’ (2007) 6
Melbourne University Law Review
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Civil Justice System
, Report 89 (2000),
Law Council of Australia,
Final Report in Relation to Possible Innovations to Case Management
(2006), Proposal 5(e).
Ibid, [107].
Ibid, [114].
Ibid, [127].
Ibid, [124].
Ibid, Rec 5.4.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 394–410.
Civil Procedure Bill 2010
Civil Procedure Act 2010
M Legg, ‘The United States
Deposition: Time for Adoption in Australian Civil Procedure?’ (2007) 6
Melbourne University Law Review
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
, Report 14 (2008), 468.
R Ackland, ‘We Should Look to
Germany for Justice’,
Sydney Morning Herald
(online), 1 October
2010, <www.smh.com.au/>.
See Terms of Reference at the front
of this Consultation Paper. Specifically, the ALRC is to ‘have regard to
the experiences
of other jurisdictions, including jurisdictions outside
Australia, provided there is sufficient commonality of approach that any
recommendations can be applied in relation to the federal courts’.
Supreme Court of NSW,
Note No. SC Eq 3: Supreme Court Equity Division—Commercial List and
Technology and Construction List
<www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/> at 20
October 2010.
Federal Court Rules
Evidence Act 1995
ALRC CP2 Discovery in Federal Courts
Appendix 1. List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals Consulted
Appendix 1. List of Agencies, Organisations and
Individuals Consulted
Justice J Allsop, President, Court of Appeal NSW
Justice P Bergin, Supreme Court of NSW
Professor C Cameron and Associate Professor C Parker, University of
Professor P Cashman,
Director of Social Justice Program, University of Sydney
Mr S Clark, Chief Operating Officer, Partner, Clayton Utz
Ms S Court and Mr S King, Australian Competition and Consumer
Justice A Emmett, Federal Court of Australia
Mr J Emmerig, Partner, Blake Dawson
Family Court: Justice S Strickland, A Filippello (Principal
Registrar), K Murray (Senior Legal Research Adviser)
Federal Magistrates Court: A Byrne (Principal Registrar), K Murray
(Senior Legal Research Adviser), FM Fibbs,
FM Bowman, FM Driver
Justice R Finkelstein, Federal Court of Australia, Melbourne
Mr G Fredericks, Executive Legal Counsel, Commonwealth Bank
Justice M Gordon, Federal Court of Australia, Melbourne
Ms G Hayden, Special Counsel, Australian Securities and Investments
Mr T Howe QC, Chief Counsel Litigation, Australian Government
Law Council of Australia, Federal Litigation Section
Law Council of Australia, Family Law Section:
G Sinclair, R O’Brien, D Farrer
Mr D McGrath, E-Litigation Solutions
Mr J McGuinness, Director, National Judicial College of Australia
Mr G Mulherin, Director, Law and Justice Foundation of New South
NSW Bar Association: A McConnachie, G McIlwaine SC,
F Kunc SC, B Pape SC, J Gleason, D Healy
Mr A Phelan, Chief Executive and Principal Registrar, High Court of
Dr M Pryles, Chartered Arbitrator
Professor G Reinhardt, Executive Director, Australasian Institute of
Judicial Administration
Professor the Hon A Rogers QC, Chartered Arbitrator, formerly a Judge of
the Supreme Court of NSW
Justice R Sackville, Acting Judge, Court of Appeal NSW
Mr W Soden, Registrar and CEO, Federal Court of Australia
Mr A Stephenson, Partner, Clayton Utz
Mr A Tsacalos, Partner, Norton Rose Australia
Mr J Walker, Executive Director, IMF Australia
Mr N Westerink, Assistant Commissioner, Australian Taxation Office
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (1.15 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter