URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/TASLRIIP/2019/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:50:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Insanity and Fitness to Plead [2019] TASLRIIP 27
Assessment reports
Review of the Defence of Insanity in s 16 of the Criminal
Code and Fitness to Plead
Issues Paper no 27
February 2019
Information
The Tasmania Law Reform Institute was established on 23 July 2001 by
agreement between the Government of the State of Tasmania, the
University of
Tasmania and the Law Society of Tasmania. The creation of the Institute was part
of a Partnership Agreement between
the University and the State government
signed in 2000. The Institute is based at the Sandy Bay campus of the University
of Tasmania
within the Faculty of Law. The Institute undertakes law reform work
and research on topics proposed by the government, the community,
the University
and the Institute itself.
The work of the Institute involves the review of laws with a view to:
• the modernisation of the law
• the elimination of defects in the law
• the simplification of the law
• the consolidation of any laws
• the repeal of laws that are obsolete or unnecessary
• uniformity between laws of other States and the Commonwealth.
The Institute’s Director is Associate Professor Terese Henning. The
members of the Board of the Institute are Associate Professor
Terese Henning
(Chair), Professor Tim McCormack (Dean of the Faculty of Law at the University
of Tasmania), the Honourable Justice
Helen Wood (appointed by the Honourable
Chief Justice of Tasmania), Ms Kristy Bourne (appointed by the
Attorney-General), Associate
Professor Jeremy Prichard (appointed by the Council
of the University), Mr Craig Mackie (appointed by the Tasmanian Bar
Association),
Ms Ann Hughes (appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board), Mr Rohan Foon (appointed by the Law Society of Tasmania), Ms
Baumeler (appointed at the invitation of the Institute Board) and Ms Rosie Smith
(appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board as a member of the Tasmanian
Aboriginal community).
The Board oversees the Institute’s research, considering each reference
before it is accepted, and approving publications before
their release.
The Tasmania Law Reform Institute invites responses to the various issues
discussed in this Issues Paper. There are a number of questions
posed by this
Issues Paper to guide your response.
Respondents can choose to address any or
all of those questions in their submissions.
Respondents can also suggest
alternative options for reform or raise other relevant matters in their
There are a number of ways to respond:
• By filling in the Submission Template
The Template can be filled in electronically and sent by email or printed out
and filled in manually and posted to the Institute.
The Submission Template can
be accessed at the Institute’s webpage:
http://www.utas.edu.au/law-reform/
• By providing a more detailed response to the Issues Paper.
The Issues Paper poses a series of questions to guide your response —
you may choose to answer all, some, or none of them. Please
explain the reasons
for your views as fully as possible.
The Institute uses all submissions received to inform its research.
Submissions may be referred to or quoted from in a TLRI final
report which will
be printed, provided to the Tasmanian Government and also published on the
Institute’s website. Extracts
may also be used in published scholarly
articles and/or public media releases. However, if you do not wish your response
to be referred
to or identified, the Institute will respect that wish.
Therefore, when making a submission to the Institute, please identify how you
would like it to be treated based on the following categories:
1. Public submission – the Institute may refer to or quote directly
from the submission, and name you as the source of the submission
in relevant
publications.
2. Anonymous submission – the Institute may refer to or quote directly
from the submission in relevant publications, but will
not identify you as the
source of the submission.
3. Confidential submission – the Institute will not refer to or quote
directly from the submission, but may aggregate information
in your submission
with other submissions for inclusion in any report or publication. Confidential
submissions will only be used
to inform the Institute generally in their
deliberations of the particular issue under investigation, and/or provide
publishable
aggregated statistical data.
After considering all responses and stakeholder feedback it is intended that
a final report, containing recommendations, will be published.
Providing a submission is completely voluntary. You are free to withdraw your
participation at any time up to the time it is sent
for publication, by
can withdraw without providing
an explanation. However, once the report has been
sent for publication, it will not be possible to remove your comments.
All responses will be held by the Tasmania Law Reform Institute for a period
of five (5) years from the date of the first publication
and then destroyed.
Electronic submissions will be stored on a secure, regularly backed-up
University network drive. Hard copy submissions
will be stored in a locked
filing cabinet. At the expiry of five years, submissions will be deleted from
the server, in the case
of electronic submissions, or shredded and securely
disposed of in the case of paper submissions.
Electronic submissions should be emailed to:
Law.Reform@utas.edu.au
Submissions in paper form should be posted to:
Tasmania Law Reform Institute
Private Bag 89
Hobart, TAS 7001
Inquiries about the study should be directed to Ms Terese Henning at the
above address, or by telephoning (03) 6226 2069, or by email
Law.Reform@utas.edu.au
CLOSING DATE FOR RESPONSES:
24 May 2019
This study has been approved by the Tasmanian Social Sciences Human Research
Ethics Committee. If you have concerns or complaints
study, please contact the Executive Officer of the HREC (Tasmania) Network on
+61 3 6226 6254 or email
human.ethics@utas.edu.au. The Executive Officer is the
person nominated to receive complaints from research participants. Please
ethics reference number [H0016752].
Report to the Attorney-General
After considering all responses and stakeholder feedback it is intended that
a final report, containing recommendations for reform,
will be published.
Acknowledgments
This Issues Paper was prepared for the Board by Dr Rebecca Bradfield.
Valuable contributions to the project and feedback on drafts
of this Issues
Paper were provided by the TLRI Director and the Reference Group for this
project, the Honourable Justice Helen Wood,
Daryl Coates, SC, Marita
O’Connell, Yvonne Chaperon, Aaron Groves, Georgina O’Donnell and
Associate Professor Jeremy
Prichard. The TLRI was acknowledges the invaluable
assistance provided by the Mental Health Tribunal in the collection of data for
this project. Assistance was also provided by the Legal Aid Commission. The
project was funded by a grant from the Solicitors’
Guarantee Fund.
Executive Summary
This Issues Paper follows a reference provided to the TLRI by the then
Attorney-General, the Hon Dr Vanessa Goodwin and considers
two specialised
responses for individuals with mental illness and/or cognitive impairment where
their mental impairment affects their
ability to participate in the ordinary
processes of the criminal justice system:
(1) fitness to stand trial; and
(2) the defence of insanity.
Introduction
Part 1 sets out the background to the reference, an overview of the structure
of the Issues Paper and the scope of the reference.
Background and Principles
Part 2 provides an overview of the legislative framework that sets out the
law in relation to the operation of the criminal justice
system for people with
mental health and/or cognitive impairments. It sets out the distinction between
fitness to stand trial and
insanity and considers the principles that underlie
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Several Acts set out the law in relation to the operation of the criminal
justice system for people with mental health and/or cognitive
impairments,
including the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Criminal Code
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) and the
Sentencing Act 1997
The key points of this Part are that:
• a significant proportion of people have mental and/or cognitive
impairments, yet only a small number of such individuals rely
on unfitness to
stand trial and/or the defence of insanity. Many more with mental and/or
cognitive impairments do not rely on the
unfitness procedure or the insanity
defence and instead enter a plea of guilty and/or are found guilty following a
• although there may be an overlap in the conditions that give rise to
a finding that a person is unfit to stand trial and a
finding that a person is
not guilty by reason of insanity, the scope of their operation and their legal
requirements are different.
fitness to stand trial
provision that
relates to the issue of whether the accused has the ability to understand or
participate in his or her trial. It is
concerned with a person’s capacity
time of the trial
. It applies where a person’s mental
processes are disordered or impaired, or if for any other reason the person is
understand court processes and make a defence to the charge.
is a matter of
substantive
involving the determination of a whether a person should not be held criminally
responsible on the ground that he or she lacked the
mental capacity to commit
the offence. Insanity is concerned with an individual’s capacity at the
time of the offence
. In order to rely on the insanity defence, the person
must have a mental disease (which includes natural imbecility) such that he
she lacked the capacity to understand the physical character of the act or know
that the act was one which he or she ought not
do, or, by reason of the mental
disease, the person was deprived of the power to resist an impulse.
• the principles that underlie the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) are fairness to the accused and the right to a
fair trial, the protection of the community and the recognition of the rights
mentally impaired individuals consistent with the principles of least
restriction.
• These principles are considered in light of the obligations that
arise under international legal instruments to which Australia
is a signatory
including the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
’), and the
Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities
Health and Cognitive Impairments and the Criminal Justice System
provides an overview of mental illness and cognitive impairments and
the criminal justice system.
Key points of this Part are that:
• Insanity and fitness to stand trial apply to only a small number of
people compared to the number of individuals with mental
health and cognitive
impairments overall who are involved in the criminal justice system.
• Individuals with mental health or cognitive impairments may not rely
on the process of fitness to stand trial and/or on the
insanity defence but may
proceed through the usual criminal justice process. This is a clear alternative
and the possible sentence
received (if found guilty) compared to the
consequences of a finding of unfitness or insanity are likely to weigh into the
decision-making
• An offender’s mental or cognitive impairment is relevant to the
sentencing process in at least six ways, including reducing
moral culpability,
influencing the kind of sentence that should be imposed, in relation to general
and specific deterrence, the nature
of a proportionate sentence and the risk of
imprisonment. In addition, in some circumstances, the nature of an
offender’s condition
may lead to a heavier sentence in view of the need to
place greater emphasis on community protection.
Unfitness to Stand Trial: The Test
sets out the current test for determining unfitness to stand trial in
Tasmania and considers the law in other jurisdictions and options
for reforming
Key points of this Part are that:
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
sets out the test to determine if a person is unfit to stand trial. This is
based on the common law criteria set out in
the Victorian case of
In Tasmania, a person
is unfit to stand trial for an offence if, because the person’s mental
processes are disordered or impaired
or for any other reason, the person is
(a) unable to understand the nature of the charge; or
(b) unable to plead to the charge or to exercise the right of challenge; or
(c) unable to understand the nature of the proceedings; or
(d) unable to follow the course of the proceedings; or
(e) unable to make a defence.
• All Australian jurisdictions have legislation dealing with fitness to
stand trial, and, although there are some variations,
the criteria are broadly
similar to the
criteria. This is also the approach in England,
Wales and New Zealand. The test concerns cognitive capacity. However, South
has introduced a requirement of rationality in relation to a
person’s ability to respond to the charges or give instructions.
• Some commentators have argued that fitness to stand trial should be
abolished in order to accord with the requirements of
• In many jurisdictions, consideration has been given by law reform
bodies to concerns about the legal criteria used for assessing
individual’s fitness to stand trial, and it has been suggested that the
test for fitness to stand trial be reformed.
• It has been argued that the test is
under-inclusive
words, that it is too difficult to establish unfitness to stand trial). Key
criticisms are that: (1) by focusing on intellectual
ability, the test generally
sets too high a threshold for unfitness and is inconsistent with the modern
trial process. There is undue
emphasis on a person’s intellectual ability
and too little focus on a person’s decision-making ability; (2) the test
is difficult to apply to people with mental illness because the criteria were
not designed for them; (3) a defendant may not be unfit
to stand trial even
where the court takes the view that he or she is incapable of making decisions
that are in his or her own interests.
• In other jurisdictions, recommendations for reform have included
replacing the current test with a test of decision-making
capacity that focuses
on an assessment of the defendant’s capacity to participate effectively in
a trial. This reform would
adopt a ‘process’ or
‘functional’ approach (focusing on the decision-making processes of
the accused) rather
than an ‘outcome’ or ‘status’
approach (focusing on the rationality of the decision).
• Other reform proposals have sought to address the deficiencies of the
current test by specifically incorporating a requirement
for rationality.
• Another option for reform is to identify additional criteria relevant
to the assessment of fitness to stand trial. At the
core of the recent reviews
of the test of fitness to stand trial is the desire to ensure that the criteria
governing the assessment
reflect a need for an accused to be ‘able to make
“true choices” concerning the crucial decisions in the trial
are not substantially prejudiced by their mental condition.’
• Other reforms that have been proposed have been based on an argument
that the test is
over-inclusive
and sets the bar too low for some
individuals. This criticism is made on the basis that the test fails to take
into account whether
supports or accommodations within the trial process could
be used to help the accused to be fit to stand trial.
• A related issue is whether the test for determining fitness should be
adapted in cases where an individual wishes to plead
guilty. This question has
been considered in several reviews of the law on the basis that a person may be
able to understand the
nature of the charge and may be able to enter a plea to
the charge but may not be able to understand more complex aspects of the
• In the Tasmanian context, it is noted that allowing an accused to
enter a plea of guilty does not necessarily allow the person
to avoid the
consequences of being found unfit to stand trial. Under the
Sentencing Act
(Tas), an offender who is found guilty may still be sentenced to a
restriction order or a supervision order.
Unfitness to Stand Trial: Procedure to Determine Unfitness to Stand
sets out the current Tasmanian procedure to determine unfitness to
stand trial, the position in other jurisdictions and options available
the current procedure.
Key points of this Part are that:
• In Tasmania, the same procedure applies in relation to fitness to
stand trial and insanity regardless of whether the matter
is an indictable
offence heard in the Supreme Court or a summary offence dealt with in the
Magistrates Court. The only difference
is that the magistrate, rather than a
jury, makes decisions in relation to fitness and other relevant findings at a
special hearing.
• The question whether a person is unfit to stand trial is a question
of fact. It is determined in the Supreme Court by a jury
and by a magistrate in
the Magistrates Court. However, there is no need to conduct an investigation (by
a jury or a magistrate) if
the prosecutor and defendant agree and the court may
record a finding that the defendant is unfit to stand trial.
• In contrast, in some jurisdictions the judge makes the determination
of whether an accused is fit to stand trial for matters
in the higher courts.
This could be an option for reform in Tasmania.
• In other jurisdictions, there are different approaches to fitness to
stand trial in lower courts. An option for reform in
Tasmania would be to amend
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to provide for
greater flexibility to allow the magistrate to dispose of a matter in a timelier
manner in circumstances where
it appears that an accused is unfit for trial.
This reform would mean that the magistrate could make an assessment of whether
appears that an accused is unfit to stand trial (and/or has a defence of
insanity) and then discharge the person and divert them
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) pathway, if this is
appropriate.
• In making an assessment of fitness to stand trial, expert reports are
crucial. Anecdotally, the TLRI understands that there
is a lack of
standardisation in assessments provided by experts in Tasmania and consequently
there is considerable diversity in assessment
reports. This is a concern given
the importance of the expert advice in the court process. Accordingly, the TLRI
seeks further feedback
on whether there are any issues that arise in relation to
the role of experts and expert reports in the process of determining unfitness
to stand trial. Further, the TLRI seeks feedback in relation to how any
difficulties might be resolved.
Unfitness to Stand Trial: Procedure Following a Determination of Unfitness to
Stand Trial
sets out the procedure following a determination of unfitness to stand
trial in Tasmania and in other comparable jurisdictions. It
then examines
options for reform of the procedure following a determination of unfitness to
stand trial.
Key points of this Part are that:
• If the court determines that the defendant is not likely to become
fit to stand trial within 12 months or the defendant does
not become fit to
stand trial within 12 months, then the court holds a special hearing. The
special hearing provides a way to test
the prosecution case and is conducted
‘so that the onus of proof and standard of proof are the same as in a
trial of criminal
proceedings and in other respects as nearly as possible as if
it were a trial of criminal proceedings.’
At a special hearing there are three findings available to the court. The
(a) find the defendant not guilty of the offence. This has the same effect as
a finding of not guilty following a trial of criminal
proceedings;
(b) find the defendant not guilty on the ground of insanity; or
(c) indicate that a finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty
of the offence charged. This finding is made if the jury
‘concluded beyond
reasonable doubt, on the evidence before it, that the accused appeared to be
• It is not possible for the prosecution and defence to dispense with
the need for a special hearing by agreeing that the accused
should be found not
guilty on the grounds of insanity. Similarly, it is not possible for a defendant
who is found unfit to stand
trial to enter a plea of guilty.
• In other jurisdictions, there are different procedures that are to be
followed if an accused is found to be unfit to stand
• Special hearing provisions in Australia (and comparable
obligations arising under the
. These criticisms have focused on the
removal of the accused from the mainstream criminal justice system and the
extent to which
the modified process of the special hearing differs from a
criminal trial.
• Based on the approach in other jurisdictions, an option for reform
would be to adopt a judge-only procedure for special hearings
— either in
all cases (England and Wales) or in cases where the prosecution and defence
agree that the evidence establishes
the defence of mental impairment/insanity
(Victoria).
provides an overview of the law of insanity in Tasmania and identifies
concerns in relation to the existing law before considering
options for reform.
It considers whether an insanity defence is required, and if so, whether the
current defence should be amended.
Key points of this Part are that:
• The defence of insanity is contained in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas). This is based on the
rules. Although not identical
to the Tasmanian provisions, all Australian jurisdictions have comparable laws
in relation to insanity.
• Central to the operation of the insanity defence is the scope of the
concept of ‘mental disease’. In order to
rely on the defence of
insanity under ss 16(1) and (2) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas), it must be
established on the balance of probabilities that the defendant was suffering a
mental disease. Significantly, the
definition of a mental disease is a legal
rather than a medical construct.
• Evidence of a mental disease alone will not provide the defendant
with a defence. Under ss 16(1) and (2), it must also be
established that the
effect of the mental disease was either that: (a) the defendant did not have the
capacity to
understand the physical character of the act
; or (b) the
defendant did not have the capacity to know that the
act or omission was one
which he or she ought not do or make
; or (c) the defendant acted under an
uncontrollable impulse
• The onus is on the defendant to prove that he or she was insane
within s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) on the balance of probabilities.
Case authority establishes that the prosecution can allege, and call evidence to
prove, insanity
if the defendant puts his or her state of mind in issue by
alleging non-insane automatism or the absence of intent. However, the
prosecution cannot introduce evidence probative of insanity until the matter is
put in issue by the defence.
• Some jurisdictions have abolished the defence of insanity.
• An alternative to the complete abolition of the insanity defence
would be to replace it with an alternative means of deciding
the circumstances
in which individuals ought not be criminally responsible for their conduct. A
model proposed in England and Wales
is for the creation of a special defence
based on the accused’s lack of capacity at the time of the offence that
would apply
to physical as well as mental conditions that led to the relevant
loss of capacity.
• Another option for reform would be to retain and amend the insanity
defence in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas). Extensive academic literature
has outlined deficiencies with the law of insanity. An overview of these
concerns is set out
in Part 7 including:
(a) inappropriate and outdated terminology (insanity);
(b) the nature of the qualifying mental state (mental disease) is outdated,
limited and offensive;
(c) the narrow scope of the incapacities specified as establishing the
defence; and
(d) the inclusion of irresistible impulses in the defence.
• Despite well-established theoretical concerns, it is less clear to
what extent these matters give rise to difficulties in
practice. Accordingly,
and if and how the defence
of insanity should be amended.
• Another area of concern in relation to the law of insanity in
Tasmania is the role of s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and the
interrelationship of the defences of insanity and self-defence. This has
previously been addressed by the TLRI. The
previous recommendation made was
Criminal Code
(Tas) be amended to provide that if a
person does an act or makes an omission as a result of a delusion caused by a
mental disease,
the delusion can only be used as a defence under s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support a defence of
self-defence under s 46 of the
. In addition, in its previous report,
the TLRI recommended that s 16(3) should be repealed.
• Concerns have been raised in relation to the burden of proof that is
cast on the defendant to prove the insanity defence on
the balance of
probabilities. This is contrary to the general rule of criminal law that the
legal burden of proof is on the prosecution.
It is also different from other
defences where an accused raises the defence of mistake or self-defence or seeks
to rely on evidence
of automatism or intoxication to deny criminal
responsibility. In relation to these matters, the accused has an evidentiary
• Unlike the criminal law generally, where the prosecution can accept a
plea by a defendant, currently in Tasmania it is not
possible for the defendant
to enter a plea of not guilty by reason of insanity. In the Supreme Court a
verdict of not guilty by reason
of insanity must be delivered by a jury and in
the Magistrates Court it must be given by a magistrate. Based on the approach in
the necessity for a jury to determine the question of insanity
prosecution and defence agree that evidence in a case establishes insanity.
Disposition: Forensic and Treatment Orders
Part 8 examines the orders that can be made under the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) following a finding that an individual is
not guilty by reason of insanity (either at a trial or a special hearing) or if
finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of an offence (at a
special hearing). It identifies concerns in relation
to the existing law and
considers options for reform.
Key points of this Part are that:
• An individual is
found guilty of an offence where he or
she is found not guilty by reason of insanity or unfit to stand trial if a
finding cannot
be made at a special hearing that the accused is not guilty.
Accordingly, the person is not ‘sentenced’ for the offence
to the ordinary principles of sentencing.
• Under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
there are five orders that a court can make if a defendant is found not guilty
of the offence on the ground of insanity or
if a finding cannot be made that the
defendant is not guilty. These are:
(a) to impose a restriction order;
(b) release the defendant and make a supervision order;
(c) make a treatment order;
(d) make a conditional release order; or
(e) make an unconditional release order.
• Restriction orders and supervision orders are indefinite orders that
can only be discharged or revoked by the Supreme Court.
• In making orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas), the court is directed by
to apply, where appropriate,
the principle that restrictions on the defendant’s freedom and personal
autonomy should be kept
to the minimum consistent with the safety of the
community. The court is also directed by
to have regard to the
following: (a) the nature of the defendant’s mental impairment or other
condition or disability; (b)
whether the defendant is, or would if released be,
likely to endanger another person or other persons generally; (c) whether there
are adequate resources available for the treatment and support of the defendant
in the community; (d) whether the defendant is likely
to comply with the
conditions of a supervision order; and (e) other matters that the court thinks
• During the term of restriction and supervision orders, there are
provisions for regular review of the order by the Mental
Health Tribunal (MHT).
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), forensic
orders are to be reviewed by the MHT within 12 months after the order was made
and at least once in each period of
12 months afterwards. At a review, the MHT
can issue a certificate if it determines that a forensic order is no longer
or that the conditions of the order are inappropriate. The factors set
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
in relation to making of orders are also relevant to the review process
conducted by the MHT.
• If a certificate is issued, the defendant may apply immediately to
the Supreme Court for a discharge, revocation or variation
of the forensic
order. The factors set out above in relation to the making of orders are also
relevant to the discharge of a restriction
order and the variation or revocation
of a supervision order by the Supreme Court.
• Under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas), the MHT may grant a
forensic patient who is subject to a restriction order leave of absence from a
secure mental health unit.
• Concerns in relation to forensic orders in Tasmania include the
indefinite nature of the orders.
• In some other jurisdictions, limiting terms exist to give an end date
to forensic orders. If a limiting term was adopted in
Tasmania, it would be
necessary to determine whether this was an
absolute limit
imposed with provision to extend
the period of restriction or supervision
prior to the end of the limiting term. In addition, it would be necessary to
determine the
mechanism for setting the limiting term.
• Concerns also have been raised in relation to the test that the
Supreme Court should apply when making, varying, discharging
or revoking orders
— in particular, the basis on which such orders should be made, discharged
or revoked.
• In Tasmania, only the Supreme Court has the power to discharge or
revoke a forensic order. In some jurisdictions there are
other models of
decision-making in relation to the review and release of people subject to
forensic orders including review and revocation
by a tribunal rather than the
• Concerns have also been raised about the difficulties for forensic
patients to transition from a restriction order to a supervision
order or from a
supervision order to treatment under the
Mental Health Act 2013
There also appear to be difficulties in providing ‘step-up’ and
‘step-down’ options for forensic patients
seeking to transition from
a restriction order (with detention at the Wilfred Lopes Centre) to detention in
a community-based facility.
Accordingly, the TLRI seeks feedback in relation to
whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) and the
leave provision in the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) currently provide
appropriate pathways for gradual reintegration of a forensic patient into the
community, consistent with the
principles of least restriction and community
safety. In this regard, options for reform could include changing the conditions
may attach to a supervision order, making changes to the leave provisions
and the creation of step-down/step-up facilities to provide
for appropriate
levels of supervision and flexibility to respond to patient need.
• Concerns have also been raised in relation to the appropriateness of
orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
people with intellectual disabilities.
Summary of Questions
The Institute welcomes your response to any individual question or to all
questions contained within this Issues Paper. A full list
of the consultation
questions is contained below with page references for questions that relate to
different parts of the Issues
Mental health and cognitive impairments and the criminal justice system
1. Should there be an amendment to the dangerous criminal provisions
contained in the
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) to provide a statutory trigger
for judicial consideration of the appropriateness of a making an order under the
Sentencing Act 1997
instead of a dangerous criminal
declaration? (Page 21)
Unfitness to stand trial: The test
2. Should the doctrine of fitness to stand trial be abolished in Tasmania?
3. If so, how should the law be changed to ensure that individuals who are
not able to participate in the trial process (even with
the provision of
supports) receive a fair trial? (Page 29)
4. Does the current test for unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
continue to be a
suitable basis for determining unfitness to stand trial? (Page 39)
5. Are there any difficulties that arise from the current application of
the criteria contained in the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8? For example, are there difficulties with the test that give rise to a
subjective interpretation of the criteria by medical
experts? (Page 39)
6. Is the current test under-inclusive and not able to appropriately
reflect the issues that arise for individuals with mental illness?
7. Should the test of unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8 include consideration of an
accused person’s decision-making capacity and/or ability for effective
participation?
8. Should the test of unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8 include an overarching
requirement of a fair trial in the application of the criteria? (Page 39)
9. Should the test of unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8 include a requirement that the
accused person is able to exercise the criteria rationally? (Page 40)
10. Are changes required to the criteria contained in the
Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8 to allow for an accused to
participate meaningfully in the trial process? (Page 40)
11. What changes to the criteria contained in the
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) can be made, if any, to enhance the ability
of experts to assess an accused person’s fitness to stand trial? (Page
12. Should the availability of accommodations and support measures,
including the potential use of an intermediary/communication assistant
scheme is adopted) be specified in the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act
(Tas) as a factor that needs to be taken into account when determining
unfitness to stand trial? (Page 40)
13. Should there be a separate test in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to determine whether a person is fit to enter a
plea? (Page 42)
14. If so, what should be the requirements of the test? (Page 42)
Unfitness to stand trial: Procedure to determine unfitness to stand
15. Are there any issues that arise in relation to the role of experts and
expert reports in the process of determining unfitness
to stand trial? (Page
16. If so, how do you think these problems might be resolved? (Page
17. Should the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
be amended to provide that unfitness to stand trial is determined by a judge in
the Supreme Court instead of a jury in all
cases? (Page 51)
18. Should the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
be amended to allow a magistrate to discharge an individual without making a
determination of their fitness to stand trial
or criminal responsibility? (Page
19. What (if any) limitations should be set out in relation to the exercise
of the power of discharge? (Page 52)
Unfitness to stand trial: Procedure following a determination of
unfitness to stand trial
20. Do you consider that the conduct of a special hearing differs from an
ordinary trial in terms of the evidence adduced or the conduct
of the hearing?
If so, in what ways? (Page 57)
21. Do you consider that the conduct of the special hearing is consistent
with the presumption of innocence? (Page 57)
22. Do issues arise in relation to the conduct of legal practitioners in
acting in the ‘best interests’ of a person rather
than based on that
person’s ‘rights, wishes and preferences’? (Page 57)
23. Should any changes be made to the procedure for a special hearing?
24. Should there be a judge-alone process available instead of a special
hearing? If so, should this be available in circumstances
where the prosecution
and defence agree that the evidence establishes the defence of insanity at a
special hearing? Or should there
be a judge-alone process available instead of a
special hearing in all cases? (Page 59)
25. Should the defence of insanity in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) be abolished? (Page 81)
26. If you consider that the insanity defence should be abolished, do you
think that a new defence should be created, or should general
principles of
criminal responsibility apply? (Page 81)
27. If the defence of insanity is abolished, do you consider that the
powers under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) are sufficient to address
community protection concerns following the acquittal of an individual with
mental health impairments?
If not, what changes would be necessary? (Page
28. Should a new defence be introduced to replace the insanity defence that
provides for a verdict of not guilty on the grounds of
a recognised medical
condition (as proposed in England and Wales)? (Page 84)
29. If so, should there be any non-qualifying conditions? (Page 84)
30. Do you consider that the name of the defence of insanity in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should be changed?
If so, what should the
defence be called? (Page 85)
31. Does the definition of ‘mental disease’ cause problems in
practice? (Page 92)
32. Should the terminology in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
changed to replace the terms ‘mental disease’ and ‘natural
imbecility’? If so, what terminology
should be used? Should s 16 refer to
mental health and cognitive impairments (as recommended in NSW)? Or mental
impairment (as used
in a majority of other jurisdictions)? Or what other
terminology would you recommend be used? (Page 92)
33. Should there be a statutory definition of the terms used? (Page
34. If so, should this be a definition that defines mental impairment to
include all or any of the following: mental illness, intellectual
disability,
cognitive impairment, senility, dementia? (Page 92)
35. Should the definition of mental impairment include some or all
personality disorders or expressly exclude some or all personality
disorders, or
should the definition not specifically refer to personality disorders? If the
definition of mental impairment is to
distinguish between personality disorders,
which should be included or excluded from the scope of s 16? (Page 92)
36. Should there be a definition, such as is recommended in New South
Wales, that separates mental health impairment and cognitive
impairment? If so,
should the New South Wales definition be adopted? (Page 92)
37. Should mental illness be defined, and if so, how? (Page 92)
38. Should cognitive impairment be defined, and if so, how? (Page 93)
39. How should drug induced psychosis be treated within the insanity
defence? Should a distinction be made between psychosis arising
temporary effects of drug use and mental health impairments resulting from drug
use (as recommended in NSW and Victoria)?
40. Does the narrow interpretation of the ‘incapacity’ and/or
the physical character of the act contained in the
Criminal Code
16(1)(a)(i) cause any problems in practice? (Page 94)
41. Does the requirement to establish that the person was incapable of
knowing that the act was one which he or she ought not do or
make contained in
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(a)(ii) cause any problems in practice?
42. Do you consider that there should be any change made to the qualifying
conditions for the defence of insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(a)? (Page 94)
43. Do you consider that the volitional test for insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(b) should be retained? (Page 95)
44. Do you consider that any amendment should be made to the
(Tas) s 16(1)(b)? (Page 95)
45. Do you have an explanation as to why successful reliance on the defence
of insanity is so low? (Page 96)
46. Do you consider that there are practical difficulties with the current
operation of the insanity defence contained in the
Criminal Code
16? (Page 96)
47. Does the current test work well in practice or does it wrongly include
or exclude defendants from the scope of the defence? (Page
48. Do medical practitioners experience cases where a person’s mental
state at the time of the offence was such that their opinion
was that he or she
ought not to have been held criminally responsible, but the mental condition did
not meet the tests contained
in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas)? (Page
49. Does the insanity test contained in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) create difficulties for experts in writing reports and/or in giving
evidence at trial? (Page 96)
50. Can you outline any circumstances where an accused would not be able to
rely on insanity within s 16(1) but would be able to rely
on insanity within
s 16(3)? (Page 103)
51. Do you agree with the view of the TLRI that s 16(3) of the
should be repealed and a provision inserted in the
provide that if a person does an act or makes an omission as a result of a
delusion caused by a mental disease, the delusion can
only be used as a defence
under s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support
a defence of self-defence under s 46 of the
Criminal Code
possible model would be the legislation in the ACT or the Commonwealth Act).
52. Alternatively, do you consider that s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
should be retained, and an amendment made to the
to provide that
successful reliance on s 16(3) would result in a special verdict of not guilty
by reason of insanity rather than a
complete acquittal? (A possible model for
the legislation would be the amendment proposed by the Western Australian Law
Reform Commission).
53. Alternatively, do you consider that evidence of delusions arising from
mental illness should be able to be relied on for the purposes
self-defence in s 46 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) with the result
being that a successful argument of self-defence receives a complete acquittal?
If so, what (if any) protections
need to be put in place in the case of an
accused who is acquitted on the basis of self-defence arising from a deluded
belief attributable
to a mental illness? (Page 104)
54. Should the
Criminal Code
(Tas) be amended to provide that the
burden of proof for the insanity defence rests on the prosecution and that the
defendant bears
an evidential burden only in relation to this defence? (Page
55. Should the prosecution have the power to raise the defence of insanity
against the wishes of the defendant? (Page 106)
56. Should the leave of the court be required for the prosecution to do
this? (Page 106)
57. Should there be legislative change to allow the prosecution and defence
to agree that a defendant is not guilty by reason of insanity?
58. If so, are there any protections in the interests of the defendant that
need to be put in place? (Page 108)
Disposition: Forensic and treatment orders
59. Should the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
be amended to provide for a limiting term for restriction and supervision orders
to replace the current indefinite nature of
these orders? (Page 131)
60. Should the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
be amended to provide for a limiting term for a conditional release order to
replace the current indefinite nature of these
orders? (Page 131)
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
amended to provide for a limiting term for restriction and supervision orders,
is it necessary and appropriate to introduce
a preventative detention scheme
that would allow for an extension of the person’s forensic patient status?
62. If a preventative detention scheme is introduced, what model should be
used? What should the threshold test for an extension order
be and how long
should an extension order operate? (Page 137)
63. If there is a time limit for restriction and supervision orders under
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), on what basis
should it be determined? (Page 140)
64. If there is a time limit for conditional release orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), should it be the
same as the conditional undertaking under the
Sentencing Act 1997
(five years)? If not, on what basis should it be determined? (Page
65. Are there any difficulties that exist under the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) in relation to the making, varying or
discharging of orders for forensic patients? (Page 148)
66. Is the current approach to decision-making in relation to individuals
subject to forensic orders overly cautious? For example,
is too much emphasis
placed on the risk to the community and too little emphasis placed on the
interests of the person? (Page 148)
67. Do you think that the test contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
referring to ‘likely to
endanger’ should be changed to refer to a ‘significant risk of
serious harm’, an
‘unacceptable risk of causing physical or
psychological harm’ or some other test? Are there any of the other factors
that should be included or removed from the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
68. If the current system of indefinite detention or supervision with
reviews is retained in Tasmania, should the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) be amended to create a presumption in favour of a
reduced level of supervision in circumstances where the Mental Health Tribunal
has issued a certificate? (Page 149)
69. If a system of limiting terms is adopted in Tasmania, should a
presumption against release or reduced supervision be created prior
expiry of the limiting term and then a presumption in favour of release from
detention/discharge from supervision after the
expiry of the limiting term?
70. Should there be a change in the judicial model of decision-making to
allow the Mental Health Tribunal to exercise powers of variation,
discharge or
revocation of forensic orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas)? (Page 152)
71. If there is a change to the decision-making model in Tasmania, is it
necessary to make changes in relation to the composition
of the panel that is
constituted to make decisions to discharge, revoke or vary forensic orders under
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas)? (Page 152)
72. Are there any difficulties with the operation of the leave provisions
Mental Health 2013
(Tas) that limit its utility in providing an
appropriate pathway for the gradual reintegration of a forensic patient into the
73. Does the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
provide an appropriate pathway for gradual reintegration of a forensic patient
into the community? (Page 155)
74. If not,
(a) Are the provisions regarding the conditions that may attach to a
supervision order adequate and appropriate? If not, what changes
should be made?
For example, would it be desirable for the provisions in relation to supervision
orders in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to be
amended to allow the court to impose conditions that the person reside in an
approved hospital if directed by the Chief
Forensic Psychiatrist or the Mental
Health Tribunal?
(b) Would changes to the leave provisions, such as providing for extended
leave, provide a more appropriate pathway for gradual reintegration
of a patient
into the community?
(c) Is there a need for a medium secure environment to operate as a
step-down/step-up facility for patients who are subject to a restriction
If so, should the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist, the Mental Health Tribunal and/or
the court have the ability to move a forensic
patient between Wilfred Lopes and
the medium secure facility? On what basis?
(d) Is there a technological solution that may be used to monitor forensic
patients to address concerns in relation to risk and community
(e) What is the cost implication of making these changes, including the
costs of supervision and of treatment services? (Page 155)
75. Are the orders available following a finding of not guilty by reason of
insanity or that a finding cannot be made that the defendant
was not guilty of
the offence charged under the current
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas) model appropriate for people with an intellectual disability
or cognitive impairment? (Page 158)
76. Are changes needed to the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) in terms of the orders available and the process to vary or
discharge an order to better meet the needs of people with an intellectual
disability or cognitive impairment? What are the likely cost implications of
making these changes? (Page 158)
77. Are changes needed to the services that support the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) model to ensure that it meets the needs
of people with an intellectual disability or cognitive impairment? What are the
cost implications of making these changes? (Page 158)
Introduction
Background to the Reference
1.1.1 In its Report,
Review of the Law Relating to
Self-defence
(Final Report No 20), the Tasmania Law Reform Institute (TLRI) recommended
that a review of the defence of insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16 should be undertaken. Concerns were expressed about the extent to
which the criminal law reflects contemporary medical
knowledge about mental
illness. Of particular concern was the relationship between delusions and
self-defence and whether mistakes
arising from insane delusions can ever ground
the defence of self-defence. The Report noted that to permit complete acquittals
cases of insane delusions does not enable appropriate treatment to be
provided to deluded defendants or take into account the need
for community
protection. Ultimately, the TLRI recommended that if a person does an act or
makes an omission as a result of a delusion
caused by a mental disease, the
delusion should only be used as a defence under s 16 of the
Criminal Code
and should not be relied on to support a defence of self-defence under of
1.1.2 Following the Report’s recommendations, the then Attorney-General
of Tasmania, the Hon Vanessa Goodwin, requested the
TLRI to provide advice in
the following terms:
To consider the operation of the law of insanity in Tasmania with particular
reference to:
• the operation of s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
• whether evidence of insane delusions arising from mental illness
should form the basis of self-defence;
• if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether defendants relying on insane delusions
should be liable to
supervision under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
• if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) requires amendment in relation to treatment options for such
defendants.
To consider the operation of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) and whether changes are needed to ensure that the Act operates
justly, effectively and consistently with the principles that
underlie it. In
particular, the Institute should consider whether:
• the process of determining fitness to stand trial or establishing the
defence of insanity can be improved; and
• the operation of
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) including in relation to discharge and review of
forensic and treatment orders and whether there is a need for ‘step
down’ options.
1.1.3 This research forms part of the
Disability Justice Plan for Tasmania
, which sets out a commitment to safeguard the rights of
forensic mental health patients.
The Plan is premised upon the principles articulated in the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
’) and its objective is to develop a justice system in
Tasmania that is responsive to the needs of people with disability and
provides equality before the law and equal access to
1.1.4 In related research, the TLRI has also undertaken a project that
recommends the establishment of an intermediary/communication
assistant scheme
in Tasmania for people with communication needs involved in the criminal justice
The term ‘communication needs’ encompasses a range of communication
needs, including those arising from linguistic and
intellectual development,
physical, mental, intellectual and cognitive impairments and those attributable
to physical and mental
purpose of the scheme is to maximise the opportunities for people with
communication needs to participate in the criminal justice
process by optimising
their communication and comprehension capacities. The implementation of such a
scheme will have clear relevance
to the issues raised in relation to fitness to
stand trial in this Issues Paper.
The TLRI has also undertaken a review of the
Guardianship and Administration
(Tas) and has released a final report that makes recommendation for
Structure of this Issues Paper
provides an overview of the legislative framework that sets out
the law in relation to the operation of the criminal justice system
with mental health and/or cognitive impairments. It sets out the distinction
between fitness to stand trial and insanity
and considers the principles that
underlie the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
1.2.2 Part 3 provides an overview of mental illness and cognitive impairments
and the criminal justice system.
1.2.3 Part 4 sets out the current test for determining unfitness to stand
trial in Tasmania and considers the law in other jurisdictions
and options for
reforming the test.
1.2.4 Part 5 sets out the current Tasmanian procedure to determine unfitness
to stand trial, the position in other jurisdictions and
options available to
reform the current procedure.
1.2.5 Part 6 sets out the procedure following a determination of unfitness to
stand trial in Tasmania and in other comparable jurisdictions.
It then examines
options for reform of the procedure following a determination of unfitness to
stand trial.
1.2.6 Part 7 provides an overview of the law of insanity in Tasmania and
identifies concerns in relation to the existing law and considers
options for
1.2.7 Part 8 examines the orders that can be made under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) following a finding that a person
is not guilty by reason of insanity (either at a trial or a special hearing) or
if a finding
cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of an offence (at a
special hearing). It identifies concerns in relation to the existing
considers options for reform.
Scope of the Reference
1.3.1 This Issues Paper considers two specialised responses for people with
mental illness and/or cognitive impairment where their
mental impairment affects
their ability to participate in the ordinary processes of the criminal justice
(1) fitness to stand trial; and
(2) the defence of insanity.
In examining the law of insanity, this Issues Paper considers the interaction
of evidence of an individual’s mental health and/or
cognitive impairment
with other defences, in particular the law of self-defence and the law of
intoxication. It also examines the
orders that may be made following a special
hearing in circumstances where a person has been found to be not fit to stand
after a person has been found not guilty by reason of insanity. A key
point to observe is that a person is
found guilty of an offence where
he or she is found not guilty by reason of insanity or unfit to stand trial if a
finding is not
able to be made at a special hearing that the person is not
guilty. Accordingly, the person is not ‘sentenced’ for the
according to the ordinary principles of sentencing. Instead, the dispositions
available to the judge or magistrate rely on
an assessment of the future risk
posed by the person to inform the exercise of judicial discretion.
1.3.2 This Issues Paper examines the operation of fitness to stand trial and
insanity provisions for individuals with mental health
and/or cognitive
impairments. The use of terminology and the scope of definitions are problematic
given that medical and legal definitions
may differ depending on the purpose and
context in which they are
However, for the purposes of this paper, the TLRI has relied on the definitions
developed by the New South Wales Law Reform Commission
(NSWLRC). Accordingly, a
mental health impairment is understood to mean ‘a temporary or continuing
disturbance of thought,
mood, volition, perception or memory that impairs
emotional wellbeing, judgement or behaviour, so as to affect function in daily
life to a material extent’.
Cognitive impairment ‘refers to impairments in a person’s ability to
think, concentrate, react to emotions, formulate
ideas and remember and process
information’.
It includes
intellectual disability and borderline intellectual functioning, acquired brain
injury, dementia, autism spectrum disorder
and drug or alcohol related brain
1.3.3 This Issues Paper does not involve a review of the
Mental Health Act
(Tas) but does consider the interaction between the criminal justice
system and that Act. In addition, it does not review the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas) but, as noted earlier, the TLRI has undertaken
a separate review of this Act.
Further, this paper does not review the Diversion List that operates in the
Magistrates Court for individuals who have mental health
and/or cognitive
impairments.
and Principles
Introduction
2.1.1 This Part contains an overview of the legislative framework that sets
out the law in relation to the operation of the criminal
justice system for
people with mental health and/or cognitive impairments. It sets out the
distinction between fitness to stand trial
and the defence of insanity and also
considers the principles that underlie the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment
Brief overview of legislative
2.2.1 In Tasmania, several pieces of legislation set out the law in relation
to the operation of the criminal justice system for people
with mental health
and/or cognitive impairments. These include:
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Establishes:
• the process and criteria for determining if a person is unfit to
stand trial;
• the procedure for a special hearing following a finding of
unfitness to stand trial;
• the findings available at a special hearing;
• the consequences of a finding that an accused is not guilty by
reason of insanity (either following an ordinary trial or a
special hearing) or
where a finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty;
• the process and criteria for the discharge of a restriction order,
and the variation or revocation of a supervision order.
The Criminal Code
• Sets down the law and procedure for determining if an accused is
not guilty by reason of insanity.
Mental Health Act 2013
• for the management of involuntary patients (including people placed
on a treatment order);
• for the management of forensic patients (including people placed on
restriction and supervision orders);
• the procedure for the review of orders by the MHT.
Sentencing Act 1997
• contains the process and criteria for making an assessment order,
treatment, supervision and restriction order in respect
of offenders found
guilty of an offence.
2.2.2 Some individuals who have mental health and/or cognitive impairments
who may be unfit to stand trial and/or who may be able
to rely on the insanity
defence, might opt instead to participate in the Diversion List (if
An outcome of the Diversion List is to modify and improve court processes to
reflect the court’s aspiration to improve access
to justice for
individuals with mental health problems or cognitive
disabilities.
While a person is
engaged with the diversion program, a treatment plan is developed for them and
their compliance with that plan
is relevant to the final disposition made by the
court. This may include the prosecution withdrawing the charges or the person
a lesser sentence than they would have received if their case had been
heard according to the ordinary court
Another aim of the Diversion List is to achieve long-term savings for the court
and community by reducing reoffending. A concomitant
result is the reduced
number of special hearings under
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
For example, in an evaluation of the Diversion List conducted in 2009, it was
reported that a benefit had been a decrease in the
need for special hearings in
the Magistrates Court.
2.2.3 A Diversion List has operated in the Magistrates Court in Tasmania
since the implementation of a pilot program in Hobart in
2007. This has now been
expanded to Launceston, Burnie and Devonport. The Diversion List is a
pre-sentence ‘problem-solving’
approach that uses the provisions of
Bail Act 1994
(Tas) and the
Sentencing Act 1997
divert eligible individuals to mental health, disability and other welfare
services in order to address the underlying issues
of their criminal offending
where they have been charged with summary offences or minor indictable offences
that can be tried summarily.
Diversion List targets repeat offenders where the nature of their offending is
usually not serious enough to warrant a prison
sentence or a community service
In 2011, it was reported
that an average of 500 Hobart defendants are referred by the court to Forensic
Mental Health Court Liaison
Officers each year for assessment and as of April
2011, 231 individuals had been referred to the
2.2.4 In addition, as discussed further in
, a significant proportion
of defendants have mental and/or cognitive impairments, and, as noted, only a
small number of such people
rely on unfitness to stand trial and/or the defence
of insanity. Many more people with mental and/or cognitive impairments do not
rely on the unfitness procedure or the insanity defence and instead enter a plea
of guilty and/or are found guilty following a trial.
Accordingly, in
understanding the operation of the criminal justice system in relation to people
with mental and/or cognitive impairments,
it is important to understand the role
of impairment as a sentencing factor. This is discussed at [3.3].
Understanding fitness to stand trial and
the defence of insanity
2.3.1 Although there may be an overlap in the conditions that give rise to a
finding that an individual is unfit to stand trial and
a finding that an
individual is not guilty by reason of insanity, the scope of their operation and
their legal requirements are different.
The difference between insanity and fitness
to stand trial
2.3.2 As shown in Table 2.1 below, fitness to stand trial is a
provision that relates to the issue of whether the accused has
the ability to understand or participate in his or her
It is concerned with the
accused’s capacity at the
time of the trial
. It applies where a
person’s mental processes are disordered or impaired, or if for any other
reason the person is unable to
understand court processes and make a defence to
Case example (unfit but no issue of insanity)
D was found unfit to stand trial for offences of arson and attempted arson by
agreement of the prosecution and defence. D has Alzheimer’s
Following a special hearing conducted before a jury, the jury returned a verdict
that they were unable to find D not guilty.
D was released unconditionally.
2.3.3 In contrast, insanity is a matter of
substantive
involving the determination of a whether an accused should not be held
criminally responsible on the ground that he or she lacked
the mental capacity
to commit the
Insanity is concerned with an accused’s capacity at the
time of the
. In order to rely on the insanity defence, the accused must have a
mental disease (which includes natural imbecility) such that the
person lacked
the capacity to understand the physical character of the act or know that the
act was one which he or she ought not
do, or, by reason of the mental disease,
the person was deprived of the power to resist an
Case example (no issue of fitness but insanity)
D was charged with murder. He suffered from schizophrenia or a schizophrenic
condition which resulted in an acute psychosis. Expert
evidence was given that
this disorder deprived him of the capacity to know the acts were ones which he
ought not to do. Following
a jury trial, D was found not guilty by reason of
insanity. D was detained in a secure mental health unit under a restriction
2.3.4 Consequently, an accused may be unfit to stand trial but not insane for
the purposes of the insanity defence or fit to stand
trial but insane or unfit
and insane.
Case example (unfit and insanity)
D was charged with assaulting a police officer. D suffered from severe
schizophrenia. Following a finding that D was unfit to stand
trial, at the
special hearing, the jury found that D was not guilty on the grounds of insanity
because D was incapable of knowing
that his acts were ones he ought not to do. D
was detained in a secure mental health unit under a restriction order.
Table 2.1: Process and timing of determining unfitness to stand trial and
the insanity
Unfitness to stand trial
Issue to be determined
Whether the accused is fit to stand trial
Whether the accused is not guilty by reason of
Relevant time
Time of trial
Time of offence
Investigation into unfitness
Trial or special hearing (if the person is unfit)
Relevant legislation
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Criminal Code
The criminal justice pathway
2.3.5 Figure 2.1 contains a flowchart that sets out the criminal justice
pathway where an accused’s mental health and/or cognitive
raises issues of fitness to stand trial and/or insanity.
Figure 2.1: Criminal justice pathway where an accused’s mental
health and/or cognitive impairment raises issues of fitness to
stand trial
and/or insanity
Figure 2.1 shows that the same dispositions are available to the court
(1) an accused is found not guilty by reason of insanity following a trial
(where the person was fit to stand trial); or
(2) where an accused is found not guilty by reason of insanity or a finding
could not be made that an accused was not guilty following
a special hearing
(unfit to stand trial).
These orders are a restriction order, a supervision order, conditional
release or unconditional
It is important to note
that these dispositions are
sentences of the court and
from a finding of guilt (unlike the ordinary trial where sentencing
orders follow a finding of guilt).
2.3.6 In addition, under the
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas), the court can
make a treatment order, a supervision order or a restriction order (in addition
to or instead of any sentence
it may impose), in respect of an offender who has
been found guilty of an offence. However, in this case, the offender has been
guilty and the orders are imposed as a sentence. This power exists where
the offender is suffering a mental illness that requires
There were seven
offenders identified in the Mental Health Tribunal (MHT) data as being subject
to restriction or supervision orders
imposed as part of a sentence.
Case examples
D suffered from schizophrenia and was found guilty of wounding. At the
sentencing hearing, D was released under the supervision of
the Chief Forensic
Psychiatrist on conditions including in relation to taking medication,
submission to treatment and attendance
at drug and alcohol rehabilitation
D suffered from schizophrenia and pleaded guilty to arson and setting fire to
vegetation. D was sentenced to 13 months’ imprisonment
and, on release, a
restriction order detaining him in a secure mental health unit until the order
was discharged by the Supreme Court.
The principles underlying the
Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
Background to the Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999 (Tas)
2.4.1 In 1999, the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
made significant changes to the law that applied to individuals with mental
illness and/or cognitive impairment in Tasmania.
It was part of a package of
reforms that followed from a review of the
Mental Health Act 1963
and sought to address deficiencies that existed in the previous law. Previously,
the procedural law on the insanity defence,
fitness to plead and disposition of
individuals were contained in the
Criminal Code
Mental Health
(Tas). Under these provisions, if a person had been found unfit to
stand trial or found not guilty by reason of insanity then:
Criminal Code
required a judge to make an order that the
person was to be dealt with as a mentally disordered person who had become
subject to the
criminal process. There was no discretion in relation to
(2) When the judge made the order, the Attorney-General was required to
specify an institution in which the person was to be detained,
which was a
Special Institution at Risdon Prison.
(3) When the Attorney-General made the order, the
Criminal Code
stated that the person was to be treated for the purposes of
Mental Health Act 1963
as having been admitted in pursuance of a
hospital order made together with a restriction order.
(4) Once the Attorney-General made the order the person could only be
released by the Governor acting on the advice of the Executive
Council and on
the recommendation of the Mental Health Review Tribunal. The decision as to
whether or not to accept the recommendations
of the tribunal was generally made
by Cabinet.
This was ‘akin to a sentence for the term of the defendant’s
natural life’ (at least for some people) given that
the decision to
release a person ‘was for practical purposes in the hands of the State
Cabinet and therefore subject to political
pressure from a community with little
compassion for, or understanding of, mental
However, while there is a lack of statistics, it has been reported that the
‘Governor’s pleasure regime’ did allow
for the release of some
people after relatively short periods of
2.4.2 Changes were made in the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act
(Tas) in relation to two key issues to address these concerns:
Procedures for a special hearing were created where an accused was
found unfit to stand trial
. Previously, if a person was declared unfit, then
they were detained under a restriction order, ‘notwithstanding the fact
these persons have not been convicted of any offence and irrespective of
both the seriousness of the mental illness, and whether
or not they are a danger
to the public’.
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas), a special hearing was
created to ‘determine the external facts of the case — excluding the
question of intention
— to ascertain whether the basic prosecution case
can be proved beyond reasonable
At the special
hearing, the following findings are available: not guilty, not guilty of the
offence charged on the grounds of insanity,
or that a finding cannot be made
that the defendant is not
It is noted that
following a special hearing, there is no provision to find that the defendant is
The process for determining the appropriate disposition order for
persons found unfit to stand trial or not guilty by reasons of insanity
court was given a discretion in relation to the disposition options from an
unconditional release order up to the making of
the restriction order. The
court, rather than the executive, was also given the power to make orders
revoking or discharging an individual.
There was a power for a person to make an
application to the Supreme Court for release every two years and for review
hearings to
be conducted annually by the Mental Health Tribunal (MHT). Under
these provisions, if the MHT is of the view that a restriction order
supervision order is no longer required, it issues a Certificate that allows the
person to apply to the Supreme Court for the
release of the restriction order or
the revocation of the supervision order. The purpose of this was to provide for
the eventual
release of persons found unfit to stand trial or not guilty by
reason of insanity.
Accordingly,
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) did not make
any changes to the defence of insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas), it did make significant changes to the consequences of a finding that
an individual was not guilty by reason of insanity.
2.4.3 In making these changes, the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act
(Tas) was intended to modernise the law in relation to mental
impairment and to recognise the rights of defendants while at the same
protecting public safety.
reflects the background to the unfitness to stand trial doctrine that ‘was
largely incorporated into modern law as a humanistic
measure to protect accused
persons with disabilities, offer a mechanism to test the prosecution, and divert
individuals to relevant
treatment’.
Principles that underlie the Criminal
Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999 (Tas)
2.4.4 The Terms of Reference require the TLRI to consider whether changes are
needed to the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) to ensure
that it operates justly, effectively and consistently with the principles that
underlie it. The principles that can
be identified from the legislative
provisions and background to the implementation of the Act are: fairness to the
accused person
and the right to a fair trial, the protection of the community
and the recognition of the rights of mentally impaired defendants
with the principles of least
restriction.
2.4.5 In addition, the TLRI’s consideration of the
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) is informed by the obligations that arise
under international legal instruments to which Australia is a signatory
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
the right to a fair trial, the right to be treated with dignity and humanity,
the right to equality before the law and the
right not to be discriminated
against. The
sets out the requirement for substantive equality for
accused persons with disabilities, including the prohibition of discrimination
on the basis of disability, the right to equal recognition before the law, the
right to access to justice and the right to liberty
and security of the
In understanding the
human rights implications of current insanity and fitness to stand trial laws,
the TLRI has been assisted by
the considerable work that has been undertaken by
the Melbourne Social Equity Institute (and associated researchers) in this
Fairness to an accused person and the right to a fair trial
2.4.6 Fundamental principles underpinning the
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) are fairness to an accused person and the right to
a fair trial. This reflects the historical basis for the requirement that
individual must be fit to stand trial and, as observed by the VLRC, ‘this
principle is based on the “central percept
of our criminal law ... that no
person shall be convicted of a crime otherwise than after a trial according to
2.4.7 In addition to providing that a person who is unfit to stand trial is
not subject to the normal trial procedure, the
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) sets out a process for providing a fair hearing to
test the evidence against a person found unfit to stand
In order to address
concerns about the imposition of orders on a person who has not been established
to have committed an offence
and without the opportunity of an acquittal, the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) provides for a special
hearing. The Act provides that special hearings are ‘to be conducted so
that the onus of proof
and standard of proof are the same as in a trial and in
all other respects as nearly as possible as if it were a trial of criminal
proceedings’.
At a special
hearing, the defendant can raise any defence that could be raised if the special
hearing were an ordinary trial and
the defendant is entitled to give
In addition, the
defendant’s legal representatives are able to challenge
Following the special
hearing, the jury can make a finding that the person is not guilty, which has
the same effect as if the accused
was acquitted following an ordinary trial
process, or a finding that the accused is not guilty by reason of insanity or
that a finding
cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of the
Least restrictive alternative
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) expressly
states that the court is to apply the principle that ‘restrictions on the
defendant’s freedom and personal
autonomy should be kept to the minimum
consistent with the safety of the
community’.
As noted by
The principle of least restriction is fundamental to considering the
protection of the community, as the rehabilitation of people
subject to the CMIA
through successful community reintegration is the best way to ensure protection
of the community, as well as
restoring the person to a state in which they can
be a functioning member of that
This principle applies to the decision of the court in relation to which
dispositions to impose on an individual, the conditions of
such an order and the
decision as to whether to discharge or vary the order. In reviewing forensic
orders under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas), the MHT must also have
regard to this principle.
Community protection
2.4.9 Connected with the principle of least restrictive alternative is the
need for community protection. A key focus of the
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) is the need to protect community safety, including
the need to recognise the interests of victims and family members. Concern
reflect the interests of a person with mental health and cognitive impairment
within the criminal justice process and the needs
of the community and victims
was articulated in the Butler Report:
It is fundamental for all mental health consumers, including forensic
patients, to be accorded basic rights and treated with humanity
and respect.
They should not be discriminated against on the grounds of mental illness.
Where, however, a person has committed a
serious criminal act, particularly a
violent act, consideration must also be given to the fundamental rights of
others to protection
2.4.10 Community protection is reflected in the
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) with the court being directed to have regard to
whether the defendant is, or would if released be, likely to endanger another
person or other persons
The Court is also
directed to have regard to the nature of the defendant’s mental impairment
or other condition or
disability,
and a court must not
discharge a restriction order, release a defendant or significantly reduce the
degree of supervision, unless
it has considered expert reports on the condition
of the defendant and the possible effect of the proposed action on the behaviour
of the defendant.
In reviewing
forensic orders under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas), the MHT must also
have regard to these principles.
Community protection is also a factor relevant to the operation of the insanity
defence (as discussed at [7.2]).
2.4.11 Related to community protection, a significant factor that is
recognised under the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
the rights of victims and family members. Before varying or discharging an
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) provides
that the court must be provided with a report stating the views of the next of
kin of the defendant and the victims
of the defendant’s conduct, so far as
is reasonably ascertainable.
Mental Health and Cognitive
Impairments and the Criminal Justice System
Introduction
3.1.1 Insanity and fitness to stand trial apply to only a small number of
individuals compared to the number of defendants with mental
cognitive impairments overall who are involved in the criminal justice system.
This Part provides an overview of mental
illness and cognitive impairments and
the criminal justice system.
Overview of mental illness and cognitive
impairments and the criminal justice system
3.2.1 Research in other Australian jurisdictions has concluded that there
‘is strong evidence that people with cognitive and
mental health
impairments are over-represented throughout the criminal justice
In 2015, the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare reported that 49 per
cent of prison entrants had disclosed that they had
been told by a doctor,
psychiatrist, psychologist or nurse that they had a mental health disorder
(including drug or alcohol
In Victoria, it has been
estimated that ‘approximately 55% of offenders at court suffer some form
of mental impairment’.
There are also high rates of cognitive impairment identified in individuals in
Victorian research has
found that people with intellectual disabilities are at increased risk of having
a history of criminal charges,
particularly for violent and sexual
The Law Council of
Australia has observed that ‘[b]etween 50 to 78 per cent of prisoners have
experienced a psychiatric disorder
compared with 11 per cent of the general
population, and 20 per cent of prisoners have an intellectual disability
compared with 2
to 3 per cent of the general
population’.
context, Gooding and his colleagues have written that, ‘[a]lthough there
are significant issues with data collection,
[this finding] echo[s] a growing
body of international research suggesting people with cognitive disabilities are
significantly over-represented
... in the criminal justice systems of Western,
high-income countries’.
International research also indicates that the prevalence of mental health
impairments in individuals in contact with the criminal
justice system is much
higher than rates in the general
population.
Bagaric and Edney
indicate that ‘most studies which have been undertaken to measure the
prevalence of mental disorders among
criminal offenders suggest that it is very
high: ranging from approximately one-third to half of criminal
offenders’.
3.2.2 Higher involvement in the criminal justice system, however, does not
reflect a simple relationship between impairment and crime.
Instead, ‘it
is frequently the product of impairment together with other factors, such as
disrupted family backgrounds, family
violence, abuse, misuse of drugs and
alcohol, and unstable
Other factors
that have been identified include the ‘deinstitutionalisation of mentally
ill people ... and the limited capacity
of community-based mental health
services to address the needs of mentally ill
offenders’.
Further, as
Cunneen et al observe, ‘for people with mental and cognitive impairment,
the majority of research finds no inherent
link between these illnesses or
disabilities and crime, but a strong causal link between disability and
incarceration’.
the risk of being drawn into the criminal justice system is not spread evenly
for those with mental and cognitive impairments,
as ‘it is only those who
are seriously socially disadvantaged (homeless mentally ill persons in
particular) and from racialised
communities who are likely to be
imprisoned’.
Mental health and cognitive impairment as
a sentencing factor
3.3.1 Although a review of the relevance of mental health and cognitive
impairment as a sentencing factor is beyond the scope of this
reference, it is
important to be aware of the operation of the sentencing process for several
reasons. First, an accused with a mental
health or cognitive impairment may not
rely on the process of fitness to stand trial and/or on the insanity defence but
may proceed
through the usual criminal justice process. This is a clear
alternative and the possible sentence received (if found guilty) compared
consequences of a finding of unfitness or insanity are likely to weigh into the
decision-making process. As discussed below,
there has been a marked shift in
relation to the types of mental health and cognitive impairments that may
mitigate sentencing and
this broadening of approach, together with the
sentencing discount that a guilty plea attracts, may make a guilty plea a more
option from an accused’s point of view given that the sentence
imposed by the court may be less restrictive than if the person
unfitness to stand trial and/or insanity and is placed on a restriction or
supervision order.
However, it
needs to be borne in mind that the nature of the deprivation of liberty and the
treatment services that a person will
receive in prison are not the same as a
person detained at the Secure Mental Health Unit (SMHU) or a supervision order
in the community.
Concerns have been raised about the level of services
available for prisoners with mental health needs at the Risdon Complex and
taskforce has been established to investigate the
The Custodial Inspector
Tasmania has recently reported that ‘current mental health services do not
meet the needs of the Tasmanian
population.’
issues identified were understaffing, lack of mental health leadership in the
prison, no formal service level agreement
with the Forensic Mental Health
Service, a lack of dedicated spaces that are conducive to the provision of
mental health care in
the prisons, and the need for ongoing training and support
for correctional officers to allow them to ‘understand and manage
with mental health
3.3.2 Another factor that makes it important to be aware of the sentencing
approach to mental health and cognitive impairments is
that if changes are made
to the test for fitness to stand trial (such as the use of supports,
accommodations and intermediaries),
which would assist people to be fit for
trial or if the concept of fit to enter a plea was adopted in
then the approach
taken to the accused’s impairment at the sentencing stage will be
important. Walvisch has argued that ‘great
care would need to be taken to
ensure that the accused person’s impairment be properly taken into account
in the sentencing
process’ and that it would be a concern ‘if such a
system were implemented which assisted an accused to face charges
at trial, only
to abandon him or her at the sentencing
3.3.3 In Tasmania, as with other jurisdictions, an offender’s mental or
cognitive impairment is relevant to the sentencing
While it is not known
what number of offenders raise mental health or cognitive impairment as
mitigating factors at sentencing (or,
as discussed at [3.2], the number of
offenders with mental health or cognitive impairments who are involved in the
criminal justice
system), it is likely that this may affect a significant
proportion of offenders. Anecdotally, it appears that there has been an
in the number of sentencing submissions in Tasmania that rely on expert reports
outlining impairment. This raises complex
issues. Bagaric and Edney have written
that ‘the sentencing of mentally impaired offenders is one of the most
complex and acute
issues in the criminal justice
3.3.4 The difficulty that arises in sentencing offenders with mental health
or cognitive impairment stems from the number of offenders
who suffer some form
of mental or cognitive impairment and the need to reconcile the tension between
two competing considerations:
the nature of the condition that may reduce the
moral culpability of the offender that may justify a more lenient sentence on
one hand, and, on the other, the nature of the condition that may indicate
that the offender is ‘a more intractable subject
for reform than one who
is not so affected or even as one who is so likely to offend again that he [or
she] should be removed from
society for a lengthy or indeterminate
As recognised in
Veen v The Queen
a mental abnormality which makes an offender a danger to society when he is
at large but which diminishes his moral culpability for
a particular crime is a
factor which has two countervailing effects: one which tends towards a longer
custodial sentence, the other
towards a shorter. These effects may balance out,
but consideration of the danger to society cannot lead to the imposition of a
severe penalty than would have been imposed if the offender had not been
suffering from a mental
abnormality.
Accordingly, in the circumstances of a case, the nature of the
offender’s mental or cognitive impairment may be such that protection
the community carries greater weight in the exercise of the sentencing
discretion. This involves balancing the offender’s
culpability and the
need to protect the community. This complexity has been recognised by the
Tasmanian Court of Criminal
3.3.5 More recently, in Tasmania the principles set out by the Victorian
Court of Appeal in
have been adopted in
relation to the mitigation of
These principles
recognise that an offender’s impaired mental functioning, whether
temporary or permanent, is relevant to sentencing
in at least six ways:
1. to reduce the offender’s moral culpability, thereby affecting the
punishment that is just in the circumstances and the importance
of denunciation
as a sentencing consideration;
2. to influence the kind of sentence that should be imposed, or the
conditions under which it should be served;
3. to moderate or eliminate the need for general deterrence as a sentencing
consideration;
4. to moderate or eliminate the need for specific deterrence as a sentencing
consideration;
5. to make a sentence weigh more heavily on the offender than on a person in
normal health, thereby affecting the determination of
a proportionate sentence;
6. to create a serious risk of imprisonment having a significant adverse
effect on the offender’s mental health, suggesting
the need to reduce the
The decision in
was a change from the pre-existing position
‘that only “[s]erious psychiatric illnesses”’ needed to
into account by a sentencing
and so expanded the relevance of mental impairment as a factor relevant to
sentencing. However, following
, the extent to which the
principles applied to personality disorders was unclear and subsequent decisions
were inconsistent in this
3.3.6 The application of the
principles to personality
disorders was considered by the Victorian Court of Appeal in
Director of
Public Prosecutions v
In this case,
the court indicated that the
principles did not apply to the
personality disorder that affected the accused (dependent personality disorder)
but indicated that
this did not mean that the ‘personality disorder should
be completely disregarded by the sentencing
There are also
unresolved issues in relation to the application of the
principles as it is unclear whether the judgment was intended to exclude all
personality disorders (the broad interpretation) or only
those that were similar
in some way to dependent personality disorder (narrow
interpretation).
This ambiguity
has not been resolved by subsequent higher court cases in other
However, in
Tasmania it has been observed that the Court of Criminal Appeal appeared to
apply a narrow interpretation (that is, excluding
only personality disorders
that are similar to dependent personality disorder and not all personality
disorders) and so this is the
interpretation of the law that applies in
It is also clear that
a further limitation of the
principles exists in relation to
self-induced impairment (such as a mental impairment resulting for drug or
alcohol use).
3.3.7 Despite this uncertainty, it is clear that the court’s view was
that a rigorous assessment of the evidence was required.
The court expressed the
view that it was inappropriate to apply a mechanistic approach such that if an
offender suffered from any
impaired mental functioning the
principles were automatically attracted. Instead, the court stated that
careful consideration should be given to the evidence to determine
whether the
offender suffered from an impairment of mental functioning, and if so, whether
there was a connection between the impairment
and the person’s moral
culpability or the need for general and specific deterrence. This meant that
there needed to be a ‘realistic
connection’ between the impairment
and the offence or that it ‘caused or contributed’ to the offence or
was ‘causally
Further, it must be shown
that the mental impairment affected the offender’s ability to appreciate
the wrongfulness of the
conduct, or obscured his or her intent to commit the
offence, or impaired his or her ability to make calm and rational choices or
think clearly at the time of the
The ability of the
court to make this rigorous assessment is clearly dependent on the nature of the
information contained in the
expert reports received by the court. Further, the
information contained in the expert report, in more serious cases of mental or
cognitive impairment, may trigger an exploration of whether the appropriate
pathway for the offender is an order under the
Sentencing Act 1997
(restriction, supervision and treatment orders) rather than a sentencing
order under
–(h) of the
Sentencing Act 1997
3.3.8 Under the
Sentencing Act 1997
, an offender who is
found guilty of an offence may be sentenced to a restriction order, a
supervision order or a treatment order
in cases where the offender appears to be
suffering from a mental illness.
In a case where a person is found guilty, the court makes a restriction order
upon receiving a report from the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist,
psychiatrist, that the person appears to be suffering from a mental illness that
requires treatment, that such treatment
can be obtained by admission to and
detention in a secure mental health unit, that the person should be admitted as
a patient for
the person’s own safety and the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist
recommends the proposed
There is also power
for the court to make a treatment order or a supervision order, subject to the
receipt of an expert report.
its research, the TLRI identified nine cases in the Supreme Court between 2001
and 2016 where an offender was sentenced under
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) to either a sentence of imprisonment combined with a supervision order
(five cases) or imprisonment combined with a restriction
order (two cases) or a
supervision order (two cases). In eight cases, the offender entered a plea of
guilty and in one case, the
offender was found guilty by a jury of one offence
(the issue was whether the offender was guilty of attempted murder or attempted
wounding) and entered a plea of guilty to another charge.
3.3.9 The other context in which an offender’s mental condition at the
time of the offence is relevant to the imposition of
sentence, and, again, the
nature of the information contained in any reports provided to the court is
central to the exercise of
judicial discretion, is in making a dangerous
criminal declaration under the
Sentencing Act 1997
dangerous criminal provisions in the
Sentencing Act 1997
Division 3 allows the court to make a dangerous criminal declaration which
provides for indefinite detention and so an offender
is ineligible for release
until the declaration is
discharged.
One of the pre-conditions to making an order is the requirement that the judge
is of the opinion that the declaration is warranted
for the protection of the
Section 19(2)
non-exhaustive list of factors that are relevant to the making of the
declaration including medical opinion. It has been
stated that the
‘existence of a mental disorder making a convicted person prone to commit
random and impulsive acts of violence
would be a most material factor in
assessing whether to make a
declaration’.
interaction of an offender’s mental health and the dangerous criminal
provisions can be seen in the case of
McCrossen v
applicant’s complex mental health state was exacerbated by his indefinite
detention and long history of incarceration.
Expert reports to the court
highlighted the rehabilitative benefit to the offender that would result from
his being discharged from
the Dangerous Criminal Declaration and instead treated
in the secure mental health unit under the
Mental Health Act 2013
as an involuntary civil patient. This was the approach to the offender’s
rehabilitation that was taken by Wood J in making
an order discharging the
declaration:
What this case has demonstrated is that the indeterminate nature of the
sentence was in itself crushing and counterproductive in terms
applicant’s rehabilitation. Since there has been talk of the order being
lifted, the applicant has made significant
progress in a short time. To offset
these crushing effects, a prison system would have to be vigilant and have a
committed and co-ordinated
approach to an individual’s rehabilitation.
Questions may be asked about whether more could have been done from the
by the prison system to promote the applicant’s rehabilitation
in a committed way which recognised the applicant’s profound
difficulties
and mental health condition. His potential for reform cannot be doubted, noting
the marked significant improvement away
from the prison during his admissions to
the Wilfred Lopes Centre, particularly in 2009.
3.3.10 It may be that in cases where the basis for the need for community
protection arises from the nature of the offender’s
mental impairment, a
more appropriate pathway for the offender that will protect the community and
allow the offender to obtain appropriate
treatment may be found in the forensic
orders contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
rather than in indefinite detention as a dangerous criminal
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas). This point was made clearly by the
High Court in
Chester v The
where the court
expressed the view that indefinite detention as a dangerous criminal should not
‘be contemplated when in due
course it may be more appropriate that there
be a justice’s order ... for reception into and detention in an approved
of a person suffering from mental
basis, a possible reform may be to amend the dangerous criminal provisions
contained in the
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) to provide a statutory trigger
for judicial consideration of the appropriateness of making an order for
referral for assessment
with a view to making a restriction, supervision or
treatment order under the
Sentencing Act 1997
, rather than
making a dangerous criminal declaration.
Should there be an amendment to the dangerous criminal provisions contained
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas) to provide a statutory trigger for
judicial consideration of the appropriateness of making an order under the
Sentencing Act 1997
instead of a dangerous criminal
declaration?
Reliance on unfitness to stand trial and
insanity in Tasmania
3.4.1 The TLRI has sought to identify information in relation to cases where
unfitness to stand trial and insanity were raised by
using a number of
• data obtained from the Director of Public Prosecutions Annual
• data obtained from the Mental Health Tribunal;
• data obtained from the Supreme Court;
• a survey of sentencing cases using a search of the TLRI database and
the online sentencing database at the Inglis Clark Library;
• data obtained from the Department of Justice.
Supreme Court
3.4.2 Table 3.1 sets out information from the Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions. It shows that in the period 2004–2005
2016–2017, there were 37 people who were found insane or unfit to stand
trial in the Supreme Court. These data also show
that such cases only account
for a small number of cases dealt with in the Supreme Court when compared with
cases that are finalised
by way of a sentence following conviction (982 cases).
In this period, individuals found unfit to stand trial or insane made up 3.8
Table 3.1: Person tried, Supreme Court
Convictions
Found insane or unfit to plead
Source: DPP Annual Reports
3.4.3 The TLRI conducted a survey of Supreme Court sentencing cases using the
TLRI sentencing database and a sentencing search on
the Inglis Clark Library
website for the period 2005–June 2018. This was supplemented by details
provided by the Supreme Court
and the Mental Health Tribunal. This study located
45 cases where an individual was found unfit to stand trial and/or not guilty
reason of insanity.
were 17 cases where the person was unfit to stand trial and 27 cases where the
person was fit for trial but found not guilty
by reason of insanity at trial. In
one case, it was not clear whether the person was unfit to stand trial and/or
not guilty by reason
of insanity.
3.4.4 Table 3.2 shows the most serious offence for those persons identified
in this survey of sentencing cases with the offences ranging
from murder to
being found prepared for the commission of a
Table 3.2: Insanity or unfit to stand trial, 2005–June 2018, by most
serious offence
Offence category
No of cases
Homicide and related offences
Acts intended to cause injury
Sexual assault and related offences
Property damage
Robbery/burglary
Related weapons and explosive offences
Public order offences
Harassment (stalking)
Threatening behaviour
Driving offences
Magistrates Court
3.4.5 Table 3.3 sets out information provided by the Department of Justice in
relation to the number of findings of not guilty by
reason of insanity and unfit
to stand trial in the Magistrates Court from
that only a small number of individuals successfully rely on insanity or are
found ‘not guilty’ (that is, a
finding cannot be made that the
accused is not guilty) following a finding of unfitness to stand trial.
Table 3.3: Magistrates Court 2013–14 to 2017–March
2017–Mar 2018
No Finding – Mental Impairment
Not Guilty – Insanity
*includes one Youth Justice case
Using online search databases, the TLRI found three cases in the Magistrates
Court, where the defendant relied on the defence of
In two of these
three cases, the defendant was found not guilty by reason of
These cases
involved assault and destroying
and dangerous
driving, failing to stop after being involved in a crash and evade police, as
well as common assault.
3.4.6 These numbers are very low. However, although difficult to capture in
official data, anecdotally, it is reported that there
are a significant number
of defendants in the Magistrates Court who have mental health or cognitive
impairment problems. Some of
these individuals may participate in the Diversion
List, and many others proceed through the ordinary criminal process. In
the data do not indicate those who have not successfully relied on
insanity or been found fit to stand trial (when the issue of fitness
was raised)
and those who are unfit to stand trial and are subsequently acquitted at the
special hearing.
Unfitness to Stand Trial: The
Introduction
5.1.1 This Part sets out the current test for determining unfitness to stand
trial in Tasmania and considers the law in other jurisdictions
and options for
reforming the test.
5.1.2 As indicated at [2.3], unfitness to stand trial relates to the issue of
whether the accused has the mental ability to understand
or participate in the
trial. This is concerned with the accused’s capacity at the
time of the
rather than at the time of the offence.
5.1.3 The Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) has summarised the
justifications for the rule that a person who is unfit to stand
trial cannot be
tried as follows:
• [to] avoid inaccurate verdicts—forcing the defendant to be
answerable for his or her actions when incapable of doing
so could lead to an
inaccurate verdict;
• [to] maintain the ‘moral dignity’ of the trial
process—requiring that a defendant is fit to stand trial
recognises the
importance of maintaining the moral dignity of the trial process, ensuring that
the defendant is able to form a link
between the alleged crime and the trial or
punishment and is accountable for his or her actions; and
• [to] avoid unfairness—it would be unfair or inhumane to subject
someone to the trial process who is
The unfitness to stand trial doctrine aims to protect accused persons with
disabilities, provide a means to challenge the prosecution
case and provide for
appropriate treatment.
discussed at [2.4], these concerns were reflected in the introduction of the
fitness to stand trial procedure contained in the
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) and are relevant to the TLRI’s examination
of the law and procedure relating of unfitness to stand trial. The Terms of
Reference request that the TLRI consider whether the Act operates justly,
effectively and consistently with the principles that underlie
particular, the TLRI has been asked to consider whether the process of
determining fitness to stand trial can be improved.
The test for determining unfitness to
stand trial: Tasmania
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8 sets
out the test to determine if a person is unfit to stand trial:
(1) A person is unfit to stand trial for an offence if, because the
person’s mental processes are disordered or impaired or
for any other
reason, the person is –
(a) unable to understand the nature of the charge; or
(b) unable to plead to the charge or to exercise the right of challenge; or
(c) unable to understand the nature of the proceedings; or
(d) unable to follow the course of the proceedings; or
(e) unable to make a defence or answer the charge.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1)(e), a person is not unfit to be tried if
the only reason that the person is unable to make a defence
or answer a charge
is that he or she is suffering from memory loss.
5.2.2 These criteria reflect the
criteria, set out in the Victorian case of
where seven
factors were identified as relevant to the determination of fitness:
• ability to understand the charge;
• ability to plead to the charge and exercise the right to challenge
• ability to understand the nature of the proceedings;
• ability to follow the course of the proceedings in broad terms;
• ability to understand the substantial effect of any evidence;
• ability to make a defence or answer to the charge;
• ability to instruct counsel.
In order to be unfit to stand trial, an accused only needs to satisfy one of
the criteria, set out above, as each criterion stands
5.2.3 In Tasmania, there is little case law that has considered the operation
of the test. However, guidance can be sought from other
indicated in the following extract from the DPP’s prosecution
guidelines:
Where fitness to stand trial is an issue requiring investigation, the
principles discussed by Smith J in
R v Presser
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45
[1958] VicRp 9
cited with approval in
Ngatayi v R
[1980] HCA 18
(1980) 147 CLR 1
at 8, are of
consequence when considering the criteria laid out in s 8:
A mere lack of formal education, a mere lack of familiarity with court forms
and procedures, would not, of course, render a man unfit
to be tried, but he
may, upon the test of fitness for the purposes of the section that has been laid
down in the cases, be held unfit
to be tried when he is far from being insane in
the colloquial sense. Dixon, J, as he then was, mentioned in
Sinclair v R
[1946] HCA 55
(1946) 73 CLR 316
, that it does not seem to have been noticed by the text
writers how high a degree of intelligence the test might demand if it were
literally applied. But he is not there, in my view, suggesting that it should be
applied in any extreme sense, or in any over-literal
sense. It needs, I think,
to be applied in a reasonable and commonsense fashion. And the question, I
consider, is whether the accused,
because of mental defect, fails to come up to
certain minimum standards which he needs to equal before he can be tried without
or injustice to him.
He needs, I think, to be able to understand what it is that he is charged
with. He needs to be able to plead to the charge and to
exercise his right of
challenge. He needs to understand generally the nature of the proceeding,
namely, that it is an inquiry as
to whether he did what he is charged with. He
needs to be able to follow the course of the proceedings so as to understand
going on in court in a general sense, though he need not, of course,
understand the purpose of all the various court formalities.
He needs to be able
to understand, I think, the substantial effect of any evidence that may be given
against him; and he needs to
be able to make his defence or answer to the
charge. Where he has counsel he needs to be able to do this through his counsel
any necessary instructions and by letting his counsel know what his
version of the facts is and, if necessary, telling the court
what it is. He need
not, of course, be conversant with court procedure and he need not have the
mental capacity to make an able defence;
but he must, I think, have sufficient
capacity to be able to decide what defence he will rely upon and to make his
defence and his
version of the facts known to the court and to his counsel, if
5.2.4 Although there is no express reference in the Tasmanian provision to
the requirement that the accused be able to give evidence,
provide an account of
his or her version of the facts or provide instructions to a legal practitioner,
these requirements would appear
to be included in the requirement that the
accused be able to make a
Similarly, there is
no requirement in the Tasmanian provision for a person to understand the
substantial effect of the evidence.
However, the requirement that a person
follow the course of the proceedings has been interpreted to mean that the
defendant is able
to follow the evidence: ‘The accused must have at least
a rudimentary understanding of the reception of evidence adverse to
him, whether
orally or by
5.2.5 The DPP’s guidelines also recognise the need for the court, in
making an assessment of whether an individual is fit to
stand trial, to take
account of any accommodations that can be made to enable a person to participate
in the trial process. These
include accommodations such as ‘regular
breaks, slowing the pace of proceedings, monitoring the type and length of
questioning
of witnesses, including the defendant, and allowing for adjournments
where necessary’.
reflects Australian case law that has accepted the availability of support as a
relevant factor in the determination of whether
someone is unfit to stand trial.
Refshauge J stated that:
Where steps can reasonably be taken to accommodate the difficulties of the
accused, including adjournments, ‘one-on-one’
assistance to follow
the proceedings, insistence on brief, clear questions to the accused if he or
she is examined on oath, an opportunity
for the accused to narrate his or her
version of events without interruption and the like, the implementation of these
the accused is not unfit to plead:
Kesavarajah v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 230
at 246; 111,
[2008] NSWDC 23
R v Tuigamala
[2007] NSWSC 493
The test for determining unfitness to
stand trial: The position in other jurisdictions
5.3.1 All Australian jurisdictions have legislation dealing with fitness to
stand trial, and although there are some variations, the
criteria are broadly
similar to the
criteria (as set out at [
This is also the approach in the England and Wales and New
These factors focus
on an accused’s cognitive capacity, particularly the capacity to
‘understand, comprehend and assist
counsel, in order to allow a
satisfactory level of participation in the court
The test is not
concerned with whether a person is able to act in their best interests or engage
in rational
However, it is noted the position in South Australia provides and exception to
this in that the test for fitness set out in the
Criminal Law Consolidation
(SA) s 269H provides that the accused is mentally unfit to stand trial
if his or her mental processes are so disordered or impaired
that he or she is
• understand, or respond
, to the charge or
allegations on which the charge is based; or
• exercise or give
instructions about the exercise of
procedural rights (such as, for example, the right to challenge jurors); or
• understand the nature of the proceedings, or to follow the evidence
or the course of the
proceedings.
Issues for consideration
Abolishing fitness to stand
5.4.1 Some commentators have argued that fitness to stand trial should be
abolished in order to accord with the requirements of the
on the basis that the adoption of a separate legal process that applies to
people with a disability is inherently
discriminatory.
In particular, it is argued that it is contrary to art 12 of the
which sets out
the right to ‘equal recognition before the law’ for people with
disability,
art 13 which sets out ‘the right to access to justice on an equal basis
with others’,
14, which prohibits the deprivation of liberty on the basis of a
disability.
Accordingly, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (UNCRPD) ‘has directed countries to abandon
the emphasis on
identifying the point at which a person should be deemed unfit to plead, and
instead places an obligation on States
Parties to provide support to the
exercise of legal
In this context, Minkowitz has asserted that the
Views all measures by which a person is treated unequally in legal
proceedings or in the adjudication of responsibility, including
the insanity
defence, unfitness to plead and incompetence to stand trial, as well as the
disposition to forensic psychiatric institutions,
as inherently suspect and
discriminatory based on disability. Therefore it is necessary to abolish these
measures in order to comply
with the equality and non-discrimination obligations
under various provisions of the
5.4.2 Other commentators on the
have not gone as far as calling
for the abolition of the doctrine of fitness to stand
but have highlighted
the uncertain and potentially significant implications arising from the
for the current doctrine and the need for considerable amendment to
comply with the requirements of the
For example,
Arstein-Kerslake et al have argued that:
One challenge is ensuring that there is a process that protects the rights of
persons with cognitive disabilities to legal capacity
on an equal basis with
others. This would, at a minimum, require that unfitness to plead regimes are
disability neutral on their
face and in their application. This will likely
require a dismantling of unfitness to plead regimes and the construction of a
that never denies legal capacities but instead provides support for the
individual to participate in a trial and a court structure
that ensures fairness
of the trial proceedings without depending on the accused’s particular
abilities to enforce those
In this way, it is argued that the focus of the inquiry should no longer be
on identifying ‘“the line” over which
someone is incapable of
expressing a valid will or undertaking some function’ and instead the
issue should ‘turn to the
support and accommodations necessary to enable
every person with a disability to function as a legal
Accordingly,
Gooding argues that ‘the measure of a person’s decision-making
capability, or their legal capacity, [should]
no longer [be] their inherent
abilities, but rather the range and quality of supports and accommodations
around them’.
of this approach is on supports and accommodations that may be available
‘in making the
legal processes accessible rather than
creating a “special” alternative measure’ for people with
cognitive difficulties.
5.4.3 While the need to identify supports and accommodations that may
facilitate participation in the trial process for as many people
as possible has
been recognised by various law reform bodies (as discussed at [4.4]), there is
less agreement in relation to the
approach that should be taken in the
‘hard’ cases — that is, the cases where people are not able to
participate
in the proceedings even with
In relation to
these cases, Arstein-Kerslake et al write that:
A system should exist where the individual is not denied his or her legal
capacity to participate in the trial, but is instead provided
with an advocate
who has responsibility of interpreting the will and preference of the individual
to the best of that person’s
ability and to convey that to the court and
the relevant professionals involved in the trial process. Any such system must
be non-discriminatory
in order to encompass all individuals — those with
disabilities and those without disabilities — who are unable to
participate
in the trial process and also to protect the rights of persons with
disabilities to be free from discriminatory
The authors argue that the reforms to the law should ensure that
‘[w]here there is a question of whether the accused can stand
ensuing procedure must not take place on the basis of disability alone and must
not serve to create a segregated criminal
justice process that only applies to
persons with cognitive
disabilities’.
contrast, law reform bodies have taken a different approach to the
interpretation of the
and have understood it as only requiring that
the test for unfitness should incorporate the use of supports and
accommodation.
This approach
still retains a threshold functional test to determine whether a person is able
to participate in the trial process
and operates to divert some individuals into
a special procedure.
2. Should the doctrine of fitness to stand trial be abolished in Tasmania?
3. If so, how should the law be changed to ensure that individuals who are
not able to participate in the trial process (even with
the provision of
supports) receive a fair trial?
Reforming the test for fitness to stand
5.4.4 In many jurisdictions, consideration has been given by law reform
bodies to concerns about the legal criteria used for assessing
accused’s fitness to stand trial. The ALRC has summarised the key
criticisms of the test as follows:
(1) The test, by focusing on intellectual ability, generally sets too high a
threshold for unfitness and is inconsistent with the
modern trial process. There
is undue emphasis on a person’s intellectual ability and too little focus
on a person’s decision-making
(2) The test is difficult to apply to individuals with mental illness because
the criteria were not designed for
(3) A defendant may not be unfit to stand trial even where the court takes
the view that he or she is incapable of making decisions
in his or her own
In this context, the following illustration is provided by the Law Commission
of England and Wales:
A defendant, A (who has paranoid schizophrenia), has a good understanding of
the trial process and understands the purpose of the
proceedings and roles
played by the different parties. A is also able to instruct his representative
and could give evidence. However,
as a result of his highly delusional state he
is convinced that if he pleads not guilty he will be destroyed by the devil. He
no insight into his condition and insists on pleading guilty to an assault
charge even though the evidence suggests that he may have
acted in lawful
self-defence. Under the current test the defendant would be likely to be found
fit to plead.
This example echoes the concerns raised by the VLRC that a person with a
mental illness ‘may have a factual understanding of
the nature of the
trial. However, their delusional beliefs may hinder their capacity to make
decisions concerning their trial, or
to make such decisions in an appropriate
5.4.5 Other criticisms of fitness to stand trial relate to the practical
application of the current test with concerns being expressed
arbitrary and subjective application of the
Criticisms of the fitness to stand trial test have focused on the difficulties
created for experts in providing an assessment to
the court of an
accused’s fitness to stand trial as a result of the vagueness of most
legal formulations of the test and the
opaque nature of the assessment
Freckelton writes
that ‘decision-making in this area is effectively delegated to clinical
evaluators making low visibility
and essential unreviewed decisions pursuant to
a vague open-textured
conducted in other jurisdictions has identified concerns about the assessment
process undertaken by experts. In England
and Wales, empirical research found
that there was considerable variability in the application of the assessment by
other clinicians
and a failure by some clinicians to address all the criteria
for unfitness to stand trial.
Similar findings were made in the Australian context, where White et al found,
in a study of assessment reports in New South Wales,
that ‘there was
significant variability in the practices and assessment methods of
‘large number of experts (67.6%) failing to address all six elements of
criteria, with some experts failing to address any of
5.4.6 In response to these concerns, there has been consideration of whether
there should be a re-evaluation of the basis of the test
to incorporate a
requirement for decision-making capacity or effective participation or rational
decision-making. In addition, there
has been consideration of whether the
current criteria reflect the crucial decisions that an accused makes relevant to
Decision making capacity/effective participation
5.4.7 The Law Commission of England and Wales has recommended replacing the
test (the English equivalent of the
test) with a
test of decision-making capacity that focuses on an assessment of the
defendant’s capacity to participate effectively
Its view was that the
lack of emphasis on decision-making capacity in the test for fitness was
difficult to reconcile with the requirements
of art 6 of the
Convention on Human Rights
, which require that an accused be able to
participate effectively in his or her
The Law Commission
also considered that a test of decision-making capacity and effective
participation would provide for a modernised
approach that better reflects
‘current medical understanding and legal practice in the field of
incapacity.’
revised test was also said to be consistent with the test of capacity as defined
Mental Capacity Act 2005
(UK) that focuses on ability to make
5.4.8 In making an assessment of an accused’s capacity, the Law
Commission adopted a ‘process’ or ‘functional’
(focusing on the decision-making processes of the accused) rather than an
‘outcome’ or ‘status’
approach (focusing on the
rationality of the decision).
It considered that (relying on the approach in the
Mental Capacity Act
(UK) s 3) an accused should be found to lack capacity if he or she is
• to understand the information relevant to the decisions that he or
she will have to make in the course of his or her trial;
• to retain that information; to use or weigh that information as part
of the decision-making process; or
• to communicate his or her
5.4.9 This was also the approach of the ALRC, which recommended that the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) be amended to provide that a person is unfit to
stand trial if the person cannot be supported to:
(a) understand the information relevant to the decisions that they will have
to make in the course of the proceedings;
(b) retain that information to the extent necessary to make decisions in the
course of the proceedings;
(c) use or weigh that information as part of the process of making decisions;
(d) communicate the decisions in some
This approach reflected the ALRC’s view that decision-making ability in
the context of the particular criminal proceedings should
be central to the
inquiry in relation to fitness. This approach was informed by the
5.4.10 The Law Commission also recommended that the following abilities be
specified as relevant to the assessment of the defendant’s
capacity for
effective participation:
• to understand the charges (what the charge means, its nature and the
evidence on which the prosecution rely to establish the
• to understand the trial process and the consequences of being
• to give instructions to a legal representative;
• to follow proceedings in courts;
• to give evidence;
• to make a decision about whether to plead guilty or not guilty;
• to make a decision about whether to give evidence;
• to make a decision about whether to elect Crown Court trial;
• and any other decision that might need to be made by the defendant in
connection with the trial.
This approach was also endorsed by the Northern Ireland Law
Commission.
5.4.11 The requirements for effective participation are set out in
legislation in Scotland. Following recommendations of the Scottish
Commission,
Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995
was amended to provide that
‘a person is unfit for trial if it is established ... that the person is
incapable, by reason of
a mental or physical condition, of participating
effectively in a
In making the
determination of fitness, the court is to have regard to the following factors:
(a) the ability of the person to — understand the nature of the charge;
understand the requirement to tender a plea to the charge
and the effect of such
a plea; understand the purpose of, and follow the course of, the trial;
understand the evidence that may be
given against the person; instruct and
otherwise communicate with the person’s legal representative; and
(b) any other factor which the court considers
5.4.12 Concerns have been expressed about an approach that focuses on
decision-making capacity and effective participation. The VLRC
considered that a
test based on ‘decision-making capacity’ or ‘effective
participation’ could introduce too
much subjectivity into the assessment
process and this would be problematic for expert
assessment.
This view was
endorsed in the review conducted by the Attorney General’s Department in
Western Australia.
was concerned that an ‘effective participation’ approach may be
over-inclusive and create
uncertainty.
Instead, the
NSWLRC recommended that the requirement for a fair trial should be prescribed as
an overarching principle for the application
criteria by
A fair trial
requirement could be incorporated into the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment
(Tas). However, a difficulty would be that the ‘fair
trial’ requirement would need to be applied by the jury in Tasmania
than a judge as occurs in New South Wales.
5.4.13 Further concerns have been raised about the requirements of an
accused’s fitness to stand trial based on an assessment
person’s mental capacity. It has been argued that the assessment of an
accused’s capacity based on a ‘functional’
approach is
problematic under the
because it violates the right to equal
recognition before the law for people with
disabilities.
Despite these
concerns, the ALRC has expressed the view that ‘it is not practicable to
completely do away with some functional
tests of ability that have consequences
for participation in legal
processes’.
the ALRC has stated that:
The integrity of a criminal trial (and, arguably, the criminal law itself)
would be prejudiced if the defendant does not have the
ability to understand and
participate in a meaningful way. It may also breach the person’s human
rights by denying them a fair
trial, implicating arts 12 and 13 of the
Instead, as discussed at [4.4.24], the ALRC has recommended a test that takes
into account an accused’s fitness to stand trial
in the context of the
supports and accommodations that may be made available.
Rationality
5.4.14 Although there is some suggestion that the law already requires a
court to take account of whether the relevant criteria are
exercised rationally,
this is not expressly stated.
For this reason, another approach taken to address the deficiencies of the
current test has been to specifically incorporate a requirement
for rationality.
This approach was implemented in South Australia, where the test explicitly
refers to rationality (as noted at [4.3.1]).
The NSWLRC has incorporated a
requirement for using information relevant to the decisions that a person will
have to make before
and during the trial as part of a rational decision-making
process in its recommendations to reform the statutory fitness
In Victoria, the Law
Reform Committee recommended that the test be amended to consider the ability to
understand, or respond rationally
to, the charge or the ability to exercise or
give rational instructions about the exercise of procedural
5.4.15 This approach can be supported on the basis that it would address
concerns that have been raised about people with mental illness
who may be able
to understand the trial process but whose capacity to make decisions is impaired
by delusional beliefs.
5.4.16 The VLRC also examined whether the test should consider the
accused’s ability to make rational decisions or to exercise
the criteria
rationally. Arguments in favour included that this would provide more clarity in
situations where an accused has a delusional
disorder that affects his or her
understanding and that the current test sets the threshold too
However, several
concerns were identified, including that:
• the current criteria already implicitly considered rationality;
• that rationality was difficult to define, assess clinically and apply
in practice;
• that it would introduce too much subjectivity; and
• that it would inappropriately widen the number of people who could be
found unfit to stand trial.
Concerns were also expressed that incorporating rationality may
‘unjustifiably limit an accused’s autonomy and their choice
decisions, including “unwise”
On balance,
the VLRC’s view was that there was a risk that introducing
‘rationality’ would add to the complexity
of the test and introduce
too much subjectivity.
5.4.17 In addition, the introduction of a requirement for rationality is
difficult to reconcile with the
which recognises the right of people
with disabilities to make choices for themselves even if the decision is not in
their ‘best
interests’.
expressed concerns about a focus on rationality which ‘may lead to a
person’s decision-making ability being
assessed on its likely
This would be
inconsistent with the National Decision-Making Principles (recommended by the
ALRC), as well as the
, which focus on the ‘rights, will and
preferences’ of the person instead of an approach based on the ‘best
5.4.18 In Tasmania, an approach that incorporates an assessment of an
accused’s capacity to make rational decisions or exercise
the criteria
rationally would reflect the current approach in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas), which allows the Guardianship and
Administration Board to appoint a guardian or administrator where a person with
a disability
is unable by reason of that disability to make
judgements in respect of all or any matters relating to his or her person or
circumstances and is in need of a
However, as noted,
the requirements of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
including the basis on which assessments are made in relation to a
person’s decision-making capacity, have been reviewed
by the TLRI and its
views were that the focus should not be on rationality but on the ability to
make a decision.
Additional criteria
5.4.19 At the core of the recent reviews of the test of fitness to stand
trial is a desire to ensure that the criteria governing the
assessment reflect a
need for an accused to be ‘able to make “true choices”
concerning the crucial decisions in
the trial that are not substantially
prejudiced by their mental
condition’.
Commission of England and Wales identified the need to ensure that there was
meaningful participation in the trial process:
it would be ‘an abuse of
the process of the law to subject someone to a trial when he or she is unable to
play any real part
Similarly, the
VLRC’s view was that fairness required that an accused is only subject to
the trial process where they are able
to make crucial decisions relevant to
their trial.
Accordingly, the
VLRC considered that the most appropriate way to ensure that the test takes this
into account is to:
• evaluate the current criteria for unfitness to stand trial against
the crucial decisions an accused should be expected to
• supplement the criteria with a requirement that the accused be able
to make these specific decisions, where the current criteria
do not cover
Other jurisdictions have also examined the criteria used to assess fitness to
stand trial and considered whether they are appropriate
in the modern trial
5.4.20 Appendix 4 contains a comparison of the criteria that are used in
other jurisdictions, as well as new criteria that have been
recommended by law
reform bodies.
5.4.21 Criteria that have been identified as essential that are not
explicitly contained in the Tasmanian legislation are:
• The accused’s ability to understand the actual significance of
entering a plea.
• The accused’s ability to communicate
instructions to his or her legal practitioner.
• The accused’s ability to decide whether to give evidence to
support his/her case, and if he or she wishes to give evidence,
his/her ability
5.4.22 In contrast to the approach of jurisdictions that have sought to
identify the specific decisions that an individual would need
to make in the
course of a trial as a means to ensure a fair trial, the ALRC has set out the
criteria relevant to the assessment
of fitness to stand trial in a more general
way by focusing on an accused’s decision-making capacity (see [4.4.9]).
Supports and accommodations
5.4.23 In contrast to criticisms that the test of unfitness to stand trial is
under-inclusive, other criticisms assert that the test
is over-inclusive and
therefore sets the bar too low for some defendants. For example, Gooding et al
argue that the test fails to
‘incorporate a requirement to consider
whether support or assistance could help the accused to optimise fitness to
stand trial’.
case law recognises the relevance of accommodations and supports, the authors
contend that ‘the application of such
accommodations is arguably ad
hoc’ and that a ‘more formalised, systematic application of
procedural accommodations ...
could be achieved through the training of judicial
officers and greater statutory protections for support persons to assist accused
persons at risk of being deemed unfit to
5.4.24 The need for greater emphasis on the supports and accommodations that
could be made available to an accused to facilitate fitness
for trial has also
been recognised by various law reform bodies. For example, the Law Reform
Committee stated that the test ‘sets
a low threshold for determining the
fitness of an accused with an intellectual disability or cognitive
impairment’.
indicated that it had received evidence to suggest that ‘the provision of
court support services could provide a mechanism
for overcoming barriers that
[such] a person ... may experience when interacting with the courts and may
therefore minimise the potential
for findings of unfitness to be made against
recommended that there be a reformulation of the test ‘to focus on
whether, and to what extent, a person can be supported
to play their role in the
justice system, rather than on whether they have capacity to play such a role at
Similarly, the
VLRC indicated that ‘the importance of support measures in the unfitness
to stand trial process was one of the
strongest themes to come out of the
Commission’s
In England and
Wales, the Law Commission expressed the view that the test should take
‘into account assistance available to
the defendant’ and that
‘a finding of lack of capacity should only be made as a last
It also noted
that this reflected the current law as applied by the courts but considered that
support should be explicitly recognised
The NSWLRC also
recommended that in determining whether a person is unfit for trial, the court
must consider where modifications
to the trial process can be made or assistance
provided to facilitate the person’s understanding and effective
participation.
The Western
Australian review conducted by the Department of the Attorney General
recommended that the concept of ‘fitness
with support’ should be
specifically included as a factor in the determination of an accused’s
fitness to stand trial.
‘Fitness with support’ refers to ‘modifications to court
processes that are made to assist an individual to participate
processes’.
5.4.25 Greater use of special measures to support an accused’s fitness
to stand trial is supported on the basis that the optimum
approach is for a
defendant to proceed through the normal trial process, wherever this can be
fairly achieved.
beneficial to the defendant and is also in the public
Accordingly, the
law should aim to reduce the number of people who take part in special hearings.
This approach is also more consistent
with the obligations that arise under the
5.4.26 Despite widespread support for this approach, concerns have been
expressed that to use special measures to allow an accused
to become fit for
trial is not necessarily in the best interests of the person. In the view of the
Northern Ireland Law Reform Commission,
it would be inherently unfair for
special measures to be used to ‘make’ an accused fit for
The individual has not changed and might be better served by the disposals
which are available following a determination of unfitness
rather than following
a criminal trial, where the focus is on sentencing and rehabilitation rather
than medical treatment and
Accordingly, its view was that special measures should only be considered
once the issue of unfitness to plead has been considered
and a finding of
fitness determined.
5.4.27 In Tasmania, as indicated, the issue of supports and accommodation for
people with communication needs involved in the criminal
justice system was the
subject of recent review by the TLRI. The TLRI undertook a project that examined
the feasibility of instituting
a communication assistant/intermediary scheme in
Tasmania, and its principal recommendation was that an expert
intermediary/communication
scheme should be established in Tasmania with a view
to enabling ‘people with communication needs to participate to the best
their ability in the criminal justice
The proposed
scheme would involve expertly trained intermediaries/communication assistants
who have a range of functions including
advisory and interpretive roles as well
as the power to intervene in inappropriate questioning and to suggest how such
questioning
should be altered. The intermediaries/communication assistants would
be able to provide advice to courts, legal practitioners and
the police and
assistance to people with communication needs who are involved in the criminal
justice process. This will facilitate
communication with the police and legal
practitioners and will support individuals with communication needs during court
and trials.
Accordingly, the creation of such a scheme is likely to reduce the need to hold
fitness hearings, and/or reduce the number of people
found unfit to stand trial
and enhance the human rights of people with communication needs in their
interactions with the criminal
justice system. The TLRI has also made
recommendations in relation to the importance of appropriate decision-making
supports as a
means to facilitate decision-making to maximise a person’s
autotomy and promote a will, preference and rights approach to decision-making
for people requiring
5.4.28 In addition to the benefits offered by an intermediary scheme in
facilitating participation in the criminal process, other
means available to
increase the level of support for people with intellectual disabilities and/or
and cognitive impairments have
been identified as
• the provision of a formal education program;
• court familiarisation processes;
• the modification of court procedures to suit people with intellectual
disabilities or cognitive impairments, such as shorter
sessions, reduced
formalities, allowing the giving of evidence via videolink;
• improved communications methods, such as visual aids, and the use of
clear language.
These measures may also allow individuals with intellectual disabilities
and/or cognitive impairments to participate more effectively
in an ordinary
trial and support their fitness to stand trial. The provision of procedural
accommodations to facilitate a person’s
access to justice accords with the
requirements of the
according to Gooding and O’Mahoney, ‘circumvent the need for any
assessment of fitness for trial in the first
5.4.29 The TLRI seeks feedback from stakeholders and members of the Tasmanian
community on the need for reform of the test for fitness
to stand trial
contained in s 8 of the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
5.4.30 In the Tasmanian context, there is a need to ensure that the test
governing fitness to stand trial and its criteria reflect
the principles
underpinning the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas). These
principles are fairness to the accused and the right to a fair trial. In
addition, it is important that the criteria
reflect the modern trial context and
allow for an assessment to be made as to whether the accused is able to
participate in his/her
trial in a meaningful way and is able to make choices in
relation to the crucial decisions that need to be made in the trial. It
that, in Tasmania, the criteria are under-inclusive and do not appropriately
reflect the need to ensure that an individual
has the capacity to make the
crucial decisions in his or her trial and that reform is necessary. However, any
move to expand (or
potentially expand) the category of people who are able to
rely on unfitness to stand trial may give rise to human rights concerns
, as noted above. Gooding et al have argued that a
‘proposal to include
people among those deemed unfit would
diverge from the UNCRPD emphasis on moving away from alternative legal processes
disabilities’.
basis, it may be desirable to specifically incorporate the relevance of supports
and accommodations into the statutory test,
including the use of an expert
intermediary/communication assistant. Further, in assisting judicial officers to
make an assessment
accommodations that would support a finding of fitness to stand trial, it
necessary to consider the nature of the expert information that may made
available to judicial officers to provide expert
guidance in this regard.
4. Does the current test for unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
continue to be a
suitable basis for determining unfitness to stand trial?
5. Are there any difficulties that arise from the current application of the
criteria contained in the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8? For example, are there difficulties with the test that give rise to a
subjective interpretation of the criteria by medical
6. Is the current test under-inclusive and not able to appropriately reflect
the issues that arise for individuals with mental illness?
7. Should the test of unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8 include consideration of an
accused person’s decision- making capacity and/or ability for effective
participation?
8. Should the test of unfitness to stand trial contained in the
Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8 include an overarching
requirement of a fair trial in the application of the criteria?
9. Should the test of unfitness to stand trial contained in
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8 include a
requirement that the accused person is able to exercise the criteria
rationally?
10. Are changes required to the criteria contained in the
Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 8 to allow for an accused to
participate meaningfully in the trial process?
11. What changes to the criteria contained in the
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) can be made, if any, to enhance the ability of
experts to assess an accused person’s fitness to stand trial?
12. Should the availability of accommodations and support measures, including
the potential use of an intermediary/communication assistant
(if the scheme is
adopted) be specified in the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) as a factor that needs to be taken into account when determining unfitness
to stand trial?
Pleas of guilty
5.4.31 A related issue is whether the test for determining fitness should be
adapted in cases where an accused wishes to plead guilty.
This question has been
considered in several reviews of the law on the basis that a person may be able
to understand the nature of
the charge and may be able to enter a plea to the
charge but may not be able to understand more complex aspects of the trial
Under the current
law, such a person is unfit to stand trial and is not able to enter a plea of
guilty but instead is subject to
the special hearing
procedures.
anecdotal evidence is that such people do plead guilty rather than rely on the
fitness to stand trial provisions, if their
legal representative is satisfied of
their capacity to plead and participate in the sentencing hearing, in order to
avoid the onerous
consequences of a finding of
5.4.32 There have been differing views expressed in relation to the
appropriateness of adapting the test if an accused wishes to plead
Arguments in favour of a separate test
5.4.33 The following arguments have been advanced in favour of a separate
• The minimum standards to enter a plea are less onerous than those
required to stand trial.
• It would enable defendants who are able to enter a plea to
participate in the usual criminal
• Where an accused is able to make a particular decision, this should
be given effect as far as
This accords with
human rights
considerations.
• It allows an accused to ‘get on with treatment’ without
concerns in relation to fitness procedures and the prospect
of proceedings being
resumed on recovery.
• If an accused can plead guilty, this is better for victims and
• The law requires flexibility to take account of differing levels of
Arguments against a separate test
5.4.34 The following arguments have been advanced against a separate test:
• The concerns about capacity are the same for both fitness to plead
and fitness to stand trial, and so the test should be the
• A separate test would be an unnecessary complication and would be
• Expert assessment can already take into account the differing demands
depending on the nature of the
proceedings.
• Concerns that an accused may not truly understand the nature of the
guilty plea and that difficulties with understanding the
trial process may mean
that they see no option other than to plead
• Concerns that such a test may undermine the legitimacy of the
criminal justice system if it allows ‘individuals who
are otherwise unable
to participate effectively in proceedings to plead guilty, especially to serious
5.4.35 The NSWLRC made no recommendation on this issue in view of the
strength of opposition from key
stakeholders.
The VLRC and
the Law Commission of England and Wales supported varying the test for pleas of
The VLRC expressed
the view that adequate safeguards should be built into the model so that the
revised test for guilty pleas would
only apply if a defendant was legally
represented.
The criteria
that were identified as relevant for fitness to enter a plea were that the
• Understands the nature of the charge.
• Understands the nature of the hearing if they pleaded not guilty.
• Understands the significance of entering a plea of guilty and its
consequences.
• Meaningfully communicates to his or her legal practitioner his/her
decision to plead guilty.
• Follows the course of the plea and sentencing hearing that will
follow a plea of guilty.
It is noted that the test for capacity recommended by the ALRC does not make
a distinction between the test to enter a plea and the
test to stand trial but
does allow the differing decisions that a defendant will need to make to be
taken into account in the assessment
13. Should there be a separate test in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to determine whether a person is fit to enter a
14. If so, what should be the requirements of the test?
Unfitness to Stand Trial:
Procedure to Determine Unfitness to Stand Trial
Introduction
6.1.1 This Part sets out the current Tasmanian procedure to determine
unfitness to stand trial, the position in other jurisdictions
and options
available to reform the current procedure.
The Tasmanian position
6.2.1 In Tasmania, subject to the potential referral of an accused to the
Diversion List,
procedure applies in relation to fitness to stand trial and insanity regardless
of whether the matter is an indictable offence
heard in the Supreme Court or a
summary offence dealt with in the Magistrates Court. The only difference is that
the magistrate makes
decisions in relation to fitness and the relevant findings
at a special hearing rather than a jury.
6.2.2 Figure 5.1 shows the stages of the unfitness to stand trial process
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
Figure 5.1: Unfitness to stand trial in the Supreme Court and Magistrates
6.2.3 There is a presumption that a person is fit to stand trial unless it is
established that the person is unfit to stand trial.
This is determined on the
balance of probabilities.
issue of fitness may be raised by the prosecution, the defendant or the court
(on its own initiative) and may be raised at any
time after the accused has been
charged, including after the trial has
In order for a
court to conduct an investigation into a defendant’s fitness to stand
trial, there must be a real and substantial
question in relation to a
person’s fitness.
circumstances where evidence of a person’s fitness to stand trial is
raised, a judge can only accept a plea of guilty if
satisfied that no reasonable
jury, properly instructed, could find the person unfit to stand
6.2.4 The question whether a person is unfit to stand trial is a question of
It is determined in the
Supreme Court by a jury and by a magistrate in the Magistrates
However, there is no
need to conduct an investigation (by a jury or a magistrate) if the prosecutor
and defendant agree, in which
case the court may record a finding that the
defendant is unfit to stand
On an investigation, a
court must hear any relevant and probative evidence and representations put to
the court by the prosecutor
or the defendant, it may call evidence on its own
initiative and may require the defendant to undergo an examination by a
psychiatrist
or other appropriate expert and require the results to be reported
to the court.
6.2.5 If, on an investigation, a defendant is found unfit to stand trial, the
court must determine whether or not the defendant is
likely to become fit to
stand trial during the next 12
If a jury determines
that a defendant is unfit to stand trial, then it determines whether or not the
defendant is likely to become
fit to stand trial during the next 12
If the defendant and
the prosecution agree and a finding that an individual is unfit is recorded
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 19) or the
matter is dealt with in the Magistrates Court, then the judicial officer (judge
or magistrate) makes the determination
fit to stand trial.
determined that the defendant is likely to become fit to stand trial during the
next 12 months, the court must adjourn the
proceedings for a period not
exceeding 12 months. If, after the adjournment, the court is of the opinion that
the grounds on which
the investigation was thought to be necessary no longer
exist, the court may decide not to proceed with the
investigation.
However, if
the defendant does not become fit to stand trial within 12 months, then the
court must proceed to hold a special
The position in other
Higher courts
6.3.1 As with Tasmania, in higher courts in the Northern Territory and
Victoria, the jury determines whether or not an accused is
fit to stand
In the Northern
Territory, and South Australia (as with Tasmania), there is power to dispense
with the investigation if the prosecution
and defence
In South Australia, a
defendant can also elect to have the investigation into fitness to stand trial
determined by a judge instead
6.3.2 In contrast, in New South Wales, Western Australia, the Australian
Capital Territory and for federal offences, the judge makes
the determination of
whether an accused is fit to stand
This is also the
position in England and
6.3.3 In Queensland, there is a dual track system, with decisions being made
by the jury under the
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 613 or the Mental Health
Court under the
Mental Health Act 2016
The Magistrates Court
6.3.4 In relation to magistrates’ courts, there are different
approaches taken in relation to fitness to stand trial.
6.3.5 As with Tasmania, in the Australian Capital Territory, South Australia
and Western Australia, magistrates have the power to
determine the issue of
unfitness to stand trial.
the ACT, greater flexibility exists in relation to the powers that a magistrate
may exercise for summary offences where fitness
to stand trial is raised as a
genuine issue. Instead of carrying out an investigation into fitness to plead
and the special hearing
process (following a finding of unfitness), the
magistrate has a power to dismiss the charge, if:
(a) the court is satisfied that there is real and substantial question about
the defendant’s fitness to stand trial and;
(b) the court considers that because of the trivial nature of the charge or
the nature of the defendant’s mental impairment,
it would be inappropriate
to inflict any punishment on the defendant in relation to the
6.3.6 In Victoria, the Magistrates’ Court does not have the power to
determine unfitness to stand trial. Similarly, in the Northern
Territory, the
Local Court does not have an express power to determine unfitness to stand
If the issue of
unfitness is raised in relation to a summary offence, the matter is
discontinued.
6.3.7 The VLRC has considered the process that should apply when questions of
unfitness to stand trial are raised in relation to summary
offences in the
Magistrates’ Court. It recommended that the Magistrates’ Court
should have the power to determine whether
a person is unfit to stand trial and
to conduct special hearings after a finding of
The VLRC also
recommended that there be flexibility for a magistrate to discharge an accused
with or without conditions for a summary
offence if there was a ‘real and
substantial question as to the unfitness of the accused’ where the
magistrate considered
that the accused did not pose an unacceptable risk of
causing physical or psychological harm to another person, or other people
as a result of the discharge and the accused is receiving treatment,
support or services in the
6.3.8 In Queensland, until recent amendments introduced by the
Health Act 2016
(Qld), the Magistrates Court did not have power to determine
issues of unfitness to stand
magistrate has the power to dismiss a complaint for a simple offence if
‘reasonably satisfied, on the balance of probabilities,
that the person
charged with the offence was or appears to have been, of unsound mind when the
offence was allegedly committed; or
is unfit for
Magistrates can
also dismiss the charge and refer the defendant to an appropriate body for care
and/or treatment if certain conditions
They can also
dismiss the matter following the receipt of a Mental Health Assessment, which is
a report prepared by a Senior Mental
Health Clinician with the support of a
Consultant Psychiatrist and includes: (i) mental health assessment court liaison
service feedback;
or (ii) mental health and fitness for trial assessment court
liaison service feedback; or (iii) mental health, fitness and soundness
assessment court liaison service
6.3.9 In New South Wales, there are no legislative provisions that apply in
relation to fitness to stand trial in the Local Court
and so the common law
applies. However, the Local Court generally deals with accused people with a
mental impairment using its diversionary
powers under
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
As set out in
Table 5.1, this procedure differs from the ACT, Queensland and proposed
Victorian approach as the magistrate’s
power to dismiss the charges
conditionally or unconditionally does not rely on a finding in relation to a
person’s unfitness
for trial or criminal responsibility. Instead, the
procedure relies on a magistrate’s assessment that the person has the
condition, and in relation to s 32, that on an outline of the facts
alleged in the proceedings, or such other evidence as the magistrate
consider, it is more appropriate to deal with the defendant in accordance with
the provisions in s 32.
6.3.10 As shown in Table 5.1, the legislation in each jurisdiction sets out a
different threshold that allows the magistrate to exercise
a discretion to
dismiss the charge (and impose assessment and treatment conditions). These range
from the lower standard that ‘it
appears to the magistrate’ (NSW),
to the requirement that ‘there is a real and substantial question’
the higher standard that the magistrate is satisfied on the balance of
probabilities (Queensland). The ‘real and substantial
question’ test
was also recommended in Victoria.
Table 5.1: Magistrates Court powers, ACT, New South Wales and
Legislation
Statutory criteria for exercise
Order available
New South Wales
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
• It appears to the magistrate that the defendant was cognitively
impaired, suffering from mental illness or suffering from
a mental condition for
which treatment is available in a mental health facility (but is not mentally
• On an outline of the facts alleged in the proceedings or such other
evidence as the magistrate may consider, it is more appropriate
to deal with the
defendant in accordance with the
provisions.
• Adjourn the proceedings
• Remand the defendant on bail
• Dismiss the charge and discharge the defendant into the care of a
responsible person, either unconditionally or subject to
• Dismiss the charge and discharge the defendant
unconditionally
• In relation to defendants who are mentally ill, there is power for
the magistrate to grant bail.
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
• If it appears that a defendant is mentally ill.
• Order that the person be detained in mental health facility for
• Discharge the defendant into the care of a responsible person,
either unconditionally or subject to conditions
• Order a community treatment order.
Australian Capital Territory
Crimes Act 1900
• Court is satisfied that there is real and substantial question
court considers
because of the trial nature of the charge or the nature of the defendant’s
mental impairment, it would be inappropriate
to inflict any punishment on the
defendant in relation to the offence the court may decide not to carry out or
continue an investigation
into fitness to plead.
• Dismiss the charge.
Mental Health Act 2016
• Reasonably satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
person charged with the offence was of unsound mind when the
offence was
committed or was unfit for trial.
• Dismiss the complaint
• Make an examination order.
Issues for consideration
Assessment reports
6.4.1 Reports provided by experts provide the evidentiary foundation for
findings of unfitness and so are fundamental to the determination
of fitness to
stand trial.
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), in addition to
requiring the court to hear evidence and representations by defendants or
prosecutors as to fitness, there is
also provision for the court to call
evidence on its own initiative and order an assessment of a defendant by a
psychiatrist or other
appropriate
6.4.2 In its consideration of the procedure in relation to determining
unfitness to stand trial, the VLRC observed that ‘[p]otential
arise in relation to the qualifications of experts, the quality and utility of
expert reports and the number of experts
relied on in assessments of unfitness
to stand trial’.
result, the VLRC sought feedback in relation to these issues, as well as other
issues that may exist in relation to the process
for determining unfitness to
stand trial.
6.4.3 In response, it was noted that, despite the general recognition of
expertise and objectivity of experts on issues of unfitness
acknowledgment of the difficult task faced by experts, some problems did arise
in this area. These included:
• discrepancies in experts’ training and expertise;
• reports sometimes lacking a forensic direction or familiarity with
CMIA legal concepts;
• assessments conducted inappropriately (for example, questions not
communicated effectively to people with an intellectual
disability or in a
culturally appropriate manner);
• a small pool of experts, which could compromise
objectivity.
6.4.4 Suggestions set out by the VLRC to improve expert assessment in
relation to unfitness to stand trial included:
• Unfitness assessments should be conducted by a multi-disciplinary
specialised team of psychologists, psychiatrists and speech
pathologists.
• There should be careful regulation of experts who assess unfitness in
terms of qualifications and expertise through registration
or accreditation of
their competency to conduct these assessments. ...
• There should be clearer guidance to experts about the test for
unfitness. This could be achieved through the development of
best practice
guidelines on what should be included in a report, or through training.
• A component of every assessment should be standardised. For example,
there should be standard information that should be included
as part of every
report. ...
• Assessments should be conducted using appropriate communication
techniques.
6.4.5 The VLRC concluded that it was necessary to make changes to
‘address unnecessary variability and to ensure the fairness
and accuracy
of expert assessments of unfitness to stand
However, it
considered that ‘experts themselves are the best people to determine the
changes’ that would be necessary
to address these
6.4.6 Anecdotally, the TLRI understands that there is a lack of
standardisation in assessments provided by experts in Tasmania, and
consequently
there is considerable diversity in the assessment reports. This is a concern
given the importance of the expert advice
in the court process. Accordingly, the
TLRI seeks further feedback on whether there are any issues that arise in
relation to the
role of experts and expert reports in the process of determining
unfitness to stand trial. Further, the TLRI seeks feedback in relation
any difficulties might be resolved, for example whether there should be a
specified minimum number of expert reports that
should be required, whether
there is a need for greater control in relation to the expertise or
accreditation of the person conducting
the assessment and writing the report for
the court, and/or the information that should be contained in the report.
15. Are there any issues that arise in relation to the role of experts and
expert reports in the process of determining unfitness
to stand trial?
16. If so, how do you think these problems might be resolved?
Determination of the issue of fitness by a
judge rather than jury in the Supreme Court
6.4.7 In Victoria, consideration has been given to removing the requirement
for investigations into fitness to be determined by a
jury. The Victorian Law
Reform Committee recommended a judge-alone procedure for investigations of
fitness to stand trial on the
grounds that:
• fitness investigations primarily involve technical matters and
therefore it is more suitable for a hearing to be conducted
• a fitness hearing is not designed to be adversarial and no decisions
are made about the person’s criminal responsibility;
• a judge hearing evidence alone may be quicker, less formal and less
confusing or stressful for the accused with an intellectual
disability or
cognitive impairment, particularly if experts from both sides agree that the
accused is clearly unfit to be
6.4.8 The VLRC, similarly, recommended that unfitness to stand trial should
be determined by a judge or a magistrate on the basis
that this was a pre-trial
issue that need not be determined by a
The VLRC observed the
narrowing of the role of the jury in relation to pre-trial matters more
It also noted that
changing the criteria for a determination of fitness to stand trial meant that a
judge (rather than a jury) was
more appropriately able to undertake the nuanced
nature of the pre-trial
decision-making.
6.4.9 In Tasmania, as noted, there is provision for the investigation into
fitness to be determined by a trial judge where the defence
and prosecution
agree. However, consideration could be given to removing the jury’s role
in relation to the determination of
the issue of fitness to stand trial in all
Question 17
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
amended to provide that unfitness to stand trial is determined by a judge in the
Supreme Court instead of a jury in all
Procedure in the Magistrates
6.4.10 In Tasmania, if an issue of fitness to stand trial arises, the
procedure for determining fitness and the conduct of special
hearings applies in
both the Supreme Court and in the Magistrates Court (as set out at [5.2]). This
is a complex process (and a potentially
costly and time consuming one) and
unlike the ACT and Queensland, and as recommended in Victoria, there is no
provision in Tasmania
for a magistrate to dismiss the charge without conducting
a special hearing. In New South Wales, there is also power for a magistrate
dismiss the charge. Accordingly, it may be argued that it is appropriate to have
a simpler and more flexible approach available
in the Magistrates Court. An
option for reform would be to amend the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas) to provide for greater flexibility to allow the magistrate to
dispose of a matter in a timelier manner in circumstances where
it appears that
a defendant is unfit for trial and this is appropriate in the context of the
particular case.
This reform
would mean that the magistrate could make an assessment of whether it appears
that an accused is unfit to stand trial
(and/or has a defence of insanity) and
then discharge the person and divert them from the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act
pathway, if this was appropriate.
6.4.11 Possible models for reform are found in other jurisdictions. The power
to discharge could be made following a determination
that the court is satisfied
that it appears that the accused is cognitively impaired, suffering a mental
illness or suffering from
a mental condition for which treatment is available in
a mental health facility, or that the accused is mentally ill (the New South
Wales position) or that there is real and substantial question about the
defendant’s fitness to stand trial (the ACT position
and proposed in
Victoria) or following a finding that on the balance of probabilities that the
accused was unfit to stand trial or
unsound (Queensland approach and current
Tasmanian test for unfitness to stand trial). In addition, in the ACT, the power
of discharge
can be exercised where the matter is trivial or, taking into
account the nature of the defendant’s mental impairment, it would
inappropriate to inflict any punishment on the defendant. In Victoria, it was
recommended that the magistrate’s power of
discharge would depend on an
assessment of the risk posed to the community and the treatment, support or
services received in the
community by the accused.
18. Should the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
amended to allow a magistrate to discharge an individual without making a
determination of their fitness to stand trial
or criminal responsibility?
19. What (if any) limitations should be set out in relation to the exercise
of the power of discharge?
Unfitness to Stand Trial:
Procedure Following a Determination of Unfitness to Stand Trial
Introduction
7.1.1 This Part sets out the procedure following a determination of unfitness
to stand trial in Tasmania and in other comparable jurisdictions.
examines options for reform of the procedure following a determination of
unfitness to stand trial.
The Tasmanian position
7.2.1 As shown in Figure 5.1, following a finding that a person is unfit to
stand trial, the court makes a determination of whether
or not the defendant is
likely to become fit to stand trial during the next 12
If the court
determines that the person is likely to become fit to stand trial during the
next 12 months, the court adjourns the
proceedings. However, if the court
determines that the defendant is unlikely to become fit to stand trial within 12
months or the
defendant does not become fit to stand trial within 12 months,
then the court holds a special
7.2.2 As noted at [2.4.1], prior to the introduction of the
Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas), if a person was found to be unfit
to stand trial, then they would be detained under a restriction order,
notwithstanding that
the prosecution case had not been
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas), a process is
set out for a special hearing to determine ‘whether, despite the unfitness
of the defendant to stand trial,
on the limited evidence available the defendant
is not guilty of an
Supreme Court this question is determined by
and in the Magistrates
Court it is determined by the magistrate.
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) provides
that the special hearing ‘is to be conducted so that the onus of proof and
standard of proof are the same as
in a trial of criminal proceeding and in other
respects as nearly as possible as if it were a trial of criminal
proceedings’.
special hearing:
• the defendant is taken to have pleaded not guilty to the offence; and
• the defendant’s legal representatives may exercise the
defendant’s rights to challenge jurors or the jury; and
• the defendant may raise any defence that could be properly raised if
the special hearing were an ordinary trial of criminal
proceedings; and
• the defendant is entitled to give
explained that the hearing ‘is an opportunity for the State and the
accused to call evidence, in the usual way,
relevant to the question whether the
accused is guilty of the offence or offences
accused is unable to give instruction to his or her legal representative, the
legal representative may act, in the exercise
of an independent discretion, in
what he or she genuinely believes to be the defendant’s best
In addition, the
court has a discretion to permit an accused to be absent from a special
7.2.4 Although the original intention was for ‘the special hearing ...
to determine the external facts of the case — excluding
the question of
intent — to ascertain whether the basic prosecution case can be proved
beyond reasonable
it appears that
an accused’s intention is relevant to the jury’s assessment in
special hearings. In
the defendant faced a
special hearing in relation to one count of committing an unlawful act intended
to cause bodily harm and, in
the alternative, causing grievous bodily harm. The
defendant was found not guilty of the first count, but the jury was not able to
find that he was not guilty of the alternative crime of causing grievous bodily
harm. In making orders under the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act
(Tas), Wood J stated that:
Clearly, the jury was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
defendant had held the necessary intention required for the charge
of committing
an unlawful act intended to cause bodily harm. The jury was not satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that ... W had intended
to cause Mr S grievous bodily harm. The
jury must have been satisfied that he realised that striking Mr S and causing
him grievous
bodily harm was a likely consequence of driving at him, and that he
went ahead disregarding that
Accordingly, in order for a jury to be unable to find that an accused is not
guilty, the prosecution must prove the external facts
and mental element for the
offence, as well as disprove any relevant defence (such as self-defence) beyond
reasonable doubt. If the
defence of insanity is raised, this must be proved by
the accused on the balance of
probabilities.
7.2.5 At a special hearing, there are three findings available to the
The court may:
(a) find the defendant not guilty of the offence. This has the same effect as
a finding of not guilty following a trial of criminal
proceedings;
(b) find the defendant not guilty on the ground of insanity; or
(c) indicate that a finding cannot be made the defendant is not guilty of the
offence charged. This finding is made if the jury ‘concluded
reasonable doubt, on the evidence before it, that the accused appeared to be
7.2.6 It is not possible for the prosecution and defence to dispense with the
need for a special hearing by agreeing that the accused
should be found not
guilty on the grounds of insanity. Similarly, it is not possible for the
defendant who is found unfit to stand
trial to enter a plea of
Other jurisdictions
7.3.1 In Australia, while there is broad similarity in the criteria used to
assess fitness to stand trial, different procedures are
followed if an accused
is found to be unfit to stand trial.
7.3.2 In Western Australia and Queensland (as set out in Appendix 5), there
is no provision for a special hearing to be
This means that the
prosecution case is not tested and a determination is not made as to whether the
accused is entitled to an
In contrast, in
other jurisdictions, there are provisions for special hearings following a
finding that the accused is unfit to stand
trial. However, there are differences
in regard to the conduct of the hearing. For example, in several jurisdictions,
the prosecution
is only required to prove the physical elements of the offence
(South Australia, ACT, England and Wales, New
and New Zealand).
Issues for consideration
CRPD obligations
7.4.1 Special hearing provisions in Australia (and comparable jurisdictions)
have been criticised by those concerned with the human
rights obligations
arising under the
. These criticisms have focused on the removal of
the accused from the mainstream criminal justice system and the extent to which
the modified process of the special hearing differs from a criminal
Gooding et al have
suggested that, in order to meet
obligations, the minimum
requirements that should apply to any alternative procedure are that:
• The same standard of proof and probative value of prosecution
evidence as typical trial;
• The same presumption of innocence, with the associated requirement
for proof of all elements;
• Availability to the accused of all defences; and
• Proceedings against the accused to be based on his or her
‘rights, wishes and preferences’ (and not his or her
interests’).
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
appear to substantially comply with the minimum requirements under the
as identified by Gooding et al. The provisions require that the same
standard of proof apply and that the special hearing is to be
conducted as
‘as nearly as possible’ to normal criminal trials. The prosecution
must prove the external and fault elements
of the offence beyond reasonable
doubt and the defendant can rely on any defences that would have been available
in a mainstream
criminal trial.
7.4.3 Nevertheless, specific criticism has been directed at the Tasmanian
provision on the ground that it allows the jury to determine
finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of the offence charged
or any offence available as an
alternative’.
et al, write that:
A literal reading of this provision suggests that in order for the accused to
secure an unconditional acquittal, the special hearing
jury must make a positive
finding that the accused is not guilty. The Tasmanian Supreme Court has
suggested that a qualified finding
is accordingly available “if the jury
concluded beyond reasonable doubt, on the evidence before it, that the accused
to be guilty”. It is not clear what it means for an accused to
‘appear to be guilty’, but this ruling raises concern
integrity of the presumption of innocence.
7.4.4 However, a contrary view is that Gooding et al’s interpretation
of the legislation does not accord with the interpretation
of the provision or
the approach adopted by the court at a special hearing. In the Tasmanian
context, it is clear that the special
hearing does not result in a reversal of
the onus of proof as the jury is directed that an accused is deemed to be
innocent unless
and until the jury is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused committed the particular offence and that Crown has the
proving this.
7.4.5 Further, as the Law Commission of England and Wales have argued, the
purpose of the special hearing is to allow an accused a
chance of an equal
opportunity for an acquittal and not to make a finding of
This means that at a
special hearing the jury makes a determination (as with the usual criminal trial
process) as to whether the
prosecution has established the case beyond
reasonable doubt. If the prosecution has not established its case, then the
a special hearing (as with an accused in the mainstream criminal
process) is entitled to an acquittal. In a mainstream trial, if
the jury is
satisfied that the prosecution has established its case beyond reasonable doubt,
then it will find the accused guilty.
However, at a special hearing, given the
limitations of the accused’s capacity to participate in a trial, it is not
appropriate to find the accused guilty of the offence (and hence the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 17(d) that
a finding cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of the offence charged
or any offence available as an
alternative).
7.4.6 Further concerns have been raised that the special hearing process
removes the benefits of entering an early guilty plea in
sentence mitigation as
it assumes that the person has pleaded not
However, it should be
remembered that a person dealt with under the
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) is not ‘sentenced’ and the usual
sentencing principles (including a discount for a guilty plea) do not apply to
the determination of the appropriate order of the court. Instead, the court
applies the principles under the
Criminal Justice Mental Impairment Act
(Tas) that focus on the nature of the defendant’s mental
impairment and the likely danger that the person poses to other people,
as the need to ensure that restrictions on the defendant’s freedom and
personal autonomy should be kept to the minimum
consistent with the safety of
the community.
comparison of the potential outcomes arising from the imposition of sentence
(taking into account a plea of guilty and
the person’s mental or cognitive
impairment as mitigating factors) and a finding of unfitness and the
dispositions that may
follow a special hearing may influence an accused’s
decision to proceed with a plea of
7.4.7 An additional criticism that could be made is in relation to the
requirement for the accused’s legal representative to
exercise his or her
independent decision-making discretion in the best interests of the accused.
This is in conflict with the
requirement that proceedings against an
accused should be based on his or her ‘rights, wishes and
preferences’ rather
than their best interests. It is also inconsistent
with the National Decision-Making
Principles.
20. Do you consider that the conduct of a special hearing differs from an
ordinary trial in terms of the evidence adduced or the conduct
of the hearing?
If so, in what ways?
21. Do you consider that the conduct of the special hearing is consistent
with the presumption of innocence?
22. Do issues arise in relation to the conduct of legal practitioners in
acting in the ‘best interests’ of a person rather
than based that
person’s ‘rights, wishes and preferences’?
Judge only proceedings
7.4.8 Law reform enquiries in England and Wales and Victoria have considered
whether or not there should be a judge-only alternative
procedure — either
in all cases (England and Wales) or in cases where the prosecution and defence
agree that the evidence establishes
the defence of mental impairment/insanity
(Victoria). It is also noted that in South Australia, the defendant may elect to
matter dealt with by a judge sitting alone rather than have the
investigation conducted by a
Recent amendments in
the Northern Territory allow for the special hearing to be dispensed with if the
parties to the prosecution
of the offence agree that the evidence establishes
the defence of mental
impairment.
7.4.9 In Victoria, there is provision for a ‘consent mental
impairment’ hearing if the prosecution and defence agree that
the evidence
establishes the defence of mental impairment for a trial conducted in the
mainstream trial process.
However, this option is not available for a person who has been found unfit to
stand trial and the determination of mental impairment
needs to be made by a
Accordingly, the VLRC
gave consideration to whether a judge-alone procedure should be available in
place of a special hearing (where
the prosecution and defence agree that the
evidence establishes the defence of mental impairment).
7.4.10 In submissions received by the VLRC, the following reasons were
advanced in support of a consent process:
• There is little utility or benefit in court and jury resources being
allocated to a special hearing in these circumstances.
A judge-alone procedure
would avoid the delay, inconvenience and expense of a special hearing.
• The court is able to determine the accused’s criminal
responsibility in a robust manner.
• A judge-alone process would avoid putting the parties through the
stress of a special hearing.
The Law Commission of England and Wales also outlined the following factors
in support of a judge-only process:
• [This would] be less formal, less time-consuming and may lead to
fewer delays in concluding the proceedings.
• A judge may be better positioned than a jury to analyse the expert
evidence adduced.
• Empirical research suggests that in the majority of cases the
[special] hearing is not
• Judges have to give reasons for their decisions which in this context
would be valuable.
• The objection based upon the apparent loss of a trial by jury is
properly met by the fact that this is not a decision which
attributes criminal
7.4.11 Opponents of a judge-alone process observed that a person who is unfit
to stand trial will not be able to instruct their lawyer
to agree to the
This concern was
also shared by the VLRC.
addition, the VLRC expressed the view that the jury (as community
representative) should be involved in determining the issues
at a special
hearing in the interests of the community and the victims and as a means to
protect the rights of the
It observed
the determination of criminal responsibility by a jury provides a greater
level of acknowledgement to victims and their families of
the harm they have
experienced. The importance of acknowledgment of victims and their family
members is not diminished in cases where
an accused has been under law not to be
criminally responsible due to a finding of not guilty because of mental
impairment. The Commission
recognises the importance of victims and their
families witnessing the process of the hearing, and listening to the psychiatric
psychological evidence and the reasons for dealing with accused within the
forensic mental health or disability system rather than
the prison system. In
the Commission’s view, this will promote the acceptance and understanding
of the finding of not guilty
because of mental impairment and its underlying
causes, such as a mental illness, intellectual disability or other cognitive
impairment.
Opposition to a judge-alone process received by the Law Commission of England
and Wales also focused on the erosion of the jury trial
and the role of the jury
as the fact-finder as a vital component of the criminal justice system. It was
thought that to remove the
jury may reduce public willingness to accept the
findings following a special hearing and may undermine the legitimacy of the
justice system.
addition, a judge-alone process would be in conflict with the requirements for
equality under the
given that this process would differ from
fact-finding in the usual trial
7.4.12 Responses received by the VLRC and the Law Commission of England and
Wales showed divided views on this issue. Similarly, the
approaches taken by the
law reform bodies were different. Ultimately, the VLRC recommended against
allowing a judge-alone process
and the Law Commission of England and Wales
considered that a judge-alone process should be available at the election of
23. Should any changes be made to the procedure for a special hearing?
24. Should there be a judge-alone process available instead of a special
hearing? If so, should this be available in circumstances
where the prosecution
and defence agree that the evidence establishes the defence of insanity at a
special hearing? Or should there
be a judge-alone process available instead of a
special hearing in all cases?
Introduction
8.1.1 The Terms of Reference request that the TLRI consider the operation of
the law of insanity in Tasmania with particular reference
• the operation of s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
• whether evidence of insane delusions arising from mental illness
should form the basis of self-defence;
• if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether defendants relying on insane delusions
should be liable to
supervision under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
• if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
requires amendment in relation to treatment options for such defendants.
Aspects of this reference have already been considered by the TLRI in its
review of the law of self-defence, where the TLRI’s
view was that the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3) should be repealed and that a provision be
included in s 46 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) to the effect that evidence
of delusions arising from a mental illness cannot be relied on for the purposes
of self-defence.
In this review, the Institute also stated that a review of the
insanity defence was warranted given that the law of insanity ‘pre-dates
the inception of modern psychiatry and psychology as professional
disciplines.’
Particular concerns identified were the scope of the legal concept of mental
disease (compared to the medical understanding of mental
illness) and the focus
on an accused’s incapacity rather than his or her actual awareness or
understanding.
8.1.2 This Part provides an overview of the law of insanity in Tasmania,
identifies concerns in relation to the existing law and considers
options for
Overview of the law of insanity in
8.2.1 The law of insanity in Tasmania has its origins in the rules laid down
in 1843 by the House of Lords’ decision in
In this case, medical evidence was presented that the accused held a delusional
belief that he was being persecuted by the police,
on instruction from the Tory
party. At his trial, evidence was presented that the accused, acting under that
delusion, killed a man
believing him to be the Home Secretary, Sir Robert
M’Naghten was
acquitted on the grounds of insanity and, as a result of the considerable public
uproar that followed, the Queen
asked the House of Lords to review the matter.
In response, the House of Lords set out the rules of insanity. These rules first
a presumption of sanity by stating that ‘in all cases that every
man [or woman] is presumed to be sane, and to possess a sufficient
reason to be responsible for his [or her] crimes, unless the contrary be
Rules then define the circumstances in which
a person may rely on the defence of insanity. The substance of the defence of
is contained in the statement by the House of Lords that:
To establish a defence on the ground of insanity, it must be clearly proved
that, at the time of the committing of the act, the party
accused was labouring
under such defect of reason, from disease of mind, as not to know the nature and
quality of the act he was
doing; or, if he did know it, that he did not know
what he was doing was wrong.
The House of Lords also considered the situation where a person was acting
under a delusion:
Making the assumption ... that he labours under such partial delusion only,
and is not in other respects insane, we think he must
be considered in the same
situation as to responsibility as if the facts with respect to which the
delusion exists were real. For
example, if under the influence of his delusion
he supposes another man to be in the act of attempting to take away his life,
he kills that man, as he supposes, in self-defence, he would be exempt from
punishment. If his delusion was that the deceased had
inflicted a serious injury
to his character and fortune, and he killed him in revenge for such supposed
injury, he would be liable
to punishment.
These aspects of the
Rules find expression in ss 15
and 16 of the
Criminal Code
, which are set out at [7.3].
8.2.3 The theoretical basis of the defence of insanity rests on a fundamental
principle of modern criminal law — the idea of
individual responsibility:
‘the idea of the subject as a rational agent with capacities of both
cognition and self-control,
and hence the idea of criminal liability is rooted
in individual
Individual responsibility is seen to be dependent on ‘the principle of
capacity and a fair opportunity to act
otherwise’.
It is for this reason that the criminal law has long recognised ‘the
notion that ... the insane lack the ability to reason’
and this is
reflected in ‘laws excusing them from responsibility for criminal
As noted by
Lacey, Wells and Quick:
A plea of exemption such as insanity goes to the defendant’s capacity
to be addressed as a normal subject of criminal law: if
a defendant’s
mental capacity is such that fundamental questions can be raised about her
cognitive or, perhaps, volitional
capacities, it might be argued that they are
not even the kind of subject whom criminal law aspires to
Fairall and Yeo recognise that ‘the law would be unduly harsh to punish
people who are unable to choose or control their
point to the lack of utility in punishing people who are mentally impaired given
that they ‘would not have been deterred
by a threat of
punishment’.
Accordingly, the function of the law of insanity has been said to ‘define
the point at which mental disorder dissolves [criminal]
responsibility’.
8.2.4 In its consideration of the foundations of criminal responsibility, the
Law Commission of England and Wales stated that:
Criminal law is generally thought to be founded on the principle that a
person must have been responsible for his or her actions in
order to be held
culpable and to be punished.
It would be unfair for those whose serious disorders caused them to lack
criminal responsibility at the time of an alleged offence
to be at risk of the
same outcome (criminal conviction) as people without that serious condition
Accordingly, the Law Commission addressed ‘the concept of
responsibility as part of the essential inquiry: when does the fact
person has a particular condition make it unfair to hold him or her responsible
for his or her otherwise criminal
Commission concluded that, ‘people should not be held criminally
responsible for their conduct if they lack the capacity
to conform their
behaviour to meet the demands imposed by the criminal law regulating that
8.2.1 In addition to fairness to the individual, the protection of the public
is a (competing) rationale for the defence of insanity
with the law of insanity
being concerned to ‘protect society against recurrence of dangerous
within the insanity defence in the
Criminal Code
s 16 (that operates to
separate sane from insane automatism) and the forward focused nature of the
assessment made in relation to
the dispositions available under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
The development of the law of insanity has been said to reflect a need to
identify ‘those defendants who seem more likely to
pose a danger to others
in the future’ and so those who ‘should be subject to supervision
and restraint rather than released
unconditionally’.
The current law of insanity in
8.3.1 In Tasmania, the presumption of sanity is set down in s 15 of the
Criminal Code,
which provides, ‘[e]very person is presumed to be of
sound mind, and to have been of sound mind at any time which comes in question,
until the contrary is proved’. This means that the prosecution does not
need to prove in every trial that the defendant is
sane. It can rely on the
presumption of sanity until it is displaced by evidence to the
8.3.2 The defence of insanity is set out in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas), which provides:
(1) A person is not criminally responsible for an act done or an omission
made by him —
(a) when afflicted with mental disease to such an extent as to render him
incapable of —
(i) understanding the physical character of such act or omission; or
(ii) knowing that such act or omission was one which he ought not to do or
(b) when such act or omission was done or made under an impulse which, by
reason of mental disease, he was in substance deprived of
any power to
(2) The fact that a person was, at the time at which he is alleged to have
done an act or made an omission, incapable of controlling
his conduct generally,
is relevant to the question whether he did such act or made such omission under
an impulse which by reason
of mental disease he was in substance deprived of any
power to resist.
(3) A person whose mind at the time of his doing an act or making an omission
is affected by a delusion on some specific matter, but
who is not otherwise
exempted from criminal responsibility under the foregoing provisions of this
section, is criminally responsible
for the act or omission to the same extent as
if the fact which he was induced by such delusion to believe to exist really
(4) For the purpose of this section the term mental disease includes natural
imbecility.
Key components of the defence
Mental disease
8.3.3 Central to the operation of the insanity defence is the scope of the
concept of ‘mental disease’. In order to rely
on the defence of
insanity under ss 16(1) and (2), it must be established on the balance of
probabilities that the defendant was
suffering a mental disease. Significantly,
the definition of a mental disease is a legal rather than a medical
It is a legal
question rather than a medical question as to whether any particular condition
is a ‘mental disease’ for
the purposes of the insanity defence.
Further, it is for the jury to determine whether the accused was suffering from
a condition
that answers the description of a ‘mental
In other words, the jury must determine whether a condition is a mental disease
according to the legal definition of the term and
whether the accused actually
has that condition. However, expert medical evidence is clearly likely to be
crucial to the jury’s
determination of these issues.
8.3.4 Mental disease is not defined in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) other
than to specify that it includes natural
imbecility,
meaning is found in the common law term ‘disease of the
of the mind’ is ‘a state of disease or disorder or mental
disturbance arising from infirmity, temporary
longstanding’
not include transient conditions caused by external factors unconnected with
An accepted
definition is found in the judgment of King CJ in
R v Radford
, where his
Honour stated that:
The expression ‘disease of the mind’ is synonymous, in my view,
with ‘mental illness’ ... The essential notion
appears to be that in
order to constitute insanity in the eyes of the law, the malfunction of mental
faculties called ‘defence
of reason’ in the M’Naghten rules,
must result from an underlying pathological infirmity of mind, be it of long or
duration and be it permanent or temporary, which can be properly termed
mental illness, as distinct from the reaction of a healthy
mind to extraordinary
external stimuli.
This statement focuses on the distinction to be drawn between the reaction of
a sound mind to external stimulus and the reactions
of an unsound mind
(sound/unsound mind distinction) as a basis for determining whether a condition
was a ‘disease of the mind’.
The key is whether the mental state is
caused by an external influence compared to an internal condition of the
defendant. This approach
reflects the explicit policy of the law, which is
concerned ‘that certain persons likely to be involved in repeated episodes
of dangerous behaviour should be subject to restraint rather than be given an
unqualified acquittal on the basis of automatism or
lack of mens
8.3.5 The legal tests to determine whether or not a condition comes within
the definition of a ‘disease of the mind’ have
largely been
developed to distinguish ‘sane’ and ‘insane’ automatism.
Sane automatism results in a complete
acquittal on the basis that the
prosecution has not proved beyond reasonable doubt that the act was voluntary
and intentional as
required by the
Criminal Code
s 13(1). In contrast,
‘insane’ automatism results in a qualified acquittal (not guilty by
reason of insanity) according
to the insanity defence by virtue of the
Criminal Code
The law provides that an accused cannot rely on automatism if the involuntary
conduct is attributable to a condition falling within
the legal definition of a
mental disease/disease of the mind — in this case, the defendant can only
rely on insanity.
8.3.6 The scope of the concept of a ‘mental disease’/disease of
the mind is also relevant to the distinction made between
the defences of
intoxication contained in s 17 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas), insanity and
automatism. The issue in this context is whether an accused’s involuntary
state at the time of the offence
was attributed to intoxication or a
‘mental disease’. There are limits on the relevance of intoxication
as a denial of
criminal responsibility as evidence of intoxication is not
relevant in determining whether an act is voluntary and intentional. It
necessary to determine whether the accused’s state of mind was
attributable to intoxication (a temporary and external
factor) or whether it was
attributable to a ‘mental disease’. Evidence of intoxication is not
relevant to the defence
of insanity unless the person is suffering from disease
of the mind caused by intoxication, such as delirium
8.3.7 At common law, conditions that have been accepted within the definition
of mental disease include:
schizophrenia,
depression,
psychomotor
hyperglycaemia,
arteriosclerosis
post-traumatic stress
As explained, the
common thread in the application of the concept of ‘mental disease’
in these cases is that the conditions
have been held to arise from an internal
rather than an external
This approach
highlights the unusual results that can be created by the current legal test
given that ‘mental disease’
has been held to extend to conditions
that are not normally associated with mental illness, such as
arteriosclerosis (hardening of arteries causing reduced flow of blood to the
There are differing
views about whether somnambulism (sleepwalking) is a ‘disease of the
mind’ depending on the evidence,
with a Canadian court in
finding that sleepwalking was not a mental
and the English Court
of Appeal finding that it is a disease of the
In Australia, it
appears that sleepwalking has generally been regarded as involving non-insane
automatism.
8.3.8 There is uncertainty in relation to the status of personality disorders
for the purpose of the
Criminal Code
s 16, and their status as a mental
disease appears to depend on the evidence adduced in a particular
In some cases, the
trial judge has refused to leave insanity on the basis of a personality
while in other
cases, insanity (although not successful) has been left for the jury on this
Limbs of the defence
8.3.9 Further, evidence of a mental disease alone will not provide the
defendant with a defence. Under ss 16(1) and (2), it must also
be established
that the effect of the mental disease was either that:
• the defendant did not have the capacity to
understand the physical
character of the act
• the defendant did not have the capacity to know that the
omission was one which he or she ought not do or make
• the defendant acted under an
uncontrollable impulse
Physical character of act
. This reflects the first limb of
M’Naghten’s
case that D be ‘labouring under such defect
of reason, from a disease of the mind as not to know the nature and quality of
the act he was doing.’ In
, Dixon J explained that a
person would not know the physical nature of what they were doing if he or
had so little capacity for understanding the nature of life and the
destruction of life, that to him [or her] it is no more than breaking
destroying an inanimate object. He [or she] would not know the implications and
what it really amounted to.
Illustrations of when a person does not understand the physical character of
the act include placing a baby on a fire thinking it
is a log of wood or
smashing a baby’s head believing it to be a
8.3.11 However, it is unclear whether s 16(1)(a)(i) is limited only to the
physical character of the act (eg strangling another under
the impression of
squeezing a lemon) or whether it extends also to the significance of the
It has been pointed
out in academic critique of the insanity defence that different results may
occur if a narrow (physical act only)
or a broad interpretation (physical act
and its consequence) is applied. For example, in a case where an accused hits
another person
repeatedly with a golf club to try to stop the person from
teasing him or her but does not know that act of striking will kill, can
person rely on the defence of insanity? Applying a narrow interpretation, the
accused would not be able to rely on insanity
as they understand the physical
character of the act (hitting with the club). However, applying a broader
interpretation they would
be able to rely on insanity, as they did not
appreciate that their conduct could kill
Another example
given in textbooks of the application of a broader interpretation of the
incapacity to understand the physical character
of the act would be where a
person decapitates someone just to see what that person looks like without a
8.3.12 The precise scope of being ‘incapable of understanding the
physical character’ of the act is not settled in Tasmania.
support for the narrow view in
Williams v The
where the accused
stabbed and killed the victim. Medical evidence was given at trial which
‘amounted ... to an opinion that
the appellant at the time he did this act
... was probably totally unaware that he was so acting or even unaware that he
basis for the insanity defence was that the accused’s act was not
voluntary and intentional because he had a ‘gross
personality
disorder’. In outlining the scope of the first limb of the insanity
defence, Neasey J relied on the approach taken
it has become the practice to regard a person as ‘incapable of
understanding the nature and quality’ of his act when in
truth he was not
conscious of having acted at all; and so to treat the formula as applicable to
cases of automatism.
Accordingly, Neasey J stated that if the individual ‘was totally
unaware of what he was doing, he was at that time incapable
of understanding the
physical character of his act, because he was at that time incapable of
considering the physical character of
it, or anything else about it, at
This approach
would seem to limit the scope of this limb of the insanity defence
significantly.
8.3.13 In contrast, a broader approach is evident in the judgment of Crawford
Hawkins (No 2)
where his Honour cited the interpretation of the common law rule ‘as not
to know the nature and quality of the act’ found
interpretation encompassed the act and its consequences: ‘whether the
accused “was in such a condition that he could
not appreciate what death
amounted to or that he was bringing it about or that he was destroying life and
all that is involved in
the destruction of
8.3.14 However, it is difficult to determine the approach that the court is
likely to adopt given that this provision is rarely used
Other than the case
Williams v The Queen
(where insanity was rejected by the jury), the
TLRI is not aware of any case decided in the Supreme Court where this ground for
establishing
insanity has been successfully relied on by the defendant.
Act or omission which ought not do or make
. This reflects the
second limb of
M’Naghten’s
case that the defendant did not
know what he was doing was wrong. In
, Dixon J stated
The question is whether he was able to appreciate the wrongness of the
particular act he was doing at the particular time. Could this
man be said to
know in this sense whether his act was wrong if through a disease or defect or
disorder of the mind he could not think
rationally of the reasons which to
ordinary people make that act right or wrong? If through the disordered
condition of the mind
he could not reason about the matter with a moderate
degree of sense and composure it may be said that he could not know that what
was doing was wrong. What is meant by ‘wrong’? What is meant by
wrong is wrong having regard to the everyday standards
of reasonable
Accordingly, a key feature of the test is that the defendant could not think
rationally about whether the matter was right or wrong.
Further, the
defendant’s understanding of ‘wrong’ is concerned with the
defendant’s failure to understand
that the act was morally wrong rather
than the defendant’s failure to understand that the act was legally wrong.
8.3.16 It has been observed that this is the most common basis on which
insanity is
established.
In Tasmania, this was the ground of insanity used in all of the cases where
insanity was successfully argued in Supreme Court cases
identified by the TLRI
from 2010. Typically, the defence was based on the accused’s impaired
judgement arising from delusions
resulting from a pre-existing mental health
impairment. For example, in making orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) in the case of
Porter J observed that
‘the mental condition and the delusions from which he suffered were of
such intensity in nature that
it impaired and reduced his ability to judge the
situation in an ordinary manner. The disorder deprived him of the capacity to
the acts were ones which he ought not to do’. In another case, the
medical evidence was that the defendant was mentally ill
and experiencing
auditory hallucinations and the crimes were committed in response to the voice
he heard and a belief that his family
would be at risk if he did not commit the
defendant’s condition caused him to experience ‘acute psychotic
symptoms including auditory and visual hallucinations
and persecutory and
referential
delusions’.
8.3.17 A further illustration of the operation of this limb of the insanity
defence (in the Western Australian context) is the case
McHenry v Western
Australia (No 2)
case, the accused killed his brother under the deluded belief that his brother
was a threat to him personally and to the
world. He believed that his brother
was an alien linked to spiders and Satan and that they were planning to blow up
the planet. By
killing his brother, he thought he would destroy the spider and
save many from Satan. He also believed he would protect his brother
from Satan.
Expert evidence was given that the accused suffered from paranoid schizophrenia
evidenced by auditory hallucinations
(hearing voices) and delusional beliefs
(religious and in extra-terrestrial aliens), and that this deprived him of the
capacity to
know that he ought not to do the act of killing. The accused was
acquitted on account of his unsoundness of mind.
Uncontrollable impulse.
This is described as the
‘volitional’ limb of the insanity defence and this basis to
establish the defence of insanity
was not contained in
McNaghten’s
rules (and so does not exist at common
Section 16(1)(b) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) states that a person is not criminally responsible
for an act or omission ‘when such act or omission was done or made
an impulse which, by reason of mental disease, he [or she] was in substance
deprived of any power to resist’. Section
16(2) provides that:
the fact that a person was, at the time at which he is alleged to have done
an act or made an omission, incapable of controlling his
conduct generally, is
relevant to the question whether he [or she] did such act or made such omission
under an impulse which by reason
of mental disease he [or she] was in substance
deprived of any power to resist.
8.3.19 The operation of this limb of the insanity defence was considered in
the case of
, where the Court of Criminal Appeal expressed the
view that the issue for the jury was:
whether the appellant did the acts complained of under an impulse which by
reason of mental disease he was in substance deprived of
any power to resist it
was for the appellant to satisfy the jury upon the balance of probabilities:
• that the acts were in fact done under an impulse;
• that it was an impulse which by reason of mental disease he was in
substance deprived of any power to
The degree of impairment of violation was addressed by the High Court in
O’Neill v The Queen
, where the court held that to succeed, it must
be established on the balance of probabilities that ‘the accused had lost
power to resist: that mental disease had left him with no power of
resistance to the impulses to do the fatal
8.3.20 As with the first limb of the insanity defence (the physical character
of the act), this provision appears to be rarely used
There have been
three decisions of the Court of Criminal Appeal that have considered the
operation of s 16(1)(b), all involving cases
where the accused was appealing a
conviction of murder.
In these cases, the difficulties in relying on this limb of the insanity
defence were apparent, as it was noted that the medical evidence
sufficient to establish that the person
resist the impulse
(rather than
resist the impulse). The TLRI has identified one
further case where this ground was unsuccessfully relied on in the Supreme Court
on the ground that the mental illness ‘greatly diminished’ but did
not result in a total loss of
Section 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
substantially reproduces the statement in
McNaghten’s
case that a
defendant’s responsibility is judged by reference to the facts as he or
she supposes them to be and not by the
It specifically refers
to the effects of delusions on a defendant’s criminal responsibility. This
provision was considered
by the Court of Criminal Appeal in
a case in which
the accused was charged with murder after he shot and killed an acquaintance at
close range.
At trial, the defence did not seek to rely on insanity.
Instead the accused sought to rely on self-defence on the basis of a
hallucinatory
belief that at ‘the time of the discharge of the weapon the
accused believed that he was in Korea defending himself from an
The accused
had been a soldier in the Korean War where he had been severely wounded by a
mortar explosion. Subsequently, he had on-going
health problems that required
hospital admission and on some occasions shock treatment. The defence sought to
adduce the accused’s
medical files that ‘showed a history consistent
with a longstanding mental disorder caused by war
experience.’
defence also sought to lead expert evidence from a psychiatrist that the accused
was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder
and, as a manifestation of
that disorder, might have believed that he was on active service in
8.3.22 The trial judge, Slicer J, ruled that the accused’s delusions
could be relied upon under s 16(3) for the purpose of self-defence
Criminal Code
(Tas). However, his Honour held that self-defence would
only be available in this way once the jury rejected the defence of insanity
under ss 16(1) and 16(2). This could occur where the jury was not satisfied on
the balance of probabilities that the accused’s
disorder amounted to a
‘mental disease’ for the purposes of the insanity defence or that
the mental disease affected
him in one of the ways set out in ss 16(1) and (2).
In these circumstances, Slicer J ruled that the jury could consider the
delusion, pursuant to s 16(3), for the purposes of self-defence.
8.3.23 The jury convicted Walsh of murder. The Court of Criminal Appeal
rejected his appeal stating that the trial judge’s direction
accused’s deluded beliefs could be considered for the purposes of
self-defence after the defence of insanity had been
properly considered was
unduly favourable to the accused. Further, the Court considered that the
accused’s action in shooting
his acquaintance could not be regarded as a
reasonable response, if he was sane. However, the Court accepted the expert
in relation to the accused’s mental disease and quashed the
accused’s conviction for murder and substituted a verdict
of not guilty on
the grounds of insanity.
8.3.24 The Court of Criminal Appeal’s view was that the accused’s
insane delusions were not relevant to self-defence and
would only be relevant to
the defence of insanity. Only the accused’s sane beliefs could provide a
basis for the accused’s
subjective belief in the need for self-defence.
The Court considered that, if accepted by the jury, the evidence of the
deluded belief brought him within s 16(1)(a)(ii) of the
Criminal Code
, and so that limb of the insanity defence governed the
accused’s criminal responsibility. In the words of Crawford J:
On the evidence, if the appellant believed that he was being attacked or
approached by an enemy soldier or by some assailant from
Sydney the cause of
that belief was his mental disease, that is to say the post traumatic stress
disorder. If he acted in defence
of himself under the influence of such a belief
he was insane within the second limb of the M’Naghten rules because he was
affected with mental disease to such an extent as to render him incapable of
knowing that his act was one which he ought not to do
16(1)(a)(ii)).
The effect of the Court of Criminal Appeal’s decision in
is to restrict the relevance of insane delusions to the defence of insanity.
Accordingly, if the jury reject the defence of insanity,
they must judge the
reasonableness of the accused’s conduct on the basis that he is
Section 16(3) cannot be
applied to extend the relevance of an insane delusion to the defence of
self-defence. However, as discussed
at [7.5.48]–[7.5.65], there remains
some uncertainty in relation to the scope of s 16(3).
8.3.25 The TLRI has not identified any other Tasmanian cases that have relied
on s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
Procedural matters
Onus of proof
8.3.26 As indicated at [7.3.1], s 15 of the
Criminal Code
contains a presumption of sanity. Thus, the onus is on the defendant to prove
that he or she was insane within s 16 on the balance
of probabilities. This is
reinforced by s 381(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas), which provides that
‘the onus of proving the insanity of any such person shall be upon the
defence, but the same may
be established upon the evidence of the
prosecution’.
8.3.27 The language used in ss 381(3), 399 and 401 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) assume that insanity can be raised by someone other than the
Section 381(3)
provides that ‘the onus of proving the insanity of any such person shall
be upon the defence, but the same may
be established upon the evidence of the
prosecution’. Section 401 of the
provides that a person
convicted may appeal. ‘Person convicted’ includes, according to s
399, ‘an accused person
who, not having set up insanity as a defence, has
been acquitted on the ground of insanity.’ Case authority establishes that
the prosecution can allege and call evidence to prove insanity if the defendant
puts his or her state of mind in issue by alleging
non-insane automatism or the
absence of intent.
the prosecution cannot introduce evidence probative of insanity until the matter
is put in issue by the
Role of judge and jury
8.3.28 As indicated, the definition of mental illness is a matter of law, but
whether the defendant suffered from a mental disease
is a question of fact. This
was set out in
where Green CJ stated
the jury have the sole responsibility for making all necessary findings of
fact and for determining the verdict. The functions of
the judge and jury are no
different in cases in which a defence of insanity has been raised. In such cases
it is for the judge to
inter alia direct the jury as to the meaning of the
expression ‘mental disease’ in s 16 but it is for the jury to decide
whether the evidence satisfies them that the accused was at the relevant time
suffering from a mental
Accordingly, it is a matter for the jury whether the defendant was affected
by a mental disease, and also whether the mental disease
deprived the defendant
of one of capacities in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas). There is no
provision for the prosecution and the defence to agree on a verdict of not
guilty by reason of insanity.
Law in other jurisdictions
8.4.1 Although not identical, all Australian jurisdictions have comparable
laws in relation to insanity based on the
rules. A summary of
the defence of insanity (Western Australia and Queensland), mental illness (New
South Wales), mental impairment
(Victoria, the Northern Territory, the
Australian Capital Territory, and in Commonwealth legislation) and mental
incompetence (South
Australia) are set out in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1 Elements of the defence of mental impairment in Australian
Name of defence
Components of mental state
Nature and quality of conduct
Knowledge that conduct is wrong
Inability to control conduct
Criminal Code
Mental Impairment
Mental impairment includes senility, intellectual disability, mental
illness, brain damage and severe personality disorder.
Mental illness is a reference to an underlying pathological infirmity of
mind, whether of long or short duration and whether permanent
or temporary, but
does not include a condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to
extraordinary external stimuli.
However, such a condition may be evidence of a
mental illness if it involves some abnormality and is prone to recur.
Did not know the nature or quality of the conduct.
Did not know that the conduct was wrong (that is, the person could not
reason with a moderate degree of sense and composure about
whether the conduct,
as perceived by reasonable people, was wrong).
Unable to control conduct.
If carried out conduct as a result of a delusion caused by a mental
impairment, the delusion cannot otherwise be relied on as a defence.
ss 7.3(8), (9)
s 7.3(1)(a)
s 7.3(1)(b)
s 7.3(1)(c)
Criminal Code
Mental Impairment
Mental impairment includes senility, intellectual disability, mental
illness, brain damage and severe personality disorder.
Mental illness is a reference to an underlying pathological infirmity of
mind, whether of long or short duration and whether permanent
or temporary, but
does not include a condition (a reactive condition) that results from the
reaction of a healthy mind to extraordinary
external stimuli. However, a
reactive condition may be evidence of a mental illness if it involves some
abnormality and is prone
Did not know the nature or quality of the conduct.
Did not know that the conduct was wrong (that is, the person could not
reason with a moderate degree of sense and composure about
whether the conduct,
as perceived by reasonable people, was wrong).
Unable to control conduct.
If carried out conduct as a result of a delusion caused by a mental
impairment, but the person may rely on the mental impairment to
deny criminal
responsibility.
ss 27(1), (2), (3)
ss 28(1)(b), (2)
M’Naghten Rules
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
Mental Illness
Defect of reason caused by a disease of the mind.
This is contrasted with ‘mere excitability of the normal man,
passion, even stupidity, obtuseness, lack of self-control and
impulsiveness.
Any mental disorder which ‘manifests itself in violence and is prone
to recur’ may be a
disease of the
Mental malfunctioning of a transitory nature caused by some external factor
such as violence, drugs, alcohol has been held not be
A ‘gross psychopath’, that is, one who has a gross lack of
self-control and emotional feeling is not M’Naghten mentally
Irresistible impulse does not by itself raise a defence of mental
Did not know the nature and quality of the act he or she was doing
Did not know that what he or she was doing was wrong.
‘Wrong’ means ‘wrong’ according to ‘ordinary
standards adopted by reasonable
If labours under a partial delusion only, and is not in other respects
insane, must be considered in the same situation as to responsibility
facts with respect to which the delusion exists were real.
Criminal Code
Mental impairment
Mental impairment includes senility, intellectual disability, mental
illness, brain damage and involuntary intoxication.
Mental illness is a reference to an underlying pathological infirmity of
mind, whether of long or short duration and whether permanent
or temporary, but
does not include a condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to
extraordinary external stimuli
(although such a condition may be evidence of a
mental illness if it involves some abnormality and is prone to recur).
Did not know the nature and quality of the conduct.
Did not know that the conduct was wrong (that is, the person could not
reason with a moderate degree of sense and composure about
whether the conduct,
as perceived by reasonable people, was wrong).
Unable to control conduct.
s 43C(1)(a)
s 43C(1)(b)
s 43C(1)(c)
Criminal Code
Mental disease or natural mental infirmity
Capacity to understand what the person is doing.
Capacity to know that the person ought not to do the act or make the
Capacity to control the person’s action.
Affected by delusions on some specific matter or matters, but who is not
otherwise entitled to the benefit of sub-s (1), is criminally
responsible to the
same extent as if the real state if things had been such as the person as
induced by the delusions to believe
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Mental incompetence
Mental impairment includes mental illness, intellectual disability or a
disability or impairment of mind resulting from senility.
Mental illness means a pathological infirmity of the mind (including a
temporary one of short duration).
Does not know nature and quality of conduct.
Does not know that the conduct is wrong, that is the person could not
reason about whether the conduct, as perceived by reasonable
people, was
Totally unable to control conduct.
[intoxication provision]
s 269C(1)(a)
s 269C(1)(b)
s 269C(1)(c)
Criminal Code
Mental disease includes ‘natural imbecility’.
Incapable of understand the physical character of the act or
Incapable of knowing that the act or omission was one that he or she ought
not to do or make.
Under an impulse which he or she was in substance deprived of any power to
Affected by a delusion on some specific matter, but who is not otherwise
exempted from criminal responsibility under the foregoing
provisions of this
section, is criminally responsible for the act or omission to the same extent as
if the fact which he was induced
by such delusion to believe to exist really
s 16(1), (4)
s 16(1)(a)(i)
s 16(1)(a)(ii)
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Fitness to be Tried) Act 1997
Mental impairment
No definition
Did not know the nature and quality of the conduct.
Did not know that the conduct was wrong (that is, the person could not
reason with a moderate degree of sense and composure about
whether the conduct,
as perceived by reasonable people, was wrong).
Criminal Code
Unsoundness of mind; mental impairment means intellectual disability,
mental illness, brain damage or senility.
Mental illness means an underlying pathological infirmity of mind, whether
of long or short duration and whether permanent or temporary,
but does not
include a condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to
extraordinary stimuli.
Capacity to understand what the person is doing.
Capacity to know that the person ought not to do the act or make the
Capacity to control the person’s action.
Affected by delusions on some specific matter or matters, but who is not
otherwise entitled to the benefit of sub-s (1), is criminally
responsible to the
same extent as if the real state if things had been such as the person as
induced by the delusions to believe
ss 1, 27(1),
Issues for consideration
8.7.1 The law of insanity has been controversial, and as Norval Morris
observed in 1970 (quoted in Blackwood and Warner): ‘Rivers
mountains of printer’s lead, and forests of paper have been
expended’ on the issue of the defence of
Since that time, there have been further reviews of the law of insanity in many
criticism, the law of
insanity has remained essentially unchanged since the mid-nineteenth
Key difficulties are
in relation to the terminology used and the disconnect between the legal concept
of insanity and contemporary
psychological understanding.
8.7.2 In view of the difficulties identified in relation to the insanity
defence, several other jurisdictions have reviewed the defence
questioned whether insanity should be retained at all. The following sections
consider whether an insanity defence is required,
and if so, whether the current
defence should be amended to ensure that ‘the law has the right test to
distinguish between
those who should be held criminally responsible for what
they have done, and those who should not because of their
condition’.
Is it necessary to have an insanity
8.7.3 In some states in the United States, the insanity defence has been
The Law Reform
Commissioner of Tasmania has previously recommended that the defence of insanity
be abolished and that evidence of
mental or psychological disorder be admissible
as relevant to deny the mental element for the offence in all
The abolition of the insanity defence has also been advocated by some legal
and disability
The Scottish Law Commission, the Law Commission of England and Wales, the New
Zealand Law Reform Commission, the New South Wales
Law Reform Commission and the
Law Reform Commission of Victoria have also considered the abolition of the
defence of insanity.
Commission of England and Wales was the only review to propose a provisional
abolition of the insanity defence. However,
the Commission still considered that
there was a need for a special defence of non-responsibility (and rejected the
adequacy of general
principles of criminal law to address cases where an
accused’s mental disorder resulted in a total loss of capacity). This
discussed further at [7.5.7]–[7.5.14].
8.7.4 The insanity defence (without a comparable replacement) would mean that
the criminal liability of a person with a mental illness
or intellectual
disability would be determined according to the general principles of criminal
law. This would allow evidence of
mental illness or intellectual disability to
be used to deny the elements of the offence (the voluntary and intentional act,
knowledge, subjective recklessness etc) or to establish a defence of
general application (such as
self-defence).
According to
this approach, concerns in relation to the protection of the public following an
acquittal could be resolved through
civil rather than criminal
procedures.
Reasons advanced for the abolition of the defence
8.7.5 The following reasons have been advanced in support of the abolition of
the defence:
It is inherently discriminatory based on disability and contrary
right to equality before the law, including the right to
recognition of legal capacity
. The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has stated that:
In the area of criminal law, recognition of the legal capacity of persons
with disabilities requires abolishing a defence based on
the negation of
criminal responsibility because of the existence of a mental or intellectual
disability. Instead disability-neutral
doctrines on the subjective elements of
crime should be applied, which take into consideration the situation of the
individual defendant.
Further, it is argued that ‘[g]ranting people with mental disability a
special defence stigmatises and marginalises them. The
category of
“criminal insanity” perpetuates the extremely damaging myth that
people with mental disability are especially
dangerous or especially
uncontrollable’.
It is fundamentally flawed to argue that a person who is mentally
ill is less guilty than someone who is not mentally ill but is driven
criminal behaviour by circumstances beyond their control (such as social
deprivation)
argument is that there is no reason for distinguishing between different causes
of non-responsibility.
It is wrong in principle
. This argument is based on the
concern that the criminal law is being used inappropriately to detain people who
have been acquitted
on the ground that they ‘were perceived to pose a risk
Burden of proof and consistency with general principles of
criminal law.
It is argued that it is contrary to ‘notions of justice
and fair play’ to require ‘the accused to prove not only
that he [or
she] did not have
but that he [or she] suffered from a total
incapacity to understand the physical nature of the
This represents a
shifting of the burden of proof to the accused and also the imposition of a more
onerous burden.
It is argued
that the abolition of the insanity defence ‘is more consistent with
general principles of criminal law’
on the basis that ‘if the
prosecution can prove the elements constituting the offence, the charge is made
out, and if it cannot,
then the accused must be
acquitted’.
8.7.6 The following reasons have been advanced to support the retention of
the defence:
The insanity verdict reflects the true ground for the
reflects the foundations of the defence as a ‘denial of criminal
responsibility due to a person’s lack of
Zealand Law Commission (NZLC) observed that:
It is not, in fact, true to say, as the abolitionists do, that the insanity
defence is ill-founded because criminal liability in general
turns on the
presence or absence of criminal intent. The criminal law, and society more
generally, across all like-minded jurisdictions,
does recognise other
circumstances in which factual guilt, and criminal actions with intent, are
justified or excused, resulting
in acquittal, because the offender was placed in
a position in which he or she did not have a “real” choice.
Self-defence,
and duress or necessity, are
Further, there may be some individuals who were proved to have the relevant
intent at the time of the offence but where the intent
was affected by a
delusion. It is argued that it would be unfair to convict such a person where
they were ‘grossly out of touch
with reality at the time of the
It also does
not account for strict liability offences, where the prosecution does not need
to prove any intention beyond a voluntary
and intentional act.
The requirement for legal capacity under the
refers to one’s power to act within the legal
is not undermined by the insanity defence
. After considering the views
expressed by those who would advocate for the abolition of the insanity defence
on human rights grounds,
Wondemaghen argues that:
Adherence to Article 12 demands that persons with mental and psychosocial
disabilities are recognised as free agents with legal capacity
who may or may
not choose to employ the defence of insanity to negate reasoning, not as a
perpetual and continuous state, but solely
at the time of the commission of a
criminal act.
This can be contrasted with the position of children where lack of criminal
responsibility is a permanent state for children under
the age of 10 and a
rebuttable presumption for children aged between 10 and 14
For individuals who
seek to raise insanity, there is a presumption of sanity and it must be
established on the balance of probabilities
that the person had a mental
disease, which gave rise to one of the relevant incapacities at the time of the
offence. Accordingly,
it is not a permanent lack of legal capacity based on
disability. Indeed, a person may be found guilty of some offences and not guilty
by reason of insanity in relation to other offences for offending that occurs in
a relatively close time
The underlying rationale for the insanity defence is still
. This was the view expressed by the NSWLRC, which stated:
Is there still a need to provide a legal mechanism for excusing from criminal
responsibility those offenders whose mental capacity
is significantly impaired,
for protecting them from themselves or the community where their impaired mental
capacity makes them susceptible
to dangerous behaviour, and for providing them
with the opportunity for treatment, rather than
punishment?
The Commission’s view was that ‘the answer to that question is
uncontroversial, and the underlying rationale for the defence
of mental illness
remains as valid today as it did when it first
Public protection requires the courts to have special powers
beyond civil powers of
Commission stated that:
A person with mental disorder who has done what would amount to a criminal
offence is not, it seems to us, in the same position as
a person who has been
acquitted without any reliance on a mental disorder defence. It is justifiable,
on the grounds of public protection,
to detain a person who has been found to
have committed what would have been a criminal offence but for his or her
medical condition
(whether physical or
25. Should the defence of insanity in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
be abolished?
26. If you consider that the insanity defence should be abolished, do you
think that a new defence should be created, or should general
principles of
criminal responsibility apply?
27. If the defence of insanity is abolished, do you consider that the powers
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) are sufficient to address
community protection concerns following the acquittal of an individual with
mental health impairments?
If not, what changes would be necessary?
A new defence (a ‘radical’
8.7.7 An alternative to the complete abolition of insanity would be to
replace the insanity defence in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) with an
alternative means of deciding the circumstances in which individuals ought not
be criminally responsible for their conduct.
8.7.8 In England and Wales, the Law Commission provisionally proposed a
‘radical’ change to the insanity
Instead of the
traditional insanity defence (and the distinction between sane and insane
automatism reflecting the internal/external
divide), its view was that the
insanity defence in its current form should be abolished and that a special
defence based on the accused’s
lack of capacity at the time of the offence
should be created that would apply to physical as well as mental conditions that
to a relevant loss of
It proposed a new
defence of ‘not criminally responsible by reason of recognised medical
condition’. This defence applies
where the defendant, as a result of a
qualifying ‘recognised medical condition’, wholly lacked the
capacity to:
• Rationally form a judgment about the relevant conduct or
circumstances;
• Understand the wrongfulness of what he or she is charged with; or
• Control his or her physical acts in relation to the relevant
8.7.9 The Commission’s view was that the boundary between
‘sane’ and ‘insane’ automatism should be re-defined,
that a special verdict would be available if a mental or a physical disorder
deprived the defendant of a relevant loss of capacity.
It outlined the following
reasons for this approach:
• This removes the artificial division between physical and mental
disorders and focuses on the essential point, which is ‘to
whether the accused had the relevant criminal
There is no
principled reason to treat mental disorders differently from physical disorders
when they gave rise to a loss of
• It would reduce the stigma attached to mental illness arising from
the use of terminology of the nineteenth century by introducing
a verdict of
‘not criminally responsible by reason of a recognised medical
condition’.
‘crafted in modern terms with flexibility to accommodate developing
medical knowledge’.
• It would result in more appropriate
The Law Commission
provides the example of a person who is charged with causing death by dangerous
driving in circumstances where
the person fell into a hypoglycaemic coma. Such a
person would be acquitted outright but the Law Commission argued that this
more appropriately fits within a defence of not criminally
responsible by reason of a medical
condition’.
also be more appropriate than labelling as ‘insane’ people with
diabetes (hyperglycaemia) and epilepsy.
• It would result in more appropriate outcomes by providing the court
with powers over cases where there is a risk of reoccurrence
arising from a
physical disorder
(hypoglycaemia).
Commission provided the example of a person who operates machinery and suffers
from sleep apnoea. If such a person harmed
someone, they may have a defence of
automatism with an acquittal and no power for preventive measures to be imposed
by the court.
Under the new defence, if the person was found ‘not
criminally responsible by reason of recognised medical condition’,
‘the court could require him or her to obtain the necessary medical
treatment or
supervision’.
8.7.10 A further reason that could be advanced for supporting such an
approach is that it more readily reflects the requirement for
equality under the
by creating a defence that applies to recognised medical conditions
(both physical and mental) that give rise to a relevant incapacity.
respect, it is disability neutral in form and substance as it will not only
apply to individuals with a mental health or
cognitive impairments.
8.7.11 The Law Commission’s provisional proposals were that there be
two non-qualifying conditions — acute intoxication
and anti-social
personality disorders.
were both excluded on policy grounds. In relation to acute intoxication, the
Commission’s view was that the existing
approach of the law in relation to
intoxication based on prior fault should continue to
However, this did not
exclude the possibility that an accused suffering from a recognised mental
condition, such as alcohol dependency
syndrome (as distinct from drunkenness)
may be a qualifying medical
In addition, the
Commission proposed, on policy grounds, that antisocial personality disorder
should not be a condition that qualified
as a ‘recognised medical
condition’.
8.7.12 The Law Commission’s proposed reform to the insanity defence has
been well received in the academic
literature.
For example, Rumbold and Wasik write that ‘[t]he changes proposed in the
discussion document provide a logical and consistent
framework for mental
condition defences that will reflect modern medical
8.7.13 However, it has not been implemented by the government. Accordingly,
in a practical sense it is not possible to determine whether
the new defence
would be a more attractive option than the current insanity defence given that
if successful it ‘may lead to
Ashworth has
observed that greater use is not guaranteed because ‘[a]s now, some
defendants may prefer to take their chances
with ordinary sentencing
powers’, and further, the new defence is narrowly drawn by requiring a
total lack of capacity.
8.7.14 Other disadvantages arising from adopting a new approach to insanity
and automatism would be that the long-settled law in this
area would be
As the NSWLRC has
observed, despite concerns in relation to the operation of
rules, there are advantages in their retention:
• Consistency with other Australian jurisdictions and comparable
• The rules have stood the test of time, and despite numerous reviews
‘most cognate jurisdictions have not taken a fundamentally
different route
in dealing with this legal
28. Should a new defence be introduced to replace the insanity defence that
provides for a verdict of not guilty on the grounds of
a recognised medical
condition (as proposed in England and Wales)?
29. If so, should there be any non-qualifying conditions?
Retain and amend the insanity defence in s
16 of the Criminal Code
8.7.15 Extensive academic literature has outlined deficiencies with the law
of insanity. An overview of these concerns is set out
below and feedback is
sought as to whether these problems create difficulties in practice and if (and
how) the defence of insanity
should be amended.
Inadequacy of the current insanity defence
Inappropriate and outdated terminology
. Problems with the
current defence are said to be created by the mismatch between the
(legal insanity)
and contemporary psychiatric knowledge about mental illness (medical
As Ormerod writes, ‘[i]t is surprising that in the twenty-first century
the law is based not on any medical understanding of
mental illness but on a
distinct legal criterion of
responsibility’.
8.7.17 A specific criticism directed at the insanity defence is the use of
inappropriate and outdated terminology such as ‘insanity’,
‘mental disease’ and ‘natural imbecility’, as well as
the concept of a ‘disease of the mind’.
These terms are considered
to be inappropriately stigmatising, and, as recognised by the Law Commission,
not medical terms but rather
outdated legal
8.7.18 In many other jurisdictions, the name of the insanity defence has been
changed to reflect the inappropriateness of using such
terminology. In the
Northern Territory, the Australian Capital Territory, Victoria, and at the
Commonwealth level, the defence is
now called the defence of mental impairment,
and in South Australia it is called ‘mental
incompetence’.
Western Australia, while the defence is still called insanity and refers to
‘unsoundness of mind’, the substance of
the defence uses the term
‘mental impairment’, which means ‘intellectual disability,
mental illness, brain damage
Reform Commission of Western Australia (LRCWA) has recommended that the defence
be renamed ‘defence of mental impairment’
and similarly, the
Scottish Law Commission has recommended a name change. In New South Wales, the
defence is called ‘mental
illness’ and the NSWLRC has recommended
that the defence be renamed ‘defence of mental health or cognitive
impairment’.
Proposed reforms in NSW will rename the legal terms for the
defence to ‘Act proven but not criminally responsible by reason
cognitive or mental health
impairment’.
contrast, the NZLC, despite acknowledging that the terminology was outdated,
considered that the terminology not be changed for
sematic reasons: ‘the
rationale for reforming it really boils down to no more than desire to make the
defence “look and
feel” more modern, without adding anything of
substance or changing
30. Do you consider that the name of the defence of insanity in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) should be changed?
If so, what should the
defence be called?
The qualifying mental state: mental disease
. In addition to the
name of the defence, concepts of mental disease and disease of the mind are
regarded as ‘limited, outdated
offensive’.
to this concern, other jurisdictions have defined the required mental state with
contemporary medical
terminology.
However, there
are different formulations used in the legislation. For example, in South
Australia, the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) uses the term,
‘mental impairment’, which is defined to include ‘mental
illness, intellectual disability or
a disability or impairment of mind resulting
from senility’.
Commonwealth, the Australian Capital Territory, the Northern Territory and
Western Australia, define mental impairment to mean,
‘intellectual
disability, mental illness, brain damage or
also differences between the ACT and the Commonwealth legislation (which include
‘severe personality disorder’
in the definition of mental
impairment). The Northern Territory includes involuntary intoxication in the
definition of mental impairment.
8.7.20 Reviews conducted in other Australian jurisdictions that do not
currently have a definition of mental impairment have all recommended
legislative change to provide for such a definition. Again, however, there are
variations in terminology recommended. The VLRC has
recommended that mental
impairment should be defined to include, but not be limited to, ‘mental
illness, intellectual disability
and cognitive
impairment’.
Reform Committee (Victoria) recommends that the definition of mental impairment
should encompass mental illness, intellectual
disability, acquired brain injury
and severe personality
recommends that the terms, ‘mental health impairment’ and
‘cognitive impairment’ be used and that
detailed definitions be
provided for these terms (this is discussed
It also recommends
that personality disorders be excluded. The Scottish Law Commission has
recommended that a brief definition should
be introduced to define mental
disorder to mean: (a) mental illness, (b) personality disorder or (c) learning
disability. However,
it should exclude psychopathic personality
In contrast, the
NZLC’s view is that there is no need to change the terminology
8.7.21 An additional criticism is that the legal interpretation of
‘disease of the mind’ has created arbitrary and unsatisfactory
outcomes. As discussed at [7.3.4]–[7.3.7], the common law tests for
determining if a condition is a disease of the mind focus
on the division
between internal and external causes and the boundary between a sound and
unsound mind. This approach has been adopted
in Tasmania in determining whether
a person has a ‘mental disease’, and in New South Wales and Victoria
(where there
is no legislative definition). It is also generally adopted by
(set out in Table 7.2).
Table 7.2: Australian legislative definitions of mental illness contained
in the defence of mental impairment
Mental illness is a reference to an underlying pathological infirmity of
mind, whether of long or short duration and whether permanent
or temporary, but
does not include a condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to
extraordinary external stimuli.
However, such a condition may be evidence of a
mental illness if it involves some abnormality and is prone to recur.
Mental illness means a pathological infirmity of the mind (including a
temporary one of short duration).
There is a note to the definition that provides that ‘a condition
that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to extraordinary
stimuli is not a mental disease, although, such a condition may be evidence of a
mental illness if it involves some abnormality
and is prone to recur (see
(1990) 171 CLR 30).
South Australia
Mental illness is a reference to an underlying pathological infirmity of
mind, whether of long or short duration and whether permanent
or temporary, but
does not include a condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to
extraordinary stimuli.
Western Australia
Mental health impairment means a temporary or continuing disturbance of
thought, mood, volition, perception, or memory that impairs
emotional wellbeing,
judgment or behaviour, so as to affect functioning in daily life to a material
extent. Mental health impairment
may arise from mental illness such as
Proposed in NSW
8.7.22 As noted at [7.3.4], the concept of ‘disease of the mind’
and the legal tests that have developed to distinguish
sane and insane
automatism have reflected a need to strike ‘the right balance ... between
fairness to mentally disordered accused
persons and societal
ection against their
misconduct’.
conflict between the two rationales has created confusion and a ‘mix up
[of] the defendant-focused question of criminal
responsibility with a second and
different question: who needs to be detained for the protection of the
has focused on internal factors that are prone to recur as providing the basis
for the classification of a ‘disease of
the mind’ and has resulted
in unusual and inappropriate results. As observed by Child and Sullivan,
‘the first thing
to strike anyone studying the current defence is that it
labels as insane persons who are manifestly not insane within any natural
medical meaning.’
Individuals with such conditions as diabetes, epilepsy and sleepwalking have
been labelled insane. The test for insanity has also
created illogical results
following the internal/external cause test so that a person with diabetes may be
insane (hyperglycemia)
or not insane (hypoglycaemia). As Ashworth has
There can be no sense in classifying hypoglycaemic states as automatism and
hyperglycaemic states as insanity, when both states are
so closely associated
with such a common condition as
However, as noted at [7.3.16], in Tasmania a review of cases decided in the
Supreme Court since 2010 revealed that insanity has most
commonly been relied on
in cases where the accused had a condition that would be regarded as a mental
illness (such as bipolar disorder
and schizophrenia).
8.7.23 Possible models for an alternative approach that may resolve the
unsatisfactory and arbitrary division between internal and
external causes are
found in other jurisdictions. The solution provisionally proposed by the Law
Commission of England and Wales
to the problems created by the definition of
‘disease of the mind’ and the arbitrary distinction between medical
that arise from an internal or external cause is a defence that would
apply to ‘recognised medical conditions’. As noted,
this would apply
to medical conditions arising from a physical or mental condition and from an
internal and external cause (subject
to an accused also meeting the relevant
incapacities).
Applying this
approach would mean that issues of automatism arising from any medical condition
(concussion, sleep apnoea, diabetes,
mental illness, epilepsy) would all fall
within the scope of the special defence.
8.7.24 A different approach is found in the Western Australian
specifies that mental illness ‘does not include a
condition that results from the reaction of a healthy mind to extraordinary
stimuli’. Unlike the position in other jurisdictions, this provision does
not specify that the ‘extraordinary stimuli’
, and so it has been argued that there is greater flexibility to
deal with conditions resulting from a healthy mind’s reaction
stimuli within the automatism defence. This would mean that
cases of involuntariness arising from hyperglycaemia, epilepsy and
arteriosclerosis
would be considered as automatism rather than giving rise to a
mental illness for the purposes of the insanity
8.7.25 Another approach is found in the review of the law conducted by the
NSWLRC, which recommended the introduction of a detailed
definition of
‘mental health impairment’ and ‘cognitive impairment’.
It was recommended that mental health
impairment be defined as follows:
(a) Mental health impairment means a temporary or continuing disturbance of
thought, mood, volition, perception, or memory that impairs
emotional wellbeing,
judgment or behaviour, so as to affect functioning in daily life to a material
(b) Such mental health impairment may arise from but is not limited to the
(i) anxiety disorders
(ii) affective disorders
(iii) psychoses
(iv) substance induced mental disorders.
“Substance induced mental disorders” include ongoing mental
health impairments such as drug-induced psychoses, but do
not include substance
abuse disorders (addiction to substances) or the temporary effects of ingesting
substances.
For the purposes of this section “mental health impairment” does
not include a personality disorder.
8.7.26 The NSWLRC further recommended that cognitive impairment be defined
(a) an ongoing impairment in comprehension, reason, adaptive functioning,
judgement, learning or memory that is the result of any
damage to, dysfunction,
developmental delay, or deterioration of the brain or mind.
(b) Such cognitive impairment may arise from, but is not limited to, the
(i) intellectual disability
(ii) borderline intellectual functioning
(iii) dementias
(iv) acquired brain injury
(v) drug or alcohol related brain damage
(vi) autism spectrum disorders.
The NSWLRC argued that the definitions were appropriate for the defence of
mental illness because they: (1) capture the appropriate
people; (2) are
consistent with the definitions recommended for diversion and bail; (3) reflect
contemporary psychological and psychiatric
understandings; (4) are respectful of
people with such impairments; and (5) are tighter and more precise than the
current outdated
terminology.
The NSWLRC considered that the fit between cognitive impairments and
‘disease of the mind’ is not a good one, and that
it should be made
clear that the defence applies to people with cognitive
impairments.
8.7.27 The NSWLRC addressed concerns that such a broad test is inappropriate
as the basis for an exculpatory defence. It argued that
the broad test is
appropriate as it is only the preliminary ‘gate’ that the defendant
must pass to succeed in the defence,
and that ‘defendants must also pass
through a second, and much narrower, “gate” by demonstrating the
required nexus
between their impairment and the
Personality disorders.
As set out at [7.5.20], the NSWLRC made
recommendations to exclude personality disorders from the definition of mental
health impairment.
The Scottish Law Commission similarly recommended that the
condition of psychopathic personality disorder be excluded from the scope
The Law Commission
of England and Wales also expressed the view that an antisocial personality
disorder should not be a condition
which qualifies for a special
Most statutory
definitions of mental illness or mental impairment do not include personality
disorders (exceptions to this are found
in Commonwealth and ACT legislation).
However, there is no express exclusion in Western Australia, South Australia and
the Northern
is also uncertainty in relation to the status of personality disorders within
the scope of the insanity defence that rely on
definitions.
8.7.29 The NSWLRC summarised the arguments in favour of excluding personality
disorders from the insanity defence:
• The inclusion of personality disorders would open the floodgates as
many people who commit crimes have personality disorders.
Its view was that to
include personality disorders was to throw ‘the net too wide. In
particular, ... [it is not] appropriate
for those with anti-social personality
disorder or psychopathy to be exculpated substantially because of their criminal
behaviour.’
• It is against the weight of community opinion, the approach in the
majority of Australian jurisdictions and academic expert
• The evidence base for policy development needs to be developed as
‘the psychiatric understandings of personality disorders,
precision with which they are defined, is not sufficient to allow their
inclusion with any degree of confidence at this present
8.7.30 The NSWLRC also set out reasons in favour of the inclusion of
personality disorders as follows:
• The gate can be narrowed by the requirement that the personality
disorder is severe, and further that the ‘person must
pass through the
second, and narrower, gate and show that the personality disorder had the effect
that he or she did not know what
they were doing, or know that it was wrong, or
that he or she was unable to control their
• There is no evidence of over-reliance on the defence in jurisdictions
that allow personality disorders to be
Other reasons identified in favour of including (or at the least not
excluding) personality disorders include the view that particular
should not be singled out in legislation for exclusion, and that there should be
flexibility to consider whether a particular
condition, including a personality
disorder, qualifies for the
The Law Commission
of England and Wales also noted that it can be difficult to distinguish
personality disorders from other mental
8.7.31 Instead of expressly including or excluding personality disorder, as
indicated at [7.5.28], another approach which has been
adopted is to neither
expressly exclude or include personality disorders for the purposes of the
insanity defence. This is also the
approach in New Zealand, where the NZLC
recommended no change be made to this
Similarly in South
Australia, Victoria and the Western Australia, reviews of the relevant
legislation recommended no change to the
approach in those jurisdictions to
personality disorders.
Substance use
. Currently, s 17(1) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) recognises that intoxication may bring an accused within the insanity
rules contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16 if the accused’s
intoxication has caused a disease of the mind. This is relatively
uncontroversial. It is also uncontroversial
that a person who is temporarily
intoxicated as a result of substance use should rely on the intoxication defence
(and not the defence
of insanity), However, as the TLRI’s report on
self-defence noted, there are complexities that arise from the interaction of
the defences of intoxication, insanity and self-defence in cases where a person
experiences substance related
8.7.33 In Carroll et al’s analysis of drug-associated psychosis and
criminal responsibility, the authors have identified at
least four ways in which
drug-associated psychosis may arise:
(1) a person may experience a drug induced psychotic episode that is part of
an intoxication syndrome that resolves rapidly with
the excretion of the drug
from the body;
(2) a person may experience relatively short-lived psychotic symptomatology
due to the direct psychological effects of an ingested
substance and the
symptoms may persist for a short period (days or weeks) after the excretion of
the substance;
(3) a person’s use of drugs may be associated with the development of a
psychotic illness that then has an independent long-term
(4) a person with an established psychotic illness may engage in substance
abuse, which appears to precipitate psychotic
As noted previously by the TLRI, currently in Tasmania defendants can rely on
the insanity defence if they suffer from a disease of
the mind caused by
intoxication and this would encompass (3) and (4) where a person has an
independent psychotic
However, issues
remain as to the appropriateness of excluding an accused from the insanity
defence where his or her psychosis is
attributable to the intoxicating effects
of the substance or short-term symptoms associated with drug use, (the states of
(1) and (2)) which may give rise to ‘temporary
insanity’).
8.7.34 The weight of commentary by academics and law reform bodies has taken
the view that there should be a distinction between self-induced
independent
conditions resulting from substance use (which should be included in the
definition of mental disorder) and the temporary
effects of ingesting drugs
(which should be excluded from the definition of mental
For example, in
its review the NSWLRC recommended that ‘substance induced mental
disorders’ be included within the definition
of mental health impairment
but that this should not include substance abuse disorders (addiction to
substances) or the temporary
effects of ingesting substances. It indicated that
this approach would include within the definition of mental health impairment
ongoing mental health impairments such a long-term drug induced psychiatric
disorders like Korsakoff’s Syndrome and drug induced
It stated that
this was consistent with the common law and the exclusion of the ‘reaction
of a healthy mind to extraordinary
external stimuli, including psychoactive
substances’ from the definition of ‘disease of the
This approach
would appear to encompass (as with Tasmania) the states set out in (3) and (4)
above within the definition of mental
health impairment. However, it appears
that a temporary drug induced psychosis (being the temporary effect of ingesting
substances)
would be excluded.
8.7.35 In its consideration of the issue, the VLRC also expressed the view
that ‘self-induced conditions that result from the
temporary effects of
ingesting substances’ should be excluded from the definition of mental
impairment. However, it considered
that self-induced independent conditions that
result from ingesting substances that persist after the drugs have left the
system should be included in the
definition.
acknowledged that this distinction would create considerable practical
difficulties for mental health experts in cases where
it is difficult to
determine whether the person was suffering from the temporary effects of
substance use or a permanent
For example, as
Bourget has written, ‘it is not often possible to distinguish
substance-induced psychosis from a first-episode
psychosis in the context of a
primary mental disorder due to the very high level of
comorbidity.’
Nevertheless, her view was that the distinction is supported on sound public
policy grounds.
8.7.36 The definition of ‘mental impairment’ in the
Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) also excludes intoxication, which is defined
as ‘a temporary disorder, abnormality or impairment of the mind that
from the consumption or administration of intoxicants and will pass on
metabolism or elimination of intoxicants from the
This approach is
similar to the approach recommended in New South Wales and
Additionally, the
review by the Sentencing Advisory Council, South Australia (SASAC) concluded
that the provisions of the legislation
that set out the relationship between
intoxication and mental impairment should be retained without
31. Does the definition of ‘mental disease’ cause problems in
32. Should the terminology in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
changed to replace the terms ‘mental disease’ and ‘natural
imbecility’? If so, what terminology
should be used? Should s 16 refer to
mental health and cognitive impairments (as recommended in NSW)? Or mental
impairment (as used
in a majority of other jurisdictions)? Or what other
terminology would you recommend be used?
33. Should there be a statutory definition of the terms used?
34. If so, should this be a definition that defines mental impairment to
include all or any of the following: mental illness, intellectual
disability,
cognitive impairment, senility, dementia?
35. Should the definition of mental impairment include some or all
personality disorders or expressly exclude some or all personality
disorders, or
should the definition not specifically refer to personality disorders? If the
definition of mental impairment is to
distinguish between personality disorders,
which should be included or excluded from the scope of s 16?
36. Should there be a definition, such as is recommended in New South Wales,
that separates mental health impairment and cognitive
impairment? If so, should
the New South Wales definition be adopted?
37. Should mental illness be defined, and if so, how?
38. Should cognitive impairment be defined, and if so,
39. How should drug induced psychosis be treated within the insanity defence?
Should a distinction be made between psychosis arising
from the temporary
effects of drug use and mental health impairments resulting from drug use (as
recommended in NSW and Victoria)?
Narrow scope of incapacities
. It has been argued that some
‘persons with medical conditions whom we would regard as insane are
outside the scope of the
because of the very narrow interpretation of the relevant incapacities set out
in the insanity defence. As noted at [7.3.11],
the first limb of the insanity
defence (that the person does understand the physical character of their act) is
very rarely used
because of its narrow interpretation. The Law Commission of
England and Wales has observed that it is very rare for a person not
to know the
nature and quality of his or her actions in a physical sense (as distinct from
the moral aspects of their conduct) and
that, further, its ‘exclusive
focus on cognitive questions excludes other sorts of problems in the functioning
of minds and
brains, such as mood disorders or emotional
The limited
utility of this limb of the insanity defence has also been noted by other legal
commentators.
8.7.38 In addition, in Tasmania the tests are focussed on people’s
‘capacity’ to know or understand rather than
their actual knowledge
or understanding. This is also the position in Queensland and Western
The NSWLRC has
observed that capacity tests may create problems ‘because a person with a
mental illness may have capacity at
one time but not at another, or may have
capacity to understand some things but not
In contrast,
in other jurisdictions, the test is whether the accused knew the nature or
quality of the conduct or that the conduct
Yeo has written
The element of incapacity is narrower than lack of knowledge because it is
possible for a person to generally possess the cognitive
capacity to know the
nature of his or her act or that it was wrong, but not to have known of it at
the time when the crime was
Yeo suggests that courts have taken a pragmatic approach to the issue and
avoided applying an overly restrictive approach to ‘incapacity’,
has expressed the view that:
Ideally, however, the word “incapacity” should be avoided so as
to enable the defence to succeed so long as the accused
was dispossessed of the
relevant mental faculty at the time of the offence, even if he or she might have
possessed such a faculty
on other occasions.
However, the precise difference between ‘capacity’ and
‘knowledge’ is unclear. For example, the VLRC has written
‘there is some contention over whether a “knowledge” or
“capacity” approach is more
restrictive’.
8.7.39 As indicated, there is also uncertainty about whether an understanding
of the physical character of the act relates just to
physical character of the
act or whether it extends to ‘the capacity to know and understand the
significance of the act’
or the ‘consequences of the
Allnutt, Samuels and O’Driscoll have suggested that the broader view (for
example, that would require an understanding that
a stabbing could result in
death) is reflected in the Queensland and WA criminal codes, which refer to the
‘capacity to understand
what the accused is
8.7.40 In relation to the requirement that the person not have the capacity
to know that the act was one which he or she ought not
do or make contained in s
16(1)(a)(i), the Tasmanian approach has been to adopt the common law
interpretation.
interpretation has been widely accepted and adopted in legislation in other
As indicated,
this is the limb of the insanity defence most commonly relied upon in Tasmania
(and other jurisdictions). However,
the TLRI seeks feedback in relation to
whether this requirement causes any difficulties in practice.
40. Does the narrow interpretation of the ‘incapacity’ and/or the
physical character of the act contained in the
Criminal Code
16(1)(a)(i) cause any problems in practice?
41. Does the requirement to establish that the person was incapable of
knowing that the act was one which he or she ought not do or
make contained in
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(a)(ii) cause any problems in
42. Do you consider that there should be any change made to the qualifying
conditions for the defence of insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(a)?
Irresistible impulse
. Concerns have also been raised in
relation to the ‘irresistible impulse’ limb of the insanity defence,
as contained
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(b). This has been
described as the ‘most controversial’ aspect of the insanity defence
it is difficult to determine objectively whether or not the action is the
consequence of “an irresistible impulse or an impulse
not resisted”,
that is, whether or not the person was genuinely incapable of controlling the
behaviour or whether or not he
or she chose not to inhibit the
In addition to the difficulty of determining whether an accused was unable or
unwilling to resist the impulse, Bronitt and McSherry
criticise the
‘volitional’ limb as being contradictory to modern psychology as it
requires the separation of cognition
and action: it ‘assume[s] that a
person can know what he or she is doing is wrong, yet be unable to control his
or her actions’.
is more forcefully stated by Kenny, who asserts that ‘the notion of
irresistible impulse is an incoherent piece of
8.7.42 The majority of Australian jurisdictions have a volitional element in
the insanity defence.
However, it does not exist in Victoria and New South Wales. This issue has also
been subject to review, and as noted by the SASAC,
‘of the six reviews
which have recently addressed this issue, three recommended incorporating a
volitional element ... (NSW,
WA and England) and three opposed its adoption
(Victoria, New Zealand and
Scotland)’.
8.7.43 Reasons for the inclusion of a volitional element are that:
• It exists in most other jurisdictions.
• Even if it may be difficult to differentiate, there are people who
are genuinely unable to control behaviour and as a matter
of principle, such
people should be
exculpated.
8.7.44 Reasons for rejecting a volitional element are that:
• It is difficult to differentiate between irresistible impulses and
non-resisted impulses.
• The other limbs of the insanity defence are sufficient to accommodate
cases where a defendant was unable to control his or
her conduct, and so a
volitional element is
unnecessary.
43. Do you consider that the volitional test for insanity contained in the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(b) should be retained?
44. Do you consider that any amendment should be made to the
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(b)?
Further consideration of the practical difficulties with the use of
the insanity defence
. Despite well-established theoretical concerns, it is
less clear to what extent these matters give rise to difficulties in practice.
Accordingly, the TLRI is seeking stakeholder feedback on this issue.
8.7.46 In England and Wales, consultations with stakeholders reported that
the ‘insanity and automatism defences are so outmoded,
inappropriate and
complicated that they are seen as irrelevant. Practitioners work round
Consequently,
despite the ‘significant problems with the law when examined from a
theoretical perspective’, there were
few practical problems actually
reported with the defence given the approach taken by legal and medical
practitioners.
Further, as
with Tasmania, insanity is rarely pleaded, and research in other jurisdictions
suggests that this is because:
practitioners take a pragmatic approach, and achieve the
“correct” outcome, in the view of the practitioner and/or the
accused, without having to consider the insanity defence: defendants often
prefer the certainty of a prison term to the uncertainty
of a release date from
Similarly, in New South Wales, stakeholders reported that ‘broadly
speaking, the defence of mental illness works in practice
without any
significant difficulty and that the right results are
8.7.47 The TLRI has undertaken a review of insanity cases decided in the
Supreme Court. This has allowed the TLRI to consider the
insanity has been successful. It does not provide a picture of how the defence
is operating in the Magistrates
Court or how often the insanity defence is
considered (and rejected) by practitioners representing clients and how often it
is unsuccessfully
relied upon at
As discussed in Part
3, the available information suggests that only a small number of individuals
with mental health or cognitive
impairments are able to rely on the insanity
defence. The TLRI welcomes feedback on stakeholders’ views on why this is
case, and, in particular, whether it is attributable to the problems with
45. Do you have an explanation as to why successful reliance on the defence
of insanity is so low?
46. Do you consider that there are practical difficulties with the current
operation of the insanity defence contained in the
Criminal Code
47. Does the current test work well in practice or does it wrongly include or
exclude defendants from the scope of the defence?
48. Do medical practitioners experience cases where a person’s mental
state at the time of the offence was such that their opinion
was that he or she
ought not to have been held criminally responsible, but the mental condition did
not meet the tests contained
in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
49. Does the insanity test contained in s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) create difficulties for experts in writing reports and/or in giving
evidence at trial?
Section 16(3): The interrelationship
between insanity and self-defence
8.7.48 Another area of concern in relation to the law of insanity in Tasmania
is the role of s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and the
interrelationship of the insanity and self-defence. The law of self-defence in s
Criminal Code
(Tas) provides that a person is justified in
using such force in defence of him or herself or another person as is reasonable
circumstances as the defendant believes them to be. The test for
self-defence requires that: (1) the defendant believes that he or
she was acting
in self-defence; and (2) the force used by the defendant was reasonable in the
circumstances that the defendant believed
to exist. In cases where the
accused’s perception of the need to use defensive force corresponds with
the actual need to do
so, the application of the law of self-defence is
unproblematic. However, difficulties arise when there is a difference between
actual circumstances and the circumstances as the accused mistakenly
believed them to be. And, in the context of this Issues Paper,
key issues are:
(1) whether an accused can rely on a mistaken belief arising from a delusion
caused by a mental illness for the purposes
of self-defence; and (2) the role of
s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
8.7.49 These issues are a focus of the Terms of Reference for this paper and,
as discussed at [1.1.1], were the subject of a previous
law reform report
prepared by the TLRI. Accordingly, in this section, the TLRI sets out its
previous views and seeks stakeholder
revisit these recommendations.
8.7.50 In its report
Review of the Law Relating to Self-defence
TLRI observed that considerable uncertainty remains in relation to the meaning
and consequences of s 16(3).
In particular, the TLRI observed that it was unclear:
Whether there are any circumstances where the jury might have regard
to evidence of a mental disease and its effects when considering
s 46 of the
Criminal Code
in circumstances where the defence of insanity has been
, the Court of Criminal Appeal left unresolved the
question whether ‘evidence concerning a mental disease and its effects may
ever be taken into account by a jury when considering s 46 in circumstances
where the defence of insanity has been
To what extent does the High Court decision in
Hawkins v the
undermine the
authority of the Court of Criminal Appeal decision in
uncertainty arises because the High Court in
Hawkins v the Queen
a different approach to that of Tasmanian Court of Criminal Appeal in
h in relation to the relevance of expert opinion evidence of mental
illness in circumstances where the jury has rejected the defence
of insanity. In
, the defence wished to use evidence about
the accused’s mental impairment caused by a mental illness to deny the
unlawfulness
of the accused’s conduct. However, different grounds were
advanced for denying the unlawfulness of the accused’s conduct
, the defence sought to deny that the act was unlawful on
the basis that the accused was acting in self-defence. In
defence sought to deny the specific intention for the offence. In both cases,
the issue for the court to decide was whether
the expert opinion evidence of
mental impairment could be used for a dual purpose — first, in relation to
the insanity defence,
and then, if insanity was rejected, as the basis for a
claim of self-defence (
) or to deny the specific intent of the
, the Court of Criminal Appeal ruled
that, in the circumstances of that case, the evidence could not be used for a
dual purpose. In
contrast, in
, in the context of a denial of
specific intent, the High Court said that the expert evidence could be used for
the dual purpose sought.
is still binding authority in
Tasmania in relation to the interaction of insanity and self-defence, it remains
to be seen how, in
light of the approach of the High Court in
the issue might be approached if the Court of Criminal Appeal reconsidered the
Is s 16(3) limited to insane delusions or does it apply to delusions
more generally?
On the basis that s 16(3) does not refer to insane
delusions, some commentators have suggested that ‘specific delusions may
be exempt from criminal responsibility even though they are not caused by mental
Read in this
way, s 16(3) could apply to a delusion arising from drug-induced psychosis
rather than from an underlying mental disease.
However, the opposing view is
that s 16(3) should be read as applying only to delusions that are produced by a
mental disease. This
interpretation is supported by the location of s 16(3)
within the provision that sets out the insanity defence. This issue is
unresolved.
If an accused is able to rely on a sane delusion under s 16(3) as a
basis for raising self-defence, is the accused entitled to a complete
qualified acquittal?
In Tasmania, reliance on s 16(3) has more commonly been
understood to provide the accused with a basis for raising self-defence under
46, and if the prosecution cannot prove beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused’s use of force was excessive, the accused
would receive a complete
position is that s 46 works within s 16 to provide the accused with an
additional way of proving insanity and obtaining
a qualified acquittal; that is,
not guilty by reason of
8.7.51 Accordingly, the TLRI expressed the view that there is a need to
clarify the interaction of the law of self-defence and
8.7.52 The Terms of Reference for this current review ask the TLRI provide
advice as to whether evidence of insane delusions arising
from mental illness
should form the basis for self-defence. This has previously been addressed by
the TLRI, and it was recommended
Criminal Code
(Tas) be amended to provide that if a person does an
act or makes an omission as a result of a delusion caused by a mental disease,
the delusion can only be used as a defence under s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support a defence of self-defence under s
Criminal Code
8.7.53 This recommendation reflects the TLRI’s view that to allow all
evidence of mental illness to be relevant to self-defence
is contrary to
community expectations and does not reflect the respective purposes of the
insanity defence and the defence of self-defence.
While, as a matter of policy,
it may be accepted that an accused should be able to rely on sane though
unreasonable mistakes for
the purposes of self-defence, it does not follow that
an accused should similarly be entitled to rely on insane delusions. As
by Baker, a belief arising from a delusion is not a
Further, in the case of a (sane) mistake the jury can apply their common sense
and may refuse to accept a patently absurd and unreasonable
mistake as one that
is not genuinely held. This ‘reality testing’ is unlikely to be
possible for an insane delusion.
This means that the prosecution will only be
able to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was not acting in
self-defence
by proving either that the delusion was not one of
immediate/imminent harm
that the force used was excessive in the circumstances as the accused believed
them to be. But exactly how would the prosecution
be able to do this? It would
require them to engage with the insane delusion as though it had some basis in
reality. This gives rise
to the possibility of trials in which the
‘facts’ to be established would consist entirely of the content of
Similarly, asking jurors to assess the reasonableness of an accused’s
response to an insane delusion obliges them to engage
in fantastical reasoning.
This begs the question, just how can a jury realistically or rationally assess
the reasonableness of a
response generated by an insane
Additionally, to
permit complete acquittals in cases of insane delusions does not enable
appropriate treatment to be provided to
deluded defendants or take into account
the need for community
protection.
8.7.54 Illustrative cases where a defendant relied on insanity but where the
nature of the delusion meant that the defendant believed
that he was acting in
self-defence include:
• A case where the accused suffered from severe schizophrenia and was
described by a forensic psychologist as ‘seriously
unwell’. The
accused’s condition caused acute psychotic symptoms including auditory and
visual hallucinations and persecutory
and referential delusions. The accused
believed that the police officers were trying to kill them.
• A case where the accused suffered from schizophrenia, with the most
prominent symptoms being a belief that family members
were being impersonated,
delusions and other abnormal beliefs. The accused repeatedly hit and injured
their family member, believing
that the person was impersonating their family
member (rather than actually being the family member). The accused believed the
‘impersonator’
was dangerous as the accused believed the
‘impersonator’ had killed the family member.
• A case where the accused threatened police officers because, due to a
psychotic illness, the accused believed that the police
were a source of
profound danger.
8.7.55 In addition, in its previous report, the TLRI considered the repeal of
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3), and recommended that it should be
8.7.56 This is the approach adopted in the
Criminal Code
7.3(7) and the
Criminal Code
(ACT) s 29(2). The
Criminal Code
(ACT) s 29 provides:
(2) If the trier of fact is satisfied that a person carried out conduct
because of a delusion caused by a mental impairment, the delusion
itself cannot
be relied on as a defence, but the person may rely on the mental impairment to
deny criminal responsibility.
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 7.3(7) provides that:
If the tribunal of fact is satisfied that a person carried out conduct as a
result of a delusion caused by a mental impairment, the
delusion cannot
otherwise be relied on as a defence.
These provisions reflect the view of the Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee (MCCOC) that ‘delusions are symptoms of underlying
pathology and
that such defendants should be confined to the mental impairment
approach precludes reliance on a delusion for self-defence, it does not prevent
a person who suffers from an insane delusion
from relying on self-defence in
circumstances where the person is actually under threat (rather than relying
solely on an imagined
threat that is a product of
psychosis).
This approach was
also supported by the Director of Public Prosecutions, who expressed the view
An accused should not be allowed to rely on evidence of a delusion caused by
mental impairment as a basis for self-defence. Evidence
of delusions caused by
mental impairment should be dealt with by a consideration of insanity under s 16
Criminal Code.
It is contrary to community expectations that an
accused person could be acquitted based on a deluded belief or view of the
The community would expect that such a person would be caught by the
insanity provisions and in that way the community would be protected
risk that they might behave in a similar way in the future due to ongoing
8.7.57 Further, this model accords with the approach of the Court of Criminal
, where it was held that expert evidence of an insane
delusion was not generally admissible in relation to the defence of self-defence
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 46. In the circumstances, evidence of the
accused’s delusions was confined to the insanity defence contained in s 16
Criminal Code
8.7.58 This model also prevents people who are suffering psychotic illnesses
from relying on their deluded beliefs to obtain a complete
acquittal. This
approach is supported on policy grounds that the public requires protection from
future potential harms.
can also be said to accord with community sentiments that a person who inflicts
violence as a result of a deluded belief of danger
‘should be confined to
a place of safety but not be
The dispositional options available following a finding of not guilty by reason
of insanity means that the court can appropriately
respond to treatment needs of
the individual and the need for community protection.
8.7.59 In addition, the TLRI’s view was that repealing s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) had the advantage of promoting clarity and the
modernisation of the law through the removal of a redundant provision. The scope
and operation this provision has remained obscure with some commentators, courts
and law reform bodies expressing the view that it
is redundant and out of step
with modern
psychiatry.
In Canada, these concerns led to the repeal in 1991 of the equivalent provision
in the Canadian
The utility of s
16(3) is particularly questionable in circumstances where a person has a deluded
belief in the need for self-defence
arising from a mental illness. It is
difficult to envisage a scenario where such a case would not fall within s
16(1)(ii) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas). This section has been interpreted
to mean that the defendant did not know that what they were doing was wrong
according to
the ‘everyday standards of reasonable
8.7.60 The possibility that the jury might reject the defence of insanity yet
consider it possible that the accused acted in self-defence
when under the
influence of an insane delusion is problematic. As noted in the Canadian
decision of
An accused will be able to bring his claim within the scope of the second
branch of the test set out in s 16(2) [the equivalent of
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(1)(ii)] if he proves that he was incapable of knowing that his
conduct was morally wrong in the particular circumstances,
for example, if he
believes that the act was necessary to protect his life. If he is not able to
establish this fact, it must be
concluded that he either knew or was capable of
knowing that the act was wrong in the circumstances. He cannot then possibly
in claiming that the act would have been justified or excused had the
perceived facts been
A similar view was expressed by Simester et al, who observed that the rule on
delusions in
M’Naghten’s
does not appear to add anything to the substance of the Rules; the
illustrations provided by the judges who formulated the Rules indicate
effect of the delusion must be to prevent D knowing the nature and quality of
his actions or from knowing that his actions
were wrong. The superfluity of this
aspect of the
Rules is borne out by the lack of case law
arising thereunder.
If the jury accepts the expert opinion evidence concerning the
accused’s delusional belief in the need to use self-defence,
qualified acquittal on the grounds of insanity is available on the basis that
the accused did not know that the act was wrong.
On the other hand, if the jury
rejects the defence of insanity, it seems difficult (if not impossible) to argue
that the accused
can rely on evidence of his or her delusion for the purposes of
self-defence on the basis that he or she is ‘criminally responsible
the act or omission to the same extent as if the fact which ... [he or she was]
induced by such delusion to believe to exist
There is no
evidentiary foundation to support the contention that the accused had a genuine
belief in the need to act in self-defence.
8.7.61 However, the TLRI observed that contrary views had been expressed in
relation to the repeal of s 16(3). Some commentators have
suggested that
arguments that s 16(3) is an anachronism fail to take account of the difference
between the medical and legal definitions
of insanity and the role of the jury
in applying the insanity
Further, the TLRI
noted that retaining s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) acknowledges the
possibility that there may be cases where juries are able to take evidence
concerning a mental disease and
its effects into account when applying s 46 of
Criminal Code
(Tas) in circumstances where the other limbs of the
defence of insanity have been rejected. The Court of Criminal Appeal in
unanswered the question whether there are any circumstances where this may be
possible. Accordingly, an alternative model considered
by the TLRI is to retain
s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) but to specify that delusions would
result in a qualified acquittal (and not a complete acquittal via s 46). This is
the approach
recommended by the LRCWA.
8.7.62 This model is supported on the basis that it permits evidence of
delusions to be relied on for the purposes of self-defence,
but provides that,
in these circumstances, only a qualified acquittal is possible (that is, not
guilty on the grounds of insanity).
This would mean that a person who held a
deluded belief in the need for self-defence but did not meet the test for
insanity contained
Criminal Code
(Tas) ss 16(1) and (2) could rely
on s 16(3) if his or her response was reasonable in the circumstances as they
believed them to be.
The onus of proof would be on the defendant (as with the
other provisions of the insanity defence) to establish this on the balance
probabilities. However, if the defendant discharged the onus of proof in this
regard, the result would be a qualified acquittal
8.7.63 This approach reflects the original
rule on delusions
and arguably reflects the intended operation of the
Criminal Code
It also reflects the
approach of the LRCWA which recommended that the equivalent Western Australian
provision be retained and that
it be made clear that successful reliance on the
provision would result in a special verdict of not guilty by reason of mental
rather than a complete
supported this approach on the basis that it was in the public interest and that
it allowed for the appropriate treatment
of a deluded
It ensures that a
person with a deluded belief in the need for self-defence receives a qualified
acquittal. It can be argued that
this reflects community expectations.
8.7.64 Accordingly, this model would retain s 16(3). This model and the model
previously recommended by the TLRI which would repeal
s 16(3)) are similar in
that they achieve the same end — limiting the use of evidence of delusions
arising from a mental illness
to the insanity defence. However, the difference
rests on the desirability of retaining s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
8.7.65 An alternative model (and one previously rejected by the TLRI) would
be to allow evidence of delusions arising from mental
illness to form the basis
for self-defence with the result that a successful argument of self-defence
results in a complete acquittal.
This model would make no distinction between
mistakes and delusional beliefs arising from mental illness. This approach may
concerns arising about the unequal treatment and discrimination for
individuals with disabilities under the
However, given
that a person acquitted by reason of self-defence is free to leave and there is
no provision for any criminal disposition
to be imposed under the provisions of
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), it does raise
questions about whether community safety is adequately protected. This depends
on the options available under
the civil process contained in the
Health Act 2013
(Tas). This issue was also addressed at [7.5.6] and
[8.3.19]–[8.3.20].
50. Can you outline any circumstances where an accused would not be able to
rely on insanity within
but would be able to rely on insanity within
51. Do you agree with the view of the TLRI that s 16(3) of the
should be repealed and a provision inserted in the
provide that if a person does an act or makes an omission as a result of a
delusion caused by a mental disease, the delusion can
only be used as a defence
under s 16 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) and cannot be relied on to support
a defence of self-defence under s 46 of the
Criminal Code
possible model would be the legislation in the ACT or the Commonwealth Act).
52. Alternatively, do you consider that s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
should be retained, and an amendment made to the
to provide that
successful reliance on s 16(3) would result in a special verdict of not guilty
by reason of insanity rather than a
complete acquittal? (A possible model for
the legislation would be the amendment proposed by the Western Australian Law
Reform Commission).
53. Alternatively, do you consider that evidence of
delusions arising from mental illness should be able to be relied on for the
of the self-defence in s 46 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) with the
result being that a successful argument of self-defence receives a complete
acquittal? If so, what (if any) protections
need to be put in place in the case
of an accused who is acquitted on the basis of self-defence arising from a
deluded belief attributable
to a mental illness?
Procedural aspects of the
Burden of proof
8.7.66 Concerns have been raised in relation to the burden of proof that is
cast on the defendant to prove the insanity defence on
the balance of
probabilities. This is contrary to the general rule of criminal law that the
legal burden of proof is on the prosecution.
It is also different from other
defences where an accused raises the defence of mistake or self-defence or seeks
to rely on evidence
of automatism or intoxication to deny criminal
responsibility. In relation to these matters, the accused has an evidentiary
8.7.67 Arguments in favour of placing the burden of proof on the defendant
are based on the view that if the burden were placed on
the prosecution,
‘it would be impossible for the prosecution to disprove an assertion of
insanity, resulting in unmeritorious
acquittals’.
Bronitt and McSherry write that the ‘modern rationale ... lies in the fear
that if an accused only has to bear an
evidentiary burden in relation to mental
impairment, more individuals would be found not criminally responsible than
should be the
However, they observe that this argument is difficult to support in relation to
insanity when it does not apply for other defences,
given that ‘[t]here
appears little support for the proposition that it may be easier to fake a claim
of mental impairment’
than these other
8.7.68 Other law reform reviews, including those conducted by the Scottish
Law Commission and the Law Reform Commission of Western
Australia, did not
recommend a change to the current burden of proof that is placed on the
In contrast, in
relation to its new defence of ‘not criminally responsible by reason of a
recognised medical condition’,
the Law Commission of England and Wales
recommended that there should be an evidential burden only on the defendant
(discharged by
the provision of supporting expert evidence) but that the
prosecution should bear the burden of disproving the defence once it has
54 Should the
Criminal Code
(Tas) be amended to provide that the
burden of proof for the insanity defence rests on the prosecution and that the
defendant bears
an evidential burden only in relation to this defence?
Raising the defence of insanity
8.7.69 As indicated at [7.3], the prosecution cannot raise the defence of
insanity unless the defendant has put his or her state of
mind in issue. In
contrast, in other Australian jurisdictions, mental impairment may be raised by
the prosecution, the defence and/or
Under the Commonwealth
Criminal Code
and legislation in the Australian Capital Territory, the
Northern Territory, South Australia and Victoria, the prosecution may raise
Similarly, the
NSWLRC recommended that the defence of mental illness should be able to be
raised by the court or the prosecution
(with the permission of the court) if it
is in the interests of
It is also noted
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
‘requires an explanation as to the availability of the defence to be put
to the jury if the question of mental illness
“is raised”,
regardless of whether it is embraced as a defence by the accused at
8.7.70 The ability for the prosecution to raise the defence of insanity
(absent the accused putting the state of mind in issue) is
supported on the
basis that the public interests of both fairness and community safety are better
served when a person who has committed
a serious offence by reason of a
cognitive or mental health impairment is detained as a forensic patient to allow
the person to receive
recognised in
by Deane and Dawson JJ, who observed that
‘nowadays it is often in the interests of the prosecution (or, at all
events, the
community) to raise the question of insanity, rather than in the
interests of the
considered that there were very few cases where the absence of a prosecution
power to raise the defence of mental impairment
posed a difficulty in
However, it
considered that the prosecution should have such a power to ensure that the
public interest was served in the appropriate
8.7.71 The contrary view is that to allow the prosecution to raise the
insanity defence is contrary to fundamental rights of the defendant
indeterminate consequences that follow from a finding of not guilty by reason of
inconsistent with ‘the interests of the defendant in retaining control of
his or her defence’.
addition, the NZLC commented on the significant stigma that attaches to the
insanity defence.
reasons, the NZLC recommended that the Crown should only be able to adduce
evidence of insanity (with the leave of the
court) where the defence has put his
or her mental capacity for criminal intent in issue without raising the insanity
8.7.72 Accordingly, a fundamental issue in Tasmania is whether the Crown
should be able to raise the defence of insanity contrary
to the wishes of the
55. Should the prosecution have the power to raise the defence of insanity
against the wishes of the defendant?
56. Should the leave of the court be required for the prosecution to do
A ‘consent defence’
8.7.73 Unlike the criminal law generally, where the prosecution can accept a
plea by a defendant, currently in Tasmania it is not
possible for the defendant
to enter a plea of not guilty by reason of insanity. In the Supreme Court a
verdict of not guilty by reason
of insanity must be delivered by a jury, and in
the Magistrates Court it must be given by a magistrate. In the letter to the
setting out the Terms of Reference, the then Attorney-General indicated
that the DPP had requested that consideration be given to
reforming the law in
relation to the criminal procedure relating to the defence of insanity and to
legislating to remove the necessity
for a jury to determine the question of
insanity in certain circumstances. Similarly, the NSWLRC recommended that if the
prosecution
and defence agree that evidence in a case establishes the defence of
mental health or cognitive impairment, then the court must enter
a verdict of
not criminally responsible by reason of mental health or cognitive impairment if
satisfied that the defence is established
This has been
described as a defence of mental illness by
Similarly, the Scottish Law Commission and the Law Commission of England and
Wales recommended that there should be provision for
the verdict of insanity by
The absence of a
‘consent defence’ in Tasmania contrasts with the position in
Victoria, Western Australia, South Australia,
the Australian Capital Territory
and the Northern Territory, as well as in New
8.7.74 Reasons in favour of allowing a consent defence are that:
• It ‘avoid[s] farcical trials where insanity is not in
It avoids the
jury process becoming ‘artificial’ or a
‘formality’.
may result in a loss of faith in the jury system as the jury is essentially
confirming the view of the defence and
prosecution.
• It saves court time and consequently
• It reduces stress on the defendant (who may still be ill at the time
of the trial) and witnesses including victims and family
members’ in cases
where this is the obvious
• In the case of an accused who is unfit to stand trial in Tasmania, it
is possible to determine this issue by consent but it
is not possible to resolve
the question of criminal responsibility by consent.
8.7.75 The VLRC noted that where the prosecution and defence agree that the
evidence establishes the defence of mental impairment,
‘it is unlikely
that the jury will arrive at a different
conclusion.’
8.7.76 The importance of the role of the jury in representing the community
in determining criminal responsibility has been identified
as the predominant
reason provided for not allowing a consent defence of
On this basis, the
VLRC changed its view from prior recommendations it had made and recommended
that the law be changed to require
a jury to determine criminal responsibility
in all criminal trials in higher courts under the
The VLRC observed that
the jury protects the interests of the community by ensuring the sound
administration of justice, and that
this is particularly important in these
that has profound
and lasting consequences for the accused, victims and the
community’.
for public examination of the issues ‘in a way that is comprehensible to
the accused, victims and the community’.
This has an educative function
for the public.
protects the accused by requiring their criminal responsibility to be determined
by independent members of the community.
In addition, ‘the determination
of criminal responsibility by a jury provides a greater level of acknowledgement
and their families of the harm that they have
experienced’.
8.7.77 Other reasons in favour of retaining the jury are that the trial
process operates as a check and a safeguard not just by the
involvement of the
community but also in that the scrutiny inherent in the trial process may
promote caution in the formulation of
opinion by expert witnesses. Further,
expert opinion is only as good as the information that is provided to the expert
as the basis
for the opinions expressed, and the factual matrix that may emerge
at trial may differ from the facts that appear in the Crown papers.
that experts may refine their opinions contained in the pre-trial reports to
reflect the change in facts that emerge at
trial. This caution and refinement
may be lost if the trial process is replaced by a ‘defence consent’
8.7.78 On the other hand, it is noted that the Director of Public
Prosecutions routinely makes decisions about criminal responsibility.
function of the DPP is to make decisions about whether or not to institute
proceedings and this involves decisions in relation
to the charges laid (for
example, whether an accused is charged with attempted murder or causing grievous
bodily harm), the acceptance
of pleas of guilty to particular charges and/or in
relation to decisions not to proceed with a matter (such as where the
prosecution
accepts that a defence of self-defence is made out on the
In making these
decisions, fairness is the overarching principle and it may be questioned as to
why decisions in relation to acceptance
of the insanity defence should be
treated any differently.
57. Should there be legislative change to allow the prosecution and defence
to agree that a defendant is not guilty by reason of insanity?
58. If so, are there any protections in the interests of the defendant that
need to be put in place?
Disposition: Forensic and
Treatment Orders
Introduction
10.1.1 This Part examines the orders that can be made under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) following a finding that an
individual is not guilty by reason of insanity (either at a trial or a special
hearing) or if finding
cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty of an
offence (at a special hearing).
10.1.2 The Terms of Reference ask the TLRI to address the following matters
relevant to disposition:
• if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether defendants relying on insane delusions
should be liable to
supervision under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
• if insane delusions arising from mental illness form the basis of
self-defence, whether the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) requires amendment in relation to treatment options for such
defendants.
The Terms of Reference also require the TLRI to consider the just and
effective operation of the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), in particular the operation of Part 4 of the Act, including in relation
to the discharge and review of forensic and treatment
orders and whether there
is a need for ‘step down’ options.
Consequences of findings under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Orders available under the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
10.2.1 Under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
there are five orders that a court can make if a defendant is found not guilty
of the offence on the ground of insanity or
if a finding cannot be made that the
defendant is not guilty. These are to impose:
(a) a restriction order;
(b) release the defendant and make a supervision order;
(c) a treatment order;
(d) a conditional release order; or
(f) an unconditional release
10.2.2 As noted at [2.3.2], under the
Sentencing Act 1997
a court may also impose a restriction, supervision or treatment order on a
person found guilty, if the court is satisfied that the
person appears to be
suffering from a mental illness that requires
10.2.3 In any case, only the Supreme Court is able to make a restriction
order or a supervision order, and so, if a magistrate considers
that either of
these orders are appropriate, the matter must be referred to the Supreme
Restriction and
supervision orders are classified as forensic
Table 8.1: Explanation of orders available under
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
Details of orders
Time limit for order
Consequences of breach
Restriction order
This is an order requiring the person to be admitted to and detained in a
secure mental health unit until the order is discharged
by the Supreme
The Wilfred Lopes
Centre is designated secure mental health facility in Tasmania. It is a 35 bed
facility that is situated near Risdon
Prison. It is a health owned facility
managed by the Department of Health and Human
No limit required but subject to annual review by Mental Health Tribunal
and the option to apply to Supreme Court for discharge of
the order after 2
Supervision order
This is an order releasing the person under the supervision of the Chief
Forensic Psychiatrist and any such conditions as the court
appropriate.
Conditions may
include requiring the person to:
• Take medication
• Submit to specified mental treatment
• Comply with direction given by the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist
around supervision and
No limit required but subject to annual review by the Mental Health
Tribunal and the option to apply to the Supreme Court for variation
revocation of the supervision
May be apprehended if, a prescribed person believes on reasonable grounds
if there is a breach or a likely breach of the supervision
order or a serious
deterioration of the person’s mental health; and as a result, there is
risk that person will harm themselves
Person must be taken to a secure mental health unit or an approved
The person can be detained for:
(a) A period not exceeding 24 hours; and
(b) If the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist authorises it, for one further
period not exceeding 72 hours; and
(c) If the Mental Health Tribunal authorises it, for one or more further
periods each of a length to be determined by that
A person detained can also be detained on authorisation of a member of the
MHT until the determination of an application to the MHT
for further detention
((c) above).
A person can also be detained until the Supreme Court has made a
determination if an application has been made to vary or revoke the
supervision
Treatment order
A treatment order has the same meaning as a treatment order made under the
Mental Health Act 2013
This allows a person to be given treatment without the person’s
informed consent.
It may require a person to be given specified treatment, require a person
to be treated at a particular place, require a person to
be admitted to and
detained an approved
Up to six months or until the order is discharged but can be renewed by the
Mental Health Tribunal.
May be involuntarily admitted to, and detained in, an approved facility if
reasonable steps have been taken to obtain the person’s
compliance and if
the person’s treating medical practitioner is satisfied that the person
has failed to comply despite the
reasonable steps that have been taken to obtain
the person’s compliance; and the failure to comply has seriously harmed,
is likely to seriously harm, the person’s health or safety or the
safety of others, and the person’s admission and detention
is necessary to
address the harm to the person’s health or safety or the safety of
The treating medical practitioner can make an application to the MHT to
vary the treatment
There are also powers to admit a person to prevent possible harm (even if
the person has complied) if the treatment order provides
for a combination of
treatment setting and for the admission and re-admission of the patient to those
If a person is admitted due to failure to comply, the person can be
detained either under the original treatment order until the order
is varied so
as to provide for a different treatment setting or if person’s treatment
order authorises admission to and if
necessary, detention in an approved
hospital, until the order ceases to have
Conditional release
Release on such conditions that the court considers appropriate.
There is no limit to the time period allowed for the conditions other than
those set out in the court
If a person breaches a condition of release, an application may be made to
the court. The court may confirm the conditions as originally
imposed; impose
new conditions or may revoke the order and deal with the person for the offence
in respect of which the order was
This does not involve the MHT.
Unconditional release
Release without conditions
10.2.4 As shown in Table 8.1, other than a restriction order, which
authorises detention in a secure mental health facility, there
are several means
by which a court is able to direct a person to take part in treatment in the
community. This may include seeing
medical practitioners, the requirement to
take medications, to attend treatment centres and to comply with residential
directions.
However, there are key differences in the orders:
• A supervision order remains in force until discharged by the Supreme
Court and the person is under the supervision and direction
of the Chief
Forensic Psychiatrist. This person is a forensic patient. On breach of the
order, the person can be detained in a SMHU.
While the decision in
suggests that
this detention is only intended to be for a relatively short time, the
legislation allows the MHT to authorise extended
periods of detention in a SMHU
for people on a supervision order. Application can also be made to the Supreme
Court to vary or discharge
the order. The court can then discharge the
supervision order and impose a restriction order or can vary or confirm the
supervision
• The term of a treatment order is set by legislation and it remains in
force for six months. However, it can be renewed by
the MHT. A treatment order
is not a forensic order. If a person does not comply with the order, there are
provisions for the person
to be detained in an approved hospital under the
provisions of the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas). A treatment order made
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
administered under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas). This process does
not involve the Supreme Court. However, there is power for a treatment order to
be renewed if this is required.
• A conditional release order remains in force for the period specified
in the order. If a person does not comply with the order,
there is power for the
Supreme Court to confirm the order, impose new orders or revoke the order and
impose another order on the
This process does not
involve the MHT and the conditional release order does not make a person subject
Mental Health Act 2013
Use of orders under the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
10.2.5 Table 8.2 sets out the use of these orders for individuals found not
guilty by reason of insanity and/or unfit to stand trial
and where a finding
cannot be made that the defendant is not guilty in the Supreme Court during the
period 2005–June 2018.
Table 8.2: Dispositions made in the Supreme Court 2005–June 2018
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) for individuals
found not guilty by reason of insanity and/or unfit to stand trial and where a
finding cannot be made that the
defendant is not guilty.
No of cases
Restriction
Supervision
Conditional release
Unconditional release
10.2.6 Table 8.3 sets out the number of individuals who have been supervised
by the Mental Health Tribunal in relation to a forensic
order during the period
2005–June 2018. This includes people who were found not guilty by reason
of insanity and/or not guilty
following a special hearing, as well as those who
had a restriction or supervision order imposed following a finding of guilt, in
addition to a sentence of imprisonment.
Table 8.3: Individuals supervised by the Mental Health Tribunal in
relation to forensic orders during the period 2005–June 2018
No of cases
Restriction
Supervision
10.2.7 In the Magistrates Court, there were 12 people identified who were
found unfit to stand trial and where a finding could not
be made that the
defendant was not guilty. Order information was recorded for nine of those
matters. In those cases, the following
orders were imposed under
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
• six were released on condition;
• three were released unconditionally.
The conditions imposed often referred to attendance at medical appointments
and compliance with medical advice for example, ‘attend
appointments with
your [general practitioner/ Forensic Mental Health Services/Community Mental
Health Services/Forensic Disability
Service]’, ‘comply with your
[Mental Health Plan/National Disability Insurance Scheme approved support
‘take medications as prescribed’, and to abstain from
using drugs and alcohol.
10.2.8 Of the nine defendants found not guilty by reason of insanity, order
information was recorded for eight matters with the following
orders imposed
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
• one treatment order;
• six conditional release orders;
• one referral to the Supreme Court.
Again, the conditions imposed were similar to those imposed for defendants
where a finding cannot be made that the defendant was not
guilty following a
special hearing (following a finding of unfitness).
Process for making orders
10.2.9 In making orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(1), the court is directed by
where appropriate, the principle that restrictions on the defendant’s
freedom and personal autonomy should be kept
to the minimum consistent with the
safety of the community.
exercising its powers under
, the court is also directed by
have regard to the following:
• the nature of the defendant’s mental impairment or other
condition or disability;
• whether the defendant is, or would, if released, be likely to
endanger another person or other persons generally;
• whether there are adequate resources available for the treatment and
support of the defendant in the community;
• whether the defendant is likely to comply with the conditions of a
supervision order; and
• other matters that the court thinks
For the purposes of assisting a court to determine proceedings under
provides that the Attorney-General must provide the court with a report
stating, so far as reasonably ascertainable, the views of
the next of kin of the
defendant and the victims, if any, of the defendant’s
The court must not
release a defendant under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(1) unless it has considered an expert report on the
condition of the defendant and the possible effects of the proposed action on
the behaviour of the defendant. The court also must have considered the report
of the attitudes of victims, if any, and next of kin,
and be satisfied that the
defendant’s next of kin and victims have been given reasonable notice of
the proceedings.
10.2.10 A review of cases indicates that factors such as the nature of the
mental illness or intellectual disability, including its
amenability to
treatment, an individual’s compliance with treatment and insight into
their condition, the person’s previous
history of offending and/or
violence are relevant to the exercise of the court’s discretion. In cases
where restriction orders
were imposed, individuals typically had chronic mental
illnesses that were difficult to treat and had a lack of insight into their
condition and a history of non-compliance with treatment. In contrast,
supervision orders, treatment orders and conditional release
orders were
typically imposed where the person had an awareness of their condition and no
history of offending or
Similar conditions were imposed in most cases where supervision, treatment or
conditional release orders were made and these involved
submission to treatment,
taking medication and residential restrictions. Factors that seemed to influence
the making of a supervision
order as opposed to a treatment order or a
conditional release order were the need to ensure long-term compliance with
and the more limited powers that existed in the event of
non-compliance with the conditions of the order in the case of treatment
supervision orders.
10.2.11 In the Supreme Court cases where the person was found not guilty, or
not guilty by reason of insanity, and details of the
mental illness or
intellectual disability were known (n = 23), there were 15 cases involving
mental illness (predominately schizophrenia),
seven cases involving intellectual
disability and one case involving cognitive impairment. In relation to the seven
cases where the
defendant was classified as having an intellectual disability,
in two cases the person received a conditional release order and in
five cases a
supervision order. In relation to defendants with a mental illness, five
defendants received a restriction order, six
defendants received a supervision
order, two defendants received a treatment order and two defendants were
conditionally released.
Review of orders
10.2.12 During the term of restriction and supervision orders, there are
provisions for regular review of the order by the MHT. Under
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), forensic orders are to be
reviewed by the MHT within 12 months after the order was made and at least once
in each period of
afterwards.
At a review, the
MHT can issue a certificate if it determines that a forensic order is no longer
warranted or that the conditions
of the order are not
appropriate.
The factors set
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
in relation to making of orders are also relevant the review process
conducted by the MHT.
However, the legislation does not direct the MHT to take into account the view
of next of kin or victims.
The MHT must also have regard to the mental health service delivery principles
set out in the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas). These principles are set out
in sch 1 of the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) and include respecting,
observing and promoting the inherent rights, liberty, dignity, autonomy and
self-respect of a person
with mental illness, to interfere with and restrict the
rights of persons with mental illness in the least restrictive way and to
least extent consistent with the protection of those persons, the protection of
the public and the proper delivery of the relevant
10.2.13 If a certificate is issued, the defendant may apply immediately to
the Supreme Court for a discharge, revocation or variation
of the forensic
The MHT can recommend
that a restriction order be discharged and replaced with a supervision or
treatment order or that the defendant
be released conditionally or
unconditionally.
recommend that a supervision order be revoked and may recommend that a treatment
order be made or that the defendant be released
conditionally or
unconditionally.
recommendation can also be made to vary the supervision order. The MHT can also
recommend that a supervision order be revoked and
that a restriction order be
made in respect of the
Although the MHT
can make recommendations, it does not have the power to discharge a restriction
order or vary or revoke a supervision
order. This power must be exercised by the
Supreme Court.
Review of orders by the Mental Health
Tribunal and the Supreme Court
10.2.14 Tables 8.4 and 8.5 set out the number of review hearings for
restriction orders and supervision orders conducted in each year
Table 8.4: Forensic statistics, Restriction Order Hearings, Mental Health
Restriction order hearings
Restriction order hearings adjourned
Restriction order certificates issued
Table 8.5: Forensic statistics, Supervision Order Hearings, Mental Health
Supervision order hearings
Supervision order hearings adjourned
Supervision order certificates issued
Source: MHT Annual Report
10.2.15 As shown in Tables 8.6 and 8.7, as at June 2018, there were nine
people under the jurisdiction of the MHT who were subject
to restriction orders
and 26 who were subject to supervision orders. There are no people still subject
to restriction orders who
have a certificate issued. In one case, it is noted
that there has not been a review hearing as the restriction order was made in
2018. In the period 2005–June 2018, there were six people where the
restriction order was discharged and a supervision order
was imposed and one
person where the restriction order was discharged. In cases where a supervision
order was imposed following the
discharge of the restriction order, none of
these individuals have had the supervision order revoked.
10.2.16 In relation to supervision orders, MHT data (set out in Table 8.7)
show that of the 26 people currently subject to supervision
orders, 18 do not
have a certificate issued and eight do have a certificate
Of the eight people
who have a certificate issued, one commenced an application to revoke with Legal
Aid but withdrew the application,
one sought advice but did not make an
application through Legal Aid, four have applications in process and two people
have not made
any contact with Legal
Table 8.6: People on restriction orders from 2005 to 30 June 2018, MHT
data (both sentenced offenders and individuals found not guilty
by reason of
insanity or where a finding could not be made that the person was not
Min time on order
Max time on order
Median on order
People currently subject to order
134 days and continuing
(4 months and 13 days)
5580 days and continuing
(15 years 3 months and 11 days)
2409 days and continuing
(6 years 7 months and 5 days)
Current certificate issued
People who have had order discharged and supervision order imposed
(2 years 6 months and 17 days)
(16 years 5 months and 7 days)
(7 years 8 months and 19 days)
People who have had restriction order discharged
(4 years 11 months and 3 days)
Table 8.7: People on supervision orders from 2005 to 30 June 2018 (both
sentenced offenders and individuals found not guilty by reason
of insanity or
where a finding could not be made that the person was not guilty)
Min time on order
Max time on order
Median on order
People currently subject to order
253 days and continuing
(8 months and 9 days)
6543 days and continuing
(17 years 10 months and 29 days)
2795 days and continuing
(7 years 7 months and 26 days)
Current certificate issued
People who have had order revoked
(1 year 8 months and 27 days)
(12 years 3 months and 5 days)
(6 years 11 months and 26 days)
Process to discharge or vary forensic
10.2.17 As noted in Table 8.1, restriction and supervision orders are
indefinite orders, subject to the discharge/revocation of the
orders by the
Supreme Court. The
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
sets out the requirements for making an application, including the time at which
an application can be made:
(1) If the person has received a certificate from the MHT, a person may apply
to the Supreme Court for the discharge, variation or
revocation immediately on
the issue of the certificate.
(2) In other cases, an application for discharge of a restriction order can
be made after two years and then a subsequent application
can be made every two
years. There are no time constraints placed on the ability to initially apply
for variation or revocation of
a supervision order. However, if the Supreme
Court has refused an application of a defendant for a variation or revocation of
a supervision
order, another application cannot be made for six months or such
other period as the Supreme Court may
Discharge of orders in Tasmania
10.2.18 The MHT Annual Report 2015–2016, indicated that in this period,
two certificates were issued and both forensic patients
made an application to
the Supreme Court to have the restriction orders revoked. In both cases, the
Supreme Court revoked the restriction
order and imposed a supervision
In the same period,
the MHT issued 11 certificates for supervision orders. As noted above, there are
eight people who are being supervised
under a supervision order who have a
current certificate and four who have an application under way with the Legal
Aid Commission
to discharge the order. The MHT reported that in 2017–2018,
10 certificates were issued to patients on supervision orders and
two patients
made an application to the Supreme Court — both applications were
successful.
In the same period, there were no certificates issued to forensic patients on
restriction orders.
10.2.19 In a review of forensic orders conducted by Smith, it was reported in
2010 that there had been 64 reviews undertaken since
February 2006. From these
reviews, a total of 25 certificates had been issued. Those 25 certificates
related to 15 people, four in
relation to restriction orders and 11 in relation
to supervision orders.
also reported that only four people had applied successfully for a discharge
from a forensic order since 2003 and these were
all supervision
However, data
provided by the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania indicate that from 2010 to 2018
(see Table 8.8), there have been five
applications made to discharge restriction
orders and all of these were successful (with the restrictions being replaced by
supervision
10.2.20 Data provided by the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania also show that
since 2010, 13 applications were made to revoke supervision
orders. In relation
to these applications, there were three that resulted in the orders being
revoked and four that resulted in revoked
supervision orders being replaced by
conditional orders. In relation to the unsuccessful applications, one had the
conditions of
the supervision order varied, three have a new application on
foot, one person withdrew the application, one has a new application
on foot and
one is ongoing.
Table 8.8: Applications undertaken by Legal Aid to revoke or discharge
supervision and restriction orders, 2010–June 2018
Application to Revoke/Discharge
Not granted
Supervision Orders
Conditional orders made, 12–24 mths
New application on foot
Client withdrew
Restriction Orders
Supervision order made in substitution
10.2.21 MHT data indicate that from 2005 to 2018, there were seven people who
had their restriction orders discharged. In six of these
cases, a supervision
order was imposed and all these people remain subject to the supervision order.
Current certificates have been
issued for two of these six people. As noted,
there are no people subject to restriction orders who have a current certificate
from the MHT. MHT data indicate that there were 16 supervision orders
that were revoked in this period. As noted, there are eight
people still subject
to supervision orders who have a current certificate from the MHT and 18 who do
not. Of those with certificates,
there are four people who currently have an
application to revoke the supervision order ongoing with the Legal Aid
Commission of
Tasmania. The fact that a number of people on restriction orders
have had their orders discharged (unlike Smith’s earlier findings
restriction orders were discharged despite having certificates issued) and that
there have been a number of supervision
orders revoked, suggests that for those
with current certificates, there has been more success in having orders
discharged/revoked
by the Supreme Court. However, this does not mean that there
are no remaining difficulties in the process for some people or that
statutory test for discharge does not require reform.
Factors relevant to the discharge or
revocation of orders
10.2.22 The factors set out at [8.2.9] in relation to making of orders are
also relevant to the discharge of a restriction order and
the variation or
revocation of a supervision order by the Supreme
In making a decision
to impose an order, or vary or discharge an order, the relevant legislative
sections involve the exercise of
judicial discretion as they require a value
the Court of
Criminal Appeal considered the interaction of the principle that ‘where
appropriate, restrictions on the defendant’s
freedom and personal autonomy
should be kept to a minimum consistent with the safety of the community’
contained in
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
with the matters set out in 35(1). It was stated that,
if a court, by reference to the matters set out in
considers it is
not appropriate to apply that principle, for example it concludes by reference
factors that a less restrictive order is not consistent with the
safety of the community, then it is entitled to make an order disregarding
first part of the principle.
This weighs the balance in favour of community safety at the expense of the
minimal restriction on the defendant’s freedom and
autonomy. Similarly, in
Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services v
the Court of
Criminal Appeal stated that ‘the issue of the respondent’s freedom
and personal autonomy is not one which
should override all else. It is an issue
to be considered “where appropriate” and in the context of community
It is also to be considered in the context of the factors identified in
10.2.23 A key factor identified in
need to assess the risk that the defendant posed to other people. In making an
assessment of the likelihood of the person
being a danger to others (as required
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
s 35(1)(b))
the view was expressed that the court was required to do more than simply
approach the issue on the basis that ‘the greater
the degree of likelihood
of danger found, the less likely a court would be to order
revocation’.
the Court had to make a finding, on the balance of probabilities, whether or not
a state of affairs was
Court noted that different interpretations of ‘likely’ include that
there is a ‘real or substantial chance
possibility’
something is ‘more likely than
However, the
precise meaning of ‘likely’ was not resolved with the Court of
Criminal Appeal indicating that the primary
judge ‘was entitled to be
satisfied that there was, at least, a real chance or possibility of the
appellant again becoming
a danger to members of the
community’.
10.2.24 The Court also considered the meaning of ‘freedom and personal
autonomy’ and examined whether this encompassed
restrictions arising from
the way in which the order could be revoked or varied (for example if the order
had to be revoked by the
Supreme Court or lapsed through the passing of
It was held that it
did not extend to the difficulties, ‘in practical terms, for the person to
make an attempt to be relieved
of some or all of the consequences of the
This meant that
the indefinite nature of the supervision order compared to the finite nature of
a treatment order was not considered
relevant to an assessment of the
restrictions that either order may place on a defendant’s freedom and
personal autonomy. Instead,
‘freedom and personal autonomy’ meant
the ‘ability to move freely and function within the community, and to be
self-regulatory and self-sufficient as far as possible, in all
10.2.25 In making decisions in relation to the revocation of orders, the
Supreme Court has been particularly concerned about the powers
that exist under
orders in the event that the person is non-compliant with their treatment
regime. In cases where the Supreme Court
refused to revoke a supervision order
and replace it with a treatment order, the applicants had long-standing mental
illness requiring
ongoing medication to manage the illness. The concern was
expressed that, while the person did not present a risk to the community
appropriately treated, there was a risk of harm to others if the medication
regime was not complied with. Accordingly, the court
considered that a
supervision order was required (rather than a treatment order) to ensure
compliance with the medication treatment
and mental health
management.
This allowed for
oversight by the Supreme Court and the power to detain the person in a SMHU, if
necessary. It also would not lapse
(unlike the treatment order that required
administrative action to renew it).
10.2.26 Subsequent to the decisions in
of the Department of Health and Human Services v
the Victorian Court of Appeal considered in detail the interaction
between the Victorian equivalents to
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), in particular the meaning of
case, the primary judge refused to revoke a supervision order on the basis that
he had concluded that the risk of danger
to the public was significant if the
individual was non-compliant with treatment (a risk assessed as low). This
approach was rejected
by the Court of Appeal:
His Honour, in our respectful opinion, wrongly focused upon the gravity of
the potential harm to others involved with such a risk
in assessing the likely
danger to others as ‘significant’. In assessing the likely danger
... the low likelihood of such
a risk materialising should have been the
critical consideration, rather than the gravity of the harm in the event that
eventuated.
Endangerment is about the risk of harm. The gravity of the harm may be
relevant to assessing the nature of the risk, but the probability
of any risk,
be it high or low, is the critical concept of endangerment. ... The ordinary
meaning of endangerment entails the concept
of chance or risk. The terms of [the
provision] require a court to assess whether a person is ‘
endanger themselves or others’. This serves to emphasise that the focus is
upon the extent of the chance, risk or peril of
some harm materialising. If the
harm or injury which is likely to result is substantial but the
‘chance’, ‘risk’
or ‘peril’ of it
eventuating is minimal, then a person subject to a supervision order is not
necessarily ‘likely
to endanger’ ...
It is an assessment of the likelihood of the risk materialising and whether
or not that risk is more than merely possible that is
the critical
consideration, not the gravity of the harm that may
This interpretation reflects the approach evident in the decisions of the
Court of Criminal Appeal in Tasmania, where the focus is
on the risk of danger
rather than the magnitude of the danger.
10.2.27 An additional issue considered in
relevance of any change in the practical restrictions on the defendant arising
from the removal of the supervision order in
considering the balance between the
safety of the community and the person’s freedom and autonomy. The primary
judge had expressed
the view that the continuation of the order would not impose
any significant practical restrictions on the defendant as his treatment
remain the same with or without the order. However, the Court of Appeal accepted
that ‘the finding that the nature and
degree of the restrictions on the
appellant’s freedom and autonomy would have no “significant
practical effect”
does not provide a basis for refusing to revoke the
supervision order’.
Court’s view was that supervision ‘is a restriction on liberty and
autonomy and it can be justified only where it
is found to be necessary’
and ‘if it was not necessary to impose any restriction on the appellant to
ensure the safety
of the community, the statutory regime, informed by the
principle of parsimony, did not allow for the consideration of the degree
inconvenience to the appellant to justify non-revocation of the
This differs
from the approach of the Court of Criminal Appeal in
Leave provisions
10.2.28 Under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas), the MHT may grant a
forensic patient who is subject to a restriction order leave of absence from a
secure mental health unit.
The Chief Forensic Psychologist (CFP) may grant leave to a forensic patient who
is not subject to a restriction
Leave may be granted
for clinical or personal reasons, for a particular purpose, or a particular
period, or both and may be granted
unconditionally or subject to
conditions.
The criteria set
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) do not
apply to leave provisions, with the MHT or the CFP being required to exercise
responsibility subject to the service delivery
principles set out in sch 1 of
Mental Health Act 2013
This takes into
account the need to respect, observe and promote the inherent rights, liberty,
dignity, autonomy and self-respect
of persons with mental illness and the need
to ensure that the interference with or restriction of the rights of persons
with mental
illness is done in the least restrictive way and to the least extent
consistent with the protection of the individual and the
Table 8.9 sets out
the number of leave applications determined by the MHT in the period
2014–2015 to 2016–2017.
Table 8.9: Leave application requested and granted by the MHT,
2014–15 to 2017–18
Leave applications requested
Leave applications granted
Source: MHT Annual Report
Issues for consideration
Indefinite nature of forensic
10.3.1 In Tasmania, restriction orders and supervision orders are indefinite,
subject to review by the MHT and revocation or discharge
by the Supreme Court.
This aspect of the insanity and fitness to stand trial provisions has been the
subject of significant criticism
(as discussed below). Although the move away
from the traditional ‘Governor’s Pleasure’ regime (in Tasmania
elsewhere) was intended to remove the arbitrary and political nature of
indefinite detention, criticism has been directed at the
Tasmanian system on the
basis that the Governor’s Pleasure model is retained ‘in substance,
if not in form’.
be argued that the current system is unfair to individuals and does not reflect
the principles underlying the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) which seek to provide an appropriate balance between individual
freedom and autonomy and community safety.
10.3.2 It is also noted that there is no statutory limit contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) for conditional
release orders. This means that a conditional release order (or some conditions
of an order) may be indefinite
and there is no provision in the legislation to
have the conditions varied or
This would also
appear to create the potential for unfairness and inflexibility.
Position in other jurisdictions
10.3.3 As shown in Appendix 3 Table A3.3, several other Australian
subject to mechanisms for review and ending the orders. This is the position in
New South Wales (for those found not guilty
by reason of insanity), Victoria,
Western Australia, Queensland and the Northern Territory. In Victoria and the
Northern Territory,
a period is set for a major review of the order, referred to
as a nominal term, either by reference to a specified statutory period
(Victoria) or by the court (Northern Territory). At the major review, there is a
presumption that the level of supervision will be
In Queensland,
Western Australia and New South Wales (as with Tasmania), there is provision for
periodic reviews, which may result
in the orders being varied or revoked. In
Queensland, orders may be revoked or varied by the Mental Health Tribunal,
subject to any
non-revocation period that may have been set for prescribed
offences. In Western Australia, an order may be revoked by the Governor
advice from the Minister following a recommendation from the Mental Impairment
Accused Review Board. In New South Wales, the court
or the Mental Health Review
Tribunal (MHRT) may make an order for releasing a
10.3.4 Other jurisdictions provide for finite terms through the use of
limiting terms.
In New South
Wales (for those found unfit and not acquitted following a special hearing),
South Australia, the Australian Capital
Territory and the Commonwealth, the
court is required to set a limiting term when imposing a detention or
supervision order. The
limiting term sets the longest period of detention and
there is a possibility that the person may be released before the expiry of
limiting term. However, evidence in New South Wales suggests release before the
expiration of the limiting term is rare. The
MHRT indicated that it did not know
of any patients being unconditionally released prior to the expiry of their
limiting terms and
that conditional release was also
In New South Wales, the
Australian Capital Territory and the Commonwealth, the limiting term is set by
the court making a best estimate
of the sentence that would have been considered
appropriate in a normal trial. In South Australia, the limiting term is the
to the period of imprisonment that would have been appropriate if the
defendant had been convicted of the offence of which the objective
elements have
been established, without taking into account the defendant’s mental
impairment.
10.3.5 Some jurisdictions with limiting terms provide, in exceptional cases,
for an extension of a person’s status following
the expiry of the term. In
New South Wales, the Supreme Court can extend a person’s status as a
forensic patient beyond the
end of the limiting term in circumstances where the
court is satisfied to a high degree of probability that the patient poses an
unacceptable risk of causing serious harm to others if he or she ceased to be a
forensic patient and the risk cannot be adequately
managed by other less
restrictive means.
in South Australia, amendments (yet to commence) to the
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA), make provision for the Supreme Court to make a
continuing supervision order where the court is satisfied, on the balance of
probabilities, that the defendant could pose a serious risk to the safety of the
community or a member of the
detention is discussed further at [8.3.16]–[8.2.26].
10.3.6 In relation to conditional release orders, only New South Wales (for
defendants where finding was made that unable to find
not guilty following
special hearing), Western Australia (for defendants found not guilty by reason
of insanity) and the Commonwealth
make provision for a conditional release order
to be made by the court.
bond may be made for up to five years in New South Wales, three years in the
Commonwealth legislation and 24 months in Western
Australia, the court can make a conditional release order for five years for
summary and minor indictable
Options for reform
10.3.7 In Tasmania, an option for reform would be to make detention subject
to a limiting term as exists in New South Wales, the Australian
Territory, South Australia and the Commonwealth. If a limiting term were
adopted, it would also be necessary to determine:
(1) whether there would be an
absolute limit
(as in the Australian
Capital Territory and the Commonwealth) or a
limit imposed with provision to
the period of restriction or supervision prior to the end of the
limiting term (as exists in New South Wales and as is proposed in
Australia);
(2) the mechanism for setting the limiting term.
10.3.8 Several law reform bodies have examined the period of supervision or
detention that is appropriate for forensic patients following
a finding of not
guilty by reason of insanity or unfit to stand trial (and not acquitted at the
special hearing). The NSWLRC recommended
that a limiting term apply for
defendants found not guilty by reason of insanity or following a finding that
the person was unfit
to stand trial (and not acquitted at the special
The view of the
NSWLRC view was that there should be a time limit because it provides an
important protection for forensic patients.
In usual cases, concerns in relation
to the safety of the community could be addressed by the civil mental health
system at the end
of the time limit and by also introducing a system that, with
appropriate safeguards, would allow for continuing detention to be
This model was an
adaptation of the rules that apply to other high-risk individuals subject to a
sentence of imprisonment and would
only be appropriate in cases where the civil
system did not apply and the individual posed a significant risk to the public
end of the limiting
The NSWLRC was
concerned to stress that the proposed model should only apply in exceptional
10.3.9 The SASAC’s view was also that limiting terms should be
recommendation of the ALRC was that there should be limits placed on detention
that can be imposed.
approach was also supported by the Senate Committee examining indefinite
detention of people with cognitive and psychiatric
impairment in
Similarly, the
LRCWA also recommended introducing the use of limiting
In contrast, the VLRC
and the Western Australian review conducted by the Department of the
Attorney-General preferred to retain indefinite
terms with regular reviews. The
VLRC considered this was the preferred approach in combination with reforms to
ensure that ‘the
decision-making framework in place once an order is made
is rigorous and ensures that the period a person is supervised closely reflects
the minimum period necessary to address the person’s risk to the
community’.
10.3.10 Other jurisdictions have also considered the most appropriate method
of setting the limiting term. In addressing this issue,
the NSWLRC identified
four basic models:
(1) Using the
hypothetical sentence
that would have been imposed had
the person been convicted in the ordinary way of the
This is the current
approach in New South Wales, the Commonwealth and the Australian Capital
(2) Using a
modified sentencing approach
such as exists in South
Australia, where the hypothetical sentence is imposed on the basis of the
objective facts only. Another variation
would be to specify that it relates to
the hypothetical non-parole period rather than the total sentence or to provide
that certain
mitigating factors are to be presumed (such as a guilty plea or
(3) Using a
fixed statutory formula
to determine the limiting
(4) Using a
time limit formulated by adopting a risk management approach
that determines a time limit taking into account ‘the likelihood of
rehabilitation, the likely length and success of treatment
(and impact on
offending behaviour) and future
The NSWLRC recommended, acknowledging that this may not be possible to do
with absolute precision, that the court should make an estimate
of the sentence
that it would have applied had the defendant been held criminally responsible at
a normal trial.
This was also
the recommendation of the
Should there be a limiting term?
Arguments in favour of making provision for a limiting
The following arguments can be identified in relation to making
provisions for a limiting term.
(1) An indefinite term creates uncertainty and this potentially is an
incentive for innocent people to plead guilty rather than rely
on unfitness to
stand trial/and or insanity.
The NSWLRC observed that ‘anecdotally it appears that the indeterminate
orders may deter people with mental impairment from
relying on the defence of
mental illness’.
Further, it stated that ‘[i]f this is correct, then it may lead to
outcomes which fail to meet the interests of justice, public
safety, or the
person’s treatment
Conversely, the
benefits of a limiting term are that it facilitates fairness so that
‘forensic patients are not detained or
managed within the forensic system
for longer than they would have been following
conviction.’
encourage people to raise unfitness to stand trial or the defence of insanity.
In addition, it ensures that people who require
treatment are able to access it
given that these people should be managed in the forensic system rather than the
correctional system.
(2) People who are detained indefinitely may spend longer under supervision
than if they had been sentenced following the usual
implications in relation to whether an individual would elect to rely on
unfitness to stand trial/and or insanity. As observed
by the Office of Public
Prosecution Victoria, ‘a person who is able to understand the process
involved in a plea of guilty
will often be better off being dealt with by a
criminal sanction, rather than being placed on an indefinite supervision
It also raises
questions of fairness.
The relationship between the time spent in detention/under supervision
compared to the sentence a person would have received had they
been sentenced
following a finding of guilty has been examined in Tasmania. Research suggests
that ‘the consequences of an
insanity plea or unfitness to plead [are]
likely to restrict the liberty of the subject to a greater degree than an actual
in all cases except murder and
This is confirmed by recent research undertaken by the TLRI with the assistance
of the MHT, which shows that the period of restriction
of liberty is
considerably longer for individuals subject to forensic orders following a
finding of not guilty by reason of insanity
or where a finding could not be made
that the defendant is not guilty at a special hearing than for offenders
sentenced following
a finding of
In addition, it has
been suggested that for persons subject to a supervision or restriction order
‘it is highly unlikely, for
practical reasons, that any person could be
discharged from an order in under in 2
This was on the
basis that the MHT will not review the order until the person is at or near the
completion of the first twelve months
under the order and, if a certificate is
issued, the experience has been that it takes 12 months after the certificate is
for an application for discharge to be filed with and considered by the
This appears contrary
to the principle of least restriction consistent with community safety and
fairness to the accused person that
underpin the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). Accordingly, it could be argued that changes are
necessary to ensure that the Act operates justly and consistently with the
principles that underlie it.
(3) Indefinite detention may affect a forensic patient’s self-esteem
and response to treatment.
has been suggested that indefinite terms cause ‘supervised people to feel
trapped or lack the motivation to get
(4) Indefinite terms reinforce negative perceptions about a forensic
patient’s criminality.
(5) A limiting term may encourage the provision of resources and greater
planning towards a person’s release from supervision
in comparison to
(6) Indefinite terms are contrary to international obligations arising under
the art 5 (prohibition of disability-based discrimination)
and art 14 (rights to
liberty and security of the person) of the
Gooding et al
have argued that indefinite terms ‘clearly deviate from the
establishing separate processes with lesser safeguards to deprive the liberty of
accused persons with disabilities deemed unfit
Arstein-Kerslake et al have suggested that compliance with international
obligations would require that procedures following a finding
of unfitness to
stand trial ‘must never result in a longer or more severe sentence than
would have resulted if a standard trial
proceeded’.
commentators have argued, that all mental health detentions are contrary to the
art 14(b) which provides that ‘the existence of a disability
shall in no case justify a deprivation of
the basis of views expressed by the UNCRPD that laws enabling involuntary
detention should be abolished in cases where
disability is a criterion, even if
other criteria are used in making the assessment (such as dangerousness or
Arguments against a limiting term
The following
arguments can be identified in relation to not introducing a limiting term and
retaining indefinite detention:
(1) A limiting term may result in some people reaching the end of the time
limit and being unconditionally released, in circumstances
where he or she is at
risk of causing harm to the
In addition, the
length of the time limit is set at the time of disposition, when the progress of
the defendant’s treatment
and rehabilitation is hard to
However, this
concern is true in relation to sentenced offenders, ‘who are ordinarily
entitled to be released at the expiry
of the sentence, even if they still pose a
risk to others’.
addition, concerns about community safety at the end of the limiting term could
be managed within the civil mental health
Further, a system of
continued restriction or supervision could be introduced to address any concern
where a person poses a serious risk of
harm to other people at the end of the limiting
(2) The forensic system has quite different objectives to
sentencing.
It is concerned
with a person’s treatment and safety, and on this basis indefinite terms
are ‘a way of recognising that
[the] orders were based on a therapeutic
framework, rather than one that is corrections-based (where orders have a
definite term).’
VLRC considered that:
Indefinite term orders ... are consistent with the therapeutic focus of the
CMIA. Such orders are also consistent with the principle
of community protection
underlying the CMIA that recognises that the recovery of a supervised person
should proceed on a gradual
basis so that their risk can be managed to a point
where they can ultimately be reintegrated into the community.
The supervision of people under the CMIA is justified on these principles and
not on the basis of proportionality or deterrence which
would form the basis of
a criminal sentence. In the Commission’s view, the duration of orders
should therefore be based on
the time a supervised person needs to recover or
progress through the system of gradual reintegration before they can safely
to the community. The length of time it takes for this to happen varies
from person to person an is difficult to predict at the time
of the making of a
supervision order.
Similar concerns were expressed in submissions received by the SASAC that
‘the amount of time the defendant spends in custody
should be determined
by the defendant’s treatment needs and the protection of the community,
rather than the nature of the
committed’.
accords with the view of Boyd-Caine and Chappell, that indefinite detention is
‘able to respond to the individual needs
of each patient on a forensic
order.’ In contrast, ‘definite orders would not necessarily be
capable of responding to
the complexities of diagnoses, responsiveness to
treatment, and access to leave privileges that are critical to the care,
and rehabilitation of forensic
There may also be advantages for an unwell person in accessing services within
the forensic mental health system given that the level
of support and treatment
may be more difficult to access in the civil mental health system.
(3) A related concern is that the use of a time limit set by reference to a
hypothetical sentence may create the expectation that
the time limit is a
A person who have
been found not guilty by reason of insanity or if a finding cannot be made that
the person is not guilty at a special
hearing (following a finding of unfitness)
is not found guilty of any offence and is not sentenced. However, in requiring
to specify a limiting term, the court is engaged in an exercise
‘akin to sentencing’, it may create an expectation that
person is being punished, despite not having been tried and convicted of any
10.3.13 Other commentators have supported indefinite detention provided there
are sufficient protections and supports to ensure that
forensic patients are
able to progress through the system and ultimately be released. The former
President and the former Forensic
Team Leader of the MHRT in New South Wales
have highlighted that there is a risk that indefinite detention is
‘susceptible
to facilitating preventive detention’ as the forensic
system is ‘susceptible to a privileging of preventative aims over
therapeutic or rehabilitative
Ultimately,
however, their view was that indefinite detention was appropriate as it was able
to respond to individual needs whereas
a definite order ‘would not
necessarily be capable of responding to the complexities of diagnoses,
responsiveness to treatment,
and access to leave privileges that are critical to
the care, treatment and rehabilitation of forensic
Consumer Advisory Group (in its submission to the NSWLRC) argued that:
step up and step down processes need to be enhanced to provide forensic
patients with transparent avenues to progress though the system,
which would
also assist in developing goals and support a recovery focused system. That is,
forensic patients need guidance and resources
to access and understand pathways
to unconditional release.
Similarly, it may be that concerns in relation to indefinite detention can be
addressed by reforms to the review process and the management
of forensic
patients in Tasmania. This is further considered below.
10.3.14 In relation to conditional release orders under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(e), there appears
to be a deficiency in the legislation as it does not provide a limiting or
maximum term for the bond or provide
any mechanism that would allow a person to
apply to have the terms of the conditional release order varied or discharged.
a court wished, it could provide for a person to be conditionally
released into the community under the supervision of Forensic Mental
Services or
the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist, for example, or to take medication, comply with
medical treatment, notify of a change
of address, employment or training or
comply with directions and these could be imposed indefinitely and with no
option to have them
removed or changed. In contrast, the term of a treatment
order under the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) is six months and the limit
for a conditional release order imposed by the court as a sentence is five
Other indefinite
orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
provision for review and revocation.
10.3.15 The TLRI seeks feedback in relation to whether a limiting term
should be adopted in Tasmania for supervision and restriction
Alternatively, it may be considered that any concerns arising in relation to the
indefinite nature of these orders and the
balancing of the interests of the
individual and the community are more appropriately dealt with through a system
of indefinite detention
with periodic reviews. In addition, the TLRI seeks
59. Should the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
amended to provide for a limiting term for restriction and supervision orders to
replace the current indefinite nature of
these orders?
60. Should the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
amended to provide for a limiting term for a conditional release order to
replace the current indefinite nature of these
If a limiting term is adopted for restriction and supervision orders,
should there be provision for the order to be extended?
10.3.16 As discussed, in New South Wales provision was made to allow the
Supreme Court to make extension orders for forensic patients
in 2013. The
threshold in the
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
cl 2 is that an extension order can be made:
(1) ... if and only if the Supreme Court is satisfied to a high degree of
probability that:
(a) the forensic patient poses an unacceptable risk of causing serious harm
to others if he or she ceases being a forensic patient,
(b) the risk cannot be adequately managed by other less restrictive
(2) The Supreme Court is not required to determine that the risk of a person
causing serious harm to others is more likely than not
in order to determine
that the person poses an unacceptable risk of causing serious harm to
This followed recommendations of the NSWLRC, which identified a gap in the
ability to transfer some forensic patients to the civil
mental health system at
the end of their limiting term in circumstances where they still presented a
risk of harm to the community.
This related to individuals who did not fall
within the criteria for admission into the civil mental health
In addition, the
guardianship system does not provide a means to detain a person on the basis of
community safety.
10.3.17 In South Australia, amendments will make it possible for the Supreme
Court to make a continuing supervision
The test in South
Australia will be that the ‘court is satisfied, on the balance of
probabilities, the defendant to whom the
application relates could, if
unsupervised, pose a serious risk to the safety of the community or a member of
the community.’
these provisions are intended to address concerns that a limited number of
people may pose an unacceptable risk of causing
harm to other people if released
from supervision at the end of the limiting term, and that such a risk cannot be
adequately managed
under the civil mental health regime.
10.3.18 In the Tasmanian context, if limiting terms are introduced for
supervision and restriction orders, the following issues need
(1) whether there would be a need for a preventative detention scheme based
on the limits of the civil mental health and disability
(2) if so, should a preventative detention scheme be introduced; and
(3) if so, how should it be structured?
Are there gaps in the civil system?
In Tasmania, there is
provision for the MHT to make a treatment order under the
Mental Health Act
(Tas), which authorises treatment for an involuntary patient. A
treatment order lasts for up to six months and sets out treatment
in a treatment
plan. This can take place in a hospital, in the community or a combination of
The criteria that must be met for the MHT to make a treatment order are that:
the person has a mental illness; without treatment,
the mental illness will, or
is likely to, seriously harm the person’s health or safety or the safety
of other persons; the
treatment will be appropriate and effective; treatment
cannot be adequately given except under a treatment order; and the person
not have decision-making
Under the Act, an
adult has decision-making capacity unless it is established that they are unable
to make a decision because of
an impairment of, or disturbance in, the
functioning of the brain and he or she is unable to understand information
relevant to the
decision, retain information relevant to the decision, use or
weigh information relevant to the decision or communicate the
Accordingly, there
may be people who refuse treatment but do not lack decision-making capacity.
Further, individuals may not meet
the definition of mental illness, such as a
person with an intellectual disability or acquired brain
10.3.20 There are also powers for intervention under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas). Under this Act, there is power for the
Guardianship and Administration Board to appoint a guardian, who can be provided
accommodation powers and health care
Accommodation powers
mean that the guardian has the authority to decide where and with whom the
person lives. This might include
accommodation in a group home or supported
residential facility.
guardian with health care powers can consent to medical treatment as well as
care provided by allied medical practitioners but
does not allow the guardian to
authorise psychiatric treatment of a person with mental
A guardian can also
consent to or make decisions about a behaviour management
However, a guardian can
only be appointed where a person has a disability and because of that disability
they cannot make reasonable
personal and lifestyle decisions and the person is
in need of a guardian.
Board must consider whether the needs of the person could be met by other means
less restrictive of that person’s freedom
of decision and action and must
be satisfied that the order would be in the best interests of the
Further, as noted by
the NSWLRC, the principles underpinning guardianship ‘focus solely on the
best interests of the person
subject to the order. The need for community
protection is not a relevant
principle’.
basis, ‘[i]t is not the guardian’s role to safeguard the community,
although the guardian’s decisions may
Accordingly,
there are limitations in relation to the effectiveness of guardianship
arrangements to provide an appropriate means
to address concerns about community
safety. The TLRI has made recommendations for reform in relation to the
functions and powers
of guardians. These reforms would allow guardians to take
into account harm to others as a relevant consideration when making
representative
However, a guardian could only exercise this decision-making power if the person
does not have the ability to make his/her own decision
or to consent to the
Should a preventative detention scheme be introduced?
indicated above, in New South Wales a preventative detention scheme that would
allow an extension of an individual’s forensic
patient status was
recommended. This was based on concerns that a small number of individuals
‘may pose a significant risk
to the public but who do not meet the
criteria for transfer into the civil
The NSWLRC was
concerned to highlight that this power was exceptional and should be exercised
sparingly, with strong justification
and suitable
protections.
It stressed that
the only justification for the making of the order should be need to protect the
community and an order should not
be made for the purposes of treatment or
punishment.
On this basis, it
considered that this was necessary for community protection and was ‘an
appropriate counterbalance to our
recommendation that limiting terms be applied
to people found NGMI’.
This cautious approach reflected the principles that apply to preventative
detention for offender’s sentenced following a finding
of guilt, where
there is only provision for high-risk sex and violent offenders to be detained
at the end of their sentence where
the Supreme Court considered there to be an
unacceptable risk of serious
10.3.22 There are strong arguments against a preventative detention scheme,
including that forensic patients ‘should not be
subject to further
restriction on their liberty following the expiry of their limiting term, apart
from those that may be imposed
under the civil
basis, many stakeholders in the NSW review process expressed considerable
concern about the creation of a preventative detention
Further, preventative
detention schemes for forensic patients are said to violate art 14 of the
which ‘prohibits the deprivation of liberty on the basis of
actual or perceived impairment even if additional factors or criteria
used to justify the deprivation of
generally, preventative detention schemes that apply to convicted offenders are
controversial on the basis that they offend
against the principle of
proportionality and finality in sentencing, that they amount to double
punishment and that prediction of
future risk is
problematic.
As the TLRI has
previously written:
an assessment of the merits and the use of indefinite and preventative
detention regimes necessarily involves the balancing of potentially
conflicting
rights of victims, offenders, and society as a whole. This conflict of rights
unsurprisingly results in tensions at the
policy level, as Parliament and the
judiciary must grapple with the balance of ostensibly irreconcilable interests.
Secondly, indefinite
and preventative detention regimes are justified as a means
of preventing future harm, but the task of predicting future dangerousness
fraught with uncertainty and predictive models have been extensively criticised
for a tendency to over-predict
Such schemes are also criticised on the basis that they are contrary to
international human rights instruments, and for this reason
the courts and
international tribunals have stressed that the power must be exercised only in
exceptional
circumstances.
If a preventative detention scheme is introduced, how should it be
structured?
This issue was considered in detail by the NSWLRC, which
considered four possible models as set out in Table
Table 8.10: Advantages and disadvantages of models of preventative
Advantages/disadvantages of model
Apply or adapt the scheme for continued supervision of high-risk
Crimes (High Risk Offenders) Act 2006
(NSW) provides for
the continued supervision or detention for high-risk sex or violent offenders
who are due to be released.
• This model could be adapted to manage forensic patients who present
a risk of harm. The nature of the risk would need to be
differently framed given
that forensic patients have not been convicted of an offence.
• Decision to extend detention is made by Supreme Court.
• Safeguards having two independent experts review the person and
high threshold for making the order.
• Consistency in processes and procedure between forensic patients
and convicted offenders.
Allow the Mental Health Review Tribunal to classify the person as a
‘compulsory patient’ to provide for continued detention
supervision in the community.
• Allow the MHRT to make the decision to classify the person as a
‘compulsory patient’ to allow for continued detention
in a mental
health facility or discharge into the community under supervision.
• Concerns regarding lack of judicial safeguard.
• No general system of preventative detention for convicted offenders
who pose a risk of harm at the end of their sentence and
so a system for
forensic patient may operate to treat people with cognitive and mental health
impairments in a discriminatory manner.
• However, this model would be developed specially for forensic
patients rather than being an adaption of a scheme designed
for convicted
high-risk offenders.
• Allows for ongoing supervision and review by the MHRT.
Amend the limiting term provision to provide that the court must release a
patient unless satisfied that the release of the person
will seriously endanger
the public.
• Provides the MHRT with a discretion to extend the limiting term for
individuals if they present a clear risk.
• Greater flexibility than having a limiting term that cannot be
• However, may be viewed as effectively removing the limiting term as
there will no longer be a definite end date for release
for any forensic
Change the civil scheme of involuntary detention to include people with
cognitive impairments.
• Amend the civil scheme of involuntary detention for people with
cognitive impairments by allowing for a parallel scheme for
involuntary
Significant resource implications to create a civil detention scheme for
the involuntary detention of people with cognitive impairments.
10.3.24 After considering these options, the NSWLRC recommended (and the
Parliament adopted) a model that was consistent with the
provisions that apply
to offenders who are subject to a sentence of imprisonment but adapted to
accommodate the management of forensic
patients. This was a hybrid of the scheme
that applied for continued supervision of high-risk offenders and the scheme
have decision-making power rest with the Mental Health Review
Tribunal (as outlined above).
10.3.25 Key features of the NSW model are that:
• the Supreme Court makes the order on the basis of a twofold
assessment of the unacceptable risk of serious harm to others
posed by the
forensic patient if released from detention or supervision and the inadequacy of
other less restrictive means of managing
• considerations that the court has regard to include: the safety of
the community, expert reports, any orders or decisions
of the MHRT, the
person’s level of compliance with any obligations imposed while they are a
forensic patient, especially while
they were on leave or conditional release;
the view of the court at the time the limiting term was imposed and a report
forensic patient’s treatment team which would include information
reasons why
arrangements that do not involve continued supervision nor detention are not
appropriate.
• the term of extension order is five years subject to further
• the MHRT conducts regular reviews.
• the Supreme Court can revoke the extension order on the ground that
circumstances have changed significantly so as to render
the extension order
unnecessary.
The relevant NSW legislation is set out in full in Appendix 6.
10.3.26 The TLRI seeks feedback in relation to whether, if a limiting term is
adopted, there is a need for a preventative scheme that
would allow for an
extension of supervision or detention or whether the Tasmanian current civil
arrangements sufficient to manage
the risk to community safety. If a
preventative detention scheme is adopted, feedback is also sought as to the most
appropriate model.
The scheme could be based on the models set out by the NSWLRC
or some other model proposed by stakeholders. For example, a model
based on the
NSWLRC approach would allow an application to be made to the Supreme Court to
extend the order. This would involve a
consideration of the threshold test for
extension and the term of the extension order. The Supreme Court could also be
given a power
to revoke the extension order and the MHT could have
responsibility for ongoing review.
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
amended to provide for a limiting term for restriction and supervision orders,
is it necessary and appropriate to introduce
a preventative detention scheme
that would allow for an extension of the person’s forensic patient
62. If a preventative detention scheme is introduced, what model should be
used? What should the threshold test for an extension order
be and how long
should an extension order operate?
If a limiting term is adopted, how should the limiting term be set?
10.3.27 A related matter for determination is how the limiting term should be
set if a limiting term is adopted in Tasmania for forensic
orders (restriction
and supervision orders) and/or conditional release orders.
10.3.28 In relation to forensic orders, the preferred approach in other
of imprisonment
the court would have imposed if the person had been found guilty in an ordinary
criminal trial. This means, so far
as is possible, general sentencing principles
such as retribution, denunciation, proportionality apply ‘as well as
principles that apply when sentencing offenders with cognitive and
mental health
impairments’.
as noted, it is recognised that this approach is ‘not without
difficulties, both conceptually and in
10.3.29 Table 8.11 sets out arguments in favour and against the different
models considered by the NSWLRC for setting the limiting
Table 8.11: Models identified by the NSWLRC for setting limiting
Arguments in favour
Arguments against
Hypothetical sentence based approach
• Approach that courts are familiar with.
• Fairness requires that forensic patients should not been detained
for longer that if convicted in a normal trial.
• Sentencing principles recognise the interests of the community and
the victims.
• This is the least arbitrary.
• Sentencing principles may not appropriate as defendants who are
unfit to stand trial or not guilty by reason of insanity require
treatment not
punishment. Under sentencing principles, proportionality is constrained by
community safety.
• Sentencing principles cannot be applied with reasonable accuracy
given the artificiality of the imposing sentence of a person
who has not been
found guilty.
• Limiting terms do not achieve outcomes commensurate with sentences
given that the person does not get a benefit from an early
guilty plea, may not
be able to put all the facts before the court and focuses on the total sentence
(not taking account of the fact
that sentenced offenders may be eligible for
• Creates the impression that the person is being punished, despite
not having been found guilty of an offence. Hunyor writes
approach suggests that there is a desire to hold people responsible and see them
punished that needs to be satisfied
such that a person isn’t perceived to
“get off more
• Encourages the development of informal tariffs related to just
deserts for the
Modified sentencing approach
• Could address some of the limitations identified with the
hypothetical sentence model by imposing a time limit equivalent
hypothetical non-parole period.
• Could provide that certain mitigating factors are presumed or
provide for a percentage-based discount for unknown mitigating
• Using a non-parole period ignores the role of supervision on
release on parole.
• Presuming mitigating factors would be very artificial.
Fixed statutory time limits (often based on maximum
• Certainty and consistency.
• Difficult to apply in Tasmania as all offences under the
Criminal Code
(other than murder and treason) have the same maximum
• Ignores the range of sentences imposed for offences.
• The relationship between the time limit and the offending conduct
ceases to be proportionate and becomes arbitrary.
Risk management approach
• This would be able to take into account the likelihood of
rehabilitation, the likely length and success of treatment (and
offending behaviour).
• The length of the term should be set by the need to protect the
community balanced against the principle that a person’s
liberty should be
subject to the minimum restriction
• Not an approach that the court is familiar with.
• Predictions of risk factors may be difficult at an early
10.3.30 As indicated, the application of the hypothetical sentence approach
is the preferred approach in other jurisdictions. This
was reaffirmed as the
most appropriate approach by the NSWLRC. However, to address some of the
limitations of the model, the NSWLRC
also recommended the following measures to
make sure that the hypothetical sentence approach did not overestimate the
commensurate
• The court should estimate the sentence as if the person had been
found guilty at a normal trial, and so taking into account
the person’s
cognitive or mental health impairment; and
• In order to make sure that the limiting term is fair in comparison
with those found guilty at a normal trial, the court should
have a broad
discretion to discount the sentence taking into account that it may not be
possible to demonstrate particular mitigating
factors such as remorse or a
guilty plea.
10.3.31 In relation to the conditional release orders, in other jurisdictions
the period of the order is generally the same as the
limit for good behaviour
bonds/conditional release orders imposed as a sentence and range from 24 months
to five years.
These have not
been the subject of review in other jurisdictions. In Tasmania, an option would
be to have the time limit for a conditional
release order under the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) equivalent to the period for a
conditional undertaking under the
Sentencing Act 1997
that is, five years.
10.3.32 The TLRI seeks feedback in relation to how a limiting term should be
set for supervision and restriction orders if one is
adopted in Tasmania. In
addition, the TLRI seeks feedback on whether the limiting term for conditional
release orders should be the
same as the conditional undertaking under the
Sentencing Act 1997
(five years).
63. If there is a time limit for restriction and supervision orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), on what basis should
it be determined?
64. If there is a time limit for conditional release orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), should it be the
same as the conditional undertaking under the
Sentencing Act 1997
(five years)? If not, on what basis should it be determined?
Test for making, varying, discharging or
revoking orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
10.3.33 In Tasmania, the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) sets out the test for the Supreme Court to apply when making, varying,
discharging or revoking orders. The same principles apply
to all decision-making
by the Supreme Court and are discussed in detail at [8.2.9] and
[8.2.22]–[8.2.27]. As noted, the provisions
aim to provide an appropriate
balance between the need to protect the safety of the community and the
principle of least restriction
with the defendant’s freedom and personal
autonomy. In making this assessment, there is a focus in the legislation (and by
the court) on the likely danger that the defendant poses to other people if
10.3.34 This section of the Issues Paper focuses on whether there is a need
to reform the test contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) for making an assessment of whether to detain a person under a
supervision order, impose a supervision order or a treatment
order or release a
person conditionally or unconditionally. In addition, it considers the basis on
which a forensic patient should
be released from detention or supervision. It
also addresses concerns that have been raised about the difficulties that arise
forensic patients in having these orders discharged. These issues will
require resolution in Tasmania, even if a limiting term is
introduced in
Tasmania for forensic patients, as it will still be necessary to decide on what
basis the order should be made and
on what basis a person can be discharged or
have an order varied prior to the expiry of the limiting term.
10.3.35 Previous analysis of the Tasmanian forensic mental health system has
raised concerns about the difficulty that patients experience
in having a
forensic order discharged. As noted at [8.3.11], there are concerns that under
restriction orders, forensic patients
are detained for ‘substantially more
than what [they] would have been if they had been found guilty of the
offence’ (other
than in cases of
Similar observations
have been made in relation to supervision orders, where concerns have been
raised about the length of time that
a forensic patient is subject to
supervision.
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner has illustrated the issues that exist in
relation to having an order discharged with a case
Case Example
A man was subject to a restriction order for 16 years. Despite reports from
the Tasmanian Forensic Review Tribunal suggesting that
the restriction order be
lifted and replaced by a supervision order allowing him to reside in the
community subject to the supervision
of the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist, the
courts were reluctant to revoke the restriction order on the basis that they had
no evidence
of how the person would operate in the community.
This was described as presenting a ‘catch 22’ situation given
that it would be ‘almost impossible to gather evidence
to present to the
court to demonstrate how they would operate in a different
10.3.36 There also appears to be a traditional reluctance for the Supreme
Court to allow an individual to transition from an indefinite
supervision order
to a limited term treatment order in cases where a person has a mental illness
that requires long-term (potentially
life-long) treatment, such as
schizophrenia. This is illustrated in the cases of
CJS v Tasmania
Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services v Horacek
in both cases the person committed an offence while unmedicated and, on the
evidence, was not a danger to the community while
medicated. However, the
concern expressed by the court was that the person may become non-compliant with
a medication regime once
the supervision order was revoked, and so the potential
for danger to the community would re-emerge. While under both a supervision
order and a treatment order there is power for a compulsory medication regime,
the court was concerned about need to renew a treatment
order (in contrast to
the indefinite nature of the supervision order) and the lack of judicial
oversight. In these circumstances,
it was considered that the long-term
management regime provided by a supervision order was necessary. Again, there
appears to the
‘catch 22’ given that there is little ability for a
forensic patient to demonstrate compliance with treatment without
a supervision
order, until provided with this opportunity. Further, Smith has argued that
these cases show that ‘too little
weight is attached to the fact that the
commission of the offences occurred when a person was undiagnosed and
untreated’ with
the ‘single most important aspect [from the
court’s point of view] with respect to schizophrenia is that it requires
lifelong treatment and, in their view, mandatory
treatment’.
approach is evident in other decisions of the Supreme Court where applications
to revoke supervision orders were rejected on
the basis the person had a chronic
mental health condition and that there was a concern about the suitability of a
treatment order
as a means to ensure compliance with medication
requirements.
10.3.37 However, more recently, people with schizophrenia or a
schizoaffective disorder have had supervision orders revoked. Data
from the MHT
show that since November 2010, there have been six people with schizophrenia or
a schizoaffective disorder who have
had their supervision orders revoked. Other
orders revoked since 2010 included four people with a primary diagnosis of
intellectual
disability and two with acquired brain injury. In this period,
there have also been three people with schizophrenia or a schizoaffective
disorder and two with intellectual disability who have had restriction orders
discharged and supervision orders made.
10.3.38 Concerns have also been raised about the inconsistency in outcomes
between decisions of the MHT in issuing certificates and
the Supreme Court in
refusing to discharge the order once an application has been made. Smith, then
President of the Guardianship
and Administration Board and ex officio member of
the Forensic Tribunal, highlighted the ‘marked difference between the
of the Forensic Tribunal in issuing the certificate and the Supreme
Court in considering
discharge’.
difference was attributed to the different legislative considerations for each
body (see [8.2.12]) but also the different experiences
of the Forensic Tribunal
and the Supreme Court:
the members of the Tribunal, unlike the Court, regularly see a range of
people with more severe or more acute levels of disability
than the person who
is the subject of forensic orders. Such people also require lifelong treatment
and Tribunal members are familiar
with the non-punitive facilities which exist
to ensure that they have it.
However, it may be that there has been a narrowing of the division between
the approach of the MHT and the Supreme Court given that
there are no people on
restriction orders who have a current certificate and eight people with current
certificates on supervision
orders and four of those have current applications
to revoke the supervision order.
10.3.39 Concerns have been raised in other jurisdictions, where commentators
have identified ‘over-cautiousness or undue “conservatism”
the approach of people involved in the system, from psychiatrists to the
Forensic Leave Panel [Victoria] and the
In Victoria, it has been observed that one of the main obstacles in the
progression of a forensic patient towards release is the
complete revocation of
the non-custodial supervision
Freckelton notes that
‘the [Victorian] Supreme Court has been more liberal in varying orders
from a custodial supervision order
to non-custodial supervision order than in
revoking supervisory status
completely’.
This is on the basis that under a non-custodial supervision order, the court
still retains a ‘continued capacity ... to order
acquittees to return to
inpatient status if they breach the terms of a non-custodial supervision
order’. In contrast, ‘if
the court revokes an acquittee’s
supervisory status, he or she reverts to being simply another patient in the
community with
a diagnosis of a mental
10.3.40 The Tasmanian Supreme Court has also commented on the differing
approach of the MHT and the Court to the revocation of supervision
has been critical of MHT for its ‘lenient approach to the issue of
certificates’.
case, Evans J expressed concern that ‘this is the fourth occasion since
March 2008 on which I have formed a different
view to the Forensic Tribunal on
whether a supervision order should be removed’. His Honour stated
Where the primary purpose for a supervision order or a community treatment
order is to impose an indefinite requirement on the subject
of the order to take
medication, those involved in the supervision and annual review of the order may
well deem those tasks to be
an unwarranted burden. My experience is that
notwithstanding that the person subject to a supervision order is content with
its continuance,
that person may be encouraged to apply for its discharge: by
those involved in its supervision or review; and on the basis of a
misunderstanding
of the effects of the order or the likely effects of a
community treatment order which might replace it.
The view seems to have been taken that from the point of view of the patient,
there is little practical difference in a compulsory
treatment regime imposed by
a supervision order or a treatment order. Accordingly, community safety warrants
retaining the indefinite
order rather than imposing an order that will expire.
However, this approach overlooks the prospect of the person progressing to
treatment regime outside of the forensic context.
10.3.41 More recently, however, decisions of the Supreme Court have accepted
that the revocation of a supervision order may be appropriate
even if the person
has an enduring mental impairment and will require life-long medication. There
has been acceptance that Community
Mental Health Services are able to manage
these conditions through life-long treatment and assertive case management and
as required, and that the ongoing supervision of the court is not
required. The court has noted the importance of comprehensive information
future care and treatment being provided to satisfy the requirement that the
revocation of the order is consistent with community
10.3.42 An additional concern raised by Smith was the lack of statistical
information about the operation of the forensic mental health
It is difficult to
access information that allows for an assessment to be made of the period of
restriction or supervision for forensic
patients. While the MHT reports on the
number of certificates issued, it is not known publicly how may certificates
result in a discharge
or revocation of order by the Supreme Court (other than if
the MHT reports on this). Although some applications for discharge are
available (either on the Inglis Clark sentencing database or in appeal
decisions), it would appear that many are not publicly
While this is
understandable given the sensitive nature of the cases, this makes it difficult
for legal practitioners to provide
advice to their clients about the likely
consequence of relying on insanity or fitness to stand trial, beyond needing to
mindful of how difficult it can be to discharge a forensic
Position in other jurisdictions
10.3.43 While there are differences in the process for making orders, the
management and review of forensic patients and the discharge
of orders in other
Australian jurisdictions, there are some broad similarities that are useful in
the context of this review. A brief
summary of the approach in other
concept of endangerment
is often used as a decision-making criterion for making,
varying or revoking forensic orders. However, as shown in Table 8.12, the
which the test of endangerment is framed differs between jurisdictions and also
varies at different decision-making stages.
Table 8.12: Comparison of tests for making and discharging forensic
orders, Australian jurisdictions
Making orders
Varying or discharging orders
Serious endangerment
New South Wales (NGMI)
New South Wales
South Australia
Likely to endanger
South Australia
Northern Territory
Australian Capital Territory
Unacceptable risk to the safety of the community
Not a threat or danger
Commonwealth
Safety will or is likely to be seriously at risk
Northern Territory
Degree of risk
Western Australia
10.3.44 A key difference (as seen in Table 8.12) is that some jurisdictions
have adopted the requirement that the court consider whether
public safety would
be seriously endangered by the person’s release (rather than ‘likely
to endanger’) as the threshold
test for the release of an
individual.
‘serious endangerment’ test encompasses ‘concepts of the
degree of harm and the degree of
In other words,
‘it encompasses the gravity of the possible harm in the event that the
risk eventuates’.
‘a small risk of serious harm occurring may amount to serious
endangerment, while a high risk of relatively trivial harm
New South Wales v XY
Court of Appeal confirmed that the test involves a consideration of the gravity
of the risk and the likelihood of the risk: this
means that it is necessary
‘to identify the nature of the harm which might follow from release, and
the chance of the harm
eventuating’.
indicated that if the conduct ‘which may occur would probably not have
serious consequences for any member of the public
if it did occur, a reasonably
high chance of occurrence would be
tolerable’.
However, if
‘the anticipated conduct ... involved serious physical harm and possibly
homicide, a much lower level of risk of
occurrence would need to be
established’.
In contrast, as set out at [8.2.26], ‘likely to endanger’ is
predominately concerned with the degree of risk of harm
occurring rather than
its gravity. ‘Likely to endanger’ involves an assessment of the risk
of harm — ‘both
the probability of the harm occurring and the
gravity of the possible harm are relevant to assessing the nature of the risk,
the probability of a risk occurring is the “critical concept of
endangerment”’.
10.3.45 Another difference that exists between jurisdictions is the existence
of statutory presumptions in favour of release or detention.
For example, in New
South Wales, in relation to the release of a forensic patient, the MHRT must not
release a patient unless it
is satisfied that the public will not be seriously
endangered. This creates a presumption in favour of detention unless the
decision-maker
is satisfied that the public will not be seriously endangered.
This is also the case under the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) and in
Queensland.
It is also the
case in Victoria during the nominal
In contrast, in some
unless satisfied that the person
poses a risk (as defined in that jurisdiction).
This creates a presumption in favour of release. This is the case in the
Territory and in Victoria (after the expiry of the nominal
In some jurisdictions
there is no presumption in favour of release or detention — this is the
case in Tasmania and Western
Options for reform
10.3.46 There are several reform options that could be considered in the
context of the Tasmanian forensic mental health system. These
• revisiting the role of dangerousness in making, varying and revoking
• including statutory presumptions in relation to the detention or
release of defendants;
• making changes to the model of decision-making;
• making changes to the leave system.
The role of dangerousness
. As the NSWLRC has identified, there
are two common features in cases following a finding at a special hearing of not
guilty by reason
of insanity:
• the absence of established criminal responsibility, and therefore the
absence of any principled basis for punishment; and
• the possibility that the person’s cognitive or mental health
impairment may give rise to a risk of harm, and a consequent
restrictions on the person’s liberty to ensure the safety of the community
This means that punishment should not have application in these cases.
Accordingly, the limits of the person’s detention are
guided by the
requirement to achieve a balance between community safety and the
individual’s freedom and personal
informed by the
concept of risk. However, as McSherry has written, ‘the problem really
lies in drawing up appropriate criteria
which will lead to the detention of
those who really may do harm in the future, whilst allowing for the absolute
discharge of those
who do not pose a risk to the
forensic patient and the process by which the
order is able to be varied or
discharged, and have examined the principles and factors that should be
considered by the court. This
discussion has generally focused on the concepts
of risk of harm and dangerousness.
10.3.48 In Victoria, the VLRC sought feedback on whether endangerment was
appropriate as the basis for the court’s assessment
of whether to detain
or release a forensic patient. The view was expressed that
‘endangerment’ was an imprecise concept
that allowed too much
subjective interpretation.
The NSWLRC considered that endangerment provided ‘very little guidance on
what this phrase
other commentators have observed that the focus on dangerousness provided little
guidance as to how the court should exercise
broad discretion and have argued
that this has resulted in the courts according ‘higher weight to factors
relating to community
protection than factors related to treatment and ongoing
evidence of mental
also considered that a test based on an assessment of dangerousness was
inadequate as it was inconsistent with the test
for determining the detention of
a patient in the civil mental health system (which required an assessment of
whether it was necessary
for the protection of the person or others from serious
harm) and it was inconsistent with contemporary language of risk
assessment.
Dangerousness was
said to be inappropriate because it was ‘a vague and unhelpful way of
expressing the risk of a particular
individual causing
Instead, its
view was that the language of risk better reflected the approach taken by
clinicians and health professionals in the
mental health
10.3.49 In response to concerns about the inadequacy of the current test, the
NSWLRC recommended a ‘a risk-based threshold for
release [that] should
require that there be no significant risk of serious
‘significant’ risk of ‘serious’ harm was viewed as an
appropriate hurdle to protect community safety
and the interests of the
individual.
In Victoria, a
different approach was recommended to address concerns about the language of
‘dangerousness’ and to move
to a ‘risk’-based test. The
VLRC’s view was that ‘an “unacceptable risk” [was] an
appropriate
measure of the likelihood of risk the supervised person
proposed for four reasons:
(1) it demonstrates that ‘there is some level of risk that will be
acceptable and will counteract any assumption that person
must prove that they
pose no risk before their level of supervision can be
(2) it ‘recognises that assessing risk requires a level of subjective
judgment by the decision-maker on the level of risk that
society is prepared to
accept when balanced against the supervised person’s right to liberty and
(3) although ‘it incorporates some level of social judgement. A test
based on unacceptable risk is more in line with modern
risk assessment that than
a test based on
dangerousness’;
(4) it ‘will encourage decision-makers to engage in more nuanced
assessments of a supervised person’s risk, rather than
a “black and
white” assessment of whether a person is “dangerous” or
dangerous”’.
10.3.50 The VLRC also considered that the test should specify the type of
harm required to provide more clarity to decision-makers
and experts applying
the test. Accordingly, it recommended a test based on physical or psychological
harm to a person.
South Wales, ‘serious harm’ was the degree of harm that was
specified given that it aligned more closely with
the civil mental health
Similarly, in
Tasmania, under the civil mental health system, ‘serious harm’ forms
part of the treatment criteria for
the MHT in making a treatment
10.3.51 Other factors that may be necessary to provide more guidance to the
court in relation to making, varying and revoking orders
were also considered by
the VLRC. It recommended that the legislation should be amended to require
consideration of an individual’s
recovery and progress, in terms of
treatment and personal improvement, to be taken into account in making a
decision about whether
to change a person’s status from a custodial
supervision order to a non-custodial supervision order or release the person
a non-custodial supervision
This change was
recommended to allow the test to be more responsive to people with intellectual
disability or other cognitive impairments,
and to recognise more positive
aspects of a person’s recovery or
10.3.52 The TLRI seeks feedback on the wording of the Tasmania test contained
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) and any
concerns that exist about its operation either generally or in the context of
particular types of individuals, such
as those with cognitive impairment or
those with long-term mental illness. In particular, the TLRI seeks feedback on
whether there
should be a change to the threshold for making, varying or
discharging an order under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to more appropriately balance the risk to the community and the
interests of the individual.
65. Are there any difficulties that exist under the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) in relation to the making, varying or
discharging of orders for forensic patients?
66. Is the current approach to decision-making in relation to individuals
subject to forensic orders overly cautious? For example,
is too much emphasis
placed on the risk to the community and too little emphasis placed on the
interests of the person?
67. Do you think that the test contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
referring to ‘likely to
endanger’ should be changed to refer to a ‘significant risk of
serious harm’, an
‘unacceptable risk of causing physical or
psychological harm’ or some other test? Are there any other factors that
be included or removed from the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
Need for statutory presumptions in relation to detention or
In the NSWLRC’s review of forensic orders, it considered
whether the presumption in favour of detention should be retained when
decisions about release. This presumption applies in the context of a limiting
term where prior to the expiry of the limiting
term, a ‘person will remain
in detention unless it can be positively established that their release ... will
not present a
recommended that this presumption should be retained because it considered that
this was necessary for community
In Victoria,
different presumptions apply at different stages of the forensic mental health
process (either in favour of detention,
release or no
presumption),
and these were
also reviewed by the VLRC.
10.3.54 The VLRC’s view was that the state should be required to
justify continued detention given that the person had not been
found to be
criminally responsible.
was the VLRC’s view that placing the onus on the supervised person had the
effect of slowing down the progression of the
person through the forensic mental
health system and also was inconsistent with the principle of least
restriction.
For this reason,
the VLRC recommended that there should only be a presumption that a
person’s level of supervision should not
be reduced if a person applied
for a variation of a custodial supervision order before the first progress
review at five years. It
recommended ‘a neutral assessment, with no
presumption that the level of supervision be reduced, at the first progress
(at five years)’ and a presumption in favour of a reduced level of
supervision for all subsequent progress
In relation
to custodial supervision orders, at the second progress review (and reviews
thereafter), there was a presumption that
the court would vary the custodial
supervision order to a non-custodial supervision order unless satisfied on the
evidence that the
person would pose an unacceptable risk of causing physical or
psychological harm. In relation to non-custodial supervision orders,
second progress review (and reviews thereafter), it was recommended that the
court must revoke the supervision order unless
satisfied of an unacceptable
The VLRC also
recommended that the requirement be retained that a custodial supervision order
not be varied unless a 12-month period
of extended leave had been
10.3.55 In Tasmania, there is currently no presumption in favour of release
or detention contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). Instead, the court takes into account the factors that are identified
in the legislation in making its decision. If the current
system of indefinite
detention or supervision with reviews is retained, an option for reform may be
to create a presumption in favour
of a reduced level of supervision in
circumstances where the MHT has issued a certificate. This may be appropriate to
address concerns
that there are unnecessary barriers for people progressing
through the system and allows greater weight to be attached to the
decision-making
process undertaken by the MHT. If a system of limiting terms is
adopted in Tasmania, consideration could also be given to introducing
presumptions such as a presumption against release or reduced supervision prior
to the expiry of the limiting term and
then a presumption in favour of release
from detention/discharge from supervision after the expiry of the limiting
68. If the current system of indefinite detention or supervision with reviews
is retained in Tasmania, should the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) be amended to create a presumption in favour of a reduced level
of supervision in circumstances where the Mental Health Tribunal
has issued a
certificate?
69. If a system of limiting terms is adopted in Tasmania, should a
presumption against release or reduced supervision be created prior
expiry of the limiting term and then a presumption in favour of release from
detention/discharge from supervision after the
expiry of the limiting term?
Making changes to the current decision making model.
as indicated, the MHT reviews forensic orders within 12 months
of the making of the order and then in each 12 month period afterwards.
can issue a certificate if it determines that a forensic order is no longer
warranted or that the conditions of the order
are not appropriate. However, it
does not have the power itself to discharge or vary the forensic order. This can
only be done by
the Supreme
Accordingly, there is
usually a two-step process (MHT review and Supreme Court hearing) to revoke or
discharge forensic orders, and
this may operate as a barrier for forensic
patients making an application to the Supreme Court to revoke or discharge an
Data from the MHT show
that it is not uncommon for a person to have received several certificates at
reviews conducted by the MHT
before an application is made to discharge the
restriction or supervision order. Further, there are some individuals on
supervision
orders who have received numerous certificates from the MHT and have
not made application to the Supreme Court for the revocation
of their order.
Alternatively, the two-step process may be viewed as providing an additional
safeguard given that a person’s
mental health may fluctuate. In this
context, it is noted that the MHT data show that there are some patients who
receive a certificate
at the MHT review (and who remain on the forensic order)
and subsequently have a review hearing where no certificate is issued by
MHT. In addition, as noted by the TLRI, differing approaches to the issue of
certificates by the MHT and the discharge of orders
by the Supreme Court have
been identified.
10.3.57 A possible approach to address concerns in relation to the
difficulties of varying or discharging forensic orders would be
different approach to the judicial model of decision-making and allow for the
MHT to have the power to vary, discharge
or revoke orders made under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) 1999
(Tas). The MHT already has
power to make, vary, renew and discharge treatment orders and to determine leave
from the SMHU for patients
subject to restriction
Extending the power
of the MHT would remove unnecessary duplication by having the MHT review a
matter and issue a certificate and
then have the forensic patient apply to the
Supreme Court. This could be supported by an avenue of appeal in event that
arose in relation to a decision of the MHT. This would also accord with
the approach in many other jurisdictions, as recognised by
10.3.58 Other models of decision-making in relation to the review and release
of people subject to forensic orders have been adopted
in Australian
In Queensland,
the Mental Health Court makes the initial order and the Mental Health Review
Tribunal can confirm or revoke a forensic
order. The Tribunal is also able to
make orders in relation to the category of forensic order, the conditions that
are in place on
the order, whether a person should have community treatment and
any other orders including revoking the forensic order and making
a Treatment
Support Order or a Treatment
The Mental Health
Review Tribunal consists of three members — a legal member, a medical
member and a community member. In New
South Wales, the court makes the initial
order but a separate tribunal (the Forensic Division of the Mental Health Review
has the power to review the forensic order and can release a forensic
patient either unconditionally or conditionally before the
end of the limiting
The Tribunal cannot
order the release of a forensic patient unless the Tribunal is constituted by at
least one member, including
the President or Deputy President, who is the holder
or the former holder of judicial
The New Zealand Law
Commission also recommended that the decision-maker should be a specialised
independent Tribunal and that it
should be chaired by a current or former
In the Australian
Capital Territory, the hearing proceeds in court and the court orders detention
and indicates a nominated term
but an administrative tribunal (the Civil and
Administrative Tribunal) reviews detention under the court order and has the
to order the release of a person from
10.3.59 This matter was considered by the VLRC, and the following advantages
to using a mental health court or tribunal were
identified:
• Potentially ameliorating over-cautiousness in decision making;
• Providing informality and an inquisitorial nature to the proceedings.
The advantages of an inquisitorial model were set out
by Freckelton:
Inquisitorial review bodies constituted by lawyers experienced in mental
health, psychiatrists and community members with lengthy
experience in mental
health generally enjoy a significant advantage over the courts in exploring the
dangerousness of persons with
mental illness and assimilating the presentation
of such patients. Adversarial courts are ill-suited to such a process and risk
insensitive to psychiatric illness realities and also to being
counter-therapeutic in their
• The membership of a Tribunal (including medical and legal expertise)
ensures that it has specialist expertise.
• More resource effective.
Many of these advantages were also recognised by the New Zealand Law
Commission.
10.3.60 The VLRC also identified benefits of retaining the existing judicial
model of decision-making including the ‘value of
the jurisprudence and the
expertise that has developed within the current judicial
The judicial
model was said to provide a continuity of approach and was ‘a forum that
is more open to public
Courts were
said to ‘confer a certain “degree of authority”, which may be
more effective at reassuring victims
that their interests are important and
being meaningfully
represented’.
10.3.61 In its final report, the VLRC considered that the benefits of the
judicial model of decision-making currently outweighed the
benefits of an
alternative model. In particular, it was considered that this was appropriate
given the public dimension of the order
(the order was made by a court and
should go back to the court for
discharge).
It was also
considered to confer legitimacy and authority on the decision and provide for
public confidence.
contrast, the NZLC recommended that a tribunal (rather than the court) was the
preferred decision-making body for the review and
discharge or
10.3.62 If the decision-making model to discharge, revoke or vary orders is
altered in Tasmania, further issues will arise in relation
to the composition of
the MHT for the purposes of these decisions. There is a need for rigorous and
consistent decision-making. In
Tasmania, hearings of the MHT are constituted by
a panel of three people: a chairperson (who is a lawyer), a psychiatrist and a
with experience in mental
This is similar to
the composition of the Mental Health Review Panel in Queensland. In contrast, in
New South Wales, decisions about
whether to release a forensic patient must be
made by a panel which includes the President or Deputy President, who is the
or the former holder of judicial office.
70. Should there be a change in the judicial model of decision-making to
allow the Mental Health Tribunal to exercise powers of variation,
discharge or
revocation of forensic orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
71. If there is a change to the decision-making model in Tasmania, is it
necessary to make changes in relation to the composition
of the panel that is
constituted to make decisions to discharge, revoke or vary forensic orders under
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Transition from forensic patient
10.3.63 In Tasmania, there is concern about the difficulty that forensic
patients encounter when transitioning from a restriction
order to a supervision
order or from a supervision order to treatment under the
Mental Health Act
(Tas). This difficulty stems from what has been described as a
‘catch-22’ situation as a forensic patient is not able
demonstrate how they may behave with a lower level of supervision and so are not
granted a lower level of
supervision.
10.3.64 There also appear to be difficulties in providing
‘step-up’ and ‘step-down’ options for a forensic
seeking to transition from a restriction order (with detention at the Wilfred
Lopes Centre) to detention in a community-based
facility. In
Secretary of the
Department of Health and Human Service v
attempted to construct a release order that would allow for the defendant to
move from the Wilfred Lopes Centre to Tyenna
Blue but with an option to have the
defendant moved back to Wilfred Lopes if
outlined the dilemma:
The dilemma can be readily stated. The aim is to permit greater flexibility
in the treatment of the applicant without the present
level of incarceration.
That flexibility requires compulsory return to the Wilfred Lopes Centre if the
regime is found to be unworkable.
Release to a less intensive institution or
centre is desirable if the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist believes, as a
consequence of medical
judgment, such a course to be apposite. Return to the
community simpliciter is not a present option. The Court is reluctant to leave
the present order in force without
However, the Court of Criminal Appeal found that the orders of the judge, in
attempting to permit, at the direction of the Chief Forensic
Psychiatrist, the
movement of the defendant in and out of the SMHU as deemed necessary and
treatment as an involuntary patient under
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) was not lawful.
held that it was not possible to use the conditions attached to a supervision
order ‘as a means of expanding the role of
a supervision order, and
creating a hybrid order somewhere between a supervision and restriction
10.3.65 Features of forensic mental health systems in other jurisdictions may
provide possible models to address concerns that exist
in relation to the
Tasmanian system. These include amendments to leave provisions, the use of
technology to better supervise forensic
patients on leave or conditional release
and/or the creation of step-up and step-down facilities.
Amendment to leave provisions.
Boyd-Caine and Chappell have
observed that leave privileges:
are critical to the patient’s ability to progress through the forensic
system towards release. In the first instance, leave
privileges provide an
opportunity for patients to be test in terms of responsibility, trust, insight
into their illness, and the
general progress of their rehabilitation. Leave
privileges are also gradual steps towards greater liberty and access to family,
and the broader
Leave in Tasmania is also a central to rehabilitation of forensic patients
and operates over the longer term with the aim of supporting
and facilitating
the discharge of a restriction order. However, this is not explicitly recognised
Mental Health Act 2013
An option for reform in
Tasmania may be to make changes to the leave system so that there are more
options in relation to the type
of leave available, including the ability of the
MHT to make extended leave orders to provide forensic patients with an
opportunity
to demonstrate their progress towards rehabilitation. This reflects
a graduated approach to release from detention and is closely
rehabilitation and
reintegration.
It would also
address the concerns raised by the court in
of the supervision order as it would allow a person on a restriction order to
live outside the secure mental
health unit for extended periods of time (with
the ability to move the person back to the SMHU if required).
10.3.67 In Victoria, there is a unique system of leave that ‘specifies
the type of leave that is available based on the location
and duration of the
summarised the types of leave as
• Special leave – this allows a forensic patient on a custodial
supervision order to leave their place of detention and
receive services for a
period not exceeding seven days for the purposes of receiving medical treatment,
or 24 hours for non-medical
treatment purposes. This can be granted by an
authorised psychiatrist and can be suspended by the Chief Psychiatrist.
• On-ground leave – this allows a forensic patient to leave their
place of detention and receive services but requires
them to remain
‘within the surrounds’ of the place of detention. It can be
authorised by the Forensic Leave Panel and
suspended by the Chief
Psychiatrist.
• Limited off-ground leave – this allows a forensic patient, for
a maximum of six months, to leave their place of detention
between the hours of
6 am and 9 pm and outside those hours on a maximum of three days in any
seven-day period. It can be authorised
by the Forensic Leave Panel and suspended
by the Chief Psychiatrist.
• Extended leave – this allows a forensic patient to leave the
place where they are being detained for a period of time
not exceeding 12
months. The Supreme Court can make an extended leave order and it can be revoked
by the Chief Psychiatrist.
Use of technology.
In New South Wales, there are changes being
introduced with a view to ensuring that people with cognitive and mental health
impairments
are better managed to improve community
One of the changes
foreshadowed is the use of GPS technology by treating teams and the Mental
Health Review Tribunal ‘to better
supervise forensic patients on leave or
conditional release’.
This reflects a review of the operation of the Mental Health Review Tribunal
that proposed the amendment of the Forensic Mental Health
Services Policy
‘to recognise advances in technology and the readily available
non-obtrusive technological solutions, including
potential for the use of mobile
phone apps, which enable supervision of patients via
It was also
recommended that:
additional GPS mechanisms for supervising patients, and other technological
options as may be appropriate, be considered by treating
teams and the Tribunal
for use in developing the risk-management plan for supervising patients on leave
or conditional release; and
that the Tribunal have the power and discretion to
direct the use of GPS monitoring through mobile apps. These options are intended
to enhance community and victim confidence in the supervision of patients on
However, it was not recommended that permanent ankle bracelets be
Step-down/step-up facilities.
Reviews conducted in other
forensic patients leaving
custodial supervision.
10.3.70 In South Australia, the SASAC reported that there was a recognised
need for an intermediate step between secure forensic mental
health detention
and being released — either conditionally or unconditionally — into
the community.
forensic facility in South Australia is James Nash House and it has a
‘step-down’ unit (Ashton House). However,
while the court was able
to order the release of a person from detention to release under licence in the
community to reside at Ashton
House, Ashton House did not operate as a step-up
There was no provision
for the Clinical Director to return a person to James Nash House without
applying to the court to suspend
or revoke a
Accordingly, the
SASAC concluded that there needed to be more flexibility to allow licensees to
be easily transferred between James
Nash House and Ashton House according to
clinical need with the MHT being empowered to assist with the efficient
operation of the
step-up and step-down process without need to apply to the
10.3.71 The VLRC also considered that incorporating more flexibility in terms
of accommodation options and the type of order that
could be made could assist
in supporting the person and would be consistent with recovery oriented
It recommended the
‘establishment of a medium-secure facility as an approved mental health
service under the CMIA to provide
an intermediate step between the high-security
facility of Thomas Embling Hospital and community
accommodation’.
could also be used where people have breached conditions of a non-custodial
supervision order.
10.3.72 In Tasmania, the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner has argued that a
step-down unit or other forms of transitional facilities
would enable forensic
patients to transition back to the
This ‘would
risk of breaching Australian obligations
Tasmania, there are resourcing difficulties that exist in using leave as a step
towards discharge of a restriction order as there
is a lack of appropriate
accommodation in the community (such as a step-down unit). There are also
difficulties with staffing so
that forensic patients may have leave cancelled
due to a lack of available staff to escort the person on supervised leave and
has potential implications for the length of time that a patient is subject
to a supervision order.
10.3.73 The TLRI seeks feedback in relation to whether the
Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) and the leave provision in the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) currently provides an appropriate pathway
for gradual reintegration of a forensic patient into the community, consistent
the principles of least restriction and community safety. In this regard,
options for reform could include changing the conditions
that may attach to a
supervision order, making changes to the leave provisions and the creation of
step-down/step-up facilities to
provide for appropriate levels of supervision
and flexibility to respond to patient need.
72. Are there any difficulties with the operation of the leave provisions
Mental Health 2013
(Tas) that limit its utility in providing an
appropriate pathway for the gradual reintegration of a forensic patient into the
73. Does the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
provide an appropriate pathway for gradual reintegration of a forensic patient
into the community?
74. If not,
(a) Are the provisions regarding the conditions that may attach to a
supervision order adequate and appropriate? If not, what changes
should be made?
For example, would it be desirable for the provisions in relation to supervision
orders in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to be
amended to allow the court to impose conditions that the person reside in an
approved hospital if directed by the Chief
Forensic Psychiatrist or the Mental
Health Tribunal?
(b) Would changes to the leave provisions, such as providing for extended
leave, provide a more appropriate pathway for gradual reintegration
of a patient
into the community?
(c) Is there a need for a medium secure environment to operate as a
step-down/step-up facility for patients who are subject to a
restriction order?
If so, should the Chief Forensic Psychiatrist, the Mental Health Tribunal and/or
the court have the ability to
move a forensic patient between Wilfred Lopes and
the medium secure facility? On what basis?
(d) Is there a technological solution that may be used to monitor forensic
patients to address concerns in relation to risk and community
(e) What are the cost implications of making these changes, including the
costs of supervision and of treatment services?
The appropriateness of orders under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) for people
with intellectual disabilities
10.3.74 The Tasmanian forensic mental health system has been criticised for
failing to provide a suitable framework for people with
intellectual
disability.
It has been
argued that people with intellectual disability ‘can sometimes be subject
to a restriction order largely as a result
of the failure to provide an
appropriate level community support to prevent offending
behaviours’.
addition, a failure to provide appropriate services in the community may result
in a person on a supervision order behaving ‘in
a manner that places both
themselves and others at substantial risk’ and being apprehended and
detained at the SMHU.
Further, there are issues in relation to patients with intellectual disability
being able to discharge an order given that ‘the
behavioural
manifestations of their intellectual disability ... are unlikely over time to be
seriously modified and thus the level
of risk to the community is unlikely to
substantially decline. It is only with appropriate levels of supervision that
the risk of
reoffending can be
mitigated’.
basis, the Forensic Mental Health Tribunal expressed concern ‘that
Tasmania’s secure mental health facility is
effectively being used to
“warehouse” people for whom the State is unable to provide
Case example
B was placed on a supervision order after being found unit to stand trial for
a change of arson. He had a well-established history
of moderate intellectual
disability. He does not suffer from a major mental illness.
B worked in a full-time capacity and was a reliable worker. He maintained
stable accommodation in a shared flat over 15 months. He
was successful in
adhering to his supervision order for a period of approximately two years.
During this period, a 24 hour one-to-one
care package was in place.
According to reports received by the Tribunal, B only began to breach his
order when his support funding was pared back, resulting
in reduced supervision.
As a result, he absconded from his supervision program for five or so weeks
culminating in his apprehension
and detention at Wilfred Lopes Centre.
He remained in detention for a period of 16 months until an adequate support
package was made available.
10.3.75 Recently, amendments have been made to the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) to provide enforcement provisions in
relation to conditional release orders made under
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
. In the second reading speech, it was
stated that:
Forensic orders are often not appropriate options for defendants who have an
intellectual disability. In such case, release on conditions
may be appropriate
orders for the court to consider but the absence of a mechanism to enforce the
conditions imposed is problematic
and means judicial officers rarely use this
As noted, the TLRI’s examination of fitness to stand trial and insanity
cases between 2005 and June 2018, identified 12 cases
in the Supreme Court
involving individuals with intellectual disabilities with conditional release
orders being imposed in two cases,
restriction orders imposed in one case and
supervision orders being imposed in nine cases.
10.3.76 Concerns have been raised in other jurisdictions in relation to the
appropriateness of forensic orders for people with cognitive
impairments, as
have concerns that facilities and services designed primarily for people with
mental illnesses are not appropriate.
This latter issue was raised in South
Australia where the SASAC expressed the view that there needed to be a dedicated
secure facility
for people with cognitive impairments, as well as
‘suitable purpose-built facilities or accommodation for licensees with
impairments’.
The SASAC also considered measures that could be put in place in the absence of
a purpose-built facility and stated that it was ‘essential
that supported
accommodation be tailored to the needs of individuals with cognitive impairments
be developed’.
Queensland, the Butler Report highlighted the inappropriateness of forensic
orders and detention in mental health units for people
with an intellectual
disability and pointed to the lack of appropriate facilities for such
10.3.77 Similarly, in Victoria, the VLRC highlighted concerns about the
suitability of the system for people with intellectual or
other cognitive
impairment:
While arrangements for mental health treatment for people on supervision
orders are relatively well established, the same does not
exist for people with
an intellectual disability under the CMIA. Unlike people with a mental illness,
people with an intellectual
disability under the CMIA:
• rarely have their supervision order revoked
• lack a clear treatment pathway
• are not subject to clinical oversight by the Senior Practitioner
• lack secure accommodation facilities and accommodation options in the
In response, the VLRC made recommendations that would clarify supervision
responsibility for people with a cognitive impairment and
mandate the
preparation of a treatment
10.3.78 The NSWLRC observed that ‘[a]n issue that has arisen repeatedly
... is that the criminal justice and forensic systems
do not deal effectively
with people with cognitive
impairment’.
context of dispositional orders, these inadequacies were said to relate to the
very limited nature of services for people
with cognitive impairment in the
community, such as secure
accommodation.
expressed the view that many of the issues were primarily operational rather
than legal, and accordingly recommended the
development of a working group to
‘develop an action plan to deal with detention, care and community support
of forensic patients
with cognitive
impairment’.
made recommendations to acknowledge cognitive impairment in the law including
renaming the relevant legislation the
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment
(Forensic Provisions)
75. Are the orders available following a finding of not guilty by reason of
insanity or that a finding cannot be made that the defendant
was not guilty of
the offence charged under the current
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment)
(Tas) model appropriate for people with an intellectual disability
or cognitive impairment?
76. Are changes needed to the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
(Tas) in terms of the orders available and the process to vary or
discharge an order to better meet the needs of people with an intellectual
disability or cognitive impairment? What are the likely cost implications of
making these changes?
77. Are changes needed to the services that support the
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) model to ensure that it meets the needs
of people with an intellectual disability or cognitive impairment? What are the
cost implications of making these changes?
Appendix 1: Proposed reforms to unfitness to
stand trial test
England and Wales
Criminal Procedure (Lack of
Capacity) Bill
3. Capacity to participate effectively in a trial
(1) This section has effect for the purposes of section 1.
(2) A defendant is to be regarded as lacking the capacity to participate
effectively in a trial if the defendant’s relevant
abilities are not,
taken together, sufficient to enable the defendant to participate effectively in
the proceedings on the offence
or offences charged.
(3) In determining that question, the court must take into account the
assistance available to the defendant as regards the proceedings.
(4) The following are relevant abilities—
(a) an ability to understand the nature of the charge;
(b) an ability to understand the evidence adduced as evidence of the
commission of the offence;
(c) an ability to understand the trial process and the consequences of being
(d) an ability to give instructions to a legal representative;
(e) an ability to make a decision about whether to plead guilty or not
(f) an ability to make a decision about whether to give evidence;
(g) an ability to make other decisions that might need to be made by the
defendant in connection with the trial;
(h) an ability to follow the proceedings in court on the offence;
(i) an ability to give evidence;
(j) any other ability that appears to the court to be relevant in the
particular case.
(5) For the purposes of subsection (4)(e) to (g), an ability to make a
decision is to be regarded as consisting of—
(a) an ability to understand information relevant to the decision,
(b) an ability to retain that information,
(c) an ability to use and to weigh the information when making the decision,
(d) an ability to communicate the
New South Wales
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) should be amended to include a statutory fitness
test, as follows:
A person is unfit to stand trial if the person cannot be afforded a fair
trial because it is established on the balance of probabilities
that the person
is unable to do any one or more of the following:
(a) understand the offence with which the person is charged
(b) understand generally the nature of the proceeding as an inquiry into
whether it has been proved that the person committed the
offence charged
(c) follow the course of proceedings and understand what is going on in a
general sense
(d) understand the substantial effect of any evidence that may be given
against the person
(e) understand the information relevant to the decisions that the person will
have to make before and during the trial, and use that
information as part of a
rational decision making process
(f) communicate effectively with, and understand advice given by, legal
representatives, and
(g) provide the person’s version of the facts to the court, if
Section 6(1)
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) should be amended to
provide that a person is unfit to stand trial for an offence if, because the
person’s mental processes
are disordered or impaired, the person is or, at
some time during the hearing, will be:
(a) unable to understand the nature of the charge
(b) unable to understand the actual significance of entering a plea to the
(c) unable to enter a plea to the charge
(d) unable to understand the nature of the hearing (that it is an inquiry as
to whether the person committed the offence)
(e) unable to follow the course of the hearing
(f) unable to understand the substantial effect of any evidence that may be
given in support of the prosecution
(g) unable to decide whether to give evidence in support of his or her
(h) unable to give evidence in support of his or her case, if he or she
wishes to do so, or
(i) unable to communicate meaningful instructions to his or her legal
practitioner.
Commonwealth
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that a person is unfit to stand trial if the person cannot be
supported to:
(a) understand the information relevant to the decisions that they will have
to make in the course of the proceedings;
(b) retain that information to the extent necessary to make decisions in the
course of the proceedings;
(c) use or weigh that information as part of the process of making decisions;
(d) communicate the decisions in some
Appendix 2: Schedule 1 – Mental health
service delivery principles
1. The mental health service delivery principles are as follows:
(a) to respect, observe and promote the inherent rights, liberty, dignity,
autonomy and self-respect of persons with mental illness;
(b) to interfere with or restrict the rights of persons with mental illness
in the least restrictive way and to the least extent consistent
protection of those persons, the protection of the public and the proper
delivery of the relevant service;
(c) to provide a service that is comprehensive, accessible, inclusive,
equitable and free from stigma;
(d) to be sensitive and responsive to individual needs (whether as to
culture, language, age, religion, gender or other factors);
(e) to emphasise and value promotion, prevention and early detection and
intervention;
(f) to seek to bring about the best therapeutic outcomes and promote patient
(g) to provide services that are consistent with patient treatment plans;
(h) to recognise the difficulty, importance and value of the role played by
families, and support persons, of persons with mental
(i) to recognise, observe and promote the rights, welfare and safety of the
children and other dependants of persons with mental illness;
(j) to promote the ability of persons with mental illness to make their own
(k) to involve persons receiving services, and where appropriate their
families and support persons, in decision-making;
(l) to recognise families, and support persons, of persons with mental
illness as partners, with mental health service providers,
in the provision of
their treatment and care to the extent that this is appropriate and consistent
with their own wishes;
(m) to respect the wishes of persons receiving services, and the wishes of
their families and support persons, to the maximum extent
consistent with the
health and safety of those persons and the safety of others;
(n) to promote and enable persons with mental illness to live, work and
participate in their own community;
(o) to operate so as to raise community awareness and understanding of mental
illness and to foster community-wide respect for the
inherent rights, liberty,
dignity, autonomy and self-respect of persons with mental illness;
(p) to be accountable;
(q) to recognise and be responsive to national and international clinical,
technical and human rights trends, developments and advances.
Appendix 3: Orders available and making and
discharging orders
Table A3.1: Orders available
Commonwealth
The court may order detention or make an order for release either
absolutely or subject to
conditions.
New South Wales
Unfit and not acquitted (following special hearing) (UNA)
If would not have imposed a sentence of imprisonment, then can impose any
other penalty or make any other order in normal trial of
proceedings.
If would have imposed sentence of imprisonment, then must nominate a
limiting term.
This can be in
a mental health facility (if the person is mentally ill or has a mental
condition and doesn’t object) or in
a place other than a mental health
facility (where not mentally ill or has mental condition but objects to
determination in mental
Not guilty by reason of insanity (NGMI)
Four orders: detention, conditional release, unconditional release and any
other order the court thinks
appropriate.
South Australia
If a person is declared liable to supervision, the court may release
unconditionally or make a supervision order committing the D
to detention or
releasing the defendant on
In relation to
summary and minor indictable offences the court can dismiss the charge and
release the person unconditionally, make
a supervision order or make an order
releasing the person on
The court must declare the person is liable to supervision under
order the person to be released
unconditionally.
supervision order can be a custodial supervision order or a non-custodial
supervision order.
Western Australia
Release the accused or make a custody
Unsound mind
If offence from Schedule 1 – the court must make a custody order and
if not a Schedule 1 offence, the court may release the
accused conditionally,
make a conditional release order, a community based order or an intensive
supervision order or a custody
A court may either discharge the person or may order the person to be
admitted to an authorised mental health service to be dealt
with under the
Mental Health Act 2016
The Mental Health
Review Tribunal may make a forensic order (mental health) or forensic order
(disability).
In addition, if
a person is acquitted on the grounds of insanity, the Governor may order the
safe custody of the person during the
There is also provision for the Mental Health Court to deal with the matter
Mental Health Act 2016
(Qld) for some
In this case, the
Mental Health Court may make a forensic order (mental health) or forensic order
(disability) or make a treatment
Australian Capital Territory
In the Supreme Court, for non-serious offences, the court can make the
orders it considers appropriate, including that the accused
by detained in
custody for review by ACAT under the
Mental Health Act 2015
the accused submit to the jurisdiction of ACAT to allow the ACAT to make a
mental health order or a forensic mental health
order under the
Mental Health
. For serious offences, the court must make an order for review and
must, if taking into account the relevant criteria (outlined below)
accused to submit to the jurisdiction of ACAT for the purposes of making the
Northern Territory
The court must declare the person is liable to supervision under Division 5
or order the person to be released
unconditionally.
supervision order can be a custodial supervision order or a non-custodial
supervision order.
Table A3.2: Test for making orders
Commonwealth
Detained in hospital if the person is suffering a mental illness or a
mental condition for which treatment is available in a hospital
and the person
does not object, otherwise, order detention in a place other than a hospital,
including a prison.
can order release if it is more appropriate to do
New South Wales
Whether or not imprisonment would have been imposed in course of normal
trial. There is no prerequisite in relation to endangerment
of the public but
this is taken into account in applying principles of sentencing.
Can only order conditional or unconditional release where satisfied on
balance that the safety of the person or any member of the
public will not be
seriously endangered if the person is released.
There are very limited decisions considering factors relevant to courts
decisions to detain or conditionally (or unconditionally)
release following a
finding of NGMI. In cases where courts have ordered that the person be released,
the factors that were considered
included the person’s diagnosis and
response to and compliance with treatment before and after the offending
conduct, the extent
to which the person understands the need for, and is willing
to accept ongoing treatment, the recommendations of treating and other
psychiatrists and accommodation
arrangements.
South Australia
Must take into account views of next of kin of the D and any victim (or
next of kin of the
The paramount consideration of the court in determining whether to release
a defendant must be to protect the safety of the community.
This outweighs the
principle that restrictions on the defendant’s freedom and personal
autonomy should be kept to a
Court should have regard to: the nature of the mental impairment; whether
the D is, or would if released be, likely to endanger another
person or other
persons generally; whether there are adequate resources available for the
treatment and support of the defendant
in the community; and whether the
defendant is likely to comply with the conditions of a licence and other matters
that the court
If going to release the defendant, require expert reports on the mental
condition of the defendant and the possible effects of the
proposed action on
the behaviour of the defendant. The court must also not release a person unless
satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that the safety of the person or any
member of the public will not be seriously endangered, and the attitudes of
victims and next
Court must apply the principle that restrictions on the defendant’s
freedom and personal autonomy should be kept to the minimum
consistent with the
safety of the
Court should have regard to: the nature of the mental impairment or other
condition or disability; the relationship between the impairment,
condition or
disability and the offending conduct; whether the D is, or would if released be,
likely to endanger themselves or another
person or other persons generally; the
need to protect people from such danger; whether there are adequate resources
available for
the treatment and support of the defendant in the community; and
other matters that the court thinks
If going to release the defendant, require expert reports on the mental
condition of the defendant and the possible effects of the
proposed action on
the behaviour of the
Western Australia
Custody order can only be made if the penalty is imprisonment and it is
appropriate having regard to the strength of the evidence
against the accused;
the nature of the alleged offence and the alleged circumstances of its
commission; the accused’s character,
antecedents, age, health and mental
conditions; and the public
Unsound mind
Custody order if sch 1 offence. Otherwise release the accused
unconditionally if it is just to do so having regard to the nature of
offence and circumstances of its commission, the accused’s character,
antecedents, age, health and mental conditions and
the public interest. The
court can only impose a conditional release order, a community based order or an
intensive supervision order
if the order could have been made had the person
been found guilty of the
In making a decision in relation to an order for a person, the Mental
Health Court must have regard to the following: the relevant
circumstances of
the person; the nature of the offence to which the reference relates and the
period of time that has passed since
the offence was allegedly committed; and
any victim impact
The Court must make a forensic order if it is necessary because of the
person’s mental condition, to protect the safety of the
including from the risk of serious harm to other persons or
The court can decide that a forensic order for treatment in the community
only if the court considers there is not there is not an
unacceptable risk to
the safety of the community, because of the person’s mental condition,
including the risk of serious harm
to other persons or
Australian Capital Territory
In making a decision which could include an order for detention, the court
must consider: the nature and extent of the accused’s
mental impairment,
including the effect it is likely to have on the person’s behaviour in the
future, whether or not, if released,
the accused’s health and safety is
likely to be substantially impaired or the accused is likely to be a danger of
the community,
the nature and circumstances of the offence with which the
accused is charged, the principle that a person should not be detained
correctional centre unless no other reasonable options are available and any
recommendations made by the ACAT about how the
accused should be dealt
Northern Territory
Court must apply the principle that restrictions on the defendant’s
freedom and personal autonomy should be kept to the minimum
consistent with the
safety of the
Court should have regard to: the nature of the mental impairment or other
condition or disability; the relationship between the impairment,
condition or
disability and the offending conduct; whether the D is, or would if released be,
likely to endanger themselves or another
person or other persons generally; the
need to protect people from danger; whether there are adequate resources
available for the
treatment and support of the defendant in the community;
whether the D is complying with or likely to comply with the conditions
supervision order; and other matters that the court thinks
If going to release the defendant, require expert
Table A3.3: Term of order
Commonwealth
Maximum term is maximum period of imprisonment that could have been imposed
if the person had been convicted of the offence
New South Wales
Limiting term – best estimate of sentence would have considered
appropriate in normal trial. Must be released unconditionally
when the limiting
term expires.
The limiting term is governed by sentencing
principles.
This is an upper
limit and the person may be released sooner.
Indefinite but subject to review
but the court
must set a nominal term (murder = 25 years, a serious offence = a period
equivalent to the maximum penalty, any other
offence with a statutory maximum =
half the maximum, any other offence = period specific by
) The court undertakes
a major review at least three months before the end of the nominal
South Australia
A limiting term equivalent to the period of imprisonment that would have
been appropriate if the defendant had been convicted of the
offence of which the
objective elements have been established. The court should not take into account
the defendant’s mental
impairment.
Western Australia
but subject
Indefinite with power to review. For prescribed offences, a period of not
more than 10 years (the non-revocation period) during which
the tribunal may not
revoke the forensic order, other than under s
In deciding the
non-revocation period, the court must have regard to the object of this Act in
relation to protecting the
Australian Capital Territory
Nominal term is set that is the best estimate of the sentence it would have
considered appropriate if the special hearing had been
a normal criminal
proceeding and must not order that the accused be detained for a period greater
than the nominated term.
Northern Territory
but the court
must fix a term for the major review of the order (nominal term). This term is
set according to the following rules:
if offence carries a mandatory life
penalty or the court’s view that life imprisonment would have been an
appropriate penalty,
the court must fix the period that it would have set as the
non-parole period and in other cases, equivalent to the term of imprisonment
supervision that would have been appropriate to impose if he or she had been
found guilty of the
Table A3.4: Test for discharging or varying orders
Commonwealth
Attorney-General must be satisfied that the person is not a threat or
danger either to himself or herself or the
New South Wales
The Tribunal must not make an order for the release of a forensic patient
unless it is satisfied, on the evidence available to it,
that: the safety of the
patient or any member of the public will not be seriously endangered by the
patient’s release, and
other care of a less restrictive kind, that is
consistent with safe and effective care, is appropriate and reasonably available
the patient or that the patient does not require
Without limiting any other matters the Tribunal may consider, the Tribunal
must have regard to the following matters when determining
what order to make
illness or other mental condition;
whether there are reasonable grounds for
believing that care, treatment or control of the person is necessary for the
own protection from serious harm or the protection of others from
serious harm; the continuing condition of the person, including
deterioration in the person’s condition, and the likely effects of any
such deterioration; in the case of a proposed
release, a report by a forensic
psychiatrist or other person of a class prescribed by the regulations, who is
not currently involved
in treating the person, as to the condition of the person
and whether the safety of the person or any member of the public will be
seriously endangered by the person’s release; in the case of the proposed
release of a forensic patient subject to a limiting
term, whether or not the
patient has spent sufficient time in
South Australia
As with making order but test is serious endangerment.
As with making the
At the end of the
nominal period, there is a major review and there is a presumption that a
custodial supervision order will be varied:
the court must vary the order to a
NCSO unless satisfied on the evidence available that the safety of the person
the subject of the
order or members of the public will be seriously
endangered.
Western Australia
The Governor on advice from the Minister following a recommendation from
the Mental Impairment Accused Review
In making this
recommendation the MIARB takes into account: the degree of risk that the release
of the accused appears to present
to the personal safety of people in the
community or of any individual in the community; the likelihood that, if
released on conditions,
the accused would comply with the conditions; the extent
to which the accused’s mental impairment, if any, might benefit from
treatment, training or any other measure; the likelihood that, if released, the
accused would be able to take care of his or her
day to day needs, obtain any
appropriate treatment and resist serious exploitation; the objective of imposing
the least restriction
of the freedom of choice and movement of the accused that
is consistent with the need to protect the health or safety of the accused
any other person; and any statement received from a victim of the alleged
offence in respect of which the accused is in
On review by the MHT, the Tribunal must confirm the forensic order if the
order is necessary, because of the person’s mental
condition, to protect
the safety of the community, including from the risk of serious harm to other
persons or property.
have regard to the relevant circumstances of the person subject to the order,
the nature of the unlawful act and the period
of time that has passed, any
victim impact statement and if the MHC made a recommendation in the order about
an intervention program
for the person — the person’s willingness to
take part in the program.
must also be confirmed during any non-revocation
Australian Capital Territory
The Civil and Administrative Tribunal can consider the detention under a
court order and must consider:
(a) that detention in custody is to be regarded as a last resort and
ordered only in exceptional circumstances;
(b) the nature and extent of the person’s mental disorder or mental
illness, including the effect it is likely to have on the
behaviour in the future;
(c) whether or not, if released—
(i) the person’s health or safety would be, or would be likely to be,
substantially at risk; or
(ii) the person would be likely to do serious harm to others;
(d) if the court nominated a term under the
the nominated
May also make and review mental health orders and forensic mental health
Northern Territory
On the major review, the court must release the supervised person
unconditionally unless the court considers that the safety of the
person or the public will or is likely to be seriously at
At periodic reviews, the court must vary a custodial supervision to a
non-custodial supervision order unless satisfied on the evidence
that the safety
of the supervised person or the public will or is likely to be seriously at
Other factors as with
making the order.
Appendix 4: Fitness to stand trial
Understand the nature of the charges
Enter a plea
Right to challenge juror
Understand the nature of the trial
Follow course of trial
Understand substantial effect of the evidence
Give instructions to legal practitioner
• Make a defence.
Presser criteria (NSW, Commonwealth, Queensland)
ALRC recommendations
• Understand the information relevant to the decisions that they will
have to make in the course of the proceedings.
• Retain that information to the extent necessary to make decisions
in the course of the proceedings.
• Use or weigh that information as part of the process of making
• Communicate decisions in some way.
Victoria (current)
recommendations
Y and ability to understand the actual significant of entering a plea to
the charge.
Communicate meaningful instructions
• Decide whether to give evidence.
• Able to give evidence.
NSWLRC recommendations
Not explicitly but general power to make decisions
Not explicitly but general power to make decisions.
Understand what is going on in a general sense
Communicate effectively with and understand advice given
• Understand the information relevant to the decisions that the
person will have to make before and during the trial, and use
that information
as part of a rational decision making process.
• Provide a version of facts to the court.
South Australia
Y and respond rationally
Respond rationally to the charge
Follow the evidence
Give rational instructions
Western Australia (current)
Y and effect of a plea
Y and understand the right
• Able to defend the charge.
WA AG’s review
• Decide whether to give evidence.
• Ability to give evidence.
Northern Territory
Australian Capital Territory
Pritchard/John criteria (England and Wales, Northern Ireland)
• Give evidence in own defence.
Law Commission
Y – ability to make a decision.
Not explicitly but incorporated in ability to make decisions that may need
to be made.
Y and consequences of being convicted.
• Make a decision about whether to give evidence.
• To give evidence.
• Make other decisions that might need to be made by the D in
connection with the trial.
• Any other ability that appears relevant.
Northern Ireland Law Reform Commission
Not explicitly but incorporated in ability to make decisions that may need
to be made.
Not explicitly but incorporated in ability to make decisions that may need
to be made.
Not explicitly but incorporated in ability to make decisions that may need
to be made.
Not explicitly but incorporated in ability to make decisions that may need
to be made.
• Give evidence in own defence.
• Understand the information relevant to the decisions that they will
have to make in the course of the proceedings.
• Retain that information.
• Use or weigh that information as part of the process of making
• Communicate decisions.
Y and effect of plea
Y and its purpose
• Any other factor that the court considers relevant.
New Zealand
(statute supplemented by Presser)
Y and its purpose and consequences.
Communicate adequately
• Make a defence.
Y and possible consequences.
• Conduct a defence.
Appendix 5: Special hearing provisions
Judge or jury
Conduct of hearing
Findings available
Legislation
New South Wales
Hearing is by judge alone unless election for a jury made
Conducted as close to a normal trial as is practicable, including:
• proof beyond a reasonable doubt
• may raise defences
• is entitled to give evidence
• to have legal representation
• Not guilty of the offence
• Not guilty on the grounds of mental illness
• On the limited evidence available, the accused committed the
offence charged or an alternative offence (finding of qualified
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Australian Capital Territory
Jury unless the accused makes an election to have judge alone
Physical elements of the offence
Conducted as nearly as possible as if it were an ordinary criminal
proceeding.
• Not guilty
• Satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused engaged in the
conduct required for the offence
Crimes Act 1990
(ACT) ss 317, 335(2)(b)
Northern Territory
Jury unless parties to the prosecution agree that the evidence established
the defence of mental impairment, the court may accept
Conducted as nearly as possible as if it were an ordinary criminal
proceeding including:
• Proof beyond reasonable doubt
• Rules of evidence apply
• May give evidence
• Raise any defence that could raise at trial
• Not guilty
• Not guilty because of mental impairment
• Committed the offence (qualified finding of guilt)
Criminal Code
(NT) ss 43V, 43X,
Conducted as nearly as possible as if it were an ordinary criminal
proceeding:
• Proof beyond reasonable doubt
• Rules of evidence apply
• May give evidence
Raise any defence that could raise at trial
• Not guilty
• Not guilty because of mental impairment
• Committed the offence (qualified finding of guilt)
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
ss 15, 16, 17
South Australia
Trial of objective elements of the offence.
Exclude from consideration any question of whether the defendant’s
conduct is defensible
• Not guilty
• Objective elements are established
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
No special hearing
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 613;
Mental Health Act 2016
Western Australia
No special hearing but judge takes into account evidence against the
accused in determining the appropriate disposition
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
England and Wales
Trial of facts (s 4A hearing) – proof that D did the act or made the
Can rely on certain defences (self-defence, mistake or accident) in limited
circumstances. This is where there is objective evidence
of the defence.
Insanity cannot be relied on
• Not guilty
• Finding that D did the act or made the omission
Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964
New Zealand
Satisfied on balance of probabilities that the evidence against the
defendant is sufficient to establish that the D caused the act
or omission
• Dismiss charges
• Record finding that satisfied of D’s involvement in the
Criminal Procedure (Mentally Impaired Persons) Act 2003
Appendix 6:
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) Schedule 1 Extension of status as forensic
(Section 54A)
Extension of status as forensic patient
1 Extension orders for forensic patients
(1) The Supreme Court may, on application under
of this Schedule, make
an order for the extension of a person’s status as a forensic patient.
(2) An order made under this clause is an extension order.
2 Forensic patients in respect of whom extension orders may be
(1) A forensic patient can be made the subject of an extension order as
provided for by this Schedule if and only if the Supreme Court
is satisfied to a
high degree of probability that:
(a) the forensic patient poses an unacceptable risk of causing serious harm
to others if he or she ceases being a forensic patient,
(b) the risk cannot be adequately managed by other less restrictive
(2) The Supreme Court is not required to determine that the risk of a person
causing serious harm to others is more likely than not
in order to determine
that the person poses an unacceptable risk of causing serious harm to
Less restrictive means of managing a risk includes, but is not limited to,
a patient being involuntarily detained or treated under
Mental Health Act
Extension orders
Division 1 Application for extension order
3 Minister may apply for extension order
A Minister administering this Act may apply to the Supreme Court for an
extension order against a forensic patient.
4 Application for extension order
(1) An application for an extension order may be made in respect of a
forensic patient only if the forensic patient is subject to:
(a) a limiting term, or
(b) an existing extension order.
(2) An application in respect of a forensic patient may not be made more than
6 months before:
(a) the end of the forensic patient’s limiting term, or
(b) the expiry of the existing extension order,
as appropriate.
5 Requirements with respect to application
An application for an extension order must be supported by documentation:
(a) that addresses each of the matters referred to in clause 7 (2) (to the
extent relevant to the application), and
(b) that includes a report (prepared by a qualified psychiatrist, registered
psychologist or registered medical practitioner):
(i) that assesses the risk of the forensic patient causing serious harm to
others, and
(ii) that addresses the need for ongoing management of the patient as a
forensic patient and the reasons why the risk of the forensic
patient causing
serious harm to others cannot be adequately managed by other less restrictive
6 Pre-hearing procedures
(1) An application under this Part for an extension order must be served on
the forensic patient concerned within 2 business days
after the application is
filed in the Supreme Court or within such further time as the Supreme Court may
(2) The Minister applying for the extension order must notify the Tribunal as
soon as practicable after making the application.
(3) Subject to subclauses (7)–(9), the Minister applying for the
extension order must disclose to the forensic patient such
documents, reports
and other information as are relevant to the proceedings on the application
(whether or not intended to be tendered
in evidence):
(a) in the case of anything that is available when the application is made,
as soon as practicable after the application is made,
(b) in the case of anything that subsequently becomes available, as soon as
practicable after it becomes available.
(4) A preliminary hearing into the application is to be conducted by the
Supreme Court within 28 days after the application is filed
in the Supreme Court
or within such further time as the Supreme Court may allow.
(5) If, following the preliminary hearing, it is satisfied that the matters
alleged in the supporting documentation would, if proved,
justify the making of
an extension order, the Supreme Court must make orders:
(a) appointing:
(i) 2 qualified psychiatrists, or
(ii) 2 registered psychologists, or
(iii) 2 registered medical practitioners, or
(iv) any combination of 2 persons referred to in subparagraphs
to conduct separate examinations of the forensic patient and to furnish
reports to the Supreme Court on the results of those examinations,
(b) directing the forensic patient to attend those examinations.
(6) If, following the preliminary hearing, it is not satisfied that the
matters alleged in the supporting documentation would, if
proved, justify the
making of an extension order, the Supreme Court must dismiss the
application.
(7) A forensic patient in respect of whom an application for an extension
order has been made is, unless the Supreme Court otherwise
determines, entitled
to inspect or otherwise have access to any medical records in the possession of
any person relating to the forensic
(8) A representative of the forensic patient is entitled, at any time before
or during the proceedings on the application, to inspect
or otherwise have
access to any medical records in the possession of any person relating to the
forensic patient.
(9) Subject to any order or direction of the Supreme Court, in relation to an
inspection under subclause (8) of, or other access under
that subclause to, any
medical record relating to a forensic patient:
(a) if a medical practitioner warns the representative of the forensic
patient that it may be harmful to communicate to the forensic
patient, or any
other person, specified information contained in those medical records, the
representative is to have full and proper
regard to that warning, and
(b) the representative is not obliged to disclose to the forensic patient any
information obtained by virtue of the inspection or
other access.
Division 2 Determination of application
7 Determination of application for extension order
(1) The Supreme Court may determine an application under this Part for an
extension order:
(a) by making the order, or
(b) by dismissing the application.
(2) In determining whether or not to make an extension order, the Supreme
Court must have regard to the following matters in addition
to any other matter
it considers relevant:
(a) the safety of the community,
(b) the reports received from the persons appointed under clause 6 (5) to
conduct examinations of the forensic patient,
(c) the report of the qualified psychiatrist, registered psychologist or
registered medical practitioner provided under clause 5 (b),
(d) any other report of a qualified psychiatrist, registered psychologist or
registered medical practitioner provided in support of
the application or by the
forensic patient,
(e) any order or decision made by the Tribunal with respect to the forensic
patient that is relevant to the application,
(f) any report of the Secretary of the Ministry of Health, the Commissioner
of Corrective Services, the Secretary of the Department
of Family and Community
Services or any other government Department or agency responsible for the
detention, care or treatment of
the forensic patient,
(g) the level of the forensic patient’s compliance with any obligations
to which he or she is or has been subject while a forensic
patient (including
while released from custody subject to conditions and while on a leave of
absence in accordance with section 49
(h) the views of the court that imposed the limiting term or existing
extension order on the forensic patient at the time the limiting
extension order was imposed,
(i) any other information that is available as to the risk that the forensic
patient will in future cause serious harm to others.
(3) If the Supreme Court makes an extension order in respect of a forensic
patient, the Court is to notify the Tribunal of the making
of the order.
8 Term of extension order
(1) An extension order:
(a) commences when it is made, or when the limiting term or existing
extension order to which the forensic patient is subject expires,
whichever is
the later, and
(b) expires at the end of the period (not exceeding 5 years from the day on
which it commences) that is specified in the order.
(2) Nothing in this clause prevents the Supreme Court from making a second or
subsequent extension order against the same forensic
Continuation of order relating to forensic patient
The making of an extension order or interim extension order in respect of a
forensic patient does not affect the operation of any
order as to the forensic
patient’s care, detention, treatment or release from custody to which the
forensic patient was subject
immediately before the making of the extension
Division 3 Interim extension orders
10 Interim extension order
The Supreme Court may make an order for the interim extension of a
person’s status as a forensic patient if, in proceedings
on an application
for an extension order, it appears to the Court:
(a) that the limiting term or existing extension order to which the forensic
patient is subject will expire before the proceedings
are determined, and
(b) that the matters alleged in the supporting documentation would, if
proved, justify the making of an extension order.
11 Term of interim extension order
(1) An interim extension order commences on the day fixed in the order for
its commencement (or, if no such day is fixed, as soon
as it is made) and
expires at the end of such period (not exceeding 28 days from the day on which
it commences) as is specified in
(2) An interim extension order may be renewed from time to time, but not so
as to provide for the extension of the person’s
status as a forensic
patient under such an order for periods totalling more than 3 months.
11A Interim extension order to continue in force for 24 hours in certain
circumstances
(1) If the Supreme Court dismisses an application for an extension order in
respect of a forensic patient who is detained only as
a result of an interim
extension order, the Court may (on its own motion or on application) order that
the patient be detained for
a further period of up to 24 hours to enable a
medical practitioner or accredited person to assess whether a mental health
certificate
should be given in respect of the patient under
Mental Health Act 2007
(2) The order ceases to authorise the detention of the person if the medical
practitioner or accredited person making the assessment
decides not to give that
mental health certificate about the person.
Division 4 General
12 Extension order or interim extension order may be varied or
(1) The Supreme Court may at any time vary or revoke an extension order or
interim extension order:
(a) on the application of a Minister administering this Act or the forensic
patient, or
(b) on the recommendation of the Tribunal under section 47 (2A).
(2) The period of an order must not be varied so that the total period as
varied is greater than that otherwise permitted under this
(3) Without limiting the grounds for revoking an extension order or interim
extension order, the Supreme Court may revoke an extension
order or interim
extension order if satisfied that circumstances have changed sufficiently to
render the order unnecessary.
Part 3 Supreme Court proceedings
13 Nature of proceedings
Proceedings under this Schedule (including proceedings on an appeal under
this Schedule) are civil proceedings and, to the extent
to which this Schedule
does not provide for their conduct, are to be conducted in accordance with the
law (including the rules of
evidence) relating to civil proceedings.
14 Right of appeal
(1) An appeal to the Court of Appeal lies from any determination of the
Supreme Court to make, or to refuse to make, or to vary or
revoke an extension
(2) An appeal may be on a question of law, a question of fact or a question
of mixed law and fact.
(3) An appeal against the decision of the Supreme Court may be made, as of
right, within 28 days after the date on which the decision
was made or, by
leave, within such further time as the Court of Appeal may allow.
(4) The making of an appeal does not stay the operation of an extension
(5) If the Court of Appeal remits a matter to the Supreme Court for decision
after an appeal is made, the extension order the subject
of the appeal continues
in force, subject to any order made by the Court of Appeal.
(6) Without limiting any other jurisdiction it may have, if the Court of
Appeal remits a matter to the Supreme Court for decision
after an appeal is
made, the Court of Appeal may make an interim order revoking or varying an
extension order the subject of the
(7) This clause does not limit any right of appeal that may exist apart from
this Schedule.
15 Costs not to be awarded against forensic patient
An order for costs may not be made against a forensic patient in relation to
any proceedings under this Schedule (including proceedings
on an appeal under
this Schedule).
16 Preservation of Supreme Court jurisdiction
Nothing in this Schedule limits the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court apart
from this Act.
Part 4 Miscellaneous
17 Minister may require provision of certain information
(1) A Minister administering this Act may, by order in writing served on any
person, require that person to provide to the Minister
any document, report or
other information in that person’s possession, or under that
person’s control, that relates to
the behaviour, or physical or mental
condition, of any forensic patient who is subject to a limiting term.
(2) A person who fails to comply with the requirements of an order under this
clause is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(3) A Minister administering this Act may request a court or the Tribunal to
provide to the Minister any document, report or other
information held by the
court or Tribunal that relates to the behaviour, or physical or mental
condition, of any forensic patient
who is subject to a limiting term.
(4) Despite any Act or law to the contrary, any document or report of a kind
referred to in subclause (1) or (3), or any copy of any
such document or report,
is admissible in proceedings under this Act (whether admission is sought by the
Minister to whom the document
or report was provided or by another Minister
administering this Act).
17A Information sharing
(1) A Minister administering this Act may disclose forensic patient
information obtained under this Act to any other Minister administering
(a) for the purpose of enabling or assisting either Minister to exercise
functions under this Act, or
(b) for the purpose of the administration or execution of this Act.
(2) In this clause:
forensic patient information means any document, report or other information
that relates to a forensic patient, including any such
information that is:
(a) personal information within the meaning of the
Information Protection Act 1998
Health Records and
Information Privacy
(b) health information within the meaning of the
Health Records and
Information Privacy Act 2002
18 Protection of certain persons from liability
No action lies against any person (including the State) for or in respect of
any act or omission done or omitted by the person if
it was done or omitted in
good faith for the purposes of, or in connection with the administration or
execution of, this Schedule.
19 Hearings
This Schedule does not affect the right of any party to proceedings under
this Schedule:
(a) to appear, either personally or by the party’s legal
representative, or
(b) to call witnesses and give evidence, or
(c) to cross-examine witnesses, or
(d) to make submissions to the Supreme Court on any matter connected with the
proceedings.
Bail Act 2013
Bail Act 2013
does not apply to or in respect of a person who is
the subject of proceedings under this Schedule.
21 Rules of court
(1) Rules of court may be made under the
Supreme Court Act 1970
regulating the practice and procedure of the Supreme Court in respect of
proceedings under this Schedule.
(2) This clause does not limit the rule-making powers conferred by the
Supreme Court Act 1970
22 Qualification of psychiatrists
For the purposes of this Schedule, a psychiatrist is not a qualified
psychiatrist unless he or she is a registered medical practitioner
fellow of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists.
Appendix 7: Law reform recommendations
Definition of mental impairment
Nature and quality
Unable to control conduct
Law Reform Committee (Vic)
Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System by People
with an Intellectual Disability and their Families and Carers
Provide a definition of mental impairment to encompass mental illness,
intellectual disability, acquired brain injuries and severe
personality
disorders (Recommendation 33)
No discussion
No discussion
No discussion
No discussion
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
People with Cognitive and Mental Health Impairments in the Criminal
Justice System: Criminal Responsibility and Consequences: Report
Defence should be renamed defence of mental health or cognitive
impairment.
The following definitions should be used:
Mental health impairment:
(a) Mental health impairment means a temporary or continuing disturbance of
thought, mood, volition, perception, or memory that impairs
emotional wellbeing,
judgment or behaviour, so as to affect functioning in daily life to a material
(b) Such mental health impairment may arise from but is not limited to the
(i) anxiety disorders
(ii) affective disorders
(iii) psychoses
(iv) substance induced mental disorders.
‘Substance induced mental disorders’ include ongoing mental
health impairments such as drug-induced psychoses, but do
not include substance
abuse disorders (addiction to substances) or the temporary effects of ingesting
substances.
For the purposes of this section ‘mental health impairment’
does not include a personality disorder.
(2) Cognitive impairment:
(a) Cognitive impairment is an ongoing impairment in comprehension, reason,
adaptive functioning, judgement, learning or memory that
is the result of any
damage to, dysfunction, developmental delay, or deterioration of the brain or
(b) Such cognitive impairment may arise from, but is not limited to, the
(i) intellectual disability
(ii) borderline intellectual functioning
(iii) dementias
(iv) acquired brain injury
(v) drug or alcohol related brain damage
(vi) autism spectrum disorders.
Verdict should be changed from ‘not guilty by reason of mental
illness’ to ‘not criminally responsible by reason
of mental health
or cognitive impairment.
Not in favour of changing law
Define wrong to mean ‘not reason with a moderate degree of sense and
composure about whether the conduct, as perceived by reasonable
people, was
wrong’ (enacting the ‘Porter
Argued test was functional, strongly supports and understood by both juries
and expert witnesses. Useful in the case of delusions,
where a person may
believe that the victim was a danger to the safety of his or her family may not
come within second limb as may
also know that killing is wrong but
approach enable proof that the person did not the act to be wrong by
inference from an ability to reason with sense and composure
conduct was wrong.
Supported introduction of volitional component
No discussion
Victorian Law Reform Commission
Review of the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act
1997: Report
Definition of mental impairment introduced in legislation. Mental
impairment should be defined as a condition that ‘includes,
limited to, mental illness, intellectual disability and cognitive
impairment’.
Should not include self-induced temporary conditions resulting from the
effects of ingesting substances.
Should include self-induced conditions that exist independently of the
effects of ingesting substances.
No change recommended
Remove ‘moderate degree of sense and composure’ with ‘did
not have the capacity to think rationally about whether
the conduct, as
perceived by reasonable’ on basis that clinicians found phrase vague,
subjective and difficult to apply in
situations in which most people would not
be acting with calmness and composure.
Opposed introduction of volitional component
No discussion
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
Review of the Law of Homicide: Final Report
The definition of mental illness does not refer to ‘external’
extraordinary stimuli and so greater flexibility to deal
with conditions
resulting from a healthy mind’s reaction to
extraordinary
stimuli (such as hyperglycaemia, arteriosclerosis and epilepsy).
No change recommended.
Personality disorders should not either automatically included or excluded
from the definition.
Defence should be renamed ‘mental impairment’ and should
replace ‘unsoundness of mind’ with mental impairment.
Replace presumption of sanity with words ‘A person is presumed not to
have been suffering a mental impairment unless the contrary
No recommendation to change verdict from not guilty but replace
‘unsoundness of mind’ with ‘by reason of mental
impairment.
No consideration of reform options
No consideration of reform options
No consideration of reform options
Recommended retaining s 27 in relation to delusions (equivalent of section
16(3)) but amend the
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
(WA) to make it clear
that gives rise to qualified acquittal (not guilty by reason of mental
impairment).
Sentencing Advisory Council (SA)
Mental Impairment and the Law: A Report on the Operation of
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (2014)
Defence still necessary as a means to protect the community and provide
individuals with the opportunity for treatment.
Three interrelated issues with definition: external factors test produce
anomalous results; difficulties surrounding the soundness
of mind test and
confusion in relation to personality disorders.
Recommended no change to specifically include or exclude any medical
conditions, including hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia and personality
Recommended retention of the current law in relation to intoxication and
Not necessary to define phrase nature and quality’ — well
understood and not difficult to explain; consistent with approach
in most other
Not replace ‘knowledge’ with ‘understanding’
— concerned about broad range of mental functions that
may be covered.
Little difficulty with current test. Unlikely make any substantive different in
Law unclear, especially in relation to whether ‘Porter
’ applies to all cases or is limited to specific types of
cases (such as those involving frenzy, uncontrolled emotion or suspended
Q should be not simply whether D knew that the conduct was wrong but
whether the D was unable to reason that it was wrong. The defence
should only
apply where the D was unable to think rationally, in the same way as other
people, in order to reason that the conduct
was wrong. Adopt Model Criminal Code
approach but delete words ‘with a moderate degree of sense and
composure’.
Strong reasons to remove it but for consistency with other jurisdiction
should be retained but should be made clear that D is totally
able to control
his or her conduct and that a partial inability to control conduct is not
sufficient.
Scottish Law Commission
Report on Insanity and Diminished Responsibility
Brief definition should be introduced — define mental disorder to
mean: (a) mental illness, (b) personality disorder or (c)
disability.
Should exclude psychopathic personality disorders
Should be renamed.
Test based on D’s ability to appreciate (rather than know) the nature
of his or her conduct. Eg woman who kills her children
by smothering them with a
pillow in belief that in doing so she will drive out demons from their souls. In
one sense she understands
the physical nature of her actions (she knows that
putting a pillow over their faces will stop them breathing) but in a wider sense
she doesn’t have a true or complete knowledge of her actions. A person who
lacks knowledge in this broader sense should be
exculpated.
Test should require D to have a deeper appreciation that the conduct was
wrong — and concluded test be defined in terms of D’s
inability at
the time of the offence to appreciate the wrongfulness of his or her
Opposed introduction of volitional component
No discussion
New Zealand Law Commission
Mental Impairment Decision-Making and the Insanity Defence: Report 120
No definition be introduced because of flexibility provided.
No change to verdict of acquittal on account of insanity.
Rejected move to broader concept of appreciation on basis that it does not
better job than the present defence of clarifying where
on the continuum the
line between sanity and insanity ought to be drawn.
No change — Porter gloss already part of the law and incorporating it
in legislation would make no material difference.
Opposed introduction of volitional component
No discussion
England Law Commission
Criminal Liability: Insanity and Automatism: Discussion Paper
Abolish insanity and create a new defence of ‘not criminally
responsible by reason of recognised medical condition’.
Should explicitly exclude intoxication and personality disorders.
Wholly lacked the capacity rationally to form a judgment about the relevant
conduct or circumstances.
Wholly lacked the capacity to understand the wrongness of what he or she is
charged with having done — extend ‘wrong’
Wholly lacked the capacity to control his or her physical acts.
Discussed delusions within the context of the other rules of
Appendix 8: Length of restriction and
supervision orders in comparison with median sentence
Table A8.1: Restriction orders – Smith’s study. Excludes
individuals who have been on orders for less than 2-year duration,
Period of incarceration of defendant
Median sentence 1990–2000
7 years and continuing
13 years, converted to a supervision order
which has run for 8 years and continuing
Head sentence 21 years
Non-parole period 14 years
2 years, converted to a supervision order
which has run for 8 years and continuing
16 years and continuing
2 years and continuing
Indecent assault
6 years and continuing
Table A8.2: Restriction orders 2010 to 30 June 2018. Excludes individuals
who have been on orders for less than 2 years duration
Period of incarceration of defendant
Median sentence 2008-14
6 years 9 months 29 days and continuing
Head sentence 20 years (single count)
Non-parole period (single count) 12 years and 3 months
16 years 5 months and 7 days converted to a supervision order which has run
for 2 years 2 months and 23 days and continuing
3 years 11 months 13 days and continuing
1 year and 9 months and 26 days converted to a supervision order which has
run for 17 years 9 months and 25 days
5 years 3 months 9 days and continuing
8 years 2 months and 8 days converted to a supervision order which has run
for 8 months and 9 days and continuing
7 months (48.1% custodial) (single count)
7 years and 10 days and continuing
6 years 7 months 5 days and continuing
1 year and 3 months (76% custodial) (single count)
Two years and 6 months and 17 days converted to a supervision order which
has run for 7 years 7 months and 22 days and continuing
3 years and 4.5 months (single count)
Driving offence
4 years 11 months and three days
Not able to make comparison
Table A8.3: Supervision orders – Smith’s study. Excludes
individuals who have been on orders for less than 2-year duration,
Period of supervision of defendant
Median sentence 1990 - 2000
3 years and continuing
5 years and finalised
5.5 years and continuing
9 years and continuing
Assault police
3 years set term
4.5 years and continuing
4–12 months (if custodial) depending on number of counts
8 years and finalised
Death by dangerous driving
2 years and continuing
False threat of danger
3 years and continuing
Generally non-custodial
2 years and finalised
Unlawfully injure property
4 years and continuing 6 months
Unlawfully setting fire to property
5.5 years and continuing 4 months
3 years and continuing
Maintain relationship with young person
2 years and continuing
18 months (single count)
Motor vehicle stealing
6 years and continuing
4 years and continuing
3 years (single count)
4 years and continuing
Sexual intercourse with young person
4 years and continuing
3 months (single count)
4.5 years and continuing
Not recorded
2 years set term
6 months (single count)
2 years set term
5 years and continuing
Table A8.4: Supervision orders. 2010–30 June 2018. Excludes
individuals who have been on orders for less than 2 years duration
Period of supervision of defendant
Median sentence 2008–14
Maintaining relationship with young person
8 years and 9 days
30 months (single count)
8 years and 17 days
1 year and 3 months (76% custodial) (single count)
12 years 3 months and 8 days
12 years 3 months and 5 days
3 years 15 days and continuing
5 years and 11 months and 5 days and continuing
Injure property
9 years and 2 days
Not available
8 years 2 months and 8 days
7 months (48.1% custodial) (single count)
9 years 7 days and continuing
12 years 3 months and 7 days and continuing
9 years and 11 months and 7 days
Set fire to vegetation/arson (include attempted)
6 years 6 months and 1 days
Arson only available (single count)
1 year and 3 months (46.2% custodial)
6 years 11 months and 9 days
12 years 1 month and 12 days and continuing
4 years 7 months and 23 days and continuing
7 years and 7 months and 26 days and continuing
11 years 9 months and 25 days and continuing
5 years 6 months and 20 days and continuing
12 years 8 months and 11 days
3 years and 4.5 months (single count)
False threat of danger
9 years 9 months and 14 days and continuing
Not available
Aggravated burglary
5 years 1 month and 12 days
Not available for single count
1 years and 2.5 months (all counts) (71% custodial)
Death by dangerous driving
10 years 5 months and 2 days
2 years (single count)
13 years 2 months and 12 days
Not available
Motor vehicle stealing
7 years and 13 days
Not available
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45.
Department of Justice,
Disability Justice Plan for Tasmania 2017–2020
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
, opened for signature 30 March
2515 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 May 2008) (‘
Tasmania Law Reform Institute
Facilitating Equal Access to Justice: An Intermediary/Communication
Assistant Scheme for Tasmania?
, Final Report No 23 (2018).
See Parts 4 and 5.
Review of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
, Final Report No 26
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission (NSWLRC),
People with Cognitive and Mental Health Impairments in
the Criminal Justice System: Diversion
Report 135 (2012) Ch 5.
Ibid Recommendation 5.2.
Ibid 122–136;
Recommendation 5.1.
See TLRI, above n
See discussion of the
Diversion List at [2.2.2]–[2.3.3].
The eligibility criteria
state that an offender is eligible if he or she has (or is likely to have) a
mental illness, intellectual
disability, acquired brain injury, autism spectrum
disorder and/or a neurological impairment, including dementia: Magistrates Court
Tasmanian Magistrates Court Diversion List: Procedural Manual
Version 1.4
(2014) 5. Other eligibility criteria include: that the defendant
has not been charged with an excluded criminal offence that involves
violence or serious sexual assault, unless the court, at its discretion,
considers the harm minor; the impairment/s cause/s
a substantially reduced
capacity in at least one of the areas of self-care, self-management, social
interaction or communication;
a connection exists between the mental impairment
and/or mental illness and the offending behaviour, the defendant being likely to
derive benefit from participation in a problem-solving court process; the
defendant may not be eligible if, based on the opinion
of Forensic Mental Health
Services (Court Liaison) staff, he or she has exhausted all reasonable and
available treatment and/or support
services for the mental illness and/or
impaired intellectual functioning. The defendant must consent to participate in
including attending court regularly and following the reasonable
directions of Forensic Mental Health Services (Court Liaison) staff:
also F Davidson et al, ‘Mental Health and Criminal Charges: Variation in
Diversion Pathways in Australia’ (2017)
Psychiatry, Psychology and
online edition.
Magistrates Court Tasmania,
E Newitt and V Stojcevski,
Mental Health Diversion List
(Evaluation Report, 2009) 13.
Magistrates Court Tasmania,
Newitt and Stojcevski, above
Magistrates Court of
Annual Report 2015–16
(2016) 12–13.
I Bartkowiak-Théron
and J Fleming,
Integration and Collaboration: Building Capacity and
Engagement for the Provision of Criminal Justice Services to Tasmania’s
Mentally Ill
(TILES, University of Tasmania, 2011) 6.
A Loughlan,
Madness: Mental Incapacity in Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2012)
The specific requirements of
the test contained in the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
are discussed further at [4.2].
Victoria Law Reform
Commission (VLRC),
Review of the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and
Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
, Final Report 28 (2014) 103.
Criminal Code
16. This is discussed further at [7.3].
This table is taken from the
Review of the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried Act
, Consultation Paper (2013) 33.
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1997
(Tas) ss 18, 21. These dispositions are discussed
further in Part 8.
Sentencing Act 1997
A mental illness is defined as a mental illness within the
meaning in the
Mental Health Act 2013
Mental Health Act
states that: ‘(1)(a) a person is taken to have a mental
illness if he or she experiences, temporarily, repeatedly or
continually
– (i) a serious impairment of thought (which may include
delusions); or (ii) a serious impairment of mood, volition, perception
cognition; and (b) nothing prevents the serious or permanent physiological,
biochemical or psychological effects of alcohol use
or drug-taking from being
regarded as an indication that a person has a mental illness. (2) However, under
this Act, a person is
not to be taken to have a mental illness by reason only of
the person’s – (a) current or past expression of, or failure
refusal to express, a particular political opinion or belief; or (b) current or
past expression of, or failure or refusal to express,
a particular religious
opinion or belief; or (c) current or past expression of, or failure or refusal
to express, a particular philosophy;
or (d) current or past expression of, or
failure or refusal to express, a particular sexual preference or orientation; or
(e) current
or past engagement in, or failure or refusal to engage in, a
particular political or religious activity; or (f) current or past engagement
a particular sexual activity or sexual promiscuity; or (g) current or past
engagement in illegal conduct; or (h) current or past
engagement in an
antisocial activity; or (i) particular economic or social status; or (j)
membership of a particular cultural or
racial group; or (k) intoxication
(however induced); or (l) intellectual or physical disability; or (m) acquired
brain injury; or
(n) dementia; or (o) temporary unconsciousness.’
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 23 March 1999, Part 2 33–114 (Patmore).
A Smith, ‘Out of the
Frying Pan: Forensic Mental Health Orders – Have Changes to the Review
Processes for People Found
“Unfit to Plead” or “Not Guilty by
Reason of Insanity” Enhanced the Liberty of the Subject?’ (2010)
Ibid 24. Smith referred to
at least two known examples of discharge after two years from a restriction
order imposed for the offence
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 23 March 1999, Part 2 33–114
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 23 March 1999, Part 2 33–114
P Gooding et al,
‘Unfitness to Stand Trial and the Indefinite Detention of Persons with
Cognitive Disabilities in Australia:
Human Rights Challenges and Proposals for
[2017] MelbULawRw 11
Melbourne University Law Review
The identification of these
principles was drawn from the VLRC’s report, see VLRC, above n
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS
(entered into force 23 March 1976) arts 14, 10, 26
arts 4, 5, 12, 13 14. For a more
detailed discussion of these provisions in the context of fitness to stand
trial, see [4.4].
See for example, B McSherry
Unfitness to Plead and Indefinite Detention of Persons with Cognitive
Disabilities: Addressing the Legal Barriers and Creating Appropriate
Alternative
Supports in the Community
(Melbourne Social Equity Institute, 2017).
VLRC, above n
, 18 quoting A Mason, ‘Fair
Criminal Law Journal
VLRC, above n
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 16.
Ibid s 16(3)(c), (d).
Ibid s 16(3)(b).
VLRC, above n
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 37(2).
Balance in the Forensic Mental Health System: Review of the Queensland Mental
Health Act 2000
(Final Report, 2006) 28–29 (the ‘Butler
Criminal Justice Mental
Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 35(1)(b).
Ibid s 35(1)(a).
Ibid s 35(2)(a).
Ibid s 37(2).
Ibid s 33(1). However, in
relation to supervision orders, the court does not require a report to determine
if the defendant should
be detained or subjected to a more rigorous form of
supervision or to vary in minor respects the conditions on which the defendant
was released: s 33(2).
NSWLRC, above n 8, xv;
People with Cognitive and Mental Health Impairments in the Criminal
Justice System:
Criminal Responsibility and Consequences
Report 138 (2013) 6–7. See also Law Reform Committee, Parliament of
Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System by
People with an Intellectual Disability and Their Families and Carers
11 (‘Law Reform Committee’); VLRC, above n
, 2; K Dean et al,
The Justice System and
Mental Health: A Review of the Literature
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
The Health of Australia’s Prisoners 2015
Magistrates’ Court
Victoria, Submission No IDAJ31 to Law Reform Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System by People with
an Intellectual Disability and Their Families and Carers
, (2011) 5 quoted in
VLRC, above n
Dean et al, above n
, 13; Law Reform Committee, above n
M Nixon et al,
‘Estimating the Risk of Crime and Victimisation in People with
Intellectual Disabilities: A Data-Linkage Study’
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology
Law Council of Australia,
The Justice Project: People with Disability
, Consultation Paper (2017) 14
referring to C Jennings,
Triple Disadvantage: Out of Sight, Out of
Violence Against Women with Disabilities Project
(Domestic Violence and Incest Resource Centre, 2
Gooding et al, above n
Dean et al, above n
M Bagaric and R Edney,
Sentencing in Australia
(Thomson Reuters, 2016) 347.
NSWLRC, above n
, 7; Dean et al, above n
J Ogloff et al, ‘The
Identification of Mental Disorders in the Criminal Justice System’
Trends and Issues in Criminal Justice
334 (2007) 2.
C Cunneen et al,
Culture and Hyperincarceration: The Revival of the Prison
(Taylor and
Francis, 2013) 91 (references omitted).
See Appendix 8.
E Bevin, ‘New
taskforce to probe how mentally ill prisoners are dealt with after Voula
Delios’s murder’,
, 2 October 2018
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-10-02/prisoner-mental-health-focus-of-new-taskforce/10328332>.
Custodial Inspector
Annual Report 2017–18
See discussion in Part
J Walvisch, submission to
VLRC, above n
See Bagaric and Edney, above
Channon v The Queen
(1978) 33 FLR 433
, 436–437 cited in
Acting Director of Public
Prosecutions v CBF
[2016] TASCCA 1
[42] (Porter J).
(1988) 164 CLR 465.
Ibid 476–477 (Mason
CJ, Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ).
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Acting) v CBF
[2016] TASCCA 1.
(2007) 16 VR 269, 276
(Maxwell P, Buchanan and Vincent JJA).
Startup v Tasmania
[2010] TASCCA 5
Groenewege v Tasmania
[2013] TASCCA 7
of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v CBF
[2016] TASCCA 1.
See Freiberg,
Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law in Victoria
289–298; Bagaric and Edney, above n
, 348–367; See D Gee and J Ogloff,
‘Sentencing Offenders with Impaired Mental Functioning: R v Verdins,
Buckley and Vo
[2007] at the Clinical Coalface’
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
for further discussion of these principles.
J Walvisch and A Carroll,
‘Sentencing Offenders with Personality Disorders: A Critical Analysis of
DPP (Vic) v O’Neill
[2017] MelbULawRw 29
Melbourne University Law Review
Ibid 423–424.
[2015] VSCA 325.
Walvisch and Carroll, above
Bagaric and Edney, above n
Director of Public
Prosecutions v O’Neill
[2015] VSCA 325
, [74] as summarised in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v CBF
[2016] TASCCA 1
[39] (Porter J).
Director of Public
Prosecutions v O’Neill
[2015] VSCA 325
, [75] as summarised in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v CBF
[2016] TASCCA 1
[39] (Porter J).
See discussion at
Sentencing Act 1997
A Comparative
Review of National Legislation for the Indefinite Detention of ‘Dangerous
Research Paper No 4
Sentencing Act 1997
s 19(1)(d).
Sentencing in
(Federation Press, 2
[2018] TASSC 49.
[1988] HCA 62
(1988) 165 CLR 611.
Ibid 617–618. See
also at 619.
It is noted that in
Western Australia in the period 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2015, 0.03 per cent of
matters finalised in the adult
courts involved accused who were found either
mentally unfit to stand trial or not guilty by reason of unsoundness of mind:
of the Attorney-General, Western Australia,
Review of the
Law (Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Final Report (2016) 27. In
Victoria, it was noted that insanity and fitness to stand trial cases made up
only approximately one percent
of the total cases that resulted in a sentence or
a CMIA order in the higher courts: VLRC, above n
There were also three
cases identified where it was not possible to determine if the order made under
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas) was a result of a
sentence imposed by the court or finding of unfitness or insanity.
The offence categories
are taken from the Australian Bureau of Crime Statistics,
Australian and New
Zealand Standard Offence Classification (ANZSOC)
Information provided by
Betty Evans, Department of Justice, email 2 April 2018.
These cases were
identified using a search for Magistrates Court decisions on the Australasian
Legal Information Institute (AUSTLII
Brazendale v O
[2008] TASMC 3
, the defendant unsuccessfully relied on the defence of
insanity in relation to charges of stalking and assault with indecent
McKenna v Smith
[2014] TASMC 11.
Bonde v Weate
[2017] TASMC 11.
Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
, Final Report No 124 (2014),
194–195 quoting the VLRC, above
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45.
Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP),
Prosecution Policy and Guidelines
R v Chanthasaeng,
Songsagkong
[2008] NSWCS 122, [48] (Nicolson SC DCJ).
DPP Guidelines, above n
[2011] ACTSC 56
(2011) 210 A Crim R
VLRC, above n
A White, S Meares and J
Batchelor, ‘The Role of Cognition in Fitness to Stand: A Systematic
Review’ (2014) 25
Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology
NSWLRC, above n
, 17; Law Commission of England and Wales,
Unfitness to Plead: A Consultation Paper
Consultation Paper No
197 (2010) 59–60.
Emphasis added.
See T Minkowitz,
‘Rethinking Criminal Responsibility from a Critical Disability
Perspective: The Abolition of Insanity/Incapacity
Acquittals and Unfitness to
Plead, and Beyond’
Griffith Law Review
discussion in P Gooding and C O’Mahoney, ‘Laws on Unfitness to Stand
Trial and the UN Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities:
Comparing Reform in England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Australia’
International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice
This critique is
summarised by Gooding et al, above n
See discussion in A Arstein-Kerslake et al, ‘Human Rights and Unfitness to
Plead: The Demands of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities’ (2017) 17(3)
Human Rights Law Review
399 [online:
https://doi.org/10.1093/hrlr/ngx025].
Gooding and
O’Mahoney, above n
, 131. See also
discussion in Arstein-Kerslake et al, above n
Melbourne Social Equity
Addressing the Indefinite Detention of People with Cognitive and
Psychiatric Impairment Due to Unfitness to Plead Law
(Submission to the
Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee, 2016) 5–6.
Gooding et al, above n
, 843. See UNCRPD,
Guidelines on Article
14 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities: The Right to
Liberty and Security of Persons
with Disabilities
Minkowitz, above n
However, the dismantling
of the regime suggested by Arstein-Kerslake et al, above n
, 417–418 seems to require reshaping
of the law to such a degree as to amount to fundamental changes to the current
to stand trial doctrine that are akin to abolition. However, the authors
acknowledge that there will be cases where a person is unable
to participate in
their trial even with supports and that some alternative approach will be
necessary. They also acknowledge that
the reforms ‘will take time and will
probably require incremental change’: at 418.
See for example,
discussion in Arstein-Kerslake et al, ibid; Gooding and O’Mahoney, above n
; Melbourne Social Equity Institute,
; Gooding et al, above n
Arstein-Kerslake et al,
‘Evolving Conceptualisations of Legal Capacity and Criminal Law in
Australia’ (Presentation to the Legal Intersections
Resource Centre:
Disability at the Margins Vulnerability, Empowerment and the Criminal Law,
University of Wollongong, November 2013).
Gooding and
O’Mahoney, above n
Arstein-Kerslake et al,
Ibid 409–412.
This is discussed further
ALRC, above n
, [7.14], [7.18]. Department of the
Attorney-General, Western Australia, above n
, 46; VLRC, above n
; Law Commission of England and Wales,
Unfitness to Plead Volume 1: Report
(Law Com No 364, 2016) 61; Northern
Ireland Law Reform Commission,
Unfitness to Plead
ALRC, above n
, 136; VLRC, above n
, 70; Law Commission UK, above n
, 27, 32; Law Commission of England and
Wales, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
, 28; Law Commission
of England and Wales, above n
VLRC, above n
I Freckelton,
‘Rationality and Flexibility in Assessment of Fitness to Stand
(1996) 19(1)
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry
54–55; VLRC, above n
99; Law Commission of England and Wales, above n
Freckelton, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
, 64 citing R MacKay,
B Mitchell and L Howe, ‘A Continued Upturn in Unfitness to Plead –
More Disability in Relation to
the Trial Under the 1991 Act’
Criminal Law Review
A White et al, ‘The
Role of Cognitive Assessment in Determining Fitness to Stand Trial’ (2012)
International Journal of Forensic Mental Health
Ibid 108. See also A
White et al, ‘Fitness to Stand Trial in One Australian Jurisdiction: The
Role of Cognitive Abilities, Neurological
Dysfunction and Psychiatric
Disorder’ (2016) 23
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
499; S van der
Wijngaart, R Hawkins and P Golus, ‘The Role of Psychologists in the South
Australian Fitness to Stand Trial
Process’ (2015) 22
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
, Recommendation 10.9,
W Brookbanks and R
Mackay, ‘Decisional Competence and “Best Interests”:
Establishing the Threshold for Fitness
to Stand Trial’
[2010] OtaLawRw 3
, 266. See also Law Commission of England and Wales, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
Ibid 54; Law Commission
of England and Wales, above n
Recommendation 10.22.
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 7-1.
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
, Recommendations
10.14–10.21. The draft legislation prepared by the Law Commission appears
in Appendix 1.
Northern Ireland Law
Reform Commission, above n
Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Insanity and Diminished Responsibility
(2004) Recommendation
Criminal Procedure
(Scotland) Act 1995
s 53F(1) inserted by
Criminal Justice and Licensing
(Scotland) Act 2010
inserted by
Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010
VLRC, above n
Department of the
Attorney General, Western Australia, above n
NSWLRC, above n
Ibid 30. See draft
provision in Appendix 1. The adoption of an underlying principles of a fair
trial approach was not contained in
recommendation of the VLRC (see draft
provision Appendix 1) but was adopted in the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and
Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 8. This legislation has
not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
Gooding and
O’Mahoney, above n
, referring to
the UNCRPD,
General Comment No 1: Equal Recognition Before the Law (Article
ALRC, above n
Error! Bookmark not defined.
VLRC, above n
, 74 referring to I Freckelton, above n
See Appendix 4.
Law Reform Committee,
, Recommendation 29.
VLRC, above n
Ibid referring to the
submission of the Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights Commission.
ALRC, above n
See ibid 76–77.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
It is noted that the UNCRPD has argued
that substitute decision-making regimes such as guardianship ‘must be
abolished in order
to ensure that full legal capacity is restored to persons
with disabilities on an equal basis with others’: UNCRPD,
Comment No 1 (2014),
Article 12: Equal Recognition Before the Law
TLRI, above n
VLRC, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
VLRC, above n
See Department of the
Attorney-General, Western Australia, above n
Gooding et al, above n
Law Reform Committee,
ALRC, above n
VLRC, above n
, 89. The recommendation of the VLRC for
courts to consider support measures that may assist an accused to stand trial
when determining
fitness was was adopted in the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and
Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 8. This legislation has
not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 2.2.
Department of the
Attorney-General, Western Australia, above n
, Recommendation 8.
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
VLRC, above n
See [2.4.5].
Northern Ireland Law
Reform Commission,
Unfitness to Plead,
Consultation Paper
(2012) 120; Northern Ireland Law Reform Commission, above n
Northern Ireland Law
Reform Commission, Consultation Paper
13, above n
Northern Ireland Law
Reform Commission, above n
Northern Ireland Law Reform Commission, ibid 122.
TLRI, above n
See TLRI, above n
See VLRC, above n
, 87–89, Law Commission of England and
Wales, above n
37–55. See also Gooding et al, above n
Melbourne Social Equity
Institute, above n
Ibid 5 referring to
Gooding and O’Mahoney, above n
report that outlines the nature of supports that may be effective for persons
with cognitive disabilities in the criminal justice
system was published in
September 2017, in a project funded by the National Disability Research and
Development Grants, see McSherry
et al, above n
Gooding et al, above n
VLRC, above n
Ibid. See [6.2.6].
NSWLRC, above n
, 36; VLRC, above n
NSWLRC above n
VLRC, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
VLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
Ibid 36–37.
VLRC, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
NSWLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
Ibid 81–82.
VLRC, above n
, 81. It is noted that a new provision that
created a test for determining whether an accused was fit to plead guilty to a
was adopted in the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be
Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 8. This legislation has not been passed
by the Victorian Parliament.
See [4.4.9].
[2.2.2]–[2.2.3].
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
Ibid s 10(5).
Heapes v The Queen
[2000] TASSC 77
, [17] (Evans J) citing
Kesavarajah v R
(1994) 181 CLR
R v Enright
[19990] 1 Qd R 563.
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
[2006] TASSC 21.
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 11.
Ibid s 12(4).
(2005) 13 Tas SR 457, [14] (Crawford J).
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 14(3).
Ibid s 15(1). The
requirements for a special hearing are discussed in detail in Part 6.
VLRC, above n
, 230 fn 32;
Criminal Code
(NT) s 43L;
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 11.
It is noted that the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried)
Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 9 provides that responsibility for determining
fitness to stand trial is to be decided by a judge (and not the jury). This
legislation has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
VLRC, above n
, 230 fn 32.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired
Accused) Act 1996
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Procedure
(Insanity) Act 1964
(UK) s 4(5).
It is noted that the
procedure under the
Criminal Code
(Qld) has fallen into disuse, and
fitness to stand trial is routinely dealt with by the Mental Health Commission
(MHC), J O’Leary,
S O’Toole and B Watt, ‘Exploring Juvenile
Fitness for Trial in Queensland’ (2013) 20
Psychiatry, Psychology and
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes Act 1900
See VLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
Ibid Recommendation 27,
Ibid Recommendation
VLRC, above n
, 121, 126.
Mental Health Act 2016
Magistrates Court (Qld),
Practice Direction 1 of 2017:
Mental Health Act 2016
Proceedings in the
Magistrates Court
VLRC, above n
It is noted that proposed
reforms will strengthen the framework in NSW for diverting people with cognitive
and mental health impairment
charged with low level offending into the health
and disability sector, see NSW Government (Justice),
Forensic Mental Health
<https://www.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/Reforms/forensic-mental-health.aspx>.
Mentally ill is defined
Mental Health Act 2007
as a person who is suffering
from a mental illness and because of that illness, there are reasonable grounds
for believing that care,
treatment or control of that person is necessary of the
person’s own protection from serious harm, or for the protection of
from serious harm.
See NSWLRC, above n
, 247–248. The court takes into account
the seriousness of the offence, the likely sentence if convicted, the
availability of
a treatment plan, the defendant’s criminal history and
failure of previous diversion: at 248–251.
VLRC, above n
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 11.
VLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
Law Reform Committee,
VLRC, above n
This was considered by
the VLRC, see above n
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 14(1).
Ibid s 15(1).
Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS),
Mental Health Act
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 15(2).
Ibid s 15(3).
Ibid s16(1).
Ibid s 16(3).
[2005] TASSC 29
(2005) 13 Tas R 457.
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 38.
Criminal Code
Tasmania v Bosworth
[2005] TASSC 29
(2005) 13 Tas R 457
[33] (Crawford J).
DHHS, above n
, 98; Tasmania,
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 23 March 1999, Part 2 33–114
15 June 2015, Wood J
(Sentence).
See [7.3] for further
discussion of onus and standard of proof for insanity.
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 17.
Ibid s 18(1).
Tasmania v Bosworth
[2005] TASSC 29
(2005) 13 Tas R 457
[16] (Crawford J).
This is discussed at
In Western Australia, a
review conducted into the operation of fitness to stand trial did not recommend
that a special hearing be
adopted, but instead recommended that the juridical
officer was to have regard to whether there was a case to answer on the balance
of probabilities after inquiring into the question and informing him or herself
in any way the judicial officer thinks fit: Department
of the Attorney-General,
Western Australia, above n
Recommendation 9.
Gooding et al, above n
See Appendix 5.
See Arstein-Kerslake et
al, above n
See McSherry et al, above
, 19; Arstein-Kerslake et al, above n
, 403–404; Gooding et al, above n
Gooding et al, above n
Criminal Justice
Mental Impairment Act 1999
(Tas) s 17.
See Law Commission of
England and Wales, above n
P Gooding et al,
‘Supporting Accused Persons with Cognitive Disabilities to Participate in
Criminal Proceedings in Australia:
Avoiding the Pitfalls of Unfitness to Stand
Trial Laws’ (2017) 35
Law in Context
64, 69 citing K Eagle and A
Ellis, ‘The Widening Net of Preventative Detention and the Unfit for
Trial’ (2016) 90(3)
Australian Law Journal
See Part 8 for a
discussion of disposition.
See Appendix 8.
See ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-1. See also TLRI, above n
recommendations were made for a shift from the paternalistic ‘best
interests’ approach to representative decision-making
person’s will, preferences and rights.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
s 43XA inserted by
Criminal Code (Amendment (Mental Impairment and Unfitness
to be Tried) Act 2017
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 21(4). It is noted
that the VLRC has now recommended repeal of this provision: see VLRC, above n
, 234 Recommendation 52.
SM v The Queen
VSCA 342. See discussion in VLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
VLRC, above n
Ibid 233, 236.
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
See discussion at
VLRC, above n
, 234; Law Commission of England and Wales,
A Schloenhardt,
Queensland Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2015) [17.1.2].
See A Simester and W
Brookbanks,
Principles of Criminal Law
(Thomson Reuters, 4
ed, 2012) 322–340, 347; S Bronitt and B McSherry,
Principles of
Criminal Law
(Lawbook Co, 3
ed, 2010) [4.30]–[4.35]; B
McSherry, ‘Defining What is a “Disease of the Mind”: The
Untenability of Current
Legal Interpretations’
Journal of Law
and Medicine
; VLRC, above n
[5.11]–[5.44]; NSWLRC, above n
[3.13]–[3.109].
[1843] EngR 875
(1843) 10 Cl&F 200
ER 718. See F McAuley,
Insanity, Psychiatry and Criminal Responsibility
(Round Hall Press, 1993) 18–26. For a summary of the history of the
insanity defence see R Mackay,
Mental Condition Defences in the Criminal
(Clarendon Press, 1995)
See summary in A Norrie,
Crime, Reason and History: A Critical Introduction to the Criminal Law
(LexisNexis, 2001) 179–180.
(1843) 10 Cl and Finn
200, 210; 8 ER 718, 722.
N Lacey, C Wells and O
Reconstructing Criminal Law
(Cambridge University Press,
ed, 2010) 95.
‘Provocation: The Case for Abolition’ in A Ashworth and B Mitchell
Rethinking English Homicide Law
(Oxford University Press, 1984).
Bronitt and McSherry write that ‘[t]he concept of criminal responsibility
is based on the
notion that individuals possess the capacity to make rational
choices in performing or refraining from performing acts’: Bronitt
McSherry, above n
, 201, [4.05].
See also P Fairall and S Yeo,
Criminal Defences
(Lexis Nexis,
[13.1]; S Yannoulidis,
Mental State Defences
in Criminal Law
(Ashgate, 2012) 51–52.
Bronitt and McSherry,
Lacey, Wells and Quick,
Fairall and Yeo, above n
, [13.1]. This is an argument from the
perspective of retributive theory.
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
, Dixon J stated that ‘it is perfectly useless for
the law to attempt, by threatening punishment, to deter people from committing
crimes if their mental condition is such that they cannot be in the least
influenced by the possibility or probability of subsequent
punishment ... what
is the point of punishing people if they be beyond the control of the law for
reasons of mental health’.
R Heaton and C De Than,
Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2011) 229.
Law Commission of England
Criminal Liability: Insanity and Automatism A Discussion Paper
(2013) 197.
All ER 673 (Lord
Diplock) quoted in Heaton and De Than, above n
J Child and G Sullivan,
‘When Does the Insanity Defence Apply? Some Recent Cases’ (2014)
Criminal Law Review
Ibid. McSherry outlines
the ‘the tortuous legal interpretations of the term “disease of the
mind”’ and stated
that the question which underlies ‘I
believe, [is] simply this: is this individual likely to cause harm to others if
not confined?
If so then his or her mental condition will be considered to be
disease of the mind for the purposes of the insanity defence’:
[1994] HCA 28
, 507. Leader-Elliott suggests that ‘it must now be taken that the
object of the presumption is to ensure that the issues of
fault, voluntariness
and insanity can be resolved without speculation about possible mental
abnormalities unless there is acceptable
evidence — usually medical
— of abnormality, disorder or disease’: I Leader-Elliott,
‘Case Comment:
Hawkins v the Queen
’ (1994) 18
Criminal Law
Bronitt and McSherry,
D Howard and B Westmore,
Crime and Mental Health Law in New South Wales
(LexisNexis Butterworths,
ed, 2010) [6.28]; J Blackwood and K Warner,
Tasmanian Criminal
Law: Texts and Cases
(University of Tasmania Law Press, 2014) vol 1, 247;
[1982] Tas SR 35.
This has been interpreted
to mean intellectual disability.
See McSherry, above n
[1933] HCA 1
, 188 (Dixon J).
(1985) 42 SASR 266
This was adopted by the High Court in
R v Falconer
(1990) 171 CLR 30, 53
(Mason CJ, Brennan and McHugh JJ), 60 (Deane and Dawson JJ); 78 (Toohey J), 85
(Gaudron J).
A Simester et al,
Simester and Sullivan’s Criminal Law: Theory and Doctrine
Publishing, 2013) 719.
See further Blackwood and
Warner, above n
, Chapter 5.
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 17(1);
[1947] St R Qd R 51, 61. It is noted that complex
questions arise in relation to the interaction of mental illness and alcohol
drugs for the purposes of the insanity and intoxication defences, see
Blackwood and Warner, above n
Bratty v A-G (Northern
) [1963] AC 386.
[1993] 1 Qd
Bratty v A-G (Northern
) [1963] AC 386.
[1989] EWCA Crim 1
[1957] 1 QB
[1993] TASSC
Schloenhardt, above n
[1989] EWCA Crim 1
, which was a case involving hyperglycaemia which is high blood sugar
resulting from a failure to take insulin. In contrast, in
[1973] EWCA Crim 1
, hypoglyceaemia was held not to be a mental disease because the condition
resulted in low blood sugar from an excess of insulin (which
the defendant had
administered as prescribed by the doctor).
[1957] 1 QB
All ER 673.
(1992) 75 CCC (3d)
See further discussion in Blackwood and Warner, above n
Lusted v Kingston
[2016] TASMC 1
referring to
Coulsen v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 146.
(1985) 19 A
Crim R 129.
[1960] HCA 5
(1960) 105 CLR 295
Williams v The Queen
[1978] TASStRp 10
This has been considered in various law reform reports: Law Reform
Commission of Western Australia (LRCWA),
A Review of the Law of Homicide
Final Report 97 (2007), 229–230; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
, 56–60. It is noted that
Bronitt and McSherry observe that the weight of psychiatric opinion is that
antisocial personality
disorder should not be equated with mental illness:
Bronitt and McSherry,
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
E Colvin and J
Criminal Law in Queensland and Western Australia: Cases and
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 6
ed, 2011) 464.
See discussion in
Blackwood and Warner, above n
This illustration is
provided by D Caruso in D Caruso et al,
South Australian Criminal Law: Review
and Critique
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 2014) 396.
Schloenhardt, above n
[1978] TASStRp 10
[1978] Tas SR 98.
Ibid 102 (Neasey J).
[1958] NZPoliceLawRp 16
(1958) NZLR 999.
Ibid 109 (Neasey J)
[1958] NZPoliceLawRp 16
(1958) NZLR 999
, 1009 (Gresson P).
(1993) 68 A Crim R
[1960] HCA 5
(1960) 105 CLR 295
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
(1993) 68 A Crim R
Blackwood and Warner,
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
189–190 cited by Gibson J in
[1959] TASStRp 25
[1959] Tas SR 209
Sentencing Advisory
Council, South Australia (SASAC),
Mental Impairment and the Law: A Report on
the Operation of
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(2014) 36. In South Australia, it has been estimated that approximately 87% of
all findings of ‘mental incompetence’
are based on this limb of the
test and two per cent of mental impairment defences are based on both limbs of
the test, Appendix B,
18 July 2014
(Sentence).
Tasmania v P
CJ, 13 November 2013 (Sentence).
Tasmania v R
Pearce J, 14 March 2017 (Sentence).
[2010] WASCA 71.
See Blackwood and Warner,
[1962] TASStRp 6
, 55 (Burbury CJ, Crisp and Cox JJ).
[1977] HCA 24
(1977) 51 ALJR 499
(Barwick CJ and Mason J).
Bronitt and McSherry,
[1962] TASStRp 6
[2015] VSCA 325
Tasmania v G
Estcourt J, 4 September 2013 (Sentence).
Blackwood and Warner,
[1993] TASSC 91.
(1991) 60 A Crim R 419
421 (Slicer J).
[1993] TASSC 91
(Crawford J).
Blackwood and Warner,
Ibid citing
, unreported 7/1991.
[1982] TASRp 20
[1982] Tas R 199.
It is noted that
changes are proposed to the defence in reforms to the forensic mental health
system in NSW. These will include changing
the legal term from ‘not guilty
by reason of mental illness’ to ‘act proven but not criminally
responsible by reason
of cognitive or mental health impairment’ and the
terms ‘cognitive impairment’ and ‘mental health
impairment’
defined, see NSW Government (Justice),
Forensic Mental
Health Reforms
Supporting Victims Factsheet
<https://www.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/Reforms/forensic-mental-health.aspx>.
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
Bratty v AG
(Northern Ireland)
[1963] AC 386, 412
[1973] EWCA Crim 1
(1973) QB 910
Radford v The Queen
(1985) 42 SASR, 274
–275, where
the contrast is drawn between a pathologically infirm mind and ‘the
reaction of a healthy mind to extraordinary
external stimuli’.
Willgoss v The
[1960] HCA 5
(1960) 105 CLR 295.
Sodeman v The
(1936) CLR 192;
(1985) 19 A Crim R 129.
Stapleton v The
[1952] HCA 56
(1952) 86 CLR 358
It is noted in
that this excludes from consideration whether the defendant could
reason with a moderate degree of sense and composure as set out
[1933] HCA 1
(1936) 55 CLR 182.
Note that a definition
of mental impairment was contained in the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and
Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 5. This legislation has
not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
Blackwood and Warner,
, 280; See also S Yeo,
‘Commonwealth and International Perspectives on the Insanity
Criminal Law Journal
; N Morris,
Madness and
the Criminal Law
(University of Chicago Press, 1982).
Simester et al, above n
, 724. See Appendix 7 for a summary of
recent law reform considerations.
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
This is the summary of
Morris’ argument for the abolition of the insanity defence provided by M
Hathaway, ‘The Moral
Significance of the Insanity Defence’
The Journal of Criminal Law
Law Reform Commissioner
of Tasmania,
Insanity, Intoxication and Automatism
, Report No 61 (1989)
Recommendations 1 and 2.
See Morris, above n
; N Morris, ‘Psychiatry and the
Dangerous Criminal’
Southern California Law Review
See Minkowitz, above n
; C Slobogin, ‘Eliminating Mental
Disability as a Legal Criterion in Deprivation of Liberty Cases: The Impact of
the Convention
on the Rights of Person With Disabilities on the Insanity
Defence, Civil Commitment, and Competency Law’
International
Journal of Law and Psychiatry
See Law Reform Commission
of Victoria,
Mental Malfunction and Criminal Responsibility
, Report 34
It is noted that, in
Tasmania, evidence of mental illness falling short of insanity can be used to
deny specific intention and actual
or imputed knowledge, see
[1994] HCA 28
(1994) 179 CLR 500
(1994) 4 Tas R 376.
This case is discussed at
Simester et al, above n
, 719–720. It is noted that some
commentators have argued that civil commitment would not be appropriate
following acquittal
as this ‘is equally discriminate under the CRPD and
relies on discriminatory perception of risk based on the existence of a
disability: Minkowitz, above n
referring to Beaupert and Steele (2014).
United National High
Commissioner for Human Rights, ‘Thematic Study on Enhancing Awareness and
Understanding of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities’ UN Doc A/HRC/10/48 (26 January 2009) [47]
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Disability/Pages/ThematicStudies.aspx
See also Minkowitz, above n
; Slobogin,
Slobogin, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
, 33 summarising
Morris’ argument.
Law Reform Commissioner
of Tasmania, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
Impairment Decision-making and the Insanity Defence
, Report 120 (2010)
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
, 37 citing S Morse
and M Hoffman, ‘The Uneasy Entente Between Insanity and Mens Rea: Beyond
Clark v Arizona
Scholarship at Penn law
, Paper 143,
M Wondemaghen,
‘Testing Equality: Insanity, Treatment Refusal and the CRPD’ (2018)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
2 referring to the
Commissioner for Human Rights,
Who Gets to Decide? Right to Legal
Capacity for Persons with Intellectual and Psychosocial Disabilities’
(2102) Council for Europe, Strasbourg 7.
Wondemaghen, above n
, (online) 10.
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 18.
, 13 November
2013 (Blow J).
People with
Cognitive and Mental Health Impairments in the Criminal Justice System:
Criminal Responsibility and Consequences
, Consultation Paper 6 (2010)
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
Ibid 29. This is set out
in Appendix 7.
Ibid 43–44.
Ibid 48–49.
See J Rumbold and M
Wasik, ‘Special Feature on Automatism’ (2015) 55
Science and the Law
147; R Mackay, ‘An Anatomy of Automatism’
Medicine, Science and the Law
150; L Claydon and P Catley,
‘Abolishing the Insanity Verdict in the United Kingdom: A Better Balance
Between Legal Rules and
Scientific Understanding?’ in S Moratti and D
Patterson (eds),
Legal Insanity and the Brain: Science, Law and European
Courts (Hart Publishing, 2016) 207.
Rumbold and Wasik, above
A Ashworth,
‘Insanity and Automatism: A Discussion Paper’ [2013]
Criminal Law
NSWLRC, above n
Fairall and Yeo, above n
See the VLRC,
to Homicide
, Final Report (2004) [5.11]–[5.44]; NSWLRC, above n
, Chapter Three; Bronitt and McSherry, above
, [4.30]; Schloenhardt, above n
, [17.1.2].
Hogan’s Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 13
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
See Table 7.2.
See Table 7.2.
See NSW Government
(Justice), above n
NZLC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
See Tables 7.1 and
Section 269A
Law Consolidation Act 1935
See Table 7.2.
See Appendix 7. It is
noted that ‘mental impairment’ was defined in the
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 5. This
Bill has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
See Appendix 7.
Reforms proposed in NSW
define cognitive impairment and mental health impairment: see NSW Government
(Justice), above n
See Appendix 7.
See Appendix 7.
There is a slight
difference in wording in the ACT legislation, where the reaction of a healthy
mind to extraordinary stimuli is
referred to as a ‘reactive
condition’, see Table 7.1.
See NSW Government
(Justice), above n
Fairall and Yeo, above n
, [13.66]; See also VLRC,
Defences to
, Options Paper (2003) [5.15]–[5.19]; VLRC, above n
; VLRC, above n
; NSWLRC, above n
; NZLC, above n
; Law Commission of England and Wales, above
NZLC, above n
Child and Sullivan, above
A Ashworth and J Horder,
Principles of Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 7
This is discussed at
[7.5.8]–[7.5.9].
LRCWA, above n
, 143, 228–229.
NSWLRC, above n
Ibid 54. Note the
proposed definition of mental health impairment (as set out in Table 7.2) does
not refer to personality disorders
(either to include or exclude). Cognitive
impairment is also defined as an ongoing impairment in comprehension, reason,
functioning, judgment, learning or memory that affects the functioning
of the person in daily life to a material extent, and that
is the result of any
damage to, dysfunction, developmental delay, or deterioration of the brain or
mind. Cognitive impairment may
arise from conditions such as intellectual
disability, dementia and acquired brain injury: see NSW Government (Justice),
NSWLRC, above n
Scottish Law Commission,
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
See Table 7.2. There is
no express inclusion or exclusion of personality disorders in the reforms
proposed in NSW: see NSW Government
(Justice), above n
See NSWLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
LRCWA, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
NZLC, above n
See Appendix 7. It is
noted that personality disorders were expressly excluded from the definition of
mental impairment in the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be
Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 5. This legislation has not been passed
by the Victorian Parliament.
the Law Relating to Self-Defence
, Final Report No 20 (2015)
A Carroll et al,
‘Drug-induced Psychoses and Criminal Responsibility’
Behavioral Sciences and the Law
TLRI, above n
NSWLRC, above n
See VLRC, above n
, 114, Recommendation 24.
Ibid 114–115.
‘Forensic Considerations of Substance-Induced Psychosis’ (2013) 41
Journal of American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law
VLRC, above n
Section 269A(1)
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
It is noted that was the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) cl 5 defined mental impairment to exclude the case of a person whose
mental functioning is impaired solely as the result of
drugs or alcohol. This
legislation has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
SASAC, above n
, 97 Recommendation 11.
Simester et al, above n
, 713. It is noted that in England, the
second limb of the insanity defence has been interpreted as referring to
wrong rather than morally wrong and this had significantly
restricted the operation of the defence, see Law Commission of England
Wales, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
See Yeo, above n
, 12; Bronitt and McSherry, above n
See Table 7.1.
NSWLRC, above n
See Table 7.1.
Yeo, above n
VLRC, above n
S Allnutt, A Samuels and
C O’Driscoll, ‘The Insanity Defence: from Wild Beasts to
M’Naghten’ (2007) 15(4)
Australasian Psychiatry
See [7.3.15].
See Table 7.1.
Allnutt, Samuels and
O’Driscoll, above n
Bronitt and McSherry,
A Kenny, ‘The
Psychiatric Expert in Court’ (1984) 14
Psychological Medicine
299 quoted in Allnutt, Samuels and O’Driscoll, above n
SASAC, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
Ibid 2. As discussed
below, the Law Commission has proposed a radical change to the law. However,
most reform projects have made
recommendations in relation to aspects of the law
but essentially retained the
approach. For example, in New
Zealand it was observed that the defence of insanity is ‘troubled in
principle, and has occasionally
produced off or anomalous results in practice.
Furthermore, the fact that the insanity defence is not very often relied upon is
in itself a reason for failing to formulate morally and legally sound
criteria for it’: NZLC, above n
29. However, despite the ‘not insignificant problems’ with the
insanity defence, the NZLC did not recommend its reform:
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
NSWLRC, above n
These difficulties were
observed by the Law Commission of England and Wales,
Insanity and Automatism:
A Scoping Paper
8. The exception is where the offender has
appealed their conviction on the basis of unsuccessful reliance on insanity.
See TLRI, above n
, Part 2, in particular [2.2.14].
[1993] TASSC 91
(Crawford J).
[1994] HCA 28
(1994) 179 CLR 500.
Fairall and Yeo, above n
This was the view
expressed in Blackwood and Warner, above n
, 230. It would also appear to be the
approach of both Slicer J and the Court of Criminal Appeal in Walsh, who viewed
the competing
claims as being of reliance on insanity (qualified acquittal) or
reliance on s 16(3) for the purposes of self-defence (complete acquittal).
This is certainly the
effect of the
Rules on delusions. As Sullivan observes in
relation to the third limb of
, ‘[t]he remarks that
D will be “exempt from punishment”, is intended to mean that D will
be able to rely on the
insanity defence, not because of a reliance on
self-defence’: Child and Sullivan, above n
, 792. See D Baker,
Glanville Williams
Textbook of Criminal Law
(Sweet & Maxwell, 3
[27–017]; Law Commission of England and Wales,
Insanity and Automatism:
Supplementary Material to the Scoping Paper
(2012) 4.59 fn 62. See also
Western Australia v Macdonald [No 2]
[2010] WASC 355.
It was also the
approach in New Zealand before the provision dealing with delusions was removed:
see Simester and Brookbanks, above
who write that ‘the McNaghten Rules and earlier New Zealand legislation
contained a provision that persons suffering “specific
delusions”,
but otherwise sane, were not to be acquitted on the grounds of insanity unless
the delusions would, if true, have
justified or excused the act’: at 328.
Although more recently, in the United Kingdom, an offender relied on an insane
to provide the basis for his genuine belief in the need for
self-defence but not for the purposes of assessing whether the amount
used was reasonable: see
[2014] 1 WLR 3354
[2013] EWCA Crim
, [36] (Davis LJ); R Mackay, ‘
: Defendant Charged with
Affray and Assault After Attacking Police — Crown Accepting Psychiatric
Evidence that Defendant Believed
Evil Spirits were Trying to Harm Him’
Criminal Law Review
544; T Storey, ‘Self-Defence: Insane
Delusions and Reasonable Force’ (2014) 78
Journal of Criminal Law
TLRI, above n
, 15 Recommendation 2.
Ibid 42 Recommendation
Baker, above n
, [27-019].
This was the situation in
two Western Australian cases where the delusions did not provide basis for
self-defence: see
Garrett v R
[1999] WASCA 169
Western Australia v
[2010] WASC 355.
‘“Specific Delusions” in the Insanity Defence’
Criminal Law Quarterly
, 464 referring to comments
made by Glanville Williams.
This was the approach in
[2014] 1 WLR 3354.
See Child and Sullivan,
See TLRI, above n
, [4.2.1]–[4.2.19].
Model Criminal
Code — Chapter 2, General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
Report (1992) [43].
[2003] ATCSC 96.
Child and Sullivan, above
Simester at al, above n
Bronitt and McSherry,
, 213–218; Fairall and Yeo,
, [13.30]; W Brookbanks,
‘Insanity’ in W Brookbanks and A Simpson (eds),
Psychiatry and
(LexisNexis, 2007), 142; G Williams,
Criminal Law: The General
ed, 1961), [160]; Law Reform Commission of Canada,
Criminal Law, The General Part: Liability and Defences
, Working Paper 29
(Ottawa: Minster of Supply and Services Canada, 1982) 48 cited in Bronitt and
McSherry, above n
(1990) 62 CCC (3d) 193.
See also Colvin and McKechnie,
, 17.20; J Devereux and M Blake,
Criminal Law in Queensland and Western Australia
(Lexis Nexis,
ed, 2013) [8.115]; Klinck, above n
, P Fairall, ‘The Exculpatory Force of
Delusions – A Note on the Insanity Defence’
[1994] BondLawRw 4
, 59; Ormerod, above n
It should be noted that
the former Canadian provision, s 16(3) of the
Criminal Code
it clear that such an accused would receive an acquittal on the grounds of
insanity (not a complete acquittal). Its repeal followed
the Report of the Law
Reform Commission of Canada that stated that ‘[m]edical opinion rejects
the idea of partial insanity
and legal scholarship stresses the injustice and
illogicality of applying to the mentally abnormal a rule requiring normal
within their abnormality; a paranoiac killing his [or her] persecutor
will be acquitted only if the imagined persecution would have
justified the
killing by way of self-defence — the law requires him [or her] to be sane
in his [or her] insanity. For this
reason it is suggested that the rule on
insane delusions be abandoned’: Law Reform Commission of Canada, above n
[1933] HCA 1
, 189–190 cited by Gibson J in
[1959] TASStRp 25
[1959] Tas SR
(1990) 62 CCC (3d) 193
236 (Lamer CJC). Note that Slicer J distinguished this case in
(1991) 60 A Crim R 419
Simester et al, above n
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3).
This was the view of
Slicer J in
(1991) 60 A Crim R 419
, 427. See Howard and Westmore,
, [6.47–6.50].
[1993] TASSC 91
(Crawford J).
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 16(3) substantially reproduces the statement of the House of Lords
M’Naghten’s
case about the effect of insane delusions on
criminal responsibility, where the accused is not otherwise legally insane
this case ‘the defendant’s responsibility is judged by
reference to the facts as he supposed them to be and not the actual
facts’. See Baker, above n
[27–017]; Law Commission of England and Wales, above n
, 4.59 fn 62. Although note
[2014] 1 WLR 3354
where the accused was able to rely on insanity and
self-defence in tandem: see discussion in Child and Sullivan, above n
; Mackay, above n
LRCWA, above n
Ibid 233. However, the
LRCWA relied on the first instance judgment of Slicer J in
60 A Crim R 419
as justification for a continued need for the provision and did
not refer to the subsequent Court of Criminal Appeal judgment.
See discussion at
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
Bronitt and McSherry,
Ibid 251–252.
Similar comments are made by the Law Commission of England and Wales, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 7.3(4) (prosecution may raise if the court gives leave);
(ACT) s 28(6) (prosecution may raise if the court gives leave);
Criminal Code
(NT) s 43F(1) (may be raised by court, on application by
prosecution, or on own initiative);
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness
to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 22(1) (prosecution may raise if the court
gives leave), s 22(2) (if admissible evidence raises the issue, judge must
the jury to consider);
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(may be raised by prosecution, or by court on own initiative
‘in the interests of the proper administration of justice’).
NSWLRC, above n
, 75 and Recommendation 3.3.
‘Appearing for the Mentally Impaired: Not Guilty Mental Illness Conference
to In-house Solicitors Legal Aid NSW’
http://www.publicdefenders.nsw.gov.au/Pages/public_defenders_research/Papers%20by%20Public%20Defenders/public_defenders_papers_pd.aspx
NSWLRC, above n
R v Falconer
(1990) 171 CLR 30, 62.
NSWLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
, 74; NZLC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
NZLC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 3.4.
Scottish Law Commission,
, 64–65; Law Commission of
England and Wales, above n
Crimes Act 1900
s 321(2)(b)
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried)
(Vic) s 21(4);
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
Criminal Procedure (Mentally Impaired Persons) Act 2003
(NZ) s 20(2).
LRCWA, above n
, 235 quoting Model Criminal Code Officers
General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
Report (2007) 47.
VLRC, above n
Defences to
(Final Report, 2004) 229 referred to in VLRC, above n
Law Commission of England
and Wales, above n
, 76; LRCWA, above n
, 235 quoting Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee,
General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
Report (2007) 47.
LRCWA, above n
, 235 quoting Model Criminal Code Officers
General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
, Final Report
(2007) 47; Law Commission of England and Wales, above n
VLRC, above n
Ibid 234 Recommendation
For more information in
relation to the role of the Director of Public Prosecutions see
http://www.dpp.tas.gov.au/about_us
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1997
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1997
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
For more information
http://www.dhhs.tas.gov.au/service_information/services_files/mental_health_services/forensic_mental_health_service/wilfred_lopes_centre
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1997
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Mental Health Act
medical practitioner may also apply to the MHT to vary the order or authorise or
seek authorisation for urgent circumstances
Mental Health Act
It is noted that in two
of the three conditional release orders imposed in the Supreme Court, the limits
were 12 months and three
years. However, in one case, it appears that an order
was imposed where some conditions were indefinite. The person was released
condition that: (1) For a period of two years he attend such educational and
other programs as directed by the Chief Forensic
Psychiatrist or officer acting
on his behalf; (2) He submit to testing for drug used as directed by the Chief
Forensic Psychiatrist
or his nominee. (3) He submit to medical, psychological or
psychiatrist assessment or treatment was directed by the Chief Forensic
Psychiatrist or his nominee, see
, 22 July 2008 (Slicer J).
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Secretary of the
Department of Health and Human Services v Horacek
[2009] TASSC 65
These enforcement
provisions were introduced in 2016 by the
Crimes (Miscellaneous Amendments)
(Tas) to address an oversight in the
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas). In the second reading speech, it was noted that
‘forensic orders are often not appropriate options for defendants who
an intellectual disability. In such cases, release of conditions may be
appropriate orders for the court to consider but the
absence of a mechanism to
enforce the conditions imposed is problematic and means judicial officers rarely
use the section’:
Parliamentary Debates
Assembly, 24 May 2016, 3.20 pm (M Ferguson).
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
(1) do not appear in
, it appears that the courts rely on this
provision in making a determination of the appropriate order.
(1) do not appear in
, it appears that the courts rely on this
provision in making a determination of the appropriate order.
order is made under the
Sentencing Act 1997
(Tas), the court is not able
to impose a restriction order unless it would have imposed a sentence of
imprisonment,
It is noted these factors
have been identified as being relevant to the making of a forensic order in NSW
for offenders found not
guilty by reason of mental illness, see NSWLRC, above n
, 159. See also I Freckelton,
‘Applications for Release by Australians in Victoria Found Not Guilty of
Offences of Violence
by Reason of Mental Impairment’
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Smith, above n
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
s 37(3)(b).
It is noted that the MHT
data identified one further person who has been subject to several supervision
orders with the latest order
suspended during a period of imprisonment.
Information provided by
Sarah Piggott, Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania, email 3 July 2018.
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Ibid 30(3).
Mental Health Tribunal
(Tasmania),
Annual Report 2015–16
Mental Health Tribunal
(Tasmania),
Annual Report 2017–18
Smith, above n
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
[2012] VSCA 198
[2008] TASSC 85.
Ibid [25] (Tennent
[2009] TASSC 65.
Ibid [75] (Tennent
[2008] TASSC 85.
Ibid [74], [75].
Ibid [75] (Tennent J)
[1998] VSC 90
(1998) 104 A Crim R 29.
Ibid [76] (Tennent J)
Boughey v R
(1986) 161 CLR 10
Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Ltd v
Australian Meat Industries Employees’ Union
(1979) 42 FLR 331.
Ibid [77] (Tennent J)
Attorney-General (NSW) v Winters
[2007] NSWSC 1071
(2007) 176 A Crim R 249.
Ibid [78] (Tennent
In this case, the
identified restriction on the defendant’s freedom and personal autonomy
created by the supervision order
as distinct from the community treatment order
arose for the way in which the order could be revoked or varied: ibid (Tennent
[2008] TASSC 85.
[2009] TASSC 65.
[2012] VSCA 198
(2012) 38 VR 618.
Ibid [57]–[59].
[2008] TASSC 85.
Mental Health Act
Ibid sch 1.
There were also two
leave of absence applications that involved varying the leave of absence and one
case involving the extension
of a leave of absence, Mental Health Tribunal,
Melbourne Social Equity
Institute, above n
, 18. Smith writes
that ‘it is arguable that changing the decision maker from the Cabinet to
the Courts has resulted in few
if any improvements to a rehabilitated
defendant’s prospects of release’: Smith, above n
In contrast, under the
Sentencing Act 1997
the court may conditionally release an
offender on the offender giving an undertaking with conditions attached for a
period not exceeding
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 35(3);
(NT) s 43ZG(6). See discussion in VLRC, above n
, 363. It is noted that changes were proposed
to the review provisions in Victoria in the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and
Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) including the introduction
of initial progress reviews, further progress reviews and major progress
reviews. This legislation
has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
See Appendix 3 for more
See Appendix 3 Table A3.3
for details of the provisions in each jurisdiction.
NSWLRC, above n
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
, schs 1, 2.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) sub-div 3, inserted by the
Criminal Law
Consolidation (Mental Impairment) Amendment Act 2017
See Appendix 3 Table
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Sentencing Act 1995
(conditional release order), 62(5)
(community-based order) and 69(6) (intensive supervision order). It is noted
that the LRCWA has
recommended the removal of these sentencing options and their
replacement with a supervised release order with the conditions set
Mentally Impaired Accused Review Board (MIARB): see LRCWA, above n
, 243 Recommendation 35.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA), div 3A.
NSWLRC, above n
, 180–181 Recommendation 7.2.
Ibid. See further
334–336 and 337–338 Recommendation 11.1. Extended supervision was
not addressed in the report of the
SASAC. However, reforms to the
Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) that are yet to be commenced also make
provision for a continued supervision order in circumstances where the court is
that the defendant could, if unsupervised, pose a serious risk to the
safety of the community or a member of the community,
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
inserted by
Criminal Law
Consolidation (Mental Impairment Act) 1935
(SA) (yet to commence).
SASAC, above n
, Recommendation 15.
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 7-2.
Senate Community Affairs
Reference Committee,
Indefinite Detention of People with Cognitive Impairment
in Australia
Report (2016) 70–71.
LRCWA, above n
, 244–245 Recommendation 36.
VLRC, above n
, 360, 361 Recommendation 83.
See NSWLRC, above n
See ibid 174.
See ibid 175.
See ibid 176.
See ibid 180.
ALRC, above n
LRCWA, above n
ALRC, above n
, 198; SASAC, above n
, 145; NSWLRC, above n
, 167; VLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
Ibid 167; ALRC, above n
, 198; SASAC, above n
, 145; VLRC, above n
Office of Public
Prosecutions, Victoria,
Submission to Review of the Crimes (Mental Impairment
and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997 Consultation Paper
Smith, above n
, 24. See also Office of the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner,
Submission of the Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner, Tasmania, to the Australian Law Reform Commission’s Inquiry
into Equality,
Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
The findings from this
research are set out in Appendix 8.
Smith, above n
NSWLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
J Hunyor, ‘A
Kangaroo Loose in the Top Paddock: Criminal Justice. Mental Impairment and
Fitness for Trial in the Northern Territory’
(Uluru Criminal Law
Conference, 2012) 20.
Melbourne Social Equity
Institute, above n
Gooding et al, above n
Arstein-Kerslake et al,
Minkowitz, above n
Ibid. See also Gooding
and O’Mahoney, above n
NSWLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
Ibid 179. This is
discussed further at [8.3.16]–[8.3.32].
NSWLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
Ibid 360. See
Recommendation 83.
SASAC, above n
T Boyd-Caine and D
Chappell, ‘The Forensic Patient Population in New South Wales’
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
NSWLRC, above n
Boyd-Caine and Chappell,
NSWLRC, above n
Mental Health Act
Sentencing Act 1997
In New South Wales, the
NSWLRC reported that 10 out of 54 (19 per cent) forensic patients have been
detained beyond their limiting
term as an involuntary patient under the
Mental Health Act 2007
(NSW): NSWLRC, above n
Ibid 318–319.
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) amended by
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Amendment Act 2013
(NSW) s 54A, sch 1;
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
inserted by
Criminal Law
Consolidation (Mental Impairment Act) 1935
(SA) (yet to commence).
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
inserted by
Criminal Law
Consolidation (Mental Impairment Act) 1935
(SA) (yet to commence).
For a discussion of a
treatment order, see Mental Health Tribunal,
The Mental Health Tribunal:
Orders, Hearing and Reviews: Information for Patients, their Carers and Support
Mental Health Act 2013
See discussion in
in relation to the meaning of mental illness.
For detailed discussion
of the nature of guardianship, see Guardianship and Administration Board,
Private Guardian’s Handbook: Information for Guardians Appointed by the
Guardianship and Administration Board
Ibid 23, 25.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
NSWLRC, above n
, 317. It is noted that the TLRI has
recommended a shift to representative decision-making rather than acting in the
‘best interests’
of a person: see TLRI, above n
NSWLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
, 321, 332–333.
Committee on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, above n
[7] cited in Gooding et al, above n
See Sentencing Advisory
Council, Tasmania (TSAC),
Sex Offence Sentencing
, Final Report No 4
(2015) 107; TLRI, above n
TLRI, above n
, 1–2 citing
Veen v The Queen
[1979] HCA 7
(1979) 143 CLR 458
, 463–465 (Stephen J);
Fardon v Attorney-General
[2004] HCA 46
(2004) 223 CLR 575
, 623 [124]–[125] (Kirby J);
McGarry v The
[2001] HCA 62
(2001) 207 CLR 121
, 141–142 [61] (Kirby J);
[1996] HCA 24
, 122–123 (McHugh J);
Buckley v The Queen
[2006] HCA 7
(2006) 80 ALJR
, [7], [21], [43];
[1996] VicRp 43
(1996) 1 VR 585
Director of
Public Prosecutions (WA) v Mangolamara
(2007) 169 Crim R 379, [165] (Hasluck
Director of Public Prosecutions (WA) v GTR
[2007] WASC 318
(McKechnie J);
Director of Public Prosecutions (WA) v Comeagain
, [20] (McKechnie J);
DPP v McIntosh
[2013] TASSC 21
, [50] (Wood
J); Bernadette McSherry, ‘Throwing Away the Key: The Ethics of Risk
Assessment for Preventative Detention Schemes’
(2014) 21(5)
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
779; David Ruschena, ‘Determining Dangerousness:
Whatever Happened to the Rules of Evidence?’
(2003) 10(1)
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
; Jessica Black, ‘Is the Preventative Detention
of Dangerous Offenders Justifiable?’ (2011) 6(3)
Journal of Applied
Security Research
317; Russ Scott, ‘Risk Assessment and Sentencing of
Serious Sex Offenders’ (2008) 15(2)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
188; Stephen J Morse, ‘Preventative Confinement of Dangerous
Journal of Law, Medicine and Ethics
Dimock, ‘Criminalizing Dangerousness: How to Preventatively Detain
Dangerous Offenders’ (2015) 9
Criminal Law and Philosophy
Warner, ‘Sentencing Review 2002–2003’
Law Journal
; Charles Ewing, ‘Preventative Detention and Execution:
The Constitutionality of Punishing Future Crimes’ (1991) 15
Human Behavior
139; Tamara Tulich, ‘Post-Sentence Preventive Detention
and Extended Supervision of High Risk Offenders in New South Wales’
[2015] UNSWLawJl 29
University of New South Wales Law Journal
; Geraldine Mackenzie
and Nigel Stobbs,
Principles of Sentencing
(Federation Press, 2010)
NSWLRC, above n
, 320–321, 332.
This information set out
in ibid 323–333.
For example, the
Disability Act 2006
NSWLRC, above n
Ibid 334–335;
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) sch 1 div 2 cl 7.
NSWLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
See NSWLRC, above n
, 172–178, 180.
Hunyor, above n
A Freiberg, ‘The
Disposition of Mentally Disordered Offenders in Australia: “Out of Mind,
Out of Sight” Revisited’
Psychiatry, Psychology and the
For example, in New
Zealand, the limiting term is 10 years from the date of making the order if the
offence is punishable by life
imprisonment, or otherwise half the maximum term
of imprisonment for the offence,
Criminal Procedure (Mentally Impaired
Person) Act 2003
(NZ) ss 30(1)–(2) (unfit only as people found not
guilty by reason of insanity are subject to an indefinite order: s 33). In
Victoria, legislation sets the nominal term for offences based on the maximum
term for the offence: see Appendix 3.
Hunyor, above n
NSWLRC, above n
See [8.3.6].
Office of the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner, above n
, 44; Smith, above n
Smith, above n
VLRC, above n
, 344. See also J Ruffles,
The Management
of Forensic Patients in Victoria: The More Things Change, the More They Remain
(PhD thesis, unpublished Monash University 2010) 175–178.
VLRC, above n
I Freckelton, ‘The
Preventative Detention of Insanity Acquitees: A Case Study in Victoria’ in
B McSherry and P Keyzer
Dangerous People: Policy, Prediction and
(Routledge, 2011) 83, 94. See also B McSherry, ‘Legal Issues:
Criminal Detention of Those with Mental Impairment’
Law and Medicine
Freckelton, above n
Smith, above n
, where Evans
J referred to four cases where an application to revoke a supervision order was
refused. Only one of these cases was
publicly available as it involved an
unsuccessful appeal against the refusal of the judge to revoke the supervision
Smith, above n
It is noted that the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) changed the test from one of dangerousness to one of risk (whether the
person poses an unacceptable risk of serious harm). This
legislation has not
been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
It is noted that the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic) changed the test from one of dangerousness to one of risk (whether the
person is likely to pose a risk of serious harm). This
legislation has not been
passed by the Victorian Parliament.
It is noted that South
Australia adopted a serious endangerment test to strengthen the test for
release, see
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
s 269T(2)(ba)
requires that the court cannot release a defendant or significantly reduce the
degree of supervision unless satisfied on the
balance of probabilities, that the
safety of the person or any member of the public will not be seriously
endangered by the person’s
NSWLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
, 208 citing
[2012] VSCA 198
[2014] NSWCA 466.
Ibid [169] (Basten
Ibid [168] (Basten JA).
NSWLRC, above n
[2012] VSCA 198
Crimes Act 1914
Mental Health Act 2016
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 32(2).
Ibid s 35(3)(i).
Criminal Justice
(Mental Impairment) Act 1999
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired
Accused) Act 1996
NSWLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
, 375; NSWLRC, ibid 157–158.
McSherry, above n
VLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
Ruffles, above n
NSWLRC, above n
Ibid 214 referring to
Howard and Westmore, above n
NSWLRC, above n
Ibid 216. It is noted
that the operation of the release provisions in New South Wales was the subject
of a review: see NSW Government
Mental Health Review Tribunal: A
Review in Respect of Forensic Patients
NSWLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
Mental Health Act 2013
VLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
See [8.3.9].
VLRC, above n
NSWLRC, above n
See VLRC, above n
, Appendix F.
Ibid. It is noted that
the VLRC recommended removing the current nominal term system with a system of
progress reviews, with the
first progress review to be held at five years: at
Ibid 372 Recommendation
Ibid 372. See [8.3.67]
for a discussion of extended leave.
See [8.2.17].
It is noted that a
certificate issued by the MHT is not a pre-requisite for the discharge of the
order and an offender may apply
Criminal Justice (Mental
Impairment) Act 1999
(Tas), see [8.2.17].
See [8.3.38].
Mental Health Act
NZLC, above n
, 80. It was noted that this is also the
position in Canada.
See VLRC, above n
Queensland Government,
Mental Health Review Tribunal Information Sheet
Health Act 2016
(Qld) ch 12
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions Act) 1990
NZLC, above n
Mental Health Act 2015
VLRC, above n
Ibid quoting Freckelton,
NZLC, above n
VLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
NZLC, above n
, 84 Recommendation R16.
Mental Health Tribunal,
See [8.3.35].
[2009] TASSC 65.
Tyenna Blue is an
approved hospital under the MHA and is a ‘six bed, high dependency unit
which provides 24 hour care to individuals
with a serious mental illness who
require treatment in a secure environment’: Department of Health and Human
Your Statewide and Mental Health Services Placement
http://www.dhhs.tas.gov.au/career/home/careers_archive/education/rntp/practice_settings/rntp_mental_health_nurses
Secretary of the
Department of Health and Human Service v Horacek
[2009] TASSC 65
Boyd-Caine and Chappell,
VLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
VLRC, above n
, 350; VLRC, above n
See NSW Government
(Justice), above n
NSW Government (Health),
Mental Health Review Tribunal: A Review in Respect of Forensic Patients
(2017) 13 (Recommendation 20).
Ibid 13 (Recommendation
SASAC, above n
VLRC, above n
Ibid xxxv, 430
Recommendation 100.
Office of the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner, above n
Ibid 46 citing Tasmanian
Forensic Mental Health Tribunal,
Annual Report 2011–2012
Ibid citing Tasmanian
Forensic Mental Health Tribunal,
Annual Report 2011–2012
Ibid 46–47.
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 24 May 2016 [3.20 pm], (M
SASAC, above n
Butler Report, above n
VLRC, above n
Ibid 439 Recommendations
NSWLRC, above n
Ibid 9, 10 Recommendation
Ibid 12 Recommendation
Law Commission of England
Unfitness to Plead – Volume 2: Draft Legislation
Com No 364, 2016) 16–17.
NSWLRC, above n
, 31–32 Recommendation 2.1.
VLRC, above n
, 79 Recommendation 15.
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 7-1.
Crimes Act 1914
Mental Health
(Forensic Procedure) Act 1990
Ibid s 23(1)(b).
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) ss 18(4), 23.
Ibid s 26(2).
Criminal Law
(Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Schedule 1 includes murder, manslaughter, sexual penetration without consent and
sexual coercion, assault occasioning bodily harm,
indecent assault, stealing a
motor vehicle in circumstances of aggravation and criminal damage.
Criminal Code
(Qld) ss 613, 647.
Mental Health Act
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 647(2).
Mental Health Act
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act
(NT) ss 43I, 43X.
Crimes Act 1914
Note that for acquittal because of mental illness, the
court must order detention in safe custody in prison or in a hospital, subject
to discretion to release the person,
Crimes Act 1914
NSWLRC, above n
, 159 referring to
R v Shan Shan Xu (no 2)
[2005] NSWSC 70
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 39(1).
Ibid s 40(1).
Ibid s 40(2). There
were changes proposed to the test in the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and
Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic). This legislation has not
been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
Criminal Law
(Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Mental Health Act
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 43ZM.
Ibid s 43ZN(1).
Ibid s 43ZN(2).
Crimes Act 1914
Section 20BJ
has been interpreted to mean that
‘the length of the period of detention should be fixed by reference to the
sentence which
would have been imposed if the person had been found
R v Goodfellow
(1994) 33 NSWLR 308
R v Robison
[2004] VSC 505
(2004) 11 VR 165.
Mental Health
(Forensic Procedure) Act 1990
(NSW) s 23(1)(b).
NSWLRC, above n
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) s 27.
Ibid s 35. Changes to
the review system were set out in the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness
to be Tried) Amendment Bill 2016
(Vic). This legislation has not been passed
by the Victorian Parliament.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Law
(Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Mental Health Act
Prescribed offences are murder, manslaughter, grievous
bodily harm and rape.
Section 457
applies in relation to a person with a dual
disability.
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 43ZC.
Ibid ss 43ZG(2),
Crimes Act 1914
Mental Health
(Forensic Procedure) Act 1990
(NSW) s 43.
Crimes (Mental
Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 1997
(Vic) ss 32(2), 35(3),
Ibid s 35(3)(b). It is
noted that the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment
(Vic) changed the test from one of dangerousness to one of risk
(whether the person poses an unacceptable risk of serious harm). This
legislation has not been passed by the Victorian Parliament.
Criminal Law
(Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 43ZG(6).
Ibid s 43ZH.
See also the test set
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Amendment
(Vic). This legislation has not been passed by the Victorian
Parliament.
The provision to
dispense with special hearings was inserted by the
Criminal Code Amendment
(Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act 2017
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.3 MB)
PDF format (3.53 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter