URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCDP/2004/46.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blind or deaf jurors - Discussion Paper [2004] NSWLRCDP 46
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
Table of Contents
TERMS OF REFERENCE
PARTICIPANTS
SUBMISSIONS
1. INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND TO THE REFERENCE
JURY SERVICE, CITIZENSHIP AND EQUALITY
REQUIREMENT OF A FAIR TRIAL
DEAF AND HEARING IMPAIRED
BLIND AND VISION IMPAIRED
STRUCTURE OF THIS PAPER
SUBMISSIONS
2. TRIAL BY JURY
JURY EMPANELMENT
DUTIES OF A JUROR
FEATURES OF TRIAL BY JURY
JUROR COMPETENCE
3. JURORS AND THE LEGAL PROCESS
INTERPRETERS
Is Auslan English?
CHALLENGING JURORS
Challenge for cause
Peremptory challenges
United Kingdom
United States
The limits of reform
4. DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION
LEGISLATION
Jury Act 1977
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
REASONABLE ADJUSTMENTS
DEAF AND BLIND PEOPLE IN THE LEGAL SYSTEM
5. LAW REFORM IN OVERSEAS JURISDICTIONS
Provincial and territorial law
Federal law
ENGLAND AND WALES
NEW ZEALAND
UNITED STATES
Qualification/disqualification
Challenges for cause
Exemptions and excuses
Reasonable accommodation
Interpreters
ELIGIBILITY
Challenging jurors
REASONABLE ADJUSTMENTS
Interpreters
: PRELIMINARY SUBMISSIONS
Table of legislation
Table of cases
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
Terms of reference
History of this reference (Digest)
Blind or Deaf Jurors
In a letter to the Commission received on 19 March 2002, the
Attorney General, the Hon R J Debus MP made the following reference:
To inquire into and to report on whether persons who are profoundly
deaf or have a significant hearing or sight impairment should
to serve as jurors in New South Wales and, if so, in what
circumstances.
In undertaking this review, the Commission should have regard to the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth), and the need to maintain confidence in the administration of justice in New South Wales.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
Participants
History of this reference (Digest)
Division Members
Pursuant to
section 12A
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the
purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
Hon Justice Michael Adams
Associate Professor Jane Goodman-Delahunty
Hon Justice David Ipp
Hon Justice Greg James
Hon Justice David Kirby
Hon Justice Ruth McColl
Hon Gordon Samuels AC CVO QC (Commissioner in charge)
Hon Justice Jeff Shaw
Professor Michael Tilbury
Reference Group
Phillip French, Executive Officer, People With Disabilities (NSW) Inc
Graeme Innes, Deputy Disability Discrimination Commissioner, HREOC
Alison Herridge
Professor Ron McCallum, Dean, Faculty of Law, University of Sydney
Alastair McEwin, President, NSW Association of the Deaf
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal research and writing
Ms Judy Maynard
Mr Ani Luzung
Research assistance
Jenny Chambers
Keren Seymour
Michelle Wood
Ms Anna Williams
Desktop publishing
Jonathan Nichol
Administrative assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
Submissions
History of this reference (Digest)
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this
review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Discussion Paper.
Making a submission
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is
inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal
Officer over the telephone, or arrange to make your submission in
THE CLOSING DATE FOR SUBMISSIONS IS 30 APRIL 2004.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy, Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
postal addresses
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 2001
or DX 1227 Sydney
street address
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
telephone (02) 9228 8230
facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
Current contact details for the Law Reform Commission
Confidentiality and use of submissions
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission
will refer to submissions made in response to this Discussion Paper.
you would like all or part of your submission to be treated as
confidential, please indicate this in your submission. The Commission
will respect requests for confidentiality when using submissions in
later publications.
Copies of submissions made to the Commission will also normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. Any
request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
Other publication formats
The Commission is committed to meeting fully its obligations
under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination legislation. These
require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices
which may prevent people with disabilities from having full and equal
access to our services.
This publication is available in alternative formats. If you have any difficulty in accessing this document please contact us.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
History of this reference (Digest)
Refer to the links indicated below for a discussion of the questions listed.
If reasonable accommodation can be made, should blind or deaf jurors who are able to discharge the duties of a juror
in the circumstances of the particular case be liable for jury service?
If blind or deaf people are required to serve on juries, how should Schedule 2 item 12 of the
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) be amended?
If blind or deaf people are required to serve on juries, should
they have the option to be excused from jury duty on account of their
blindness or deafness?
Should the trial judge decide whether or not a blind or deaf person is capable of discharging the duties of a juror
in the circumstances of the particular case?
Ought the availability of peremptory challenges to be the subject of further review?
What technologies would blind or deaf people need effectively to discharge their duties as jurors?
What are the cost implications of the provision of the technologies identified in Question 6?
Ought Auslan interpreters to be provided for deaf jurors and, if so, under what conditions?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
1. Introduction
History of this reference (Digest)
Background to the reference
Jury service, citizenship and equality
Requirement of a fair trial
Deaf and hearing impaired
Blind and vision impaired
Structure of this paper
Submissions
BACKGROUND TO THE REFERENCE
1.1 In March 2002 the Commission received a reference from the
Attorney General, the Hon R J Debus MP to inquire into and report on
whether people who are deaf or blind or have significant sight or
hearing loss should be able to serve as jurors in New South Wales.
1.2 The Attorney General’s Department’s Disability
Strategic Plan Internal Steering Committee had explored the issue
before a reference was given to the New South Wales Law
Reform Commission for inquiry and report. The Commission established a
group to provide assistance to the review.
1.3 In mid-2002 the Commission wrote to relevant organisations
and individuals, as well as issuing a media release, calling for
preliminary
submissions. Fifteen preliminary submissions were received.
An introductory meeting of the Division was convened in December, and
substantial work on the reference commenced in 2003.
SERVICE, CITIZENSHIP AND EQUALITY
1.4 The participation in juries by representatives of the
community is a fundamental element of the administration of justice,
thus serves the interests of the State. Jury service, like voting,
is a right and obligation of citizenship.
The preamble to the
Australian Citizenship Act 1948
(Cth) recognises that:
Australian citizenship represents formal membership of the community of
the Commonwealth of Australia; and Australian citizenship
is a common
bond, involving reciprocal rights and obligations, uniting all
Australians, while respecting their diversity…
“Citizenship” is a legal relationship between the
individual and the State, but it is also more than this, as hinted
in the preamble’s reference to “a common bond” and
the notion of unity. It has been said to “describe
service to community in everyday life” and to “encompass
ideals of civic life that can be seen as the public
core values in a
society whose people follow many different beliefs and ways of life
[and] are of many different national and ethnic
These extra-legal descriptions of citizenship all contain the idea of
connection between citizens for mutual benefit. Thus the citizen
individual who not only has a legal status in respect of the State, but
also shares in a community of such individuals.
1.6 One American commentator notes that the obligation of jury
service, again like voting, “is a significant form of
participation
in our democratic and judicial systems; it is a badge of
self-esteem, a mark of status and full citizenship”.
Although sometimes thought of as a nuisance by those on whom the duty
falls “jury service is most treasured by those citizenswho
to challenge the system in order to sit in the jury box”.
The US Supreme Court noted “with the exception of voting, for
most citizens the honor and privilege of jury duty is their most
significant opportunity to participate in the democratic process”.
It is conceivable that one person’s “liability” for
jury service is another’s powerful symbol of acceptance
1.7 In New South Wales non-citizens are ineligible for jury
duty. People who are blind or deaf, while not legislatively barred from
participating in jury service are, nevertheless, prevented from so
doing by policy determinations. This, it appears, is on the ground
they are ineligible under the
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) “because of … disability, to discharge the duties of a juror”.
The view of People With Disabilities (“PWD”), a peak
disability rights and advocacy organisation in this State, is that
exclusion of people who are blind or deaf from jury service amounts to
a denial of citizenship.
1.8 The denial of jury service to people who are blind or deaf is also an abuse of their human rights, according to PWD.
Prohibiting such persons from serving as jurors on the grounds of their
disability is discriminatory, and contrary to notions of
equality. In
1993 the United Nations adopted the Standard Rules on the Equalisation
of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities.
Australia took an active role in their development and in promoting their adoption by other member countries.
They are not legally binding, but urge members to achieve equity in all
areas of life for people with disabilities. The purpose of
the Rules is
to ensure that all persons with disabilities:
as members of their societies, may exercise the same
rights and obligations as others. In all societies of the world there
obstacles preventing persons with disabilities from
exercising their rights and freedoms and making it difficult for them
to participate
fully in the activities of their societies. It is the
responsibility of States to take appropriate action to remove such
The principle of equal rights implies that the needs of each and every
individual be made the basis for the planning of society.
Moreover, as
people with disabilities achieve equal rights:
they should also have equal obligations. As those rights are
being achieved, societies should raise their expectations of persons
with disabilities. As part of the process of equal opportunities,
provision should be made to assist persons with disabilities to
their full responsibility as members of society.
REQUIREMENT
OF A FAIR TRIAL
1.10 There is an overriding public interest in the due and proper
administration of justice. Apart from defamation trials the
overwhelming
use of juries is in criminal matters. In a criminal trial
both the defence and prosecution must have full opportunity to present
their respective cases and test the evidence adduced by the other side.
Each has the right to expect that a jury will be able adequately
understand and assess that evidence. The crucial question is,
therefore, whether significant hearing or sight impairment prevents
considerably hinders an individual juror from doing so. Stating this
another way, is the inclusion of a blind or deaf person on
likely to affect adversely the jury’s consideration of the issues
entrusted to it for determination? If it does, then
the accused may
have been denied a fair trial.
1.11 The right of an accused to a fair trial is fundamental to
our criminal justice system, although, strictly speaking it should
characterised as a right not to be tried unfairly.
The right is manifested in rules of law and practice governing trial process,
and in the Court’s power to regulate proceedings.
With respect to jury selection:
[e]very court of justice has an inherent power – a duty as well
as a power – to take care that the machinery of justice
abused in such a manner as to prevent justice being done, or allow a
scandal to take place; and it would be a great scandal
if a juryman,
who was incapable of performing any of the duties of a juryman or
understanding the nature of the evidence, were allowed
to enter the
jury-box and confer with the other jurymen in the consideration of
issues they were all bound to try.
Present policy is based on the assumption that people who are blind or
deaf are incapable of properly performing the duties of
a juror. This
leads to the practical conclusion that, in order to prevent an unjust
trial, they must be barred from the jury-box.
Several of the
preliminary submissions received agreed, sometimes regretfully, with
this general proposition.
Is it correct? The authors of
much of the recent literature do not believe so. It is, therefore,
necessary to consider the tasks
incumbent on a jury,
well as the nature of visual and hearing impairment, including the
technological and other means available to assist with such
AND HEARING IMPAIRED
1.13 It is important to understand that the terms
“deaf” and “hearing impaired” are not
interchangeable. “Deafness”
is an inability to hear,
whereas “hearing impairment” refers to a partial loss of
hearing. The distinction is important
for our purposes, as the terms of
reference mention people who are “profoundly deaf” or who
significant
hearing impairment. Milder hearing loss is
already accommodated in some courthouses through the provision of
infra-red assistive
hearing devices (sometimes referred to as a
“hearing loop”).
1.14 In 1993 the Australian Bureau of Statistics reported that approximately 36,000 people nationwide had total hearing loss.
The NSW Association of the Deaf is the State peak body representing
those people who identify as belonging to the Deaf community.
Association, together with the Deaf Society of NSW, provided the
Commission with a preliminary submission pointing out that the
community regards itself as just that, a community, and one that
“identifies itself through the use of a common language,
Australian Sign Language (Auslan), a shared culture and a strong
tradition of social, sporting and political networks”.
Furthermore, while the general community’s perception of deaf
people is associated with disability, “the Deaf community
itself as a language group”.
It should be noted
that not all people with hearing loss use sign language. For example,
the organisation Self Help for Hard of Hearing
(“SHHH”), who also furnished us with a preliminary
submission, serves hearing-impaired people whose preferred
communication is the spoken word.
1.15 In its review the Commission is, therefore, concerned with
those people whose impairment is of such a degree that they are unable
to use their hearing or a hearing aid to communicate, and instead rely
on their vision. Examples of the latter are sign language,
lip reading
and writing.
AND VISION IMPAIRED
1.16 The terms of reference also mention blind people and people
with significant sight impairment. Blindness is the loss of vision,
even blind people may be able to perceive light or shadow, while others
see nothing at all. Vision impairment denotes a partial
loss of vision
that is not corrected by glasses. Vision impairments may affect
individuals in different ways. For example, some people
may see light
but are unable to recognise an object or a person’s face, or may
see during the day but are blind at night. There
are also different
ways in which documents are seen, depending on the viewer’s
particular condition. For the purposes of this
review, the Commission
is concerned with those people who, due to blindness or significant
vision impairment, have no means by which
to recognise a face or to
read printed or handwritten documents.
1.17 The Australian Bureau of Statistics reported in 1993
that, nationally, 278,700 people reported a sight disability due to
impairment, comprising an estimated 17,000 persons having total
loss of sight, and a further 261,700 reporting partial loss.
OF THIS PAPER
1.18 In the following chapter we discuss various aspects of the
jury system, including empanelment procedure and the features said
be embodied in the institution known as trial by jury. Chapter 3
explores the impact that the presence of deaf or blind jurors
have on the criminal justice system, for example in comprehending
evidence presented at trial, in the use of interpreters,
and regarding
the rules about challenging prospective jurors. While Chapter 3
concentrates on legal issues, Chapter 4 examines the
position of deaf
or blind people wishing to serve as jurors in terms of
anti-discrimination legislation and policy. Chapter 5 looks
legislative position in jurisdictions outside New South Wales. In the
final chapter we pose questions relating to the possible
reform of the
SUBMISSIONS
1.19 It is hoped that the discussion contained in this paper
will stimulate informed comment from individuals or groups with an
in the subject matter of this inquiry. The Commission is very
interested in receiving such comment and opinion on the matters herein
or any other relevant issue. You are invited to make a submission,
details of which appear at page
. It is envisaged that a Report will be published in the latter half of 2004.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
* The Commission wishes to thank Lynn Anamourlis, of the Office of the Sheriff of NSW, for her assistance in this inquiry.
Parliamentary Electorates and Elections Act 1912
(NSW) s 20,
Jury Act 1977
. Australian Citizenship Council,
Australian Citizenship for a New Century
(The Council, Canberra, 2000) at 6-7.
. M A Lynch, “The Application of Equal Protection to Prospective Jurors With Disabilities: Will
Cover Disability-Based Strikes?”
Albany Law Review
at note 53.
. Lynch at 297.
Powers v Ohio
[1991] USSC 52
(1991) at 407.
Jury Act 1977
, Sch 2 item 12.
. People With Disabilities,
. People With Disabilities,
. United Nations General Assembly resolution 48/96 of 20
December 1993 «www.un.org/documents/ga/res/48/a48r096.htm»
at 15 December 2003).
. Commonwealth Disability Strategy, “Fair treatment for
all Australians – the Basis of Our Laws About Disability
Discrimination”
«www.facs.gov.au/
disability/cds/fs/fs_01.htm» (as at 15 December 2003).
. United Nations, General Assembly, resolution 48/96, Annex, Introduction at para 15.
. United Nations, General Assembly, resolution 48/96, Annex, Introduction at para 25, 27.
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
at 299. The
Commission has recently discussed the notion of a fair trial in the
context of cross-examination of complainants by unrepresented
in sexual offence proceedings: see New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in Sexual Offence Trials
(Report 101, 2003) at para 3.23-3.35.
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
at 299-300.
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
Jago v District Court of New South Wales
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
(1883) 9 VLR 191 at 193; see also
Mansell v The Queen
[1857] EngR 701
; (1857) 8 El & Bl 54;
[1993] 2 VR 367.
at 1; Far West Law Society,
at 1; Legal Aid Commission of NSW,
at 1; New South Wales Police Service,
at 1-2; Scott,
at 1; Wood,
at 1. Some of these did indicate that the views they expressed were
preliminary, and that their authors would give further consideration
following the release of this Discussion Paper.
. See ch 2.
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
“Hearing Loops for People with Hearing Impairments”
«www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/lawlink.nsf/pages/disability
_hearloop_index» (as at 8 October 2003).
. Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Disability, Ageing and Carers Australia, 1993: Hearing Impairment
(ABS, Canberra, 1993) at 1.
. Deaf Society of NSW and NSW Association of the Deaf,
. Deaf Society of NSW and NSW Association of the Deaf,
. University of Sydney, Nursing Research Centre for Adaptation
in Health and Illness, “SHHH”
«www.usyd.edu.au/rcahi/Links/SHHH.html»
(as at 14 October
. Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Disability, Ageing and Carers Australia, 1993: Visual Impairment
(ABS, Canberra, 1993) at 1.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
2. Trial by jury
History of this reference (Digest)
Jury empanelment
Duties of a juror
Features of trial by jury
Juror competence
2.1 In the Supreme and District Courts of New South Wales criminal trials for indictable offences
are normally by jury.
The accused may elect to be tried by judge alone for a State offence,
but not for an indictable offence against the Commonwealth, since
Constitution
requires this be tried by jury.
The presumption in civil proceedings is that they will be tried without
a jury unless the interests of justice otherwise require.
EMPANELMENT
2.2 The principal statute governing jury procedures is the
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) (hereinafter “the Act”). Every person enrolled as an
elector for the New South Wales Parliament is, subject to
exceptions,
qualified and liable to serve as a juror.
These exceptions are for persons who are disqualified
or ineligible.
The latter, which includes “a person who is unable, because of
sickness, infirmity or disability, to discharge the duties of
juror”, is of relevance to this inquiry.
Another category of ineligibility, that of “a person who is unable to read or understand English”,
may also be relevant.
The Act does not define “sickness”, “infirmity”
or “disability”, nor does it define or list the
“duties of a juror”.
2.3 It is the task of the Sheriff to maintain jury rolls.
First a supplementary jury roll is compiled from names selected at random from current electoral rolls.
Each person whose name is included on a supplementary roll must be notified.
This notice includes a questionnaire to be completed if certain
conditions apply, for example if the person is ineligible to serve
juror. The Sheriff deletes from the supplementary jury roll the names
of persons disqualified, ineligible or otherwise entitled
to exemption
from jury service.
It is left to the Sheriff’s
discretion to determine whether a person is ineligible. If a person
claims ineligibility, but the
Sheriff decides not to delete his or her
name from the roll, the person may appeal to the Local Court.
However, a person whose name the Sheriff deletes for ineligibility, but
who wishes to remain on the jury roll, has no right of appeal
to have his or her name reinstated, though the Sheriff’s decision
may, possibly, be amenable to judicial review.
The remaining names on the supplementary list are then added to the existing jury roll,
while those names that have been on the roll for 15 months are culled.
2.4 In addition to the initial selection process involved in
compiling a jury roll, at the commencement of the trial the parties
have a limited right to challenge, or object to, specific
jurors. The underlying rationale and the significance of the challenge
will be discussed in the following chapter.
The trial judge also has the power to stand down a juror who appears unfit to serve.
Jurors are selected by ballot,
a procedure that involves drawing from a box a number of cards, each of
which bears an identification number corresponding with each
the jury panel.
This continues, allowing for challenges, until twelve people have been empanelled and sworn.
2.5 A person with a disability is not automatically ineligible
for jury service. The Sheriff’s Office will undertake certain
steps to accommodate such persons,
such as equipping some
courts with hearing loops and arranging inspections of the court house
prior to jury service so that a prospective
juror may become familiar
with its layout. However, the advice given by the Sheriff’s
Office to the public is that it is not
always possible for everyone to
participate in jury service,
and, as already stated, the final decision as to eligibility rests with the Sheriff.
2.6 The Act deems a person ineligible for jury service if
unable, due to sickness, infirmity or disability, “to discharge
duties of a juror”.
Provisions to similar effect operate in every State and Territory.
The jury’s function is to decide questions of fact, and the judge’s to decide questions of law.
However, neither the Act nor Australian case law further particularises
a juror’s function. The English legislation contains
a provision
that refers to the ability of a person “to act effectively as a
There is scant reference to this provision in the case law. In
it was noted that there was little authority on the requisites for
acting effectively as a juror, and this was perhaps because the
was readily understood.
The Court stated that there were
two aspects: the duties in court and duties in retirement (when the
jury considers its verdict).
The former requires that, in fairness to
the defendant, “every juror should have a similar opportunity to
listen to the evidence
and to assess the reliability of a
witness.” In retirement all jurors may make a contribution.
2.7 In the American case
People v Guzman
the Court stated:
At a minimum, a juror must be able to understand all of the evidence
presented, evaluate that evidence in a rational manner, communicate
effectively with the other jurors during deliberations, and comprehend
the applicable legal principles, as instructed by the court.
their role of fact-finder, the jurors should understand and weigh up
the evidence presented, assess the credibility of witnesses
on the likelihood of certain events having occurred in the light of the
jurors’ personal experiences.
OF TRIAL BY JURY
2.8 The institution of trial by jury, although not without
critics, has been regarded for centuries as a fundamental part of the
administration
of justice. Its features are credited with helping to
secure the protection of the community from the tyranny of absolutism
self-interest of the powerful, while reflecting democratic
ideals and representing current social values and attitudes. The jury
was probably introduced to England by the Normans, and comprised a
group of men of the neighbourhood who could provide answers on
to facts within their knowledge.
It evolved into an
increasingly complex legal institution, and has come to be described in
such heroic terms as “the bulwark
of liberty, the shield of the
poor from the oppression of the rich and powerful”.
While such lavish praise now seems exaggerated, the theory underpinning it is clear:
[T]he jury prevents the state from manipulating the strings of justice
to its own ends in cases having direct political significance;
prevents judges from imposing the views of the class of society from
which they are drawn; the jury prevents liaison between
judges and the
police; and the jury prevents private citizens from exerting improper
influence over judges.
jury is thus a group of “ordinary” people, disinterested in
the outcome of the trial, and independent of powerful
and influential
social forces.
2.9 A number of decisions of the High Court have enumerated the essential, often interconnecting, features of trial by jury.
representativeness;
unanimous verdict;
random selection;
impartiality.
2.10 The first of these features – representativeness
– is perhaps of most interest to this inquiry. The High Court has
referred to the jury’s “representative character and
… collective nature”,
and to its being “assembled as representative of the general community”.
The Sheriff’s Office in this State describes the jury as “a
link between the community and the justice system”,
“that the legal system reflects the general will of the people of
New South Wales”.
The composition of the jury has,
over time, become more inclusive and diverse, especially since 1947,
when the right to serve on
a jury was extended to women, and property
qualifications abolished.
As the above quotations illustrate, juries are idealised as a democratic microcosm of society.
the High Court said:
The restrictions and qualifications of jurors which either advance or
are consistent with [the feature of representativeness] may
with contemporary standards and perceptions. The exclusion of women and
unpropertied persons was, presumably, seen as justified
in earlier days
by a then current perception that the only true representatives of the
wider community were men of property. It would,
however, be absurd to
suggest that
a requirement that the jury be truly representative
requires a continuation of any such exclusion in the more enlightened
climate of 1993. To the contrary, in contemporary Australia,
exclusion of females and unpropertied persons would itself be
inconsistent with such a requirement.
(Emphasis added)
The truth is that juries are not, and are never likely to be,
“truly representative”. Randomness of selection is
guarantee of representativeness.
In any event most
systems of jury selection are not entirely random, beginning with a
process of exclusion or exemption, whether
due to profession, language
or literacy levels, or a prior criminal record. Nor does it end there.
The selection of the “ultimate
jury” from a panel of
potential jurors “is a process which is calculated to impinge
upon the randomness, representativeness
and impartiality of the wider
The representative character of juries is
thus qualified. Indeed, can a person seen as representing a particular
group in the community
be considered impartial in any event? Justice
Kirby has considered this question,
concluding that these
notions can be reconciled, adopting the statement of the Supreme Court
of Canada that “[t]he surest guarantee
of jury impartiality
consists in the combination of … representativeness with the
requirement of a unanimous verdict”.
2.13 While complete representativeness may not be attainable, it is
argued that representativeness is a goal worth aspiring to. As
in the United States put it “the notions of a fair trial prohibit
systematically excluding any one group of individuals
from a specific
2.14 Both from a policy point of view and in applying the
the starting premise should be that, unless it can be shown that there
is a real or significant risk that they are incapable of
discharging
the duties of jurors, people who are blind or deaf should be able to
serve on juries. This position is, arguably, in
the interests of the
justice system. It is also consistent with the general trend towards
eliminating unlawful and unnecessary discrimination
against particular
groups in society. Several of the preliminary submissions received by
the Commission share this view.
2.15 In his submission Chris Puplick, former President of the Anti-Discrimination Board of New South Wales, stated:
It is an important principle of our judicial system that an
accused person shall be determined guilty or otherwise only by a jury
of their peers. If it is truly an objective of the justice system that
juries be peer-based and reflective of the community, then
automatic disqualification of people who are deaf or blind would seem
to be at odds with this objective.
with Disabilities, a peak disability and advocacy organisation, argues
that the jury is “intended to apply the values
and standards of
the community as a whole”, and that excluding people who are
blind or deaf, an important population group
and part of the
community’s diversity, “narrows the base of people who can
give effect to these values and standards”.
submission from the Equity and Diversity Unit of the University of
Technology, Sydney says that “much community faith in
the [legal]
system is drawn from the fact that all have the chance to be
represented”, and that people who are blind or deaf
given this same opportunity.
Professor Ron McCallum, Dean of the Faculty of Law at the University of Sydney,
described “a blanket administrative ruling which excludes all
blind and deaf persons from jury service in New South Wales [as]
outmoded, unfair, arbitrary and discriminatory”, and called for
its abolition.
He called on the Commission to recommend
the establishment of procedures for determining the circumstances in
which, having regard
to the administration of justice, it would be
inappropriate for a blind or deaf person to undertake jury service.
2.16 The right of an accused to a fair trial clearly takes
precedence over any entitlement of a deaf or blind person to serve as a
juror. As was said in Chapter 1, the issue is whether that entitlement
is compatible with the notion of a fair trial or whether there
point at which they become mutually exclusive. Many of the submissions
we received take the view that, despite the desirability
on equity or
citizenship grounds of having blind or deaf people serving on juries,
it is clear that they would experience practical
difficulties in so
2.17 It is not the role of this Reference to consider the virtues or shortcomings of the jury system.
Nevertheless, to avoid the risk of requiring a higher standard of blind
and deaf persons than others, some regard should be had to
potential limitations inherent in the jury system that pertain to all
jurors, sighted and hearing, which could affect their
decision-making.
Due to the confidentiality shrouding jury deliberations this is not
straightforward. However, in recent years a
great deal of jury research
has been undertaken worldwide to try to reach a better understanding of
how - and how well - juries work,
using such methodology as mock shadow
juries, interviews with other participants in the trial (such as judges
and lawyers), and interviews
with actual jurors.
surprisingly, one likely conclusion from all of this research is that,
given the demands of the undertaking and the rules governing
procedure, no juror is perfect:
As an individual, we ask each member to listen and
accurately remember each piece of evidence, where necessary to draw
of fact from that evidence, using their experience of
everyday life and at the same time evaluate the credibility of
witnesses and
the relative importance of evidence. Prior to
deliberation, we expect each juror to understand and apply directions
individually
and, when they retire as a jury, to collectively compare
the facts with the contents of the judge’s instruction on the law
and arrive at a verdict…In the eyes of the law, the perfect jury
member would be an intelligent but passive sponge who waits
deliberation stage before reaching a verdict, diligently following the
judge’s instruction without the burden of
prejudice or sympathy
and mindless to the consequences of their decision. Unfortunately,
there is ample empirical evidence to suggest
that such a person would
be a rare find.
Juries developed when trials were very short, rarely lasting over a
day. Today, trials are generally longer and involve complex
procedures designed to secure a fair trial. This complexity has the
potential to affect adversely any juror, perhaps a
sighted and hearing
one even more than a juror who is blind or deaf and who may have become
habituated to developing compensating
strategies such as a keener
memory or lessened likelihood of becoming distracted.
2.19 The New Zealand Law Commission undertook a detailed
consideration of juries as part of a recent review of criminal
It noted that there were problems in identifying apparent
juror incompetence in empirical research, as for example in determining
whether apparent difficulty in comprehension is due to the
jurors’ inability or counsel’s failure to present matters
Nevertheless, its research indicated that in the 48 jury trials sampled:
there were five in which one or more jurors were reported by others
to have suffered from intellectual or other limitations which
their grasp of the evidence;
in seven different trials, eight jurors whose first language
was not English were said either by themselves or others to have failed
to understand fully the evidence due to language; and
five trials involved technical evidence which jurors lacked
the knowledge or experience to assess, these limitations contributing
to perverse or compromise verdicts in two cases and a hung jury in a
2.20 Any juror may perform below the standard expected, due to such
factors as his or her individual attention span, boredom threshold,
lack of interest in the matter being tried, the trial’s length
and unpredictable external events.
Any juror may bring his or her prejudices, such as racism or distrust of police or authority,
to the jury room. In addition, according to the authors of a
comprehensive review of jury research, although using the same
different jurors will reach different conclusions,
despite having the use of the same senses. Nearly all commentators
agree that juries have great difficulty understanding and applying
judicial instructions,
although this conclusion is
necessarily somewhat speculative. Finally, as the New Zealand Law
Commission’s research indicates,
while the blindness or deafness
of a person summoned for jury duty might be obvious to staff of the
Sheriff’s Office, other
disabilities or limitations on the level
of comprehension or competence of other potential jurors may not be,
making it difficult to predict how well any juror will discharge the duties of the office.
2.21 All these diverse influencing factors affect the entity known
as the jury. The question we must attempt to answer is whether
who are blind or deaf are at such a disadvantage in performing the task
required that they should be excluded from serving
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Brown v The Queen
[1986] HCA 11
(1986) 160 CLR 171.
Supreme Court Act 1970
District Court Act 1973
Jury Act 1977
Parliamentary Electorates and Elections Act 1912
(NSW) s 20(1).
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
, Sch 2 item 12.
Jury Act 1977
, Sch 2 item 11.
. See para 3.29-3.35.
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Ainsworth v Criminal Justice Commission
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
at 585-586 (scope of judicial review of statutory powers and functions). Consider further
Subritzky v Circosta
(1996) 127 ACTR 1
(Sheriff’s decision possibly amendable to judicial review under ADJR Act).
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
. See para 3.36-3.53.
R v Rawcliffe
[1977] 1 NSWLR 219
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
. New South Wales, Office of the Sheriff, “People with
Disabilities and Jury Duty”
«www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/ots.nsf/pages/jury16»
December 2003).
. New South Wales, Office of the Sheriff, “People with
Disabilities and Jury Duty”
«www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/ots.nsf/pages/jury16»
December 2003).
Jury Act 1977
gives the Sheriff discretion to determine whether a person is disqualified from or ineligible for jury service.
Jury Act 1977
, Sch 2 item 12.
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 1962
(NT) s 10, 11, Sch 7;
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1927
Jury Act 1899
(Tas) s 7 (
Juries Act 2003
, Sch 2, not yet proclaimed);
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 1957
Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd v Luna
[1969] HCA 66
(1969) 123 CLR 305
at 319. See also
District Court Act 1973
, (5). Other functions may include acting as “the
conscience of the community, a safeguard against arbitrary or
oppressive government,
an institution which legitimises the criminal
justice system, and an educative institution”: New Zealand, Law
Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
A Discussion Paper
(PP No 32, 1998) at para 57.
Juries Act 1974
(Eng) s 9B.
In re Osman
[1995] 1 WLR 1327.
In re Osman
[1995] 1 WLR 1327 at 1328.
In re Osman
[1995] 1 WLR 1327 at 1328; see also
R v Guildford Crown Court, Ex parte Siderfin
[1990] 2 QB 683.
People v Guzman
(1990) at 5.
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, Melbourne, 1994) at 1; New Zealand, Law Commission, PP No 32 at para 62.
. D M Walker,
The Oxford Companion to Law
(Clarendon, Oxford, 1980) at 686.
Ford v Blurton
(1922) 38 TLR 801
at 805 (Atkin LJ); see also Blackstone quoted in W R Cornish,
(Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1970) at 138.
. Cornish at 138.
Cheatle v The Queen
[1993] HCA 44
(1993) 177 CLR 541
at 552, 560-561;
Huddart, Parker & Co Pty Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
Kingswell v The Queen
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264
Brownlee v The Queen
(2001) 207 CLR 278 at 289;
Ng v The Queen
[2003] HCA 20
(2003) 77 ALJR 967
at 974-975.
Jury Act 1977
Huddart, Parker & Co Pty Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
Brownlee v The Queen
(2001) 207 CLR 278 at 327;
Brown v The Queen
[1986] HCA 11
(1986) 160 CLR 171
Cheatle v The Queen
[1993] HCA 44
(1993) 177 CLR 541
Brown v The Queen
[1986] HCA 11
(1986) 160 CLR 171
. New South Wales, Office of the Sheriff, “Jury Duty in
New South Wales”
«www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/ots.nsf/pages/juryindex»
Jury (Amendment) Act 1947
(NSW) s 2(3)(a), amending
Jury Act 1912
Cheatle v The Queen
[1993] HCA 44
(1993) 177 CLR 541
. See M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, Melbourne, 1994) at 3.
(2002) 5 VR 257 at 271.
Brownlee v The Queen
(2001) 207 CLR 278 at 327.
[1995] 1 SCR 761 at 788.
Jones v New York City Transit Authority
126 Misc 2d 585
(1984) at 586.
. People with Disabilities,
. University of Technology Sydney, Equity and Diversity Unit,
. Professor McCallum is himself blind.
. McCallum,
at 1; Far West Law Society,
at 1; Legal Aid Commission of NSW,
at 1; New South Wales Police Service,
at 1-2; Scott,
at 1; Wood,
. The Commission has previously considered the jury in detail: see New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Discussion Paper 12, 1985).
. P Darbyshire, A Maughan and A Stewart, “What Can the
English Legal System Learn from Jury Research Published up to
10 «www.kingston.ac.uk/
~ku00596/elsres01.pdf» (as at 19 June 2003).
. Darbyshire, Maughan and Stewart at 21.
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials Part 2: Discussion Paper
(PP No 37, 1999) vol 1 at para 220.
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials Part 2: Summary of the Research Findings
(PP No 37, 1999) vol 2 at para 1.4, 3.18.
. Darbyshire, Maughan and Stewart at 12, 45.
. Darbyshire, Maughan and Stewart at 53-54.
. Darbyshire, Maughan and Stewart at 12.
. Darbyshire, Maughan and Stewart at 25.
Ras Behari Lal v King-Emperor
(1933) 50 TLR 1
[1933] 2 KB 489.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
3. Jurors and the legal process
History of this reference (Digest)
Interpreters
Challenging jurors
3.1 This chapter explores the various legal issues that may arise if
deaf or blind people serve as jurors, for example their ability
evaluate evidence, their use of interpreters, and the impact of the
current rules for challenging prospective jurors, and, in
this context,
considers whether deaf or blind people serving as jurors is consistent
with the notion of a fair trial.
3.2 The jury’s verdict in a criminal trial must be based on the whole of the evidence.
It is therefore crucial to determine if a juror who is unable to see or
hear is able to receive in its entirety, and properly evaluate,
evidence presented at trial. The perceived inability of blind or deaf
jurors to do this was the reason identified in almost all preliminary
submissions opposing the notion of blind or deaf jurors.
Indeed, it is a judgment commonly made by people who are both sighted
and hearing. It is, therefore, not based on direct personal
experience.
According to People With Disabilities it is “based in antiquated
assumptions about and prejudice towards people
with disability, and
ignorance of the personal and technological assistance that can
overcome participation barriers”.
Even if this is
so, however, the very substantial question remains whether, bearing in
mind that a juror’s task is difficult
in many cases even for
jurors with no impediments to observation and communication, the
additional difficulties posed by sight or
hearing disabilities create
risks for the adequacy of the jury’s deliberations.
3.3 Self Help for Hard of Hearing People (“SHHH”), a voluntary non-profit group,
calls the view that all blind and deaf people are unable to discharge
properly the duties of a juror an “assumption”,
that is “both wrong and discriminatory”.
People With Disabilities (“PWD”) states:
it can not be said that people who are blind or deaf are unable to
perform the inherent requirements of the position as juror. Blindness
or deafness does not result in an incapacity to analyse information.
to how blind or deaf people can “receive” the information
in the first place, the PWD submission discusses this with
reference to
assistive technology and other examples of reasonable adjustments, a
subject discussed below at paragraphs 4.15-4.18.
3.4 Advocates for inclusion, while not seeking a universal right,
do decry what amounts to a blanket ban on jury service for the deaf
blind. Professor D Nolan Kaiser, Professor of Philosophy at Central
Michigan University and himself blind, refers to the exclusion
people from jury service as a “confused legal practice”.
Professor Ron McCallum, Dean of Law at the University of Sydney, states in his preliminary submission:
I am not suggesting that we blind and deaf citizens should always be
entitled to sit upon juries irrespective of our disabilities.
example, circumstances may arise in the administration of criminal
justice where, having regard to the visual nature of the evidence
proffered, it would be inappropriate for a blind or visually impaired
person to be empanelled for jury service for that trial.
Similarly, a blind judge sitting on the Illinois Circuit Court concedes
that there are some types of cases for which such jurors
should not be
eligible. Examples he suggests are of the unsuitability of a blind
person judging whether a film is obscene, or a deaf
person sitting on a
trial in which a singing group is accused of “stealing”
someone else’s song.
However, all three commentators view such cases as the exceptions.
3.6 The nature of the evidence to be adduced at trial is thus a
critical question in deciding the suitability of certain persons to
serve as jurors. Most evidence is in the form of oral testimony, which
would not be an obstacle to a blind juror, except to the extent
or she is unable to view demeanour, discussed below at paragraphs
3.11-3.22. A deaf juror may be assisted by means of an
interpreter,
but is, of course, unable to listen to the evidence or, for that
matter, to the addresses of counsel, the directions of the trial
or the deliberations of the other jurors.
3.7 Evidence of a visual nature poses an obvious challenge for
the blind, but this should not be regarded as insurmountable in many
cases. Documentary evidence can be read aloud, or converted to Braille.
It should also be borne in mind that even sighted jurors
necessarily read entire documents,
and trials where
examination of documents is important are rare. On the other hand, a
blind juror would be very limited in assessing
the cogency of
identification evidence. An American judge surveyed a small sample of
blind jurors, all of whom “claimed emphatically
that they could
understand visual presentations providing the presenter coupled the
visual material with detailed testimony”.
was meant a detailed description of a photograph, diagram, chart or
sketch given by the witness, with possible further clarification
their fellow jurors. One commentator suggests that such reliance on
other jurors to clarify the visual evidence is to their mutual
as it may force them to focus more clearly on the evidence.
This seems to be acknowledged in the practice of some American courts.
By contrast, in
Commonwealth v Susi
the Supreme Court of Massachusetts found that in a case where
identification was the predominant issue, the trial judge had abused
her discretion in denying the defendant’s challenge for cause of
a blind juror. The Court held that “a mere description
physical evidence would not have conveyed adequately the subtleties
which would be apparent on a visual comparison”.
A similar conclusion was reached in
Jones v New York City Transit Authority
although the Court did add that the mere fact of a juror’s
blindness did not make him or her “any less able to determine
credibility of a witness’ testimony through the use of his [or
her] other facilities”.
People v Caldwell
the Court ruled that a vision-impaired juror
able to participate because the case primarily involved credibility
determinations based on conflicting accounts from witnesses.
that the defendant introduced some photographs at trial did not render
the juror ineligible because they involved a collateral
issue and so it
was not absolutely necessary she see them for herself. Although the
case was concerned with whether disqualifying
the juror would breach
Americans with Disabilities Act
and other US legislation, the conclusions are relevant:
It is difficult to imagine a trial in which absolutely no documents,
diagrams, police reports, photographs or physical evidence are
introduced. If this court were to hold that Ms B was disqualified
simply because a few documents and a few photographs are presented,
would, in effect, be concluding that there were almost no cases on
which visually-impaired or blind jurors could sit. …
Rather, the
question is whether the court could accommodate the juror by verbally
describing the evidence or by any other means,
and whether the evidence
is so crucial that the juror’s inability to see it denied the
defendant a fair trial.
Lapses in concentration and failures in comprehension due to the
technical nature of the material, the lack of clarity with which
presented or the juror’s own limitations may affect all jurors,
regardless of sight or hearing problems.
However, gaps in any individual juror’s understanding of the case may be plugged in the course of jury deliberations.
The institution of the jury brings together 12 randomly selected
individuals to contribute to the production of one verdict. How
interprets the evidence and how the verdict is reached are unknowable
to the world beyond the jury room. In Lord Denning’s
“their verdict is as inscrutable as the sphinx”.
Each juror brings a unique way of receiving and evaluating evidence based on his or her life experience.
Together, the jurors are assumed to enjoy the advantages of group recall and “common sense”.
Any problem encountered by an individual juror in mastering the
information and judicial instruction received at trial, is to some
extent offset by the collective nature of deliberations and the
application of “common sense justice”.
Moreover, they are – or should be – assisted by the arguments of counsel and the judge’s summing up.
3.10 The deaf or blind juror will, like most others, have found ways
of encountering, and coping with, everyday life, including the
to assess the truthfulness of what people say to them. A person who is
deaf, for example, might use visual clues to determine
speaker’s tone and inflection.
It is also very
likely that he or she will have developed increased sensitivity in
other faculties as a means of compensating for
the loss of sight or
hearing. SHHH told us that “a blind jury person may not be able
to see the demeanour of witnesses, but
may compensate for this by
hearing subtle nuances of voice and having a better recollection and
analysis of what was said”.
Blind people may well have greater listening skills and the ability to recall information than the sighted,
and can achieve a high level of auditory and tactile perception.
Of course, this will not always be the case.
3.11 Perhaps the most significant argument often advanced
against people who are blind or deaf serving as jurors is that they
be unable to witness the demeanour of a person giving evidence.
Demeanour denotes the outward manifestations of a witness, including
appearance, conduct and tone and inflection in speech, which may assist
the trier of fact generally in interpreting the witness’
evidence and also in determining the credibility of the evidence given
by that witness.
3.12 The importance accorded demeanour in common law is attested
to by the reluctance of an appellate court to overturn the decision
a trial judge where this decision has been based on the judge’s
opinion of a witness’s demeanour.
The trier of fact
is regarded as enjoying an advantage in seeing and hearing the witness
firsthand, rather than having to rely on
printed evidence.
That advantage may be limited, according to Lord Normand, if the
witness is a foreigner and not one “whose native language
modes of thought are English”.
Cultural interpretations of even non-verbal signals may vary. Apparently, among many Aboriginal people:
silence is a common and positively valued part of conversation which
can signal thought, discomfort, lack of understanding, lack
of cultural
authority to speak on the topic … or disagreement, when
unwilling to say so. However, in court silence can be
misinterpreted as
agreement, … insolence, or guilt.
It is essential to realise that demeanour is relevant to an
understanding and assessment of a witness’ testimony in at
two senses. First, the witness may use demeanour, as people commonly do
in communication, to convey the meaning of what he
or she is saying
through body language, gestures, smiles, frowns, nods, hesitations,
inflexions and the like. This mode of communication
can be used
deliberately, but is often unintentional or perhaps instinctive. It can
be as powerful as the spoken word that it accompanies.
For example, it
can turn a “yes” into a “no” and vice versa.
3.14 Secondly, demeanour also becomes relevant to the credibility
of a witness where a conflict between what is said and the way in
it is said raises the question of whether or not the witness is telling
the truth. The issue is whether or not the way in which
something is
said unconsciously gives the lie away and, if so, whether the recipient
of the communication can tell. The facts surrounding
the Chamberlain
case, which most Australians will remember, provide an example.
Following the disappearance of their daughter, Azaria,
and the two
resulting coronial inquiries, Lindy and Michael Chamberlain were
charged with and convicted of her murder and of being
an accessory,
respectively. Two appeals failed. The convictions were eventually
quashed following a judicial inquiry. A major problem
prosecution’s case was the expert evidence on which it relied and
which proved to be wrong. Australians who lived
through the entire saga
will recall the damaging and potentially prejudicial pre-trial
publicity the case attracted, due in part
to widespread bizarre and
unfounded rumours concerning certain religious practices attributed to
the Chamberlains, but also to the
widely reported perception concerning
the demeanour of the couple, especially Lindy, that they failed to
demonstrate sufficient grief.
Even the Royal Commissioner, Justice
Morling, picked up on this in his report, by apparently feeling the
need to comment in passing
on this subject, although it was not part of
the Crown’s case. He says, for example,
It is true that Mrs Chamberlain might not have displayed as much grief
as others may have shown in the same situation, but there
evidence that she was visibly distressed after Azaria’s
disappearance.
Further, it was not the fact that [Mr Chamberlain] did not exhibit grief.
For many, the Chamberlain case stands out as a salient example of the danger of relying on demeanour in assessing credibility.
3.15 The danger of relying on demeanour in assessing credibility is
recognised in modern law. While there can be no doubt that demeanour
of value in confirming inconsistencies in testimony that become
apparent in the context of proceedings as a whole, its evidential
is otherwise limited. The English jurist, Sir James Stephen, wrote that
if an ability to discern whether a person is lying
can be acquired at
all, then it is only to be acquired by personal observation and
practical experience. “Unless [the judge]
knows [those appearing
before him] in their unrestrained and familiar moments, he will have
great difficulty in finding any good
reason for believing one man
rather than another”.
Almost eighty years ago Lord
Atkin expressed the opinion that “an ounce of intrinsic merit or
demerit in the evidence, that
is to say, the value of the comparison of
evidence with known facts, is worth pounds of demeanour”, and,
elsewhere, “the
lynx eyed Judge who can discern the truth teller
from the liar by looking at him is more often found in fiction or in
appellate judgments
than on the Bench”.
Onassis v Vergottis
Lord Denning MR stated:
Now the Judge [at first instance], it is true, has a great advantage
over this Court. He sees and hears the witnesses, and we do
demeanour is not always a touchstone of truth. A man who appears to be
convincing may yet be mistaken. He may, without being
fraudulent, have
reconstructed the facts in his mind so as to support his own case.
Conversely, a man who appears shifty and spiteful
may yet be truthful.
The heat engendered by the case may have made him angry, but not a
liar. It is for this reason that a judge
of fact should always test the
evidence by reference to the documents and the probabilities of the
Justice Edmund Davies expresses a similar view, adding that demeanour
is only one “ingredient” and needs to be balanced
the rest of the evidence.
Devries v Australian National Railways Commission
Justices Deane and Dawson stated in a joint judgment:
Judges are increasingly aware of their own limitations and of the fact
that, in a courtroom, the habitual liar may be confident and
and the conscientious truthful witness may be hesitant and uncertain.
In that context, it is relevant to note that the
cases in which
findings of fact and assessments of credibility are, to a significant
extent, based on observation of demeanour have
possibly become, if they
have not always been, the exception rather than the rule.
The foregoing quotations are made in the context of trials before a
judge without a jury. The risk for juries relying on demeanour
arguably greater than it is for judges who have far more experience in
observing witnesses. On the other hand, an unreasonable
opinion of one
juror may be corrected by the others.
3.19 Experiments conducted over the past few decades to detect
whether ordinary people have the capacity to detect lies or error
observation of non-verbal behaviour have shown:
[w]ith remarkable consistency … that [the capacity]
simply does not exist. To the extent that people can detect lying or
beliefs in another, they do so primarily by paying close
attention to the content of what the other says, not by observing
expression, posture, tone of voice, or other nonverbal behaviour.
Cues related to vocal evidence, such as increases in speech
hesitations, speech errors and in the pitch of a speaker’s
may be more valuable indicators of deception.
Some evidence has even suggested that observation of facial behaviour
the accuracy of lie detection.
This research, however, is conducted in circumstances far removed from
a courtroom. Not only is the witness cross-examined but other
in the evidence may be used to assess the witness and will often
provide useful clues for understanding particular elements
her demeanour.
3.21 Vocal cues would normally be considered part of a
witness’s overall demeanour. Nevertheless, the New York Court of
questioned whether “perception of vocal inflections is a
necessary part or a superior method of assessing credibility”.
In considering whether a profoundly deaf man was qualified to serve as
a juror, the Court disagreed with the defendant’s contention
such a juror could not adequately evaluate the credibility of oral
testimony because he would miss vocal inflections, and appeared
accept the juror’s testimony that he was able to use visual clues
to determine the tone and inflection of the speaker. This
necessarily in conflict with the findings cited in the previous
paragraph, as it may be the case that a person who is deaf
to observe with greater acuity than a person who has all their senses.
The Court said this with regard to the way jurors
generally arrive at a
conclusion:
Each juror is expected to bring to the courtroom his or
her own method of sorting fact from fiction – the same method the
relies on in conducting everyday affairs. The factors that each
juror will rely on to evaluate the trustworthiness of a statement
be a function of that juror’s experience. This juror’s
experience has been to make such determinations without vocal
Nothing but speculation suggests that this has been a disadvantage. If
anything, his apparent success suggests that for him
the ring of truth
need not be heard to be recognised.
While the Commission recognises the force of arguments pointing out the
limitations of demeanour for the purpose of assessing
whether or not
witnesses are telling the truth, those arguments do not address
demeanour in the more general sense of interpreting
oral testimony.
The Commission considers it crucial to
determine if deaf or blind jurors are able to appreciate the meaning of
a witness’ testimony
where the spoken words must be understood in
light of the witness’ demeanour in this more general sense. The
Commission invites
submissions on this important issue, which is
relevant to Question 1 at paragraph 6.1.
INTERPRETERS
3.23 A principle of common law holds that a jury must deliberate in private,
and that it is “an incurable irregularity” for a non-member to be present in the jury room.
This was the basis for the Court’s decision in
to discharge a person summoned for jury service who was profoundly deaf
and who would have required the services of an interpreter
deliberations.
3.24 In Britain, publicity arising out of cases occurring during
the past two decades in which deaf people have been denied the
opportunity
to serve as jurors has led to calls for change.
In April 2000 the Lord Chancellor indicated that he did not oppose deaf
people serving as jurors. The following year Lord Justice
Auld, who had
been appointed by the Lord Chancellor, the Home Secretary and the
Attorney-General to review the working of the Criminal
England and Wales, delivered his report. He stated that while caution
jury room was
understandable, “accredited interpreters work to agreed
professional standards that should preclude any attempt
to intrude on
or breach the confidence of juries’ deliberations”.
Because the Home Office was due to issue a consultation paper on the subject of third party support to jurors,
he refrained from making a recommendation but expressed in principle
support for providing reasonable arrangements and suitable safeguards
to enable people with disabilities to serve as jurors.
3.25 Some jurisdictions within the United States have overcome
this problem. Some States have enacted legislation permitting the use
of interpreters.
United States v Dempsey
the Court considered objections to the presence of an interpreter
during deliberations. Of concern was whether this posed a threat
secrecy of jury deliberations, and whether the interpreter might
unlawfully participate.
The Court formed the view that an
interpreter could well be less likely than a juror to reveal
confidences of the jury room. Participation
in deliberations was also
unlikely as an interpreter performing his or her role properly would be
occupied with signing. In any case
such concerns could be obviated by
the trial judge administering an oath requiring the interpreter neither
to interfere with, nor
reveal, the deliberations.
3.26 The Court in
was more concerned with the
potential “chilling” effect the presence of a thirteenth
person might have - in other words,
whether the jurors would feel
inhibited from speaking frankly. The Court considered that this was
unlikely in a “television-age
society” that “has
become so accustomed to seeing interpreters for the deaf translating to
sign political speeches, newscasts,
and the like that virtually all of
us have come to view such interpreters more as part of the background
than as independent participants”.
However, because
of important social policy considerations militating “against
automatically foreclosing members of an important
segment of our
society from jury duty” merely because of their need for an
interpreter in the jury room, the Court declined
to adopt a rule
stating that the presence of an interpreter in the jury room would
necessitate a new trial.
People v Guzman
State’s highest Court rejected as unfounded concerns about the
interpreter’s presence in the jury room. The
Court stated that
the general rule excluding strangers was sufficiently flexible to allow
in a signer where this was necessary to
accommodate a hearing-impaired
juror. The signer is a “neutral figure”, in contrast with
bailiffs or court officials
whom the jury may perceive as being aligned
with the law enforcement community and whose presence may thus be
inhibiting.
Participation in the deliberative process by
an interpreter can be avoided by having him or her swear an oath, and
by instructing
both the interpreter and the jury that participation is
improper, any breach reportable to the court. “This, together
ethical constraints and the signer’s hope of future
employment in this capacity should provide sufficient assurance that
signer will not make public the proceedings in the jury room.”
The practical result of
appears to be an increasing use of deaf jurors in New York courts, with
sign interpreters being secured through a co-operative relationship
between the courts and the New York Society for the Deaf.
3.28 There are other concerns that may be held with regard to
the use of sign language interpreters in a jury context. For example,
during jury room deliberations, which have no prescribed procedure and
where discussion may be lively, a practical difficulty may
Should several jurors speak at once, or individual jurors talk amongst
themselves, whose contribution is the interpreter to
sign? What level
of qualification would an interpreter need in order to meet the demands
of the trial situation, and how would the
competence of the interpreter
be assessed? Are there any implications for the trial process in the
need to rest and rotate the interpreters?
An interpreter may be able to
sign for up to an hour or so, depending on the complexity or intensity
of the matter, before requiring
a break. It is arguable that rotating
interpreters is disruptive to the flow of proceedings. It may also have
adverse cost implications.
On the other hand, for those concerned that
an interpreter might somehow participate in deliberations or unduly
influence his or
her audience, rotation may be seen as a way of
countering this by fragmenting each interpreter’s time in the
Is Auslan English?
3.29 A potential problem related to the use of sign language arises in New South Wales. This is the relationship of Auslan
to English. Auslan, or Australian Sign Language, is the language used
by sections of the deaf community in Australia, and has been
recognised as a community language in national policy statements.
It has no written form. One misconception about sign language is that
it is universal. Australian Sign Language evolved in the nineteenth
century from British Sign Language (BSL), and while the two are clearly
related they are both unlike American Sign Language (ASL),
even though
all three of these deaf communities reside in countries with English as
the spoken language. This brings us to a second
common misconception,
namely that Auslan is English conveyed through signs, a kind of manual
representation of English. Auslan is
not English, although it is
influenced by it. It is a visual language with its own grammar and
lexicon, and is not based on spoken
languages. Auslan is the primary,
and sometimes only, language of the majority of the early onset
profoundly deaf population.
Members of the deaf community commonly lead “bilingual lives”,
in which English is a second language.
3.30 Included in the list of those ineligible for jury duty is
“a person who is unable to read or understand English.”
fact that a deaf juror could require the assistance of an Auslan
interpreter does not necessarily mean that such a juror is unable
read or understand English. Nevertheless, the requirement for a juror
to be able to read and comprehend English may imply that
English is the
language through which the jurors are expected to receive evidence
presented at trial.
3.31 The point was taken by the court in
which stated:
It is clear that in order for a deaf person to meet the statutory
language requirement for jury service that person must understand
communicate in English using either signed English, or lip reading, or
finger spelling or any combination thereof as the mode
communication. There are those in the deaf community who know only
American Sign Language and do not know English. These people
meet the statutory English requirement any more than would any other
non-English-speaking person.
3.32 It is possible to sign in English.
This can be done by fingerspelling,
by combining Auslan signs and fingerspelling in English word order, or by means of Signed English.
None of these is a sign language in its own right, but rather a manual
representation of English, word by word or letter by letter.
evolved because of the need that sometimes arises, for example, to know
what a person or document says word for word in
English. Signing in
English is effective as a means of communication only to the extent of
the signer and audience’s knowledge
of English vocabulary and
syntax. Signing in English will not be understood by a deaf person with
poor proficiency in English. It
should not be assumed that deaf people
living in an English-speaking community are fluent in English, and in
fact the level of proficiency
in English within the deaf community
varies greatly.
3.33 However, even where deaf people are fluent in English, Signed
English is not a feasible alternative for use in a courtroom setting.
The vocabulary is small, containing only approximately 2500 words.
It is, therefore, extremely limited, and it would be difficult even to
find an interpreter as Signed English is used little following
completion of schooling.
3.34 The joint submission from the Deaf Society of NSW and the
NSW Association of the Deaf states that, “while it is not always
possible for Deaf people to use a ‘basic level’ of spoken
English, many Deaf people are employed in positions which require
great deal of public interaction, and most Deaf people can read a
newspaper, even though it is written in their second language,
In this and other respects it is arguable
that the situation of a deaf juror relying on an Auslan interpreter but
bilingual in Auslan
and English, can be distinguished from that of
other prospective non-English speaking jurors. Auslan is related to
English; should
the need arise to convey a precise phrase or sentence
(such as a term of a contract) into English, this could be achieved by
transliterating
Auslan signs into English word order. Furthermore, the
life experiences of Auslan speakers have been gleaned in an Australian
aiding comprehension of evidence adduced at trial.
3.35 Nevertheless, it might be argued that an interpreter is
just that, an interpreter; the evidence adduced in the courtroom and
the discussion that takes place in the jury room are filtered through
the interposition of this third person to the deaf juror, thereby
necessitating a kind of editing process. This would especially apply to
a jury room situation where a number of people might speak
at once, the
interpreter needing to select which comments to translate into Auslan.
CHALLENGING
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) provides for the
making of challenges to persons acting as jurors. There are two
principal types of challenge in New South
Wales, the peremptory
challenge and the challenge for cause.
The peremptory
challenge allows each of the accused and the Crown in criminal
proceedings to challenge three of the potential jurors
without giving
any reason.
Challenge for cause
3.37 The Crown
and the accused
may challenge any number of the prospective jurors for cause on one of the few permitted grounds. In
Murphy v The Queen
the High Court, quoting the trial judge, identified the causes for challenge as being that:
[T]he proposed juror does not possess the necessary qualifications or
that he has some personal defects which render him incapable
discharging his duty as a juror or that he is not impartial or that he
has served on another jury in respect of the same matter
or that he has
been convicted for an infamous crime.
3.38 The qualifications necessary are mostly contained in the legislative provisions referred to in the previous chapter.
A reason must, therefore, be provided in order to challenge for cause, and a
prima facie
case put in support of such an application. If a
prima facie
case is established, the prospective juror is sworn and questioned
under oath. The trial judge will decide on the balance of probabilities
if the grounds for disqualification have been established, and, if so,
the juror will be removed from the panel.
Because the identity of prospective jurors is confidential,
the parties have no information other than appearance on which to base
such a challenge. Consequently, challenges for cause are rare
South Wales.
3.39 The fact that a juror has a significant vision or hearing
impairment may not be apparent to the parties. It is, however, vital
that the parties have this information, as they are in the best
position to know whether the impairment may adversely affect their
cases. Present procedures, which disclose nothing about a prospective
juror, would, therefore, need modification. While this does
to be an insuperable problem, the Commission would welcome comments on
it. Another procedural difficulty is the delay
caused to the
commencement of trial, should a juror requiring a sign interpreter be
selected. Interpreters available for the duration
of the trial and
subsequent jury deliberation need to be identified and appointed.
Peremptory challenges
3.40 A peremptory challenge is one in which no reason need be
given for objecting to a particular potential juror. Chief Justice
[t]hat the challenge is peremptory means that the accused
need not in any wise justify his challenge. It need represent no more
his personal objection to be tried by the person whom he sees
before him. … It is his peculiar right to follow his own
impressions
and inclinations.
Because the challenge for cause is so little used, the peremptory
challenge is the main means by which a party may exclude as
person suspected of bias or partiality.
This may be
relevant, for example, where a trial is held not in a city but in a
small rural town, where an increased probability
exists of an accused
being acquainted with a person summoned for jury duty.
Chief Justice Barwick said of the right of challenge “and
particularly the right of peremptory challenge, [that it] lies at
very root of the jury system as it now exists.”
American commentator referred to the peremptory challenge as having
been “sacrosanct” and a cherished part of the
However, like the challenge for cause,
information on which to base a peremptory challenge is lacking, and
this, together with the
absence of a requirement for justifying the
challenge, undermines its utility. The irony is that, in supposedly
countering bias,
the peremptory challenge may itself be driven by
prejudice. If not based on any facts other than the potential
juror’s appearance,
then the risk is that it is based on crude
social stereotyping, and that it is superficial and arbitrary.
The ability to challenge jurors slightly qualifies the randomness of juror selection.
3.42 In the context of people with disabilities serving as jurors,
the peremptory challenge may present an insurmountable problem.
initiatives to be introduced, such as assessment by the Sheriff’s
Office or the court of individual prospective jurors
to ascertain
whether their blindness or deafness in reality prevents their effective
functioning, as well as the introduction of
interpreters and assistive
technology, these can nevertheless be rendered ineffective by the
continuing use of peremptory challenges.
3.43 In 1986 this Commission produced a report on juries in criminal trials.
At that time each side was permitted twenty peremptory challenges where the offence was murder, and eight in any other case.
Having regard to the inherent problems with this type of challenge, the
Commission considered various options for reform, including
abolition. This option was rejected, as it was felt that parties would
be forced to challenge for cause, a procedure both more
time-consuming
and potentially embarrassing for the prospective juror.
Further, it was argued that, as the rules and procedures pertaining to
jury selection are established by the Crown, the abolition
peremptory challenge would deny the accused an input into the
composition of the jury trying his or her case.
3.44 The law was amended to allow each side three peremptory challenges,
with a correspondingly reduced risk of discriminatory selection.
United Kingdom
3.45 In 1986 the Fraud Trials Committee published a report
(“the Roskill Report”), recommending the abolition of the
challenge in fraud cases.
Committee’s comments make clear that it would have gone further
had it not been constrained by its terms of reference:
The current practice of peremptory challenge further
weakens the same principle [of random selection], to a potentially
critical extent.
Our evidence shows that the public, the press and many
legal practitioners now believe that this ancient right is abused
and systematically to manipulate cases towards a desired
result. The current situation bids fair to bring the whole system of
trial into public disrepute. We conclude that in respect of fraud
trials such manipulation is wholly unacceptable and must be stopped.
Whether it is acceptable in robbery, drugs or murder trials is for
others to conclude.
That invitation appears to have been accepted. In 1988 peremptory challenge was abolished in the United Kingdom.
United States
3.46 In contrast with the juror anonymity provisions of this
State, most American jurisdictions permit extensive examination of
prospective
jurors by means of a “voir dire”. Through this
procedure counsel may question prospective jurors about their attitudes
and other personal details, and then use the results to make peremptory
“strikes”, or challenges, against them.
the extent to which this practice is unregulated, its use carries the
risk that it may reflect no more than the prejudices of
the challenger.
Batson v Kentucky
the United States Supreme Court imposed limits on the
prosecution’s right to make peremptory challenges, by prohibiting
made on the basis of race. The Court’s finding was
based on the Equal Protection Clause contained in the Fourteenth
Constitution
, and to that extent is of little
relevance in New South Wales. Of interest, however, is the mirroring by
(and its so-called “progeny”) of initiatives
to reduce discrimination in society, together with comments contained
the majority opinion pertaining to jury selection.
3.48 The appellant was an African American convicted of
burglary and receipt of stolen goods. During the trial the prosecutor
used his peremptory challenges to strike all four black persons on
, or jury pool, and an all-white jury was sworn. It
was held that, while the prosecutor was ordinarily entitled to exercise
challenges for any reason, the Equal Protection Clause
forbids challenges to potential jurors solely on account of their race.
Court stated:
While we recognise, of course, that the peremptory
challenge occupies an important position in our trial procedures, we do
that our decision today will undermine the contribution the
challenge generally makes to the administration of justice. The reality
of practice, amply reflected in many state- and federal-court opinions,
shows that the challenge may be, and unfortunately at times
used to discriminate against black jurors. By requiring trial courts to
be sensitive to the racially discriminatory use
of peremptory
challenges, our decision enforces the mandate of equal protection and
furthers the ends of justice. In view of the
heterogeneous population
of our Nation, public respect for our criminal justice system and the
rule of law will be strengthened if
we ensure that no citizen is
disqualified from jury service because of his race.
3.49 Elsewhere
the Court expressed the opinion that:
[t]he harm from discriminatory jury selection extends beyond that
inflicted on the defendant and the excluded juror to touch the
community. Selection procedures that purposefully exclude black persons
from juries undermine public confidence in the fairness
of our system
of justice. Discrimination within the judicial system is most
pernicious because it is “a stimulant to that race
which is an impediment to securing to [black citizens] that equal
justice which the law aims to secure to all others.”
3.50 Implicit in the prohibition against race-based challenges is the recognition that they are based on irrational prejudice.
JEB v Alabama ex rel TB
extended the prohibition to gender-based peremptory challenges. Previous decisions had already applied
to civil cases,
and to criminal defence use of racially discriminatory challenges.
It appears unlikely, however, that
will be extended to prohibit peremptory challenges on the basis of disability. As the Court stated in
United States v Harris
“unlike race or gender, disability may legitimately affect a person’s ability to serve as a juror”.
Rather, the current approach of examining each case on its particular
facts to discover whether a prospective juror can do the job,
without reasonable accommodations, seems likely to continue.
3.52 Unlike race or gender, blindness or deafness
impair the ability of the person to perform effectively as a juror. However, it is arguable that a
ban on allowing persons who are blind or deaf to serve as jurors is no
more rational than a ban based on race or gender. Testing
the extent of
a sight or hearing disability is always possible.
Galloway v Superior Court of the District of Columbia
a blind man responded to a notice to appear for jury duty but was then
barred from serving due to his blindness. He filed suit alleging
violation of various legislative provisions. The Court, finding in his
favour, noted that “whether a blind juror can serve
competently
can be addressed on a case-by-case basis”.
the New York Court of Appeals stated that, in regard to those such as
deaf prospective jurors, “the question in each case,
that the prospective juror is otherwise qualified, must be whether the
is capable of doing what jurors are supposed to do” (emphasis added).
Both cases assume that reasonable adjustments
(“accommodations”) such as sign interpreters, will be
offered as required.
The limits of reform
3.54 If the conclusion from analysis of the current exclusionary
policy is that there are compelling reasons for departing from the
there is nevertheless a real danger that reform risks being cosmetic
only. A blind or deaf person, called to be a juror, may be
from being empanelled due to peremptory challenge by counsel on the
basis of the sorts of preconceptions discussed in this
chapter. In the
United States a peremptory challenge based on a juror’s deafness
was disallowed because, the Court stated,
“the effort to bar the
hearing impaired person from jury service must, at the very least, have
a rational basis” and,
in the light of
proposed challenge based solely on disability and not on the
juror’s ability to communicate was not rational and violated
juror’s equal protection rights.
However, even in
the United States this test is not applicable in all jurisdictions,
making it easier to sustain a peremptory challenge
circumstances.
In New South Wales it is not a requirement that a peremptory challenge be based on any articulated reason.
3.55 For meaningful change to take place, considerable effort
would be required to educate and instil confidence in lawyers and the
general public as to the competence of deaf or blind people to serve as
jurors. Unless such a perception becomes widespread and not
patchy, in practice blind or deaf people may well continue to be
excluded from juries.
3.56 Many of the objections to blind or deaf people serving on
juries appear to be based on prejudice, stereotyping, or the
inconvenience
of devising means to accommodate such jurors. The
systematic exclusion from jury service of a sector of society,
especially where
its members have expressed a willingness to serve, has
the potential to undermine public confidence in the criminal justice
by calling into question its fairness. Belief in the fairness of
the justice system could be damaged by the perception that legal
fail to keep pace with our better understanding of the rights of people
with disabilities, and their ability to contribute
to, and participate
in, society. In this regard, Justice Deane has stated:
a change in community perceptions or standards may lead,
on reconsideration, to the modification or abandonment of rules or
which were, in other times, seen as necessary to ensure that
the trial of an accused was a fair one.
Examples from American jurisdictions, cited above, show that some US
courts are demonstrating increasingly their confidence in
the ability
of deaf or blind people to serve as jurors without compromising the
fairness of the trial.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. In addition the
Jury Act 1977
requires each
juror to take an oath or affirm that he or she will give “a true
verdict according to the evidence”. Where
a court of criminal
appeal is asked to set aside a verdict as unsafe “the question
must in the end be … whether the
appellate court thinks that
upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused was guilty”:
Whitehorn v The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
(1983) 152 CLR 657
Chamberlain v The Queen [No 2]
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
[1992] HCA 56
(1992) 175 CLR 495
Davies v The Queen
[1937] HCA 27
(1937) 57 CLR 170
at 180-181.
. Far West Law Society,
at 1; Legal Aid Commission of NSW,
at 1; New South Wales Police Service,
at 1-2; Scott,
at 1; Wood,
. People With Disabilities,
. University of Sydney, Research Centre for Adaptation in
Health and Illness, “SHHH”
«www.usyd.edu.au/rcahi/Links/SHHH.html»
(as at 8 July
. Self Help for Hard of Hearing People (“SHHH”),
. People With Disabilities,
. D N Kaiser, “Juries, Blindness, and the Juror Function” (1984) 60
Chicago Kent Law Review
191 at 191.
. McCallum,
. Associate Judge Nicholas T Pomaro quoted in D Ranii, “Blind Judge Backs Use of Deaf, Blind Jurors”
National Law Journal
(NY) (21 March 1983) at 11.
. See para 4.16, 5.23, 5.24.
. M J Crehan, “Seating the Blind Juror”
. M J Crehan, “Seating the Blind Juror”
. M J Crehan, “Seating the Blind Juror”
. See, for example, S M Wise and G Mota, “Justice Can Be Blind and Still See”
National Law Journal
(14 May 1984) at 47 (blind juror in personal injury case in a
Minneapolis district court, who “relied on medical and other
testimony, as well as his fellow jurors’ descriptions, to form an
opinion about the plaintiff’s alleged disfigurement”);
Zeldis, “Blind Juror Sits on Case”
National Law Journal
(26 October 1987) at 43 (blind juror in “slip-and-fall”
case, NY Supreme Court. The presiding judge said “the only
irregularity in the proceedings came when he instructed the jury to
view some 13 exhibits during deliberations, and, in deference
juror], asked the other jurors to describe the contents to her”).
Commonwealth v Susi
394 Mass 784
Commonwealth v Susi
394 Mass 784
(1985) at 788; Compare M J Crehan, “Seating the Blind Juror”
at 108, 110.
Jones v New York City Transit Authority
126 Misc 2d 585
(1984) at 589.
People v Caldwell
603 NYS 2d 713
42 USC § 12101
and following.
People v Caldwell
603 NYS 2d 713
(1993) at 716.
People v Guzman
(1990) at 6 (NY Ct of Appeals); see also para 2.17-2.21.
. M J Crehan, “Seating the Blind Juror”
Ward v James
[1966] 1 QB 273 at 301.
People v Guzman
(1990) at 6 (NY Ct of Appeals).
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
A Discussion Paper
(PP No 32, 1998) at para 62.
. Various commentators, summarised in P Darbyshire, A Maughan
and A Stewart, “What Can the English Legal System Learn from Jury
Research Published up to 2001?”at 25-26
«www.kingston.ac.uk/~ku00596/elsres01.pdf» (as at 19 June
2003); see also
D N Kaiser, “Juries, Blindness, and the Juror
Function” (1984) 60
Chicago Kent Law Review
191 at 203-204.
. In Australia this will be much more extensive than is the
case in the US, where judges are, for the most part, prohibited from
People v Guzman
(1990) at 6 (NY Ct of Appeals).
. M J Crehan, “Seating the Blind Juror”
. M J Crehan, “Seating the Blind Juror”
Butterworths Encyclopaedic Australian Legal Dictionary
(Butterworths, Sydney, 2002) (online).
Yuill v Yuill
[1945] 1 All ER 183
at 188 (Lord Greene MR);
Jones v Jones
[1961] NSWR 278
Mashiati v Australian Poultry Ltd
(1995) 11 NSWCCR 345
at 352 (Clarke JA). The importance of demeanour is
also given as one of the reasons for the rule against the admission of
evidence: see, for example,
Teper v The Queen
[1952] AC 480
Watt v Thomas
[1947] AC 484
at 487-8 (Lord Thankerton);
Devries v Australian National Railways Commission
(1993) 177 CLR 472 at 480.
The “British Confidence”
[1951] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 447 at 460; see also
Mashiati v Australian Poultry Ltd
(1995) 11 NSWCCR 345
. K Mack, “Challenging Assumptions About Credibility”
(2001) 39(10)
Law Society Journal
. Australia, Royal Commission of Inquiry into Chamberlain Convictions,
Report of the Commissioner the Hon Mr Justice T R Morling
(Government Printer, Darwin, 1987) at 296.
. Australia, Royal Commission of Inquiry into Chamberlain Convictions at 300.
. J F Stephen,
Evidence Act
(Macmillan, London, 1872) at 42-43.
. The quotations are from respectively
Société D’Avances Commerciales v Merchants’ Marine Insurance Co
(1924) 20 Ll L Rep 140 at 152 and
Lek v Matthews
(1926) 25 Ll L Rep 525 at 543. See also Kirby P in
Britt v Nominal Defendant
(NSW, Court of Appeal, No 147/84, 3 July 1987, unreported) at 1. The
following are examples of the inappropriate use of demeanour.
Quercia v United States
[1933] USSC 117
(1933) at 468, the trial judge had instructed the jury as follows:
And now I am going to tell you what I think of the defendant’s
testimony. You may have noticed, Mr Foreman and gentlemen, that
wiped his hands during his testimony. It is rather a curious thing, but
that is almost always an indication of lying. Why it should
don’t know, but that is the fact. I think that every single word
that man said, except when he agreed with the Government’s
testimony, was a lie.
Stephen wrote:
“I always used to look at the witnesses’ toes when I was
cross-examining them,” said a friend of mine who had practised
the bar in Ceylon. “As soon as they began to lie they always
fidgeted about with them.” I knew a Judge who formed
the opinion
that a letter had been forged because the expression “that
woman” which is contained appeared to him to be
one which a woman
and not a man would use, and the question was whether the letter in
question had been forged by a woman. In the
Life of Lord Keeper Guildford
it is said that he always acted on the principle that a man was to be
believed in what he said when he was in a passion. (J F Stephen,
Evidence Act
(Macmillan, London, 1872) at 42-43).
Onassis v Vergottis
[1968] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 294 at 297.
Onassis v Vergottis
[1968] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 294 at 302. Similar opinions are found in
Yuill v Yuill
[1945] 1 All ER 183
at 189 (Lord Greene MR) and in US cases such as
[1963] USCA9 118
314 F 2d 718
(1963) at 749;
Miller v Virginia Employment Commission
31 Va Cir 151 (1993) at 152;
John J Williams v Auto Brokers
6 Va App 570
(1988) at 574.
Devries v Australian National Railways Commission
(1993) 177 CLR 472 at 480. See also Kirby J in
Rosenberg v Percival
[2001] HCA 18
(2001) 205 CLR 434
. O G Wellborn III, “Demeanor”
Cornell Law Review
at 1104-110.
. J A Blumenthal, “A Wipe of the Hands, a Lick of the
Lips: the Validity of Demeanor Evidence in Assessing Witness
Credibility”
Nebraska Law Review
In cases where jurors must assess the accuracy, rather than the
truthfulness, of the witness’s testimony, researchers
that the witness’s confidence is the major influence on a
jury’s belief. Of course, this bears little relation
the witness’s perception and memory are correct: Wellborn at
. Wellborn at 1088.
People v Guzman
(1990) at 6 (NY Ct of Appeals).
People v Guzman
(1990) at 6 (NY Ct of Appeals).
. See para 3.13.
Goby v Wetherill
[1915] 2 KB 674 at 675;
[1967] Crim L R 540.
In re Osman
[1995] 1 WLR 1327.
In re Osman
[1995] 1 WLR 1327 at 1328.
. Eg “Prime Minister Tony Blair has indicated that the
law could be changed to make it easier for deaf people to perform jury
service. The announcement follows the outcry over the failure of an
appeal by a profoundly deaf man against a court’s decision
banning him from sitting as a juror. Jeff McWhinney, chief executive of
the British Deaf Association, was told … that the
current law
did not allow a 13th person – in this case a sign language
interpreter – to be present in a jury room during
deliberations”: BBC News Online (10 November 1999), “Deaf
Juror Rules ‘to be Reviewed’”
«news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/514551.stm»
(as at 29 July 2003).
See also D Silas, “Deaf Jurors”
New Law Journal
; J Robins, “Falling On Deaf Ears” (2000) 97
Law Society’s Gazette
28; S Enright, “The Deaf Juror and the Thirteenth Man”
New Law Journal
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales: Report
(The Chancellor’s Department, London, 2001) at 153.
. This paper is not available to the Commission at the time of writing.
. Examples include the following provisions from
Massachusetts (permitting a deaf juror to use a translator) and
Illinois (rendering
it unlawful for a person who is not a jury member
to hear or observe jury deliberations):
… In the presence of the jury, the court shall
instruct the translator to make true, literal and complete translations
testimony and other relevant colloquy to the deaf juror to the
best of his ability. The court may permit a translator to be present
and assist a deaf juror during the deliberations of the jury. In the
presence of the jury, the court shall instruct the translator
refrain from participating in any manner in the deliberations of the
jury and to refrain from having any communications, oral
with any member of the jury regarding the deliberations of the jury
except for the literal translations of jurors’
remarks made
during deliberations. The verdict of the jury shall be valid
notwithstanding the presence of the translator during deliberations.
(General Laws of Massachusetts Chapter 234A § 69.)
However, if any juror is deaf or hard of hearing, the juror may be
accompanied by and may communicate with a court appointed interpreter
throughout any period during which the jury is sequestered or engaged
in its deliberations. If the jury foreman reasonably believes
interpreter is doing more than interpreting, nothing in this Act shall
prevent him or her from petitioning the court and
requesting that the
interpreter be replaced with another interpreter. (705 Illinois
Compiled Statutes § 315/1(a) (Jury Secrecy
US v Dempsey
830 F 2d 1084
(1987) at 1089.
. The importance of the secrecy of the jury’s deliberations has recently been reinforced in
R v O’Connor
[2004] UKHL 2
(22 January 2004).
US v Dempsey
830 F 2d 1084
(1987) at 1090.
US v Dempsey
830 F 2d 1084
(1987) at 1091. The Commission is not suggesting that this is necessarily the same in Australia.
People v Guzman
(1990) (NY Ct of Appeals).
People v Guzman
(1990) at 7 (NY Ct of Appeals).
People v Guzman
(1990) at 7 (NY Ct of Appeals).
. S S Ostrau, “Administrative Judge Hails Efforts of Courts”
New York Law Journal
(11 February 1992) at 2; F Ellman, “Translator Aids Deaf Juror in Negligence Trial”
New York Law Journal
(27 August 1992) at 2; O Kitzes, (Letter to the Editor)
New York Law Journal
(11 February 1992) at 2.
. The discussion of Auslan is compiled from the following sources: T Johnston (ed),
Signs of Australia: a New Dictionary of Auslan
(North Rocks Press, Sydney, 1996) at 8, 557-566; Victoria Deaf Society,
“What is Auslan” «www.vicdeaf.com.au/about
us/auslan/about_auslan.htm» (as at 14 October 2003); Australian
Communication Exchange, Deafness Resources Australia, “What
the Difference Between Auslan and Signed English?”
«www.aceinfo.net.au/Resources/Downloads/ faq/dra.rtf» (as
at 14 October 2003); The Western Australian Deaf Society Inc,
“Auslan – Australian Sign Language”
«www.wadeaf.org.au/auslan.shtml»
(as at 14 October 2003)
. J Lo Bianco,
National Policy on Languages
(AGPS, Canberra, 1987) at 14, 76.
. Johnston at 557.
. Deaf Society of NSW and NSW Association of the Deaf,
. In the United States there have even been successful
challenges against prospective jurors who were bilingual in English and
on the basis that some of the testimony was to be in Spanish,
and it was feared that the jurors would follow the original Spanish
not the interpreter’s official English version:
Hernandez v New York
[1991] USSC 82
People v Guzman
125 Misc 2d 457
(1984) at 459 (NY
Sup Ct). The Court of Appeals noted that the appeal did not require it
to determine whether a juror dependent on
a “nonliteral sign
language”, such as American Sign Language, would be qualified
under the statutory requirement that
a juror be English-speaking:
(1990) at 3 n2. See also
People v Green
561 NYS 2d 130
Arizona v Marcham
160 Ariz 52
People v Rodriguez
145 Misc 2d 105
. Johnston at 560.
. Spelling words out, letter by letter, by means of twenty-six distinct configurations of handshapes: Johnston at 558.
. Signed English is a signed form of English, thus English in
a different format. It uses English grammar and syntax, but borrows
many signs from Auslan: Deaf Society of NSW, “FAQ”
«www.deafsocietynsw.org.au/resources/faqsign.htm» (as
October 2003).
. Advice obtained from Robert Adam, Co-ordinator of Community Relations and Development for the Deaf Society of NSW.
. Deaf Society of NSW and NSW Association of the Deaf,
. Challenge to the array, that is, to the entire jury panel,
is also available on the basis of some default of duty on the part of
the Sheriff eg disregarding the provisions of a statute or of the law:
[1972] VicRp 47
[1972] VR 423
at 424. See also
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
; If the Crown and all
the accused agree, then any number of peremptory challenges may be
In civil proceedings each party may issue challenges to
half the number of potential jurors as are required to constitute the
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Murphy v The Queen
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94
. See para 2.2.
. L A McCrimmon, “Challenging A Potential Juror For Cause: Resuscitation Or Requiem?” (2000) 23
University of New South Wales Law Journal
127 at 135;
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, Melbourne, 1994) at 45; McCrimmon at 128.
Johns v The Queen
[1979] HCA 33
(1979) 141 CLR 409
. Findlay at 48.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Report 48, 1986) at para 4.60.
Johns v The Queen
[1979] HCA 33
(1979) 141 CLR 409
. M A Lynch, “The Application of Equal Protection to Prospective Jurors With Disabilities: Will
Cover Disability-Based Strikes?”
Albany Law Review
. Findlay at 49-52. See also England and Wales, Fraud Trials Committee,
(“Roskill Report”) (HMSO, London, 1986) at para 7.22-7.24.
. See note 86 above.
. NSWLRC Report 48 at para 4.58.
. Compare Findlay at 55: “Given the limited grounds on
which a challenge for cause can be mounted, and the paucity of
information
that counsel possess about prospective jurors, there is
little to suggest such an extravagant consumption of time or stress.
it could be argued that it is highly desirable, where counsel
has strong grounds for suspecting bias on the part of a prospective
juror (such as would warrant a challenge for cause), that this bias be
explicitly identified in the courtroom. In this way the empanelment
procedure would be clearly seen to be operating to secure an
“impartial” jury…”
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Discussion Paper 12, 1985) at para 4.16.
Jury (Amendment) Act 1987
(NSW) Sch 1 item 5;
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) (No 3) Act 1988
(NSW) Sch 12 item 3. Findlay is critical of this so-called
“compromise”, claiming that “the only practical
alternative
to the vagaries of the current peremptory challenge
mechanism is to dismantle it altogether”: Findlay at 53-54.
. Roskill Report at para 7.38.
. Roskill Report at para 7.37.
Criminal Justice Act 1988
(UK) s 118(1).
. M Findlay at 53.
. A Weis, “Peremptory Challenges: the Last Barrier to Jury Service for People With Disabilities”
Willamette Law Review
at 5, refers to peremptory challenges as “the final and
ultimate bastion of prejudice, segregation, and exclusion preventing
jury service by “qualified” people with physical and mental
impairments”.
Batson v Kentucky
[1986] USSC 89
Batson v Kentucky
[1986] USSC 89
(1986) at 98-99.
Batson v Kentucky
[1986] USSC 89
(1986) at 87-88.
JEB v Alabama ex rel TB
[1994] USSC 6
Edmonson v Leesville Concrete Co Inc
[1991] USSC 91
Georgia v McCollum
[1992] USSC 87
US v Harris
[1999] USCA7 636
197 F 3d 870
(1999) at 875.
NY v Falkenstein
288 AD 2d 922
Donelson v Fritz
70 P 3d 539 (2002); Compare
People v Green
561 NYS 2d 130
. Lynch at 302.
Galloway v Superior Court of the District of Columbia
816 F Supp 12
Galloway v Superior Court of the District of Columbia
816 F Supp 12
(1993) at 18 n 12.
People v Guzman
(1990) at 5 (NY Ct of Appeals).
. See further discussion at para 4.15-4.18.
People v Green
561 NYS 2d 130
(1990) at 132-133.
. The US Supreme Court has stated “Parties may also
exercise their peremptory challenges to remove from the venire any
or class of individuals normally subject to “rational
basis” review”:
JEB v Alabama ex rel TB
[1994] USSC 6
(1994) at 143; see also D J Meyer, “A New Peremptory Inclusion to
Increase Representativeness and Impartiality in Jury Selection”
Case Western Reserve Law Review
Katsuno v The Queen
[1999] HCA 50
(1999) 199 CLR 40
at 50, 57-58.
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
4. Disability discrimination
History of this reference (Digest)
Legislation
Policy considerations
Reasonable adjustments
Deaf and blind people in the legal system
LEGISLATION
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) mandates the
removal from the supplementary jury roll of the names of persons who
are disqualified or ineligible to serve as
jurors. The section also
gives the Sheriff discretion to determine eligibility:
(1) The sheriff shall delete from a supplementary jury roll those persons whom the sheriff determines:
(a) are disqualified from serving as jurors or ineligible to serve as jurors, or
(b) are entitled as of right to be exempted from serving as jurors and who have duly claimed exemption. (emphasis added)
4.2 In practice, with the possible exception of item 11 of
Schedule 2 (“persons who do not read or understand
discretion plays no part with regard to any category
of disqualification, ineligibility or exemption contained within the
first three
schedules to the Act, other than that pertaining to people
with sickness or disability. If a doubt arises as to whether a
prospective
juror will be able to discharge the requisite duties,
either because of insufficient English language proficiency or because
forms of impairment or illness, the Sheriff’s office will
attempt to ascertain whether the prospective juror meets the
requirements
of the position. However, as far as blind or deaf people
are concerned, the current policy is automatic exclusion from jury
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
4.3 Deafness and blindness constitute disabilities for the purposes of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) (“ADA”).
Disallowing deaf or blind persons from serving as jurors falls within
discriminatory behaviour on the basis of disability, as defined
(1) A person (“the perpetrator”) discriminates
against another person (“the aggrieved person”) on the
of disability if, on the ground of the aggrieved person’s
disability … , the perpetrator:
(a) treats the aggrieved person less favourably than in the
same circumstances, or in circumstances which are not materially
the perpetrator treats or would treat a person who does not
have that disability …
4.4 This, however, does not make it unlawful.
Section 54(1)(a)
discriminatory behaviour where this is necessary in order to comply
with a requirement of another statute.
As already stated, once the Sheriff has determined, as he or she is entitled to do under
Jury Act 1977
(NSW), that a blind or deaf person is ineligible to serve as a juror,
the deletion of that person’s name from the roll is mandatory.
would seem, therefore, that by virtue of
, the Sheriff’s act
in deleting from the supplementary jury roll the names of blind and
deaf persons, is not inconsistent with
the ADA. This would obviate the
need to discuss how a blind or deaf person’s desire to serve as a
juror would be affected by
Divisions 2 and 3 of
of the ADA,
which specify the areas of the Act’s application such as
employment and the provision of goods and services.
4.5 A different interpretation is suggested by Chris Puplick, the
former President of the Anti-Discrimination Board of New South Wales.
He states that the
Jury Act 1977
necessitate
exclusion of people who are blind or deaf” (his emphasis). If
there are suitable accommodations that can be made “there
reason to conclude that a person who is blind or deaf is unable to
discharge his or her duties as a juror”. He asserts
guidelines developed by the Sheriff’s Office, not having
statutory force, do not attract the protection of
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Section 5(1)
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) (hereinafter “DDA”) defines disability discrimination
in essentially the same terms as s 49B of the ADA.
DDA makes it unlawful to discriminate against a person on the grounds
of disability in the area of employment. While it is
unlikely that this
provision would have any application to the issue of jury service, the
terms of s 12 of the Act render any detailed
consideration unnecessary
by limiting the scope of s 15 to Commonwealth employees.
4.7 Section 24 of the DDA prohibits discrimination in relation to the provision of goods and services.
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission has held that
“service” includes “providing the administration
management to enable eligible persons to serve on a jury”.
The case concerned wheelchair access to a courtroom for a person
summoned for jury service. There was no question as to whether the
complainant was eligible to serve as a juror, but rather, whether being
eligible, she was treated less favourably than other eligible
without her disability, by the respondent’s refusal to provide a
service. This is distinguishable from the situation
of those potential
jurors who, due to blindness or deafness, are deemed ineligible by the
Sheriff. While it might be argued that
the judgment that no blind or
deaf person is capable of discharging the duties of a juror is flawed,
the fact that the Sheriff has
used his or her discretion to arrive at
this decision cannot be regarded as having failed to provide a service,
thereby treating
less favourably a person with a disability.
CONSIDERATIONS
4.8 Lord Justice Auld, in the report referred to in the previous chapter,
supported people with disabilities serving as jurors “not because
there is a general right, as distinct from duty, to undertake
service or under any anti-discrimination legislation, but because such
inclusiveness is a mark of a modern, civilised, society”.
In Australia, the broad policy, if not the actual provisions, of the
anti-discrimination legislation referred to above, accords with
aspirations of those blind or deaf persons desiring, but denied, the
opportunity to perform jury service. The ADA is “an
to promote equality of opportunity between all persons”. The DDA,
lists amongst its objects:
to ensure, as far as practicable, that persons with disabilities
have the same rights to equality before the law as the rest of the
community; and
to promote recognition and acceptance within the community of
the principle that persons with disabilities have the same fundamental
rights as the rest of the community.
4.9 In introducing the
Disability Discrimination Bill
to Federal Parliament, Mr Howe, then Minister for Health, Housing and Community Services, stated:
Our vision is a fairer Australia where people with disabilities are
regarded as equals, with the same rights as all other citizens,
recourse to systems that redress any infringements of their rights;
where people with disabilities can participate in the life
community in which they live, to the degree that they wish; …
where difference is accepted, and where public instrumentalities,
communities and individuals act to ensure that society accommodates
such difference. Only then will we be able to say that justice
Jury duty is, arguably, an area where there is still some way to go in
translating these aspirations into practice. While “reasonable
adjustments”
have been made in cases of persons
with some impairment to hearing or sight, it has been assumed that such
adjustments are not required
in the case of profoundly blind or deaf
persons, presumed to be incompetent to act as jurors. The general
absence of discussion regarding
the possibility for adjustments
reflects the current legal practice preventing blind or deaf persons
from undertaking jury service.
4.11 The accused’s right to a fair trial has, rightly, been
afforded pre-eminence. There is, however, little sign of any
consideration
of the possibility that this right may not be compromised
if blind or deaf people serve as jurors. In the United States there has
been a gradual shift of emphasis from the defendant’s rights to
those of others in the community. Andrew Weis
three phases, and while his analysis is within the context of the
discriminatory use of the peremptory challenge and constitutional
guarantees of equal protection, it does serve to highlight the fact
that the US Supreme Court has not been content to sacrifice the
of jurors totally to the pre-eminent rights of the accused. Initially,
according to Weis, the US Supreme Court upheld the
right to a jury from which members of the accused’s race had not
been deliberately excluded. In later decisions
the Court began to
emphasise the excluded jurors’ right to be free from
discrimination, as well as the community’s right
to a legitimate
judicial system. More recently the rights of the excluded jurors have
been given more prominence. The Court held
Georgia v McCollum
that a criminal defendant was prohibited by the
Constitution
exercising a peremptory challenge in a racially discriminatory manner.
4.12 The notion of “equality of opportunity” in the
present context need not be restricted to the question of whether
deaf or blind person should be eligible for jury duty, but also raises
the broader issue of whether such a person has been subjected
same selection process. Members of the public with a disability who are
summoned for jury service are invited by the Sheriff’s
make contact in order to discuss the situation, and see if the
disability can be reasonably accommodated.
This approach
suggests that people with disabilities who wish to explore the
possibility of serving as jurors can have their particular
assessed. Those with a significant hearing or sight impairment are not
treated equally, in the sense that they are subject
to a policy of
blanket exclusion, and not assessed, as individuals, on a case-by-case
basis. In the light of the American experience,
it is necessary to
reconsider the argument that, solely by reason of their impairment,
deaf or blind people are incapable of performing
the necessary duties
of jury service.
4.13 People With Disabilities (“PWD”), a peak
disability rights and advocacy organisation, urges the Commission to
from a social model of disability, according to which
“the fundamental issue” is not the individual’s
limitations
“but, rather, a hostile and non-adaptive
From a social model perspective, people who are blind or
deaf are not prevented from participation in jury service as a result
their impairments, but as a result of a failure of the legal system
to adapt to their participation requirements.
Such views challenge automatic exclusion. Few people would disagree
with the policy objectives of the ADA and DDA. The aspirations
embody can, nevertheless, be undermined in the jury context by
regarding people with disabilities as fortunate in
being required to perform jury service, and as
over those citizens who find the obligation a nuisance. This, again,
depends on one’s perspective. A civic duty may be a burden
person obliged to perform it, while treasured by the person who must
fight to undertake it.
One commentator has noted that, in
addition to practical barriers to jury service faced by people with
disabilities, such as lack
of access to courtrooms or sign
interpreters, they may also encounter “humanistic” barriers
“such as the court
officer who ‘takes care’ of the
disabled person by relieving her of jury duty”.
The judgment in an American case concerning a challenge to a deaf juror contained the following statement:
The deaf are not poor creatures to be patronized by us, congratulated
on their individual efforts to overcome their handicaps and
brushed aside. Like members of any other cognizable group, the deaf are
a part of our community and must be considered,
evaluated, and finally
either accepted or rejected for service as individuals just as any
other citizen.
ADJUSTMENTS
4.15 Reference has been made elsewhere in this paper to
“reasonable adjustments”, or “reasonable
accommodations”
as they are referred to in the United States.
These are changes or modifications, for example within an environment
or to a job,
that make it possible for an otherwise qualified person
with a disability to participate in a process or perform required tasks.
The New South Wales Attorney General’s Department, which is
responsible for administering the State’s court system, has
developed a Disability Strategic Plan (“DSP”) in order to
meet its obligations under State and Federal anti-discrimination
legislation. It is arguable that this legislation does not pertain to
blind or deaf people who are summoned for jury service.
Indeed, the DSP’s chief concern is with the non-discriminatory
delivery of services to clients, and the enjoyment of a
disability-friendly
workplace by departmental employees (and jurors
fall into neither of these two categories). Nevertheless, more
generally the Department
states that one of its objectives is to
incorporate disability principles into the Department’s policies
and practices.
4.16 Various accommodations are already made in relation to facilitating jury duty.
Some courthouses are wheelchair-accessible, or equipped with hearing
aid loops. Travel allowances are available for general or
wheelchair-accessible
taxis, and the Sheriff’s Office undertakes
to be flexible regarding such matters as arranging suitable parking
facilities and
reallocating a prospective juror to a courthouse better
equipped to meet that person’s needs. Auslan interpreters are
in certain situations, although not, at present, for use by
jurors. Whether it would be unreasonable, as to either expense or
inconvenience,
to make available a greater range of accommodations in
order to open up jury duty to a larger pool of potential jurors with
significant
sight or hearing loss is a matter which the Commission is
exploring in its work on this review.
4.17 In the US, the court in
accommodated a juror with a detached retina in one eye and limited
vision in the other. This was done by taking measures such as
her to a seat in the jury box closer to the witness box, reading
documents into the evidence, and providing her with an enlarged
version of the transcript. In
prospective juror who was blind had been barred from jury service, no
reasonable accommodations being offered. The Court, in granting
motion for judgment against the court that had initially excluded him,
suggested that accommodations that might have been offered
reading aloud the documentary evidence and describing the physical
evidence. The Court noted that the Library of Congress
uses a device
called the Kurzweil Reading Machine, which translates printed material
into audio. “Audio describers” –
individuals trained
to describe physical movements, dress and physical settings for the
blind – could also be employed. In
conclusion, the Court stated
that it took no position on the reasonableness of any particular
accommodation “other than to
note that solutions are as limitless
as a willing imagination can conceive”.
4.18 PWD states the view that many jurors struggle to retain
comprehension of all the evidence with which they are presented and
benefit from having access to a transcript.
It is already permissible for jurors to be furnished with transcripts if the judge agrees.
Real-time captioning, in its versatility, could prove very useful to
everyone concerned. In a court situation, where proceedings
are already
being transcribed by a court reporter, the captions can be displayed on
a television or computer screen and read by a
juror who is deaf, so
long as he or she meets the requirement of being able to read and
understand English. Created in an electronic
format, this could then be
easily converted to Braille for a blind juror to refer to later, if
necessary. The service is cost effective
because the captions are
recorded to become the written transcript, available to the judge,
lawyers and any other relevant party.
In New York real-time technology
was first used to assist a deaf juror in 1990, and its use is
widespread in the United States.
AND BLIND PEOPLE IN THE LEGAL SYSTEM
4.19 A number of deaf or blind people operate effectively in
modern legal systems. For example, there are a small number of judicial
officers, appointed to their posts despite a significant sight
impairment. In
Galloway v Superior Court of the District of Columbia
the Court stated:
in the United States, there are several active judges who are blind.
Indeed, it is highly persuasive that Judge David Norman, a blind
person, served as a judge on the Superior Court of the District of
Columbia and presided over numerous trials where he was the sole
of fact and had to assess the credibility of the witnesses before him
and evaluate the documentation and physical evidence.
Defendants have
never claimed that “those trials were invalid because [Judge
Norman] was blind.” It is thus illogical
to suggest that all
blind persons are unqualified to sit on a jury when a blind judge in
the same Superior Court successfully fulfilled
those very duties a
blind juror would have to discharge. No distinction can be drawn
between a blind judge’s ability to make
factual findings and the
abilities of a blind juror.
The Court went on to note:
The well-proven capabilities of blind lawyers, although not precisely
parallel to those of every blind juror, are nonetheless persuasive.
Blind lawyers have tried both civil and criminal cases before this
Court and in doing so, they have utilised the same skills that
juror would need – they evaluate the credibility of witnesses and
the content of physical and documentary evidence.
Jones v New York City Transit Authority
the Court held that, due to the facts of the particular case, a blind
person was not competent to serve as a juror. However, the
stated that blindness did not disable a person to be a lawyer or judge,
and it would be “contradictory to use the
defect as the sole
basis for rejecting a juror, especially since the juror does not act
alone but in conjunction with the other persons
on the jury to reach a
joint determination”.
4.21 In the United Kingdom, in the eighteenth century, Sir John
Fielding, brother of the novelist Henry, was appointed to the
despite his blindness. It was said he knew more than three
thousand London thieves by their voices.
More recent
appointments to judicial office of blind persons in the United Kingdom
have included a deputy master of the High Court,
an assistant recorder of a criminal court (“seen as the first rung on the judicial ladder”),
and an immigration adjudicator.
In addition to several blind people serving as members of various
tribunals, nine blind magistrates were appointed in 2001, following
three year pilot scheme initiated by the Lord Chancellor.
4.22 Of course a judge is in an easier position than a juror
since he or she has control of the court and is thus able to deal, so
far as is possible, with any needs arising from his or her blindness.
Likewise, a lawyer has greater control of his or her environment
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
. The Commission has noted that
was intended as a
temporary measure, and has recommended its repeal: New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(Report 92, 1999) at para 6.9, 6.34 and Recommendation 43.
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
, (4), (5).
Druett v New South Wales
(HR&EOC, No H99/6, Street SC, 17 April 2000, unreported).
. See ch 3 note 53.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales: Report
(The Chancellor’s Department, London, 2001) at 153.
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
. Australia,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
House of Representatives, 26 May 1992 at 2755.
. See para 4.15-4.18 below.
. A Weis, “Peremptory Challenges: the Last Barrier to Jury Service for People With Disabilities”
Willamette Law Review
Georgia v McCollum
[1992] USSC 87
. New South Wales, Office of the Sheriff, “People with
Disabilities and Jury Duty”
«www.agd.nsw.gov.au/ots.nsf/pages/jury16»
September 2003).
. People With Disabilities,
. M A Lynch, “The Application of Equal Protection to Prospective Jurors With Disabilities: Will
Cover Disability-Based Strikes?”
Albany Law Review
. Lynch at 299.
People v Guzman
125 Misc 2d 457
(1984) at 474 (NY Sup Ct).
. See, eg, US Department of Justice, “Americans With
Disabilities Act Questions and Answers”
«www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/employmt.htm»
(as at 5 November
. See para 4.3-4.7.
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
“Disability Strategic Plan 2003-2005”
«www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/agd.nsf/pages/dap»
November 2003).
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
Office of the Sheriff, “People with Disabilities and Jury
«www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/ots.nsf/pages/jury16»
(as at 5 November 2003).
People v Caldwell
603 NYS 2d 713
(1993) at 714.
Galloway v Superior Court of the District of Columbia
816 F Supp 12
Galloway v Superior Court of the District of Columbia
816 F Supp 12
(1993) at 18 n 11.
. People With Disabilities,
. Advice from Sheriff’s Office by email dated 24 June 2003.
. D Wise, “Courtroom Open For Real-Time Transcription”
New York Law Journal
(27 June 1996) at 1.
Galloway v Superior Court of the District of Columbia
816 F Supp 12
(1993) at 17.
Galloway v Superior Court of the District of Columbia
816 F Supp 12
(1993) at 17 n 8.
Jones v New York City Transit Authority
126 Misc 2d 585
(1984) at 589.
. National Portrait Gallery, Search the Collection, “Sir
John Fielding”
«www.npg.org.uk/live/search/portrait.asp?LinkID=mp01570&rNo=1&role=sit»
(as at 30 October 2002).
. In the News section, “Blind Justice” (1991) 141 (February 8)
New Law Journal
. F Gibb, “Crime Court Debut For Blind Judge”
(21 March 2000) in Features Section.
. F Gibb, “Crime Court Debut For Blind Judge”
(21 March 2000) in Features Section.
. K Foster, “Blind Justice Sets Moral Precedent”
The Scotsman
(27 June 2001) at 7; United Kingdom, Lord Chancellor’s
Department, “Seven Advisory Committees Seeking Blind
Magistrates”
«www.newsrelease-archive.net/coi/depts/GLC/
coi4342d.ok» (as at 27 October 2003).
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
5. Law reform in overseas jurisdictions
History of this reference (Digest)
England and Wales
New Zealand
United States
5.1 This chapter examines the law governing jury service by people with
disabilities in selected overseas jurisdictions with emphasis
legislative reforms.
5.2 Criminal jury trials are a shared sphere of responsibility
between the Federal and Provincial governments. Each Province and
has legislation (
) that sets out the qualifications for inclusion in jury panels and how jury panels will be constituted. Federally, the
Criminal Code
establishes rules to ensure that selection of jury members is fair.
Provincial and Territorial law
5.3 In most Provinces and Territories, physical infirmity is a
ground for disqualification, or exemption, or challenge for cause.
example, the legislation in Manitoba,
Northwest Territories
provides that a person who possesses a physical or mental infirmity
incompatible with the discharge of jury duties is disqualified
serving as a juror. Courts have construed this statutory language as an
absolute disqualification.
5.4 In the 1990’s three provinces – Alberta, British
Columbia and New Brunswick – amended their laws to allow people
with physical disabilities to render jury service under certain
circumstances. The amendments also require the provision of assistance
to enable such individuals to render adequate jury service. More
specifically, these Provinces’ statutory provisions disqualifying
or exempting a person with physical infirmity do not apply to a person
who wishes to serve as a juror and who:
if aided would be able to see or hear adequately and attend court in adequate comfort, and
will receive the assistance of a person or device that the
presiding judge considers adequate to enable the person to discharge
duties of a juror.
5.5 The legislation in British Columbia and New Brunswick provides
further that a person giving assistance may attend in all the
proceedings including the jury deliberations but must not comment on
the proceedings and can take part in the proceedings only by
the juror as the court directs.
Such provision overcomes the legal impediment to the presence of a
non-juror (for example, a sign language interpreter) in the jury
deliberation room.
Federal law
5.6 The reforms in some of the Provinces have been reflected at the Federal level. The
Criminal Code
was amended in 1997 giving courts the authority to permit a juror with
a physical disability to have technical, personal, interpretative
other support services.
Moreover, it provides that a
person with a physical disability may be challenged only if he or she
is physically unable to perform
properly the duties of a juror even
with the aid of technical, personal, interpretative or other support
The amendments were made on recommendation by the Federal Task Force on Disability Issues
and the Federal Justice Department,
which was of the view that people with disabilities have rights to
participate in the criminal justice system and that their automatic
disqualification from sitting as jurors diminishes those rights.
5.7 Section 9B of the
provides that where it appears to the appropriate officer that on
account of physical disability there is doubt as to the capacity
person to act effectively as a juror, the person may be brought before
the judge who must determine whether or not the person
should act as a
This section, introduced in 1994,
established a presumption that people with disabilities can serve as jurors.
“The judge must affirm the summons unless he or she is of the
opinion that the person will not, on account of his or her disability,
be capable of acting effectively as a juror, in which case he must
discharge the summons.”
5.8 However, courts have used this section to discharge jury summonses received by deaf individuals.
In one of these cases, the court identified duties in the court and in
retirement as the two aspects that present obstacles to jury
deaf people. A deaf person must rely on an interpreter during the
hearing and in the process may lose some of the meanings
of the oral
testimony. Consequently, he or she will be ineffective in assessing the
credibility of witnesses. The more serious problem
– which the
court described as “insoluble” unless overturned by
legislation – is that the presence of an
interpreter in the
deliberation room would violate the established rule prohibiting a
person who is not a juror from retiring with
5.9 Following the widely publicised case involving the exclusion
from jury service of the chief executive officer of the British Deaf
Association,
Prime Minister Tony Blair indicated in
Parliament that the law could be changed to make it easier for deaf
people to perform jury
service, stating: “Jury service is a great
public service and we should do all we can to encourage people to
participate in
The Home Office is preparing a consultation paper on this matter.
5.10 Section 8(j) of the
excluded from jury service persons “incapable of serving because
of blindness, deafness, or any other permanent physical
disability”. This provision was repealed by the
Juries Amendment Act
(NZ). The intention was to encourage people from all walks of life to take part in jury duty.
However, while persons with physical disabilities are no longer automatically disqualified, the
contains a number of provisions under which such persons may be
excluded or exempted from jury service at various stages of the
proceedings.
For example, before the jury is sworn, the judge, on his
or her own motion, or on application by the registrar, may discharge
summons of a person if the judge is satisfied that, because of
physical disability, the person is not capable of acting effectively
The New Zealand Law Commission, in its report on juries in criminal trials, expressed this view:
The ability of physically disabled people to serve on juries has been
adequately addressed by the Juries Amendment Act 2000. No further
amendment is required.
It agreed with the Act’s focus on ability to serve rather than on categories of disability.
Qualification/Disqualification
5.11 Juror qualification requirements are set by statute or
court rules both at State and Federal levels. Under Federal law, a
is not qualified to serve on a jury if he or she is incapable by
reason of mental or physical infirmity to render satisfactory jury
5.12 The statutes in some States used to contain provisions that
disqualified outright persons whose senses of hearing or sight are
substantially impaired.
New York’s law required a juror to be in “possession of his natural faculties”,
which was construed as an automatic disqualification of a blind person.
Such disqualification provisions have all been repealed.
5.13 Reflecting the Federal law, many States currently have
uniform provisions that exclude people who are incompetent “by
of physical or mental ability to render satisfactory jury
Courts are divided on the construction of
these provisions. Earlier cases have construed them as an absolute
disqualification for
blind and deaf individuals. In other cases,
however, they have been interpreted as giving courts the discretion to
assess the suitability
for jury service of a person with a disability
depending on the particular circumstances of each case.
5.14 There are an increasing number of States that have amended
their laws to prohibit the disqualification of a person from jury
service “solely on the basis of loss of hearing or sight in any
The legislation of West Virginia contains
such prohibition but also provides a test as to when people with
disabilities may be disqualified:
A person who is physically disabled and can render
competent [jury] service with reasonable accommodation shall not be
to act as juror or be dismissed from a jury panel on the
basis of disability alone:
That the circuit judge shall, upon motion by either party or upon his
or her own motion, disqualify a disabled juror if the circuit
finds that the nature of potential evidence in the case including, but
not limited to, the type or volume of exhibits or the
juror’s ability to evaluate a witness or witnesses, unduly
inhibits the disabled juror’s ability to evaluate
the potential
5.15 It should also be noted that
many States require jurors to have the ability to read, speak and/or
understand the English language.
This requirement may be used to disqualify deaf persons who use sign language, such as American Sign Language.
The American Bar Association recommended the deletion of words that
require jurors to hear, write, read or understand English. It
a broader phrase allowing jury service by persons able to communicate
effectively in English.
It is not clear how such an
approach would solve the problem of whether or not Auslan is an
acceptable language for purposes of the
Jury Act 1977
Challenges for Cause
5.16 Many States have statutory provisions allowing parties to
challenge a person from sitting as a juror on grounds of physical
that satisfies the court that the challenged person is
incapable of performing jury duties in the particular action.
However, a number of States now provide that hearing or visual disability alone is not a ground for challenge.
Exemptions and Excuses
5.17 A few States provide legal exemption from jury service to persons with physical disabilities.
An exemption, which is granted automatically to persons belonging to an
identified group, differs from an excuse, which may be given
individual basis by the court. There are States that provide excuses,
instead of exemptions, based on physical disability.
5.18 The American Bar Association recommends the elimination of
all automatic exemptions, on the basis that group exemptions reduce
representativeness of the jury panel. It favours excuses based either
on continuing hardship or if the person’s ability
to receive and
evaluate information is so impaired that he or she is unable to perform
their duties as jurors. This proposed test
is phrased in functional
terms instead of relying on diagnostic labels, since it is the effect
of the disability rather than its
cause that is significant. It would
encourage tailored assessments based on competence rather than on broad
medical terms and stereotypes.
As has been seen, the
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) defines eligility in terms of competence.
Reasonable Accommodation
5.19 In July 1990, the
Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) became effective as the most comprehensive federal civil rights law for people with disabilities in the United States.
It protects qualified individuals with disabilities from discrimination
on the basis of disability. It requires that individuals
disabilities be given equal opportunity in access to State services,
including State court programs and services.
government agencies including courts to modify their policies,
practices and procedures to avoid discrimination, unless
modification would fundamentally alter the nature of its services,
programs or activities.
5.20 The ADA, which has been invoked by people with disabilities
in cases where they have been disqualified from jury service, has
influenced judges to give greater access to the jury process by
providing reasonable accommodations to individuals with disabilities,
while ensuring a fair trial.
5.21 Some States have included juror accommodation provisions in
their statutes or rules. They require the provision of assistance
jurors with disabilities, which may consist of human services (such as
interpreters for deaf people or readers for the visually
impaired) and
technology (for example assistive listening device, videotext display,
open captioning equipment and real-time computer
transcription).
5.22 The ABA’s
Disability (Jury) Accommodation Guide for State Courts
contains a comprehensive list of suggested accommodations that go
beyond what is currently in State legislation, for example eliminating
the physical barriers at the courthouse, such as modifying the jury box
and the deliberation room to make them more accessible to
people with
disabilities.
Interpreters
5.23 One issue relating to jury service by deaf people is that
the presence of a sign language interpreter in the deliberation room
violates the rule excluding persons other than the jurors in that room.
Eckstein v Kirby
the US District Court ruled
that it did, noting that secrecy must be preserved to guarantee a
vigorous and candid discussion of the
issues by the jurors. However,
some courts have held that the rule excluding persons other than jurors
from the jury room during
deliberations does not apply to sign language
interpreters based on a number of reasons.
rule is said to apply in reality only to officers of the court such as
bailiffs, judges or counsel, who because of their
(perceived or actual)
capacity to influence the jurors, might inhibit free discussion. This
danger would not arise in the case of
an interpreter who performs a
purely mechanical function, much like a hearing aid, microphone or
of inappropriate behaviour on the part
of an interpreter, the jurors are unlikely to perceive him or her as
having any influence
on or capacity to pressure any of them. Also, the
judge may give instructions to both the interpreter and the jury that
participation
by the former is improper. Secondly, jury secrecy would
not be endangered since there are legal and ethical rules preventing
interpreters
from revealing confidences made during jury deliberations.
Finally, practical experience has shown that none of the anticipated
have arisen. In those jurisdictions where deaf people have
been sworn, interpreters accompanied the jurors in the jury room, and
there has never been a breach of confidentiality, nor problems with the
interpreter breaching the oath of non-involvement, nor any
problem with
respect to the panel not being able effectively to deliberate because
of the presence of the interpreter.
5.24 A number of States have adopted legislation or court
rules allowing an interpreter to accompany a deaf juror during
deliberations.
Some contain safeguards such as specifying
that the interpreter will only act to communicate for and to the juror
with the disability,
or should refrain from personal interjection and uphold the secrecy of the proceeding.
5.25 Law reform in a number of overseas jurisdictions has
resulted in the adoption of laws prohibiting the disqualification,
or challenge from jury service of blind and deaf people (and
others with physical disabilities) based on their disability alone.
They give courts discretion to scrutinise the suitability of people
with disabilities for jury service. However, rather than focusing
solely or mainly on a person’s disability, they emphasise two
the person’s ability to perform adequate jury service; and
whether aid or assistance to such a person would enable him or
her to render jury service effectively and attend court in adequate
5.26 The first obliges courts to make determinations on a case-by-case
basis and enables them to take into account such factors as:
of the person’s disability, the nature of the potential evidence
in the case and the person’s ability to receive
evidence, including the credibility of witnesses (if any).
5.27 The second element underscores another aspect of the reforms.
In addition to removing any legal impediment to jury service by
and deaf people, courts and other institutions involved in the justice
system are being required to modify their policies,
practices and
procedures to avoid discrimination of people with disabilities, unless
the modification would fundamentally alter the
nature of their
services, programs or activities. In particular, the reforms mandate
the provision of support services (also known
as reasonable
accommodations) required by individuals with disabilities to
participate in the jury process.
5.28 Furthermore, there is an emerging trend to adopt laws
allowing a person giving assistance to a person with a disability (for
example, an interpreter) to attend in all the proceedings including the
jury deliberations. The laws are intended to overcome the
long-standing
prohibition on a non-juror from being present at the jury
deliberations.
5.29 Finally, there has been a proposal for the deletion of
words in US statutes that require jurors to hear, write, read or
English. These provisions may be used to disqualify deaf
people who use a sign language and require sign language interpreters.
proposed alternative is to require an ability to communicate
effectively in English. It is argued that such broader language would
allow people who use sign language, such as American Sign Language, to
serve as jurors.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. For a discussion on the interplay between federal and provincial law on juries, see Canada, Department of Justice,
Amendments to the Criminal Code and the Canada
Evidence Act
With Respect to Persons With Disability
(Consultation Paper, 1993) at 12.
(Manitoba), CCSM 1987, c J30, s 3(o).
. Jury Act (Northwest Territories), RSNWT 1988, c J-2, s 5(b).
. Jury Act (Nunavut), RSNWT 1988, c J-2, s 5(b).
. Juries Act (Ontario), RSO 1990, c J.3, s 4(A).
(Yukon), RSY 1986, c 97,
[1925] SCR 525
(deaf person).
(Alberta), RSA 2000, c J-3,
(British Columbia), RSBC 1996, c 242,
; Jury Act (New Brunswick),
RSNB 1973, c J-3.1, s 5.1(1).
(Alberta), RSA 2000, c J-3,
; Jury Act (New Brunswick), RSNB 1973,
c J-3.1, s 5.1(2).
Criminal Code
(Can) s 626(2).
Criminal Code
(Can) s 638(e).
. Canada, Federal Task Force on Disability Issues,
Equal Citizenship for Canadians with Disabilities
(1996), Recommendation 21.
. Canada, Department of Justice,
Amendments to the Criminal Code and the Canada
Evidence Act
With Respect to Persons With Disability
(Consultation paper, 1993) at 12-13.
. In addition, a judge has, at common law, a residual
discretion to discharge a particular juror who ought not to be serving
jury. This is part of the judge’s duty to ensure that
there is a fair trial. It is based on the duty of a judge to prevent
scandal and the perversion of justice. A judge must, for example,
prevent a juryman from serving who is completely deaf or blind
or otherwise incompetent to give a verdict:
Mansell v The Queen
[1857] EngR 701
; (1857) 8 El & Bl 54;
R v Ford (Royston)
[1989] QB 868.
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 41.
. See R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales: Report
(The Chancellor’s Department, London, 2001)
at para 42.
(Eng) s 9B(2).
. See “Judge ban deaf juror from case”
(21 January 1994); R Verkaik, “Ban on severely deaf jurors is upheld by court”
The Independent
(10 November 1999) at 5;
[1995] 1 WLR 1327.
In re Osman
[1995] 1 WLR 1327.
. R Verkaik, “Ban on Severely Deaf Jurors is Upheld by Court”
The Independent
(10 November 1999) at 5.
. United Kingdom,
Hansard Debates
House of Commons, 10 November 1999 at column 1123.
. See para 3.24.
. New Zealand,
Hansard Debates
, 23 February 2000 at 749.
Juries Act 1981
(NZ) s 16AA. See also the following provisions:
Juries Act 1981
(NZ) s 25(1)(b) (Each party to the proceedings
is entitled to challenge for cause a potential juror on the ground that
is not capable of acting effectively as a juror in the
proceedings because of physical disability).
Juries Act 1981
(NZ) s 15(1)(aa) (If the registrar is
satisfied, on written application made to him by or on behalf of any
person summoned to attend
as a juror on any occasion, that, because of
that person’s physical disability attendance on that occasion
would cause or result
in undue hardship or serious inconvenience to
that person, or to any other person, or to the general public, the
registrar may excuse
that person from attending on that occasion).
Juries Act 1981
(NZ) s 22(1)(b) (The judge may discharge
a juror if, at any time after the jury is constituted but before the
case is opened or the
accused is given in charge, it is brought to the
attention of the judge that the juror is not capable of acting
effectively as a
juror in the proceedings because of physical
disability).
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
69, 2001) at para 190-194. It did not express any view on the issues
associated with the use of interpreters nor on the demeanour
discussed in Chapter 3 of this Discussion Paper.
28 USC § 1865(b)(4).
. See M Golbas, “Due Process: The Deaf and Blind as Jurors”
New England Law Review
, note 3 citing the legislation then current in Arkansas, Iowa, North Carolina and Tennessee.
. New York Judiciary Law § 506(3).
This section
has been amended and now provides that in order to qualify as a juror a
person must not have a mental or physical condition,
or combination
thereof, which causes the person to be incapable of performing in a
reasonable manner the duties of a juror.
Lewinson v Crews
236 NE 2d 853
. Alabama Code § 12-16-60; Arkansas Code § 16-31-102;
Colorado Revised Statutes § 13-71-105; General Statutes of
Connecticut
§ 51-217; Delaware Code § 4509; Hawaii Revised
Statutes § 612-4; Maryland Code § 8-207; General Laws of
Massachusetts,
Chapter 234A § 4; Nebraska Revised Statutes §
25-1601; North Carolina General Statutes § 15A-1212; Vermont
Annotated § 962. See also Idaho Code § 2-209;
Indiana Code § 33-4-5.5-11; Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure
401; Michigan Compiled Laws § 600.1307a; Minnesota Rules
of Practice for District Courts, Rule 808; Missouri Revised Statutes
§ 494.425(9); Nevada Revised Statutes § 6.030; New Hampshire
Revised Statutes § 500-A:6; New Jersey Statutes §
New Mexico Statutes § 38-5-1; New York Judiciary Law § 506;
North Dakota Century Code § 27-09.1-04; Rhode
Island General Laws
§ 9-9-1.1; South Carolina Code § 14-7-810; West Virginia Code
. For a comprehensive survey of cases involving jurors with disabilities, see American Bar Association,
Into the Jury Box: A Disability Accommodation Guide for State Courts
. See for example Alaska Statutes § 09.20.010; Arkansas
Code § 16-31-102; California Code of Civil Procedure § 203;
General Statutes of Connecticut § 51-217; Florida Statutes §
913.03(2); Oregon Revised Statutes § 10.030.
. West Virginia Code § 52-1-8(e).
. Alabama Code § 12-16-59; Alaska Statutes §
09.20.010; Arkansas Code § 16-31-102; California Penal Code §
Colorado Revised Statutes § 13-71-105; Conneticut General
Statutes § 51-217; Delaware Code § 4509; Georgia Code §
15-12-163; Hawaii Revised Statutes § 612-4; Idaho Code §
2-209; Indiana Code § 33-4-5.5-11; Iowa Code § 607A.4;
Kentucky Revised Statutes § 29A.080; Louisiana Code of Criminal
Procedure Article 401; Maryland Code § 8-207; General Laws
Massachusetts, Chapter 234A § 4; Michigan Compiled Laws §
600.1307a; Minnesota Rules of Practice for District Courts,
Missouri Revised Statutes § 494.425(5); Nebraska Revised Statutes
§ 25-1601; Nevada Revised Statutes § 6.010;
New Hampshire
Revised Statutes § 500-A:6; New Jersey Statutes § 2B:20-1;
New York Judiciary Law § 510; North Carolina
General Statutes
§ 9-3; North Dakota Century Code § 27-09.1-08; Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes § 4502; South Carolina
Code § 14-7-810;
South Dakota Codified Laws § 16-13-10; Utah Code § 78-46-7;
Vermont Statutes Annotated § 962;
Washington Revised Code §
2.36.070; West Virginia Code § 52-1-8; Wisconsin Statutes §
756.02; Wyoming Statutes §
People v Guzman
478 NYS 455
(1984), the court, in
obiter dicta
stated that a deaf juror who only knows American Sign Language and does
not know English does not meet the New York statutory requirements
jury service that a person understand and communicate in English.
See also para 3.29-3.35.
. American Bar Association,
Into the Jury Box: A Disability Accommodation Guide for State Courts
(1994) at 20.
. This problem is discussed in para 3.29-3.35, 6.6, 6.7.
. Arkansas Code § 16-33-304; California Code of Civil
Procedure § 228(b); Colorado Revised Statutes § 13-71-105;
Supreme Court Rules, rule 434; Iowa Court Rules of Civil
Procedure, Rule 287(f); Iowa Court Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule
North Carolina General Statutes § 15A-1212; Oregon Revised
Civil Procedure § 57D(1)(b); Utah Rules of Criminal Procedure,
rule 18(e); Washington Revised Code § 4.44.170.
. Arkansas Code § 16-31-102; Florida Statutes §
913.03(2); New York Judiciary Law § 510; Oregon Revised Statutes
. Georgia Code § 15-12-1; Michigan Compiled Laws §
600.1307a; Tennessee Code § 22-1-103(7); Texas Government Code
. Alaska Statutes § 09.20.030; California Rules of
Court Rule 860(d)(5); Maine Revised Statutes § 1213(2); Nebraska
Statutes § 25-1601; Nevada Revised Statutes § 6.030;
New Mexico Statutes § 38-5-11B(1); New York Standards and
Administrative
Policies (Part 28 Uniform Rules for the Jury System)
§ 128.6-b(1); Rhode Island General Laws § 9-10-9; Utah Code
78-45-15; Vermont Statutes Annotated § 962.
. American Bar Association,
Into the Jury Box: A Disability Accommodation Guide for State Courts
(1994) at 10.
42 USC § 12102-12213.
42 USC § 12132.
. 28 Code of Federal Regulations § 35.130(b)(7).
. See for example
People v Caldwell
603 NYS 2d 713
. See for example, Kansas Statute § 75-4355a --- 75-4355d; Missouri Revised Statutes § 476.750, 476.753.
. American Bar Association,
Into the Jury Box: A Disability Accommodation Guide for State Courts
(1994) at 21-37.
452 F Supp 1235
People v Guzman
478 NYS 455
(1984) at 465-467;
DeLong v Brumbaugh
703 F Supp 399
United States v Dempsey
830 F2d 1084
(1987). See also para 3.25-3.29.
. Colorado Revised Statutes § 13-71-137;
Connecticut Superior Court Rules § 16-1;
Florida Statutes § 90.6063; 705 Illinois Compiled Statutes § 315/1(a); West Virginia Code § 52-1-8(e)(1).
. West Virginia Code § 52-1-8(e)(2).
. Florida Statutes § 905.17(3).
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
History of this reference (Digest)
Eligibility
Reasonable adjustments
6.1 It is a fundamental principle of Australian mores that no group of
its citizens should be excluded from the duties or rights
attaching to
citizenship except for compelling and acceptable reasons. Exclusion of
any citizen from jury service should occur only
in circumstances where
that person is not capable of fulfilling the task. This consideration
militates against the current practice
that maintains a blanket
exclusion on blind or deaf people serving on juries. The apparently
positive experience of some United States
blind or deaf jurors supports this view — even allowing for the
differing legal, social and economic
conditions that exist in the
United States, especially by reason of explicit constitutional norms
and the pervasive use of juries
in criminal and civil proceedings. On
the other hand, there is much to commend the view that jurors need to
have available all their
faculties of communication for the purpose of
evaluating evidence which is often a difficult task. It is reasonable
to argue that,
although blind or deaf persons may not, in the
particular case, have greater difficulty in doing this than other
jurors, the risk
that the quality of justice might be adversely
affected justifies retention of the present exclusion. In the case of
deaf persons,
the requirement of a signer, not only in court but also
in the jury room, supports this conclusion.
If reasonable accommodation can be made, should blind or deaf jurors who are able to discharge the duties of a juror
in the circumstances of the particular case be liable for jury service?
ELIGIBILITY
6.2 If blind or deaf jurors (as defined in paras 1.15 and 1.16) are
not automatically excluded from jury service, the question arises
whether item 12 of Schedule 2 of the
Jury Act 1977
would require qualification and, if so, how. A further question is
whether there is also a need for the insertion into Schedule 3
who may claim exemption as of right) of a new item giving people with
disabilities the option to be excused from jury duty,
notwithstanding
the fact that they might otherwise be eligible.
If blind or deaf people are required to serve on juries, how should Schedule 2 item 12 of the
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) be amended?
If blind or deaf people are required to serve on juries, should they
have the option to be excused from jury duty on account of their
blindness or deafness?
6.3 At present determining
the eligibility of prospective jurors who are blind or deaf is at the
discretion of the Sheriff. The exercise
of that discretion does not,
and cannot, take account of factors weighing on the suitability of
individual blind or deaf persons
to serve as jurors, for example
the type of evidence to be adduced at trial
It seems preferable, therefore, to leave the question of whether blind
or deaf persons are likely to be able to discharge the duties
the determination of the trial judge. It is at this point that counsel
for either party would have the opportunity to state arguments
objecting to the potential inclusion of a juror who is believed to lack
the ability to accomplish the task. Such applications are
unlikely to
arise frequently, and should not cause any appreciable delay in either
individual proceedings or to the system as a whole.
Should the trial judge decide whether or not a blind or deaf person is capable of discharging the duties of a juror
in the circumstances of the particular case?
Challenging jurors
6.3 In chapter 3 we discussed the nature of the peremptory
challenge, and the obstacle it poses to reform in this area. The
consideration
of any general abolition of peremptory challenges (which
has occurred in the United Kingdom) is beyond the scope of the
Commission’s
reference. Nor, because of the discrimination that
such a recommendation would itself create, would the Commission wish to
that peremptory challenges should not be permissible against
blind or deaf persons but freely allowable against anyone else. This
would allow full effect to be given to all prejudices (for example,
racial prejudices) except those associated with blindness or
Ought the availability of peremptory challenges to be the subject of further review?
ADJUSTMENTS
6.5 For blind or deaf people to serve as jurors the range of
services and assistive technologies currently available, and their cost
implications, would need to be identified. Judicial officers and staff
of the courts and the Sheriff’s Office would require
information
respond to inquiries from the public and give advice
services available.
What technologies would blind or deaf people need effectively to discharge their duties as jurors?
What are the cost implications of the provision of the technologies identified in Question 6?
Interpreters
6.6 At paragraphs 3.29-3.35 the problem of using interpreters of a
non-English language (Auslan) were discussed. To allow their use
appears to contravene the practice of conveying evidence in English,
and that may create a precedent for arguing in favour of using
translators of non-English
The Commission welcomes comment on whether the use of Auslan constitutes a special case.
6.7 If the use of Auslan interpreters were to be permitted, the
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) would require amendment to allow for this and to stipulate
conditions, such as the necessary qualifications and the requirement
swear an oath. This would be particularly relevant to the role of the
jury in retirement.
Ought Auslan interpreters to be provided for deaf jurors and, if so, under what conditions?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. “A person who is unable, because of sickness, infirmity or disability, to discharge the duties of a juror”.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
Appendix A: Preliminary submissions
History of this reference (Digest)
Blanch, The Hon Justice R O, Chief Judge, District Court of New South Wales, 15 May 2002
Cowdery, N R , Q C, Director of Public Prosecutions, 5 June 2002
Deaf Society of NSW and NSW Association of the Deaf, 31 March 2003
Far West Law Society, 19 June 2002
Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales, 27 May 2002
McCallum, Professor R C, Dean, Faculty of Law, University of Sydney, 9 July 2002
Multicultural Disability Advocacy Association of New South Wales, 13 May 2002
New South Wales Police Service, Court and Legal Services, 27 May 2002
Northern Rivers Community Legal Centre, 7 August 2002
People With Disabilities (NSW) Inc, 31 May 2002
Puplick, C, President, Anti-Discrimination Board of New South Wales, 3 May 2002
Scott, M, 2 July 2002
Self Help for Hard of Hearing People Australia Inc, 7 May 2002
University of Technology Sydney, Equity and Diversity Unit, 8 July 2002
Wood, The Hon Justice James, Chief Judge at Common Law, Supreme Court of New South Wales, 22 May 2002
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
Table of legislation
History of this reference (Digest)
COMMONWEALTH
Australian Citizenship Act 1948 ... 1.4
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
NEW SOUTH WALES
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
... 4.3, 4.6
... 4.4, 4.5
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
District Court Act 1973
Jury (Amendment) Act 1947
s 2(3)(a) ... 2.10
Jury (Amendment) Act 1987
Sch 1 item 5 ... 3.44
Jury Act 1912
s 3 ... 2.10
Jury Act 1977
s 3 ... 2.10
... 1.4, 2.2
... 1.7, 2.2, 2.6
... 2.3, 2.5, 4.1
... 2.4, 3.38
... 3.2, 3.4
Sch 1 ... 2.2
Sch 2 ... 2.2
Sch 2 item 11 ... 2.2, 4.2
Sch 2 item 12 ... 1.7, 2.2, 2.6, 6.2
Parliamentary Electorates and Elections Act 1912
s 20 ... 1.4
s 20(1) ... 2.2
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) (No 3) Act 1988
Sch 12 item 3 ... 3.44
Supreme Court Act 1970
Jury Act 1995
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 2003
Sch 2 ... 2.6
Jury Act 1899
s 7 ... 2.6
Juries Act 2000
Sch 2 ... 2.6
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Juries Act 1957
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Juries Act 1967
s 10 ... 2.6
NORTHERN TERRITORY
Juries Act 1962
s 10 ... 2.6
s 11 ... 2.6
Sch 7 ... 2.6
Criminal Code
s 626(2) ... 5.6
s 638(e) ... 5.6
Jury Act, RSA 2000, c J-3
s 6(1) ... 5.4, 5.5
British Columbia
Jury Act, RSBC 1996, c 242
s 5 ... 5.4
Jury Act, CCSM 1987, c J30
s 3(o) ... 5.3
New Brunswick
Jury Act, RSNB 1973, c J-3.1
s 5.1(1) ... 5.4
s 5.1(2) ... 5.5
Northwest Territories
Jury Act, RSNWT 1988, c J-2
s 5(b) ... 5.3
Jury Act, RSNWT 1988, c J-2
s 5(b) ... 5.3
Juries Act, RSO 1990, c J.3
s 4(A) ... 5.3
Jury Act, RSY 1986, c 97
s 5(b) ... 5.3
NEW ZEALAND
Juries Act 1981
s 8(j) ... 5.10
s 15(1)(aa) ... 5.10
s 16AA ... 5.10
s 22(1)(b) ... 5.10
s 25(1)(b) ... 5.10
UNITED KINGDOM
Criminal Justice Act 1988
s 118(1) ... 3.45
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
s 41 ... 5.7
Juries Act 1974
s 9B ... 2.6, 5.7
s 9B(2) ... 5.7
UNITED STATES
28 Code of Federal Regulations
§ 35.130(b)(7) ... 5.19
§ 1865(b)(4)
§ 12102 ... 5.19
§ 12132 ... 5.19
Alabama Code
§ 12-16-59 ... 5.15
§ 12-16-60 ... 5.13
Alaska Statutes
§ 09.20.010 ... 5.14, 5.15
§ 09.20.030 ... 5.17
Arkansas Code
§ 16-31-102 ... 5.13, 5.14, 5.15, 5.16
§ 16-33-304 ... 5.16
California Code of Civil Procedure
§ 203 ... 5.14
§ 228(b) ... 5.16
California Penal Code
§ 893 ... 5.15
California Rules of Court
Rule 860(d)(5) ... 5.17
Colorado Revised Statutes
§ 13-71-105 ... 5.13, 5.15, 5.16
§ 13-71-137 ... 5.24
Connecticut
General Statutes of Connecticut
§ 51-217 ... 5.13, 5.14, 5.15
Connecticut Superior Court Rules
§ 16-1 ... 5.24
Delaware Code
§ 4509 ... 5.13, 5.15
Florida Statutes
§ 90.6063 ... 5.24
§ 905.17(3) ... 5.24
§ 913.03(2) ... 5.14, 5.16
Georgia Code
§ 15-12-1 ... 5.17
§ 15-12-163 ... 5.15
Hawaii Revised Statutes
§ 612-4 ... 5.13, 5.15
§ 2-209 ... 5.13, 5.15
705 Illinois Compiled Statutes
§ 315/1(a) ... 3.25, 5.24
Illinois Supreme Court Rules
Rule 434 ... 5.16
Indiana Code
§ 33-4-5.5-11 ... 5.13, 5.15
§ 607A.4 ... 5.15
Iowa Court Rules of Civil Procedure
Rule 287(f) ... 5.16
Iowa Court Rules of Criminal Procedure
Rule 17-5 ... 5.16
Kansas Statute
§ 75-4355a - 75-4355d ... 5.21
Kentucky Revised Statutes
§ 29A.080 ... 5.15
Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure
Article 401 ... 5.13, 5.15
Maine Revised Statutes
§ 1213(2) ... 5.17
Maryland Code
§ 8-207 ... 5.13, 5.15
Massachusetts
General Laws of Massachusetts
Chapter 234A § 4 ... 5.13, 5.15
Chapter 234A § 69 ... 3.25
Michigan Compiled Laws
§ 600.1307a ... 5.13, 5.15, 5.17
Minnesota Rules of Practice for District Courts
Rule 808 ... 5.13, 5.15
Missouri Revised Statutes
§ 476.750 ... 5.21
§ 476.753 ... 5.21
§ 494.425(5) ... 5.15
§ 494.425(9) ... 5.13
Nebraska Revised Statutes
§ 25-1601 ... 5.13, 5.15, 5.17
Nevada Revised Statutes
§ 6.010 ... 5.15
§ 6.030 ... 5.13, 5.17
New Hampshire
New Hampshire Revised Statutes
§ 500-A:6 ... 5.13, 5.15
New Jersey Statutes
§ 2B:20-1 ... 5.13, 5.15
New Mexico Statutes
§ 38-5-1 ... 5.13
§ 38-5-11B(1) ... 5.17
New York Judiciary Law
§ 506 ... 5.13
§ 506(3) ... 5.12
§ 510 ... 5.15, 5.16
New York Standards and Administrative Policies (Part 28 Uniform Rules for the Jury System)
§ 128.6-b(1) ... 5.17
North Carolina
North Carolina General Statutes
§ 9-3 ... 5.15
§ 15A-1212 ... 5.13, 5.16
North Dakota
North Dakota Century Code
§ 27-09.1-04 ... 5.13
§ 27-09.1-08 ... 5.15
Oregon Revised Civil Procedure
§ 57D(1)(b) ... 5.16
Oregon Revised Statutes
§ 10.030 ... 5.14, 5.16
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes
§ 4502 ... 5.15
Rhode Island
Rhode Island General Laws
§ 9-9-1.1 ... 5.13
§ 9-10-9 ... 5.17
South Carolina
South Carolina Code
§ 14-7-810 ... 5.13, 5.15
South Dakota
South Dakota Codified Laws
§ 16-13-10 ... 5.15
Tennessee Code
§ 22-1-103(7) ... 5.17
Texas Government Code
§ 62.109 ... 5.17
§ 78-45-15 ... 5.17
§ 78-46-7 ... 5.15
Utah Rules of Criminal Procedure
Rule 18(e) ... 5.16
4 Vermont Statutes Annotated
§ 962 ... 5.13, 5.15, 5.17
Washington Revised Code
§ 2.36.070 ... 5.15
§ 4.44.170 ... 5.16
West Virginia
West Virginia Code
§ 52-1-8 ... 5.13, 5.15
§ 52-1-8(e) ... 5.14
§ 52-1-8(e)(1) ... 5.24
§ 52-1-8(e)(2) ... 5.24
Wisconsin Statutes
§ 756.02 ... 5.15
Wyoming Statutes
§ 1-11-101 ... 5.15
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
Table of cases
History of this reference (Digest)
Arizona v Marcham
160 Ariz 52
(1988) ... 3.31
Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd v Luna
[1969] HCA 66
(1969) 123 CLR 305
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
Batson v Kentucky
[1986] USSC 89
(1986) ... 3.47-3.48, 3.49
“British Confidence”, The
[1951] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 447 ... 3.12
Britt v Nominal Defendant
(NSW, Court of Appeal, No 147/84, 3 July 1987, unreported) ... 3.15
Brown v The Queen
[1986] HCA 11
(1986) 160 CLR 171
... 2.1, 2.9, 2.10
Brownlee v The Queen
(2001) 207 CLR 278 ... 2.9, 2.12
[1963] USCA9 118
314 F 2d 718
(1963) ... 3.16
Chamberlain v The Queen [No 2]
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
Cheatle v The Queen
[1993] HCA 44
(1993) 177 CLR 541
... 2.9-2.11
Commonwealth v Susi
394 Mass 784
(1985) ... 3.7
Davies v The Queen
[1937] HCA 27
(1937) 57 CLR 170
DeLong v Brumbaugh
703 F Supp 399
(1989) ... 5.23
Devries v Australian National Railways Commission
(1993) 177 CLR 472 ... 3.12, 3.17
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
... 1.11, 3.56
Donelson v Fritz
70 P 3d 539 (2002) ... 3.51
Druett v New South Wales
(HR&EOC, No H99/6, Street SC, 17 April 2000, unreported) ... 4.7
Eckstein v Kirby
452 F Supp 1235
(1978) ... 5.23
Edmonson v Leesville Concrete Co Inc
[1991] USSC 91
(1991) ... 3.51
Ford v Blurton
(1922) 38 TLR 801
Galloway v Superior Court of the District of Columbia
816 F Supp 12
(1993) ... 3.53, 4.17, 4.19
Georgia v McCollum
[1992] USSC 87
(1992) ... 3.51, 4.11
Goby v Wetherill
[1915] 2 KB 674 ... 3.23
Hernandez v New York
[1991] USSC 82
(1991) ... 3.30
Huddart, Parker & Co Pty Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
Jago v District Court of New South Wales
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
JEB v Alabama ex rel TB
[1994] USSC 6
(1994) ... 3.51, 3.54
John J Williams v Auto Brokers
6 Va App 570
(1988) ... 3.16
Johns v The Queen
[1979] HCA 33
(1979) 141 CLR 409
... 3.40, 3.41
Jones v Jones
[1961] NSWR 278
Jones v New York City Transit Authority
126 Misc 2d 585
(1984) ... 2.13, 3.7, 4.20
Katsuno v The Queen
[1999] HCA 50
(1999) 199 CLR 40
Kingswell v The Queen
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264
Lek v Matthews
(1926) 25 Ll L Rep 525 ... 3.15
Lewinson v Crews
236 NE 2d 853
(1968) ... 5.12
Mansell v The Queen
[1857] EngR 701
; (1857) 8 El & Bl 54;
... 1.11, 5.7
Mashiati v Australian Poultry Ltd
(1995) 11 NSWCCR 345
Miller v Virginia Employment Commission
31 Va Cir 151 (1993) ... 3.16
Murphy v The Queen
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94
Ng v The Queen
[2003] HCA 20
(2003) 77 ALJR 967
NY v Falkenstein
288 AD 2d 922
(2001) ... 3.51
Onassis v Vergottis
[1968] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 294 ... 3.16
Osman, In re
[1995] 1 WLR 1327 ... 2.6, 3.23, 5.8
People v Caldwell
603 NYS 2d 713
(1993) ... 3.8, 4.17, 5.20
People v Green
561 NYS 2d 130
(1990) ... 3.31, 3.51, 3.54
People v Guzman
125 Misc 2d 457
(1984) ... 3.31, 4.14
People v Guzman
478 NYS 455
(1984) ... 5.15, 5.23
People v Guzman
(1990) ... 2.7, 3.9, 3.10, 3.21, 3.27, 3.31, 3.53
People v Rodriguez
145 Misc 2d 105
(1989) ... 3.31
Powers v Ohio
[1991] USSC 52
(1991) ... 1.6
Quercia v United States
[1933] USSC 117
(1933) ... 3.15
[1995] 1 SCR 761 ... 2.12
[1925] SCR 525
(1883) 9 VLR 191 ... 1.11
R v Ford (Royston)
[1989] QB 868
[1972] VicRp 47
[1972] VR 423
R v Guildford Crown Court, Ex parte Siderfin
[1990] 2 QB 683 ... 2.6
[1992] HCA 56
(1992) 175 CLR 495
[1967] Crim L R 540
(2002) 5 VR 257 ... 2.12
R v O’Connor
[2004] UKHL 2
R v Rawcliffe
[1977] 1 NSWLR 219
[1993] 2 VR 367 ... 1.11
[1933] 2 KB 489 ... 2.20
Rosenberg v Percival
[2001] HCA 18
(2001) 205 CLR 434
Société D’Avances Commerciales v Merchants’ Marine Insurance Co
(1924) 20 Ll L Rep 140 ... 3.15
Teper v The Queen
[1952] AC 480
US v Dempsey
830 F 2d 1084
(1987) ... 3.25, 3.26, 5.23
US v Harris
[1999] USCA7 636
197 F 3d 870
(1999) ... 3.51
Ward v James
[1966] 1 QB 273 ... 3.9
Watt v Thomas
[1947] AC 484
Whitehorn v The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
(1983) 152 CLR 657
Yuill v Yuill
[1945] 1 All ER 183
... 3.12, 3.16
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 46 (2004) - Blind or deaf jurors
Bibliography
History of this reference (Digest)
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION,
Into the Jury Box: A Disability Accommodation Guide for State Courts
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales: Report
(The Chancellor’s Department, London, 2001)
AUSTRALIA, Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Disability, Ageing and Carers Australia, 1993: Hearing Impairment
(ABS, Canberra, 1993)
AUSTRALIA, Royal Commission of Inquiry into Chamberlain Convictions,
Report of the Commissioner the Hon Mr Justice T R Morling
(Government Printer, Darwin, 1987)
AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP COUNCIL,
Australian Citizenship for a New Century
(The Council, Canberra, 2000)
BLACKSTONE, W,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
(9th ed, Strahan, Cadell and Prince, London, 1783)
BLUMENTHAL, J A, “A Wipe of the Hands, a Lick of the Lips:
the Validity of Demeanor Evidence in Assessing Witness
Credibility”
Nebraska Law Review
CANADA, Department of Justice,
Amendments to the Criminal Code and the Canada
Evidence Act
With Respect to Persons With Disability
(Consultation Paper, 1993)
CANADA, Federal Task Force on Disability Issues,
Equal Citizenship for Canadians with Disabilities
CORNISH, W R,
(Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1970)
CREHAN, M J, “Seating the Blind Juror”
ELLMAN, F, “Translator Aids Deaf Juror in Negligence Trial”
New York Law Journal
(27 August 1992)
ENGLAND AND WALES, Fraud Trials Committee,
(“Roskill Report”) (HMSO, London, 1986)
ENRIGHT, S, “The Deaf Juror and the Thirteenth Man”
New Law Journal
FINDLAY, M,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, Melbourne, 1994)
GOLBAS, M, “Due Process: The Deaf and Blind as Jurors”
New England Law Review
JOHNSTON, T, (ed),
Signs of Australia: a New Dictionary of Auslan
(North Rocks Press, Sydney, 1996)
KAISER, D N, “Juries, Blindness, and the Juror Function” (1984) 60
Chicago Kent Law Review
KITZES, O, (Letter to the Editor)
New York Law Journal
(11 February 1992)
LO BIANCO, J,
National Policy on Languages
(AGPS, Canberra, 1987)
LYNCH, M A, “The Application of Equal Protection to
Prospective Jurors With Disabilities: Will Batson Cover
Disability-Based
Albany Law Review
MACK, K, “Challenging Assumptions About Credibility”
Law Society Journal
McCRIMMON, L.A., “Challenging A Potential Juror For Cause: Resuscitation Or Requiem?” (2000) 23
University of New South Wales Law Journal
MEYER, D J, “A New Peremptory Inclusion to Increase
Representativeness and Impartiality in Jury Selection”
Case Western Reserve Law Review
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in Sexual Offence Trials
(Report 101, 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Review of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) (Report 92, 1999)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Discussion Paper 12, 1985)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Report 48, 1986)
NEW ZEALAND, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001)
NEW ZEALAND, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
A Discussion Paper
(PP No 32, 1998)
NEW ZEALAND, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
Discussion Paper
(PP No 37, 1999) vol 1
NEW ZEALAND, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
Summary of the Research Findings
(PP No 37, 1999) vol 2
OSTRAU, S S, “Administrative Judge Hails Efforts of Courts”
New York Law Journal
(11 February 1992)
PARLIAMENT OF VICTORIA, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Report, Volume 2, 1997)
RANII, D, “Blind Judge Backs Use of Deaf, Blind Jurors”
National Law Journal
(NY) (21 March 1983)
ROBINS, J, “Falling On Deaf Ears” (2000) 97
Law Society’s Gazette
SILAS, D, “Deaf Jurors”
New Law Journal
STEPHEN, J F,
Evidence Act
(Macmillan, London, 1872)
WALKER, D M,
The Oxford Companion to Law
(Clarendon, Oxford, 1980)
WEIS, A., “Peremptory Challenges: the Last Barrier to Jury Service for People With Disabilities”
Willamette Law Review
WELLBORN III, O G, “Demeanor”
Cornell Law Review
WISE, D, “Courtroom Open For Real-Time Transcription”
New York Law Journal
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter