URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTLRC/2001/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Report on the Laws Relating to Sexual Assault [2001] ACTLRC 18
REPORT ON THE LAWS RELATING TO SEXUAL ASSAULT
1 INTRODUCTION
2. OFFENCES UNDER PART 3A of the CRIMES ACT
INTRODUCTION
STATUTORY DEFINITIONS
SEXUAL ASSAULT AND SEXUAL INTERCOURSE WITHOUT CONSENT
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE WITH A CHILD OR YOUNG PERSON
3. OTHER RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE CRIMES ACT
THE CONCEPT OF CONSENT
THE CONCEPT OF MENS REA
NO PRESUMPTION AS TO INCAPACITY DUE TO AGE
MARRIAGE NO BAR TO CONVICTION
ALTERNATIVE VERDICTS & DESCRIPTION OF OFFENCES
4. PROCEDURAL ISSUES
5. EVIDENTIARY ISSUES
6. LEGISLATION IS NOT ENOUGH
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
ACT Law Reform Commission
REPORT ON THE LAWS RELATING TO SEXUAL
REPORT ON THE LAWS RELATING TO SEXUAL ASSAULT
report reflects the law as at April 2001
Commission Reference: ACTLRC No
On 28 January 1993 the ACT Community Law
Reform Committee, as the Commission was then known, was asked to review the laws
in the Territory in relation to sexual assault and to report on
desirable changes to existing laws, practices and
procedures.
The Committee
subsequently embarked upon a wide ranging examination of the relevant issues, an
extensive program of consultation
and a careful review of the available
literature.
A lengthy discussion paper was issued in
September 1997 canvassing relevant issues and seeking to dispel common
misconceptions. The
paper also identified various problems and offered a range
of alternative proposals for dealing with them. It was intended to facilitate
more informed and constructive debate about the relevant
A further discussion paper was issued by
the Commission in August 1998 with a more specific legislative focus. It
addressed the adequacy
of the existing provisions of the
Crimes Act 1900
in its application to the Australian Capital Territory (‘the
’) and suggested a number of changes. The manner in which each offence
was defined was considered and the maximum penalties
were reviewed. It also
discussed the implications of certain procedural and/or evidentiary provisions
that currently govern the
prosecution of offences of this
These papers generated considerable
comment. Written submissions were received from some individuals and
organisations with particular
knowledge and experience of problems encountered
in this area and others were consulted verbally.
During recent years this area of the law
has been the subject of debate and controversy throughout much of the western
has received attention from governments, law reform bodies,
academics, feminist writers and those involved in providing counselling
support for victims. Consequently, the Commission has been able to draw upon a
vast body of literature. In addition, it has
had the benefit of informal
consultations with police, prosecutors and others involved in the investigation
and prosecution of offenders.
The Criminal Law Consultative Committee has also
made further valuable suggestions.
The present report follows the same
general format as the second discussion paper and has a similar legislative
focus. In the interests
of avoiding unnecessary duplication the analysis of the
wider issues contained in the earlier discussion paper has not been reproduced.
However, the present proposals for reform should be considered in the context of
the issues raised in that paper and the different
views and arguments
The report is divided into six chapters.
Chapter 1 is an introductory chapter which refers to some of the concerns
expressed about
the legal system and seeks to identify some of the conflicting
considerations with which the Commission has grappled. Chapter 2
is devoted to
a discussion of the nature of the relevant offences created by the
in its application to the Australian Capital Territory.
Other relevant provisions such as those relating to the concept of consent
discussed in chapter 3. Procedural issues are discussed in chapter 4 and
evidentiary issues in chapter 5. In each case, the
existing law is identified,
anomalies or other difficulties highlighted and, where considered appropriate,
proposed changes suggested.
Chapter 6 briefly makes the point that legislative
change can never be sufficient to meet every need and there is a need to address
other issues such as the need for adequate funding for counselling services and
the provision of court facilities.
The Commission gratefully acknowledges
the assistance it has received from the many individuals, government agencies
and other bodies
and organisations, whether informally or by means of written
submissions made in response to the discussion papers.
The process of consultation has
revealed a wide range of concerns including the nature and extent of sexual
assault, community attitudes
and perceptions, the need for education concerning
the impact of sexual assault and the need for greater understanding of why
might act or not act in a particular manner. Particular concerns have
been expressed about the need to understand the vulnerability
of children,
intellectually handicapped people and those from different cultural backgrounds.
Submissions have also been made concerning
the need for counselling, support and
compensation. Some of these issues fall outside the ambit of the
Commission’s terms
of reference and the report has been substantially
confined to an examination of issues relating to the nature of the various
appropriate sentences, the rules of evidence and the procedures
employed in prosecuting alleged offenders.
It has not been practicable to address
all of the points made in each submission separately but all of the views
advanced have been
considered. In some instances the Commission has adopted
suggestions and incorporated them into its own recommendations. In others,
has supported the objective identified in the submission but has been obliged to
conclude that the particular measure proposed
would be ineffective or create
further difficulties. In yet others, it has been apparent that submission
reflected some misunderstanding
of the existing law or the nature of a proposal
for reform. For example, the 1998 discussion paper was greeted by vehement
privilege relating to the disclosure of counsellors’ notes.
there is no such privilege and the Commission was proposing that one should be
On some issues significant differences
of opinion were revealed. For example, some opposed the use of victim impact
statements in
sexual assault cases on the basis that their use suggested that
some victims were more important than others, whilst others supported
the basis that victims wanted courts to know what they had suffered and/or that
they were necessary to reveal the devastating
impact of crimes of this nature.
Where such major areas of controversy have been identified the Commission has
generally attempted
to include a summary of the competing
Ultimately the Commission is charged
with the duty of forming its own conclusions and offering its own
recommendations. The conclusions
expressed in the report reflect the considered
views of the present members of the Commission formed after carefully weighing
issues and considering the various submissions. However, both the
Director of Public Prosecutions and the Chief Executive Officer
of the Legal Aid
Office have expressed their support for those conclusions. The former is, of
course, responsible for the effective
prosecution of sexual offences whilst the
latter is responsible for ensuring the legal defence of many people charged with
such offences.
It is pleasing to note that there is substantial agreement from
people on both sides as to the appropriateness of the reforms proposed
report. The Commission commends them to the Assembly.
INTRODUCTION
12. The prevalence of sexual assault throughout Australia and in
other western democracies remains deeply disturbing. Crimes of
this nature
involve devastating personal violations and cause longstanding emotional damage.
The crime has been said to be essentially
concerned with power rather than sex.
The very act of sexual assault leaves
complainants
feeling humiliated and
debased. Some speak of having been 'defiled' or 'sullied'. Others speak of an
invasion not just of the body
but of the sense of self or integrity as a person.
The offence is often accompanied by abuse and other degrading behaviour and
by gratuitous violence. In an age in which the risk of AIDS and other
grave sexually transmitted diseases cannot be discounted,
sexual assaults may
even be fatal. If complainants are able to survive the assaults without being
left with serious physical injuries
or disease they will nonetheless be left
with a legacy of trauma and fear. They may be afraid of the offenders
returning, afraid
of further assault whether by them or others and in some cases
left in a state of generalised apprehension or foreboding. They may
an inescapable pall or shadow has been cast over their lives. Their activities
may be constrained by fear of going out
alone especially at night and they may
be afraid of relationships and sexual intimacy. Some complainants may be left
with an all-pervading
sense of shame. Those from certain ethnic or cultural
backgrounds may find themselves stigmatised and rejected. Whilst it may leave
no superficial or obvious marks of injury, sexual assault causes deep wounds and
complainants may bear emotional scars for the rest
of their lives.
The nature and extent of the harm caused
by sexual assault lends added emphasis to the need to ensure that the law
affirms the basic
right to protection from assaults of this kind and provides
for the fair but effective prosecution of those who infringe such rights.
also gives rise to an obvious need to ensure that the processes of the law
reflect due recognition of the special needs of complainants
and avoid causing
further unnecessary trauma to those already suffering.
The process of consultation confirmed
the fact that complainants of sexual assault frequently find their participation
in the legal
process an alienating experience. Indeed, many feel that it has
significantly compounded the trauma they have
. Some of the submissions
reflected significant scepticism concerning the ability of the legal system to
deal with allegations of
sexual assault in an informed, sensible and fair
manner. This scepticism obviously involves more than mere misgivings about the
current state of the law or criminal procedure. It extends to a belief that
judges, jurors, magistrates and lawyers are prone to
act upon misconceived
stereotypical views about sexual assault and the behaviour of complainants and
that the law and the legal process
both reflect and entrench such
15. This lack of confidence in the judicial
process, which appears to exist throughout the western world, is a matter of
concern. People who have been complainants of sexual assault should be
entitled to look to the law for justice and protection.
The processes they
encounter should be as supportive and reassuring as circumstances permit.
Practical help and emotional support
should be provided. Their rights and
options should be clearly explained. Legal proceedings should be conspicuously
fair with cases
being decided solely on the evidence and without recourse to
stereotypical views. Penalties should be adequate to reflect the gravity
crime. Of course, these have long been recognised as objectives of the criminal
justice system and in the past two decades
numerous reforms have been
implemented in order to make that system more conducive to their attainment.
Why then are there still
heartfelt expressions of disquiet?
As the diversity of submissions
demonstrates, there can be no single answer to this question. There is a
plethora of issues relating
to the nature of the offences created by the
, the concept of consent, means of proof, prior sexual history,
evidence of complaint, corroboration and procedural matters such as
evidence by video link. Nonetheless, the most fundamental concerns seem to
relate to the perceived prejudices of judges,
lawyers and jurors. This concern
has been fuelled by occasional reports of comments by judges or magistrates
which appear to have
been lamentably sexist or to have reflected an outmoded or
discredited view of human relationships. It also reflects the distress
frequently caused by cross-examination suggesting that the complainant has lied
views of the kind so
rightly decried. Furthermore, there are no doubt many cases in which
complainants have been left feeling hurt
and bewildered because although they
told the truth the accused was found not guilty. These problems may be
compounded by the feeling
that they were 'thrown to the wolves' once the trial
started and that more should have been done to protect them from further
Neither the reality of these concerns
nor the fact that there is a real basis for them can sensibly be doubted.
However, it is one
thing to acknowledge the validity of the concerns and another
to find adequate solutions. Community attitudes have changed over
the past few
years and most judges now warn juries to put aside any stereotypical views they
may have and decide the case without
recourse to prejudice or presupposition.
Nonetheless, criminal charges have to be proven beyond reasonable doubt and when
little more evidence as to the decisive issue in a case than the word
of one person against that of another it may be difficult for
a jury to be
satisfied to that standard. The risk that the guilty will sometimes be
acquitted is an inevitable corollary of the
criminal justice
Similarly, whilst the very
process of giving evidence can be distressing and complainants frequently find
cross-examination quite
traumatic, that problem is to some extent unavoidable in
proceedings conducted within an adversarial system of
Whilst this is well understood in other
contexts, acquittals may leave complainants hurt and bewildered. They may be
left with feelings
of having been further abused by the trial process, rejected
by a patriarchal court which did not want to listen or even stigmatised
scheming liar. Such responses are vividly conveyed by Prof Alison Young who
refers to a number of cases in which there had
been acquittals and, after
alluding to the legend of Philomela described in
The Metamorphoses of
, concludes that: ‘Closing its dirty ears, law is deaf to the
accusations of rape, and silences woman, replacing her tongue
with the pathos of
wordless song, inarticulate sound, non-language, the pain of
It is important
that the feelings underlying such statements be understood and respected. The
Commission is acutely aware of the
need to consider any reforms in the light of
the anguish experienced by complainants by the trial
However, an alleged offender is not
tried by some abstract entity known as ‘the law’ but by twelve men
and women drawn
from the community to try the particular
When the charge is one of
sexual assault they usually hear two people, each of whom is a complete stranger
to them, give contradictory
evidence about an incident that occurred some years
before the trial. If they are unable to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that one account is true and the other is not then that does not mean that they
have closed minds or ‘dirty ears’. Of
course, jurors may be subject
to the same human frailties as other people and the possibility that prejudice
may have played some
part can never be wholly excluded. However, in most cases
the verdict will merely reflect the fact that having conscientiously considered
all of the evidence in the case they could not be sure of the guilt of the
accused and were constrained to give him or her the benefit
of any reasonable
Similar problems are encountered in the
prosecution of other offences allegedly committed when only the complainant and
accused were
present. For example, in 1999/2000, 53% of the charges of non
sexual offences against the person and 55% of the charges of sexual
were found proven.
cases those charged may have been innocent and in others guilt may not have been
proven to the requisite standard but any
assumption that acquittals are
generally due to prejudice or bias on the part of jurors would be quite
unjustified.
Any examination of the issues involved
in the reform of the relevant law and procedure provides a stark reminder that a
perfect system
of justice still eludes human ingenuity. Allegations of sexual
assault usually arise in circumstances where there are unlikely to
independent witnesses and the allegations are likely to be vehemently disputed.
Where drugs or alcohol were involved there
may be issues concerning the
reliability of evidence given by even the most apparently truthful witnesses.
Perceptions may vary
and later memories of those perceptions may vary even more.
Furthermore, the jury must act on its own impressions of the witnesses.
it has been said that findings of fact, whether by a judge or a jury, are at
best the court's "belief or opinion about someone
else's belief or
These problems almost inevitably lead
counsel for both sides to ask questions about the events leading up to and
immediately following
the incident in question and other circumstances that may
be relevant. Complainants are likely to be cross-examined about any aspect
their conduct that defence counsel think may cast doubt on their accounts of the
incidents. Indeed, the rule in
Browne v Dunn
generally requires counsel
to put to a witness any allegations of facts or circumstances by reason of which
he or she may later contend
that the witness’s evidence should not be
accepted. This is a rule of fairness intended to give the witness the
opportunity
to deny the suggestions or otherwise answer the proposed criticism.
However, especially in the context of a sexual assault trial,
cross-examination
suggesting that a complainant has lied on oath is inevitably
distressing.
In recent years there have been numerous
attempts to reform the law in order to provide some protection for complainants.
restrictions on cross-examination
abrogating the common law rule
requiring judges to give directions as to corroboration;
permitting evidence to be given in
camera and/or by means of closed circuit television;
prohibiting publication of the
identities of complainants without their consent; and
amending the substantive law in
various respects.
Yet despite the attention which this
problem has received from law reform bodies, academics, feminists and others, no
wholly adequate
means have been found of overcoming this problem in a manner
compatible with the conduct of fair and effective trials. An understanding
what is sometimes described as the Locard exchange
and significant
advances in forensic science have enabled more perpetrators to be identified and
offences proven than would have
been possible in earlier years. Yet it remains
true that the outcome of criminal trials is still largely dependent upon the
of eye-witnesses and in sexual assault cases this almost invariably
means that complainants are required to give evidence.
It must be acknowledged that those
seeking to review this area of law inevitably encounter profoundly difficult
questions. It is
not always possible to reconcile competing considerations of
public interest and in some areas there are opposing views as to where
balance should lie or even as to whether any balance should be
. It must also be
acknowledged that there are some problems for which the law can provide no
wholly adequate answers. The law cannot
provide any real anodyne for the pain
of complainants of sexual assault. At best it can seek to punish offenders and
complainants. Yet it is a fundamental principle of the criminal law
that no person be punished for a crime unless his or her guilt
has been proven
in a fair trial and there is presently no means of proving the relevant facts
without the complainant giving evidence,
being cross-examined and hence being
exposed to the risk, if not the certainty, of further emotional trauma.
Nonetheless, the Commission
has sought to find further means of making the law
more fair and effective and ameliorating the plight of
complainants.
Rather than proceed on a piecemeal basis
the Commission has attempted to provide a concise analysis of all of the
relevant legislative
provisions and to review their implications for the
prosecution of offences of this character. Such a review has involved a need
ensure that theoretical issues do not obscure more pragmatic considerations. A
penal statute such as the
is intended to provide protection
for the community by facilitating the effective prosecution of offenders. It
does so by creating
specific offences, defining the relevant legal principles
and prescribing appropriate penalties. Some submissions put forward proposals
which seemed to reflect assumptions that statutes should contain explanations of
the philosophy underlying particular provisions,
factual examples of how such
provisions might apply or general observations about how people might be
expected to behave or not behave
in particular situations. However, there is an
extensive body of jurisprudence governing the interpretation of statutes and the
injection of material that might be appropriate in other contexts without regard
for that jurisprudence may have unintended consequences.
Statements of the kind
suggested are sometimes included in explanatory memoranda but they fall outside
the normally accepted scope
of statutory provisions and their inclusion might be
more likely to confuse than
Any reforms should be conducive to, or
at least compatible with, the fair and efficient prosecution of alleged
offenders. Furthermore,
whilst the criminal law necessarily involves principles
of general application, legislative provisions should be drafted in terms
will provide sufficient flexibility to avoid injustice when unexpected
circumstances are encountered. It has been observed
'a lawyer must always decide what to do in the
circumstances she confronts, not those the system designer imagined she would
Decisions of judges and juries are
constrained by law. If the law is too inflexible, injustice may become
unavoidable. It is also
important to bear in mind that juveniles and mentally
dysfunctional people are frequently charged with serious criminal offences
there is a need to ensure that the criminal justice system treats them fairly.
Legislative provisions based upon assumptions
that people accused of serious
criminal offences must have had certain knowledge or understanding may be
entirely fair when applied
to an adult of normal intelligence but quite unfair
when applied to someone with the mental age of a five year old child or a
of reality distorted by severe mental illness.
The incidence of mental illness and drug
and alcohol abuse also give rise to incidents attended by seemingly bizarre
circumstances.
Indeed, courts with criminal jurisdiction frequently deal with
cases involving apparently novel or unusual situations. The risk
of injustice
occurring due to the unintended implications of laws enacted with other
situations in mind are sometimes dismissed on
the basis that such risks rarely
arise and, when they do, can be dealt with by the exercise of judicial
discretion or the imposition
of lenient penalties. However, for a number of
reasons responses of that kind are generally inadequate.
First, the prevalence of such cases may
be greater than most people would anticipate. The enormous increase in the
number of mentally
ill people returned to the community rather than being
treated in psychiatric hospitals has caused a corresponding increase in the
incidence of aberrant behaviour. This has been compounded by the constant
escalation in drug abuse. Now that other community ‘safety
have been substantially removed such people tend to fall into the criminal
justice system in disproportionate numbers.
They usually come before the courts
as defendants but it is not uncommon for mentally ill people to make unjustified
and irrational
complaints about other people. For example, allegations of
treason and other criminal behaviour are from time to time made against
ministers and other government leaders on grounds that are entirely spurious.
There is no reason to suppose that mentally ill people
are incapable of making
irrational claims of sexual abuse as well as treason, murder, torture and other
serious criminal offences.
Furthermore, even perfectly rational people
sometimes find themselves in situations that may not have been easily foreseen
legislature at the time the relevant legal provision was enacted. The
prevalence of particular situations may also be affected by
changing social
mores and customs and these cannot always be
Secondly, significant risk of unfairness
to mentally dysfunctional or retarded people or others should not be accepted
even if the
prevalence of such cases proved to be relatively low. The
likelihood of injustice should not be accepted merely because it can be
reasonably anticipated that it will occur only rarely. As responses to the
wrongful convictions of individuals such as Lindy Chamberlain,
‘Ziggy’ Pohl and Alexander McLeod-Lindsay tend to confirm, there is
a public perception that injustice to even one person
charged with a criminal
offence is unacceptable.
Thirdly, the suggested remedies of
judicial discretion and/or lenient sentences do not provide adequate means of
redressing the injustice
of an inappropriate conviction. There is no judicial
discretion to direct an acquittal merely because the judge believes that the
person charged should not be convicted for acting as he or she did in the
circumstances then prevailing.
criminal conviction may cause enormous shame and embarrassment and ruin a
person’s career and reputation even if the penalty
imposed was unusually
For these reasons penal statutes should
be drafted in a manner calculated to ensure not only that those at whom they are
do not fall through the legislative net but that others are not
inadvertently caught in it. Having carried out a comprehensive review
relevant legislation, the Commission has been obliged to conclude that some of
the earlier attempts to reform this area of
the law seem to have been successful
but others have failed to deliver the advantages apparently anticipated. In
some cases the
stated objectives have not been achieved and the measures relied
upon to achieve them have produced confusion and/or potential for
injustice in
certain circumstances. In the end result the guilty have not always been well
targeted nor the innocent kept out of
the line of fire.
Such conclusions are bound to cause
concern and disappointment to those who had optimistic expectations of the
provisions in question.
However, neither past optimism nor present regret offer
any sound reason for retaining legislative provisions which have proven
ineffective. Risks of people being wrongly convicted or acquitted, of
complainants having to give evidence again unnecessarily and
of confidence in
this area of the law being further eroded are all too grave to permit the
retention of legislative provisions which
are not conducive to fair and
efficient trials. Hence, the Commission has sought to examine each provision by
reference to such
practical considerations as its impact upon the fair and
efficient trial of alleged offenders and the prescription of adequate penalties.
In doing so it has sought to address the special issues that arise in relation
to prosecutions for sexual assaults of various kinds
and to take into account
the concerns raised in submissions and discussions.
Because of their gravity, offences
involving sexual assault are usually prosecuted on indictment. The procedures
followed are essentially
the same as those employed in the prosecution of other
very serious criminal offences such as murder or armed robbery and any
consideration
of this area of the law involves many of the same considerations.
Consequently, the Commission has been guided by a number of principles,
might be regarded as being of general application. These include the
• Offences should be defined by the
statute so that the basis on which a person may be liable for conviction and
can be clearly understood and undue technicalities avoided;
• The relevant provisions should together form a consistent
legislative scheme adequately covering the whole range of behaviour
sought to be
prohibited and should provide a consistent range of maximum penalties
commensurate with the relative gravity of the
• The rules of evidence and procedure should be conducive
to trials which are both fair and efficient; and
• The relevant
legal principles should be sufficiently clear to be capable of explanation in
terms comprehensible to a jury.
However, in view of the special
considerations that arise in relation to prosecutions for sexual offences and
the Commission has been
guided by two further principles,
• The trial should be conducted with a view
to reducing any risk of prejudgment based on stereotypical views;
• The rules of evidence and procedure should incorporate such
measures as are reasonably available to protect complainants
vulnerable witnesses from further psychological or emotional damage without
jeopardising the essential fairness of the
2. OFFENCES
INTRODUCTION
is devoted to sexual offences. It creates a series of offences involving:
sexual assault;
sexual intercourse without consent;
sexual intercourse with young people;
maintaining sexual relationships with
young people;
for the purpose of engaging in sexual intercourse;
child pornography.
It also contains a number of other
provisions defining sexual intercourse, providing that consent should be taken
to have been "negated"
in certain circumstances, abrogating any presumption of
incapacity to engage in sexual intercourse due to age, and confirming that
marriage of an offender and complainant offers no bar to conviction. In
addition, there are provisions relating to the joinder
This chapter is concerned with the
nature of the offences so created and the manner in which they have been
defined. A discussion
of the other provisions of this Part has generally been
left to the next chapter, though issues relating to the definition of various
terms including 'sexual intercourse' have been dealt with in the present chapter
because of their obvious relevance to the ambit
of the offences discussed.
Whilst the offences are discussed separately, it has been necessary to examine
as a whole with a view to determining whether it provides a
comprehensive legislative scheme of offences, reflects sound legal policy
conducive to fair and effective prosecutions.
DEFINITIONS
It is obviously important for terms used
to be defined with precision so that the nature of the
offences described by reference to them can be clearly understood. The relevant
concepts must be clearly explained to juries so that they may make sensible
judgments as to whether conduct proven by the evidence
falls within their ambit.
If the definitions are not sufficiently clear then time may be wasted whilst
argument ensues as to the
meaning of words or phrases used in the indictment and
if the explanation is inadequate or incorrect then any convictions may be
aside on appeal and new trials
It is plainly
undesirable to permit trials to be interrupted by lengthy semantic arguments, to
risk verdicts based upon confusion
as to the relevant legal principles, or to
have complainants being forced to give evidence again after convictions have
aside upon appeal.
The Commission has examined the existing
statutory provisions with due care and has concluded that whilst some of the
terms may convey
the general meaning intended they do not provide a sufficiently
precise or appropriate delineation of the concept in question. This
particularly acute in relation to the provisions dealing with the concept of
consent but also arises to some extent in
relation to the terms employed in
defining various offences.
intercourse
The concept of `sexual intercourse' has
been expanded by the terms of
to mean the
(a) the penetration, to any extent, of the
vagina or anus of a person by any part of the body of another person, except
penetration is carried out for a proper medical purpose or is
otherwise authorised by law;
(b) the penetration, to any extent,
of the vagina or anus of a person by an object, being penetration carried out by
another person,
except where that penetration is carried out for a proper
medical purpose or is otherwise authorised by law;
introduction of any part of the penis of a person into the mouth of another
(d) cunnilingus; or
(e) the continuation of
sexual intercourse as defined in paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (d).
This expanded definition has the
consequence that many sexual acts of a kind which would once have been
prosecuted as indecent assaults
or acts of indecency may now be prosecuted as
sexual intercourse without consent or other offences in which sexual intercourse
an element.
It has been suggested that this
consequence may tend to inappropriately trivialise or at least derogate from the
gravity formerly
attached to offences of rape. This suggestion seems to be
based upon the view that penile penetration involves a more serious violation
than the other acts stipulated, possibly because it may give rise not only to
the risk of pregnancy and venereal disease but AIDS,
whilst other assaults of
the kind mentioned are unlikely to have the same long term consequences. On the
other hand, it has been
argued that such a comparison involves an inappropriate
preoccupation with physical consequences and that the devastating psychological
trauma is at least equally important. It may also be argued that the real
gravamen of offences of this kind lies in the abuse of
power by wrongfully
violating another person's body irrespective of the precise nature of that
violation. The nature of the act
may, in any event, be considered in relation
to the severity of the sentence imposed in relation to such an offence and any
consequences
such as the contraction of disease may be taken into account as
aggravating factors.
Having considered these competing
arguments, the Commission has concluded that it would be appropriate to maintain
the approach presently
reflected in
of providing a limited expansion
of the concept of sexual intercourse for the purposes of the
In particular, whilst paragraph (c) of
the definition refers to 'the introduction of any part of the penis of a person
into the mouth
of another person' it has been suggested that it should extend to
any act of fellatio whether or not involving actual penetration
of that kind.
The Commission recommends that the concept be extended to include any contact
between the penis of the offender and
the mouth of another
The Child at Risk Assessment Unit has
suggested that a further definition be provided giving the word
‘vagina’ a meaning
extending to include penetration of the external
genitalia. It has been suggested that children often describe penetration of
labia by reference to having been 'touched inside' and such an act appears
to cause equal trauma. It can be both difficult and distressing
to have a child
witness give evidence with a view to distinguishing between penetration of the
vagina and penetration of the labia
and there is no apparent reason for
excluding the latter from the concept of ‘sexual
intercourse’.
The corresponding Victorian legislation
contains a provision extending the meaning of the term 'vagina' to embrace both
However, the Commission is of the view that it would be more straight
forward to amend the definition of ‘sexual intercourse’
penetration of the labia. It also recommends that any the section should also
make it clear that the word 'vagina' includes
a surgically constructed
substantially revised in 1985 it was apparently assumed that it was desirable to
dispense with the word 'rape' and replace it
with the phrase 'sexual intercourse
without consent' which, of course, conveyed the same legal meaning. It was
presumably thought
that a change in terminology might lead to a change in
community perceptions. However, complainants almost invariably speak of having
been 'raped' rather than describing what has been done to them by the more
cumbersome though equally descriptive words of the section.
There seems to have
been no widespread abandonment of the term within the community generally.
Whilst it is true that language
may play a part in shaping or maintaining
community perceptions, this change in statutory terminology unaccompanied by any
corresponding
change in general usage does not seem to have had any significant
impact upon inappropriate views about sexual assault.
Furthermore, there is a countervailing
view that any such change has been counter-productive because it has tended to
diminish perceptions
as to the gravity of the offence. Conversely, the term'
rape' may more effectively convey the full horror of the crime and appropriately
stigmatise the perpetrator as a 'rapist'. It has also been suggested that the
use of the term 'sexual assault' accompanied by gradations
of offence based upon
the degree of violence may have further downgraded the perceived gravity of
rapes unaccompanied by violence
of the kind
The term 'sexual penetration without
consent' is used in Western Australia and the Model Criminal Code
Officers’ Committee of
the Standing Committee of Attorney’s-General
(‘MCCOC’)' has suggested adoption of the term, ‘unlawful
penetration’. In making that suggestion MCCOC referred to a number
of competing arguments but ultimately concluded that ‘the
phrase provides
a concise, accurate and readily understood encapsulation of the
However, this
phrase would not always be an accurate description of conduct falling within the
extended definition of sexual intercourse
contained in section 92, especially if
further extended as the Commission has recommended. Whilst it would be possible
a statutory definition of sexual penetration which extended the
concept to acts involving no penetration at all, the incongruity
between that
term and non-penetrative acts alleged to constitute the offence might cause
confusion and, perhaps, a reluctance by
some jurors to
The term 'sexual assault' is still used
in New South Wales and 'sexual intercourse without consent' is used in the
Northern Territory.
In other Australian jurisdictions the offence of having
sexual intercourse with another person without that person's consent is
'rape'. The word forms part of the name, 'The Canberra Rape Crisis Centre', is
used by others involved in assisting 'rape'
complainants and is also commonly
employed in academic articles and debate. Indeed, it was used in most of the
submissions to the
Commission. As previously mentioned, the word is almost
invariably used by complainants and it seems inappropriate for them to be
repeatedly corrected when the word is so widely understood and in much more
common usage than the statutory euphemism currently used
Accordingly, whilst acknowledging that
there are divergent opinions which may be strongly held and reasonably based,
the Commission
accepts that the use of the term 'rape' is an appropriate means
of referring to an offence of engaging in sexual intercourse (as
section 92) without the other person's consent, knowing that the other person
does not consent or being reckless as to
whether that other person consents. It
is recommended that the term be recognised by the addition of a further
statutory definition.
The term has been employed throughout
this report for convenience and clarity.
terminology
The Criminal Law Consultative Committee
has suggested that the term, ‘act of a sexual nature’, be defined to
make it clear
it extends to an act of sexual intercourse or an act of indecency.
The Commission agrees that it might be useful to have this term
defined in this
It was also suggested that the term,
‘complainant’, be defined to mean a person upon whom an offence is
alleged to have
been committed. This term has long been used in criminal trials
and its meaning is well understood to lawyers. However, the Commission
that it should be defined as suggested.
The Commission also considered
suggestions that the terms, ‘child’, be defined to mean a person
under the age of 13 years,
the term, ‘young person, be defined to mean a
person under the age of 16 years and that the term ‘person’ be
to make it clear that it encompassed children and young people as well
as adults. However, the term ‘child’ is presently
section 4 to mean a person under the age of 18 years and it may be confusing to
attribute different meanings to the same
term in different parts of the Act. On
the other hand, the term, ‘young person’ is already defined in
sections 92EA,
92NA and 92NB to mean a person under the age of 16 years though
in each case the definition applies only to the section in question.
be preferable to insert such a definition in section 92 so that it would apply
to the whole of Part 3A and to repeal the
definitions in the other sections
providing for more limited applications. The Commission is of the view that a
definition of the
word ‘person’ is probably unnecessary but accepts
that it would remove any ground for a suggestion that the legislature
intended to use the word in contradistinction to the terms ‘child’
or ‘young person’.
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends:
(a) that paragraphs (a) and (b)
of the definition of ‘sexual intercourse’ in section 92 be amended
in each case by adding
a comma and the word ‘labia’ after the word
vagina and before the words ‘or anus’.
(b) that the words
‘and any contact between the penis of the offender and the mouth of
another person’ be added to subparagraph
(c) of the definition of
‘sexual intercourse’.
(c) that the following definitions be
added to section 92:
act of a sexual nature
means sexual intercourse or an act of
complainant
means a person upon whom an offence is alleged to have been
includes a child or a young
offence under section 92D;
includes a surgically constructed vagina;
young person
person under the age of 16 years.
(d) that sections 92EA,
92NA and 92NB be amended to remove the definition of ‘young person’
from those sections.
ASSAULT AND SEXUAL INTERCOURSE WITHOUT CONSENT
In the Australian Capital Territory the
single offence of rape has been replaced with a series of sexual offences. Six
of these offences
are based upon the infliction or threatened infliction of
bodily harm or assault with intent to engage in sexual intercourse with
person. In each case the maximum penalty is dependent upon the degree of actual
or threatened harm and whether the offender
was acting in company with others.
There are also two offences of sexual intercourse without consent, the second
involving the additional
element of the offender acting in company with
These offences are defined in the
following sections:
92A Sexual assault in the first
(1) A person who inflicts grievous bodily harm upon another
person with intent to engage in sexual intercourse with that other person,
with a third person who is present or nearby is guilty of an offence punishable,
on conviction, by imprisonment for 17 years.
(2) A person who,
acting in company with any other person, inflicts, or assists in inflicting,
grievous bodily harm upon a third person
with the intent that the
first-mentioned person, or any person with whom he or she is in company, should
engage in sexual intercourse
with that third person, or with any other person
who is present or nearby, is guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction, by
imprisonment for 20 years."
92B Sexual assault in the second
(1) A person who inflicts actual bodily harm upon another
person with intent to engage in sexual intercourse with that other person,
with a third person who is present or nearby, is guilty of an offence
punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 14 years.
person who, acting in company with any other person, inflicts, or assists in
inflicting, actual bodily harm upon a third person
with the intent that the
first-mentioned person, or any person with whom he or she is in company, should
engage in sexual intercourse
with that third person, or with any other person
who is present or nearby, is guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction, by
imprisonment for 17 years.
92C Sexual assault in the third
A person who unlawfully
assaults, or threatens to inflict grievous or actual bodily harm upon, another
person with intent to engage
in sexual intercourse with that other person, or
with a third person who is present or nearby, is guilty of an offence
punishable,
on conviction, by imprisonment for 12
A person who, acting in
company with any other person, unlawfully assaults, or threatens to inflict
grievous or actual bodily harm
upon, a third person with the intent that the
first-mentioned person, or any person with whom he or she is in company, should
in sexual intercourse with that third person, or with any other person
who is present or nearby, is guilty of an offence punishable,
on conviction, by
imprisonment for 14 years.
92D Sexual intercourse
without consent
1) A person who engages in sexual intercourse
with another person without the consent of that other person and who knows that
other person does not consent, or who is reckless as to whether that other
person consents, to the sexual intercourse is guilty of
an offence punishable,
on conviction, by imprisonment for 12 years.
(2) A person who,
acting in company with any other person, engages in sexual intercourse with
another person without the consent of
that other person and who knows that that
other person does not consent, or who is reckless as to whether that other
person consents,
to the sexual intercourse is guilty of an offence punishable,
on conviction, by imprisonment for 14 years.
The nature of the
The offences created by sections 92A and
92B are constituted by the infliction of bodily harm with the intention of
engaging in sexual
intercourse and, in the case of the offences created by the
second subsection of each section, doing so in company with others.
offences created by section 92C are constituted by unlawful assaults or threats
to inflict bodily harm, again with the intention
of engaging in sexual
intercourse and, in the case of the offences created by the second subsection,
again doing so in company with
In each case the sections have been
poorly drafted and it is difficult to determine the ambit of the offences
created. It is clearly
unnecessary for sexual intercourse to have actually
occurred but the sections do not contain any explicit requirement for the
offender to have had any intent to engage in sexual intercourse without
the other person's consent. Whilst section 92C stipulates
that any assault must
be unlawful none of the sections stipulate that the infliction of bodily harm
must be unlawful.
However, since
such harm must be inflicted with the intention of engaging in sexual
intercourse, the infliction of bodily harm after
a person had already been
raped, whether in order to deter any complaint or simply as the result of
gratuitous violence, would not
constitute an offence under any of the sections
92A, 92B or 92C. These matters make it difficult to find some means of
the sections in a manner consistent with the enactment of a coherent
legislative scheme of offences.
The suggested
attempt to dispense with the issue of consent
It has been suggested that the enactment
of offences in these terms was seen as removing the need to prove the absence of
in sexual assault cases. The point was succinctly made in the
submission by the Canberra Rape Crisis Centre and the Women's Legal
Centre (ACT
and Region):
the) purpose ... was to take the focus
off the victim's behaviour, and foreclose the opportunity traditionally
presented to defendants
in rape trials to suggest that something the victim
wore, said or did may have been taken as an indication of consent. The trauma
that is caused to rape victims by the usual defence to a charge which is to
argue that the victim consented, or the defendant believed
she did, is now
extremely well documented ...Removing the issue of consent from the definition
of sexual assault was therefore welcomed
by many as an improvement to the
criminal justice system for
As previously mentioned, the Commission
is acutely aware that the need to give evidence and be cross-examined
contributes to the trauma
suffered by rape complainants. It is a matter of
profound regret that the very system which is intended to provide justice should
add to their pain. In recent years this consideration has led to a number of
changes to the laws of evidence and procedure including
restrictions on
cross-examination as to a complainant's previous sexual history and provision
for evidence to be given by closed
circuit television. Yet, it remains true
that rape complainants suffer further trauma as a result of giving evidence and
being cross-examined.
In this context it is understandable many would have
welcomed an apparent opportunity to remove the issue of consent from trials
sexual assault. However, that objective has not been achieved by the enactment
of these sections.
The approach adopted can be traced back
to the final report of the Royal Commission on Human Relationships in 1977 which
acknowledged
that 'absence of consent is basic to the crime of
but argued that there had
been too great an emphasis upon that issue. The report included the
We believe that the act of intercourse
should not be singled out as the illegal act. Intercourse without consent is
certainly a violation
of the person which the law must condemn and punish.
However rape often involves much more than mere absence of consent. The
and threats of violence, by means of which intercourse is procured, are
themselves anti-social and unlawful. We think the law should
be changed to
emphasise these unlawful means, rather than the non-consensual intercourse
itself, and so shift attention away from
the victim and onto her
It is clear that the Royal Commissioners
intended that the law should continue to be directed at non-consensual sexual
intercourse
though they were anxious to secure a shift in focus. This was
confirmed by the acknowledgment that there were 'inherent difficulties
eliminating
the issue of consent' followed by the comment that the Royal
Commission did not think that 'these difficulties should stop a necessary
of the law: namely a shift away from a consideration of
complainant's actions and attitudes, necessary when consent is in issue,
upon the actions and intentions of the
Nonetheless, it
concluded that:
In our view there should be no scope
for the defence of consent where sexual acts cause physical injury to the victim
... This accords
with the common law relating to non-sexual assaults, where
consent is available as a defence to minor assaults, but not generally
assaults which cause physical injury. We do not equate unwanted intercourse
with a minor assault; intercourse constitutes a much
greater intrusion into the
individual's freedom and
This passage seems to display some
confusion of thinking.
the reference to 'the defence of consent' is misconceived: absence of consent
has always been an element of the offence of
rape which it is incumbent upon the
Crown to prove. Secondly, sexual acts are not necessarily assaults even if
injury results.
For example, a couple who fall out off a bed whilst making love
are not taken to have assaulted each other even if each suffers some
injury. Thirdly, the assertion that consent is not available as a defence to
assaults which cause physical injury is also
misconceived: an assault with
consent is not an assault at all
and the absence of consent is again an element of the offence which it is
normally incumbent upon the Crown to
. Fourthly, the assertion
fails to acknowledge that even in cases of assault occasioning bodily harm it
will be necessary to prove
the absence of consent in circumstances such as sport
where the relevant activity is prima facie
and sexual activity
between consenting adults is also lawful. Fifthly, the passage refers
'unwanted' intercourse and intercourse
constituting intrusion into an
individual’s freedom and equality and these concepts are plainly
suggestive of non-consensual
It should be noted that the Royal
Commission acknowledged that the framework suggested might apply in relation to
acts done 'with
the full consent of the so-called victim or even, on occasions,
at her request'. However, it expressed the optimistic view that
few such cases
would come before the courts and said that that those few 'should be left to the
trial judge when imposing
It did not explain
why the consent of the ‘so called victim’ should be seen merely as a
mitigating factor or why it
thought adults needed to be protected from sexual
acts done at their own request. Nor did it apparently consider the fact that in
such circumstances the ‘so called victim’ would be liable to be
convicted of the same offence by virtue of being an aider
More fundamentally, it
failed to acknowledge that what was being alleged in substance was aggravated
and that it was unjust to
cast the net so widely that those substantially innocent of such an offence
might be caught along with
the guilty. Freedom from the stigma of criminal
conviction for sexual offences and exposure to criminal sanctions should not be
dependent upon the absence of complaint or the discretion of a prosecuting
agency. As mentioned earlier, legislative provisions
creating serious criminal
offences should be drafted with sufficient precision to ensure that those who
have not been guilty of the
misconduct to which the provisions are directed do
not fall within their net. Vague references to the possibility of more lenient
sentences provide no acceptable alternative to this important
An official commentary on similar
statutory reforms in New South Wales also reflected some confusion as to what
was intended. On
the one hand it stated that:
violence is inflicted ... offences should be defined so as to exclude the
requirement that the Crown prove, as part of its case,
that sexual penetration
occurred and that the complainant victim did not consent to
This statement appeared to suggest that
the Crown would need to prove neither the relevant sexual act nor the absence of
In that event it would have been difficult to imagine the nature of
any offence that might have been charged. However, in the following
passage the
commentary suggested that both of these elements would have to be
Although the law can be structured so as to
remove primary emphasis from consent to sexual penetration or intercourse, in
that issue will still probably arise. Inevitably the accused must in
relation to sexual assault offences (however defined) be able
to raise as a
defence the argument that the complainant did consent, and if such a suggestion
is properly raised, and is relevant
to an issue, it must be disproved by the
Crown beyond reasonable
The confusion about whether absence of
consent had to be proven was echoed in successive and contradictory decisions of
the NSW Court
of Criminal
. The relevant sections
have since been repealed.
Whilst the ACT sections contain no
explicit statement to the effect that the accused must have contemplated that
the sexual intercourse
in question be without the other person's consent such a
requirement has been held to be
Legislative provisions
are sometimes interpreted as being subject to implied limitations when a court
forms the view that the legislature
could not have intended to cause the
consequences that might otherwise ensue, especially if the provisions would
otherwise create
a risk of absurdity or
Sections 92A, 92B and
92C have apparently been interpreted in this manner. No reasons for the
implication of the requirement that
the intended sexual intercourse be
non-consensual are available but some of the factors may, perhaps, be
The essential problem is that the need
to prove the absence or contemplated absence of consent can be removed only by
removing any
such issue as an element of the offences. None of the sections
suggest that whilst such issues need not be proven the offender may
as though he had engaged in or intended to engage in sexual intercourse without
consent. Yet to remove this element would
drastically reduce the seriousness of
the offences. An assault may itself constitute an offence and other offences of
assault for
specified purposes
are punishable by heavier penalties, usually because those purposes are
themselves illegal and hence lend added criminality to the
behaviour. An intent to engage in sexual intercourse may lend enormous gravity
to an offence otherwise based upon
assault or the infliction of bodily harm if
the violent act constituting the assault is intended to facilitate the rape of
the complainant.
However, it is only the absence of consent that makes the
difference between lawful sexual intimacy and unlawful sexual
Hence, the fact that
a person intended to engage in consensual sexual intercourse could offer no
logical basis for concluding that
the criminality of any other antecedent
conduct should be treated more seriously.
Of course, proof of violence may provide
strong, perhaps even compelling, evidence of an intention to engage in sexual
intercourse
without consent. However, if the offence charged did not require an
absence of consent then its gravity would really depend upon
the nature and
extent of the violence or the bodily harm thereby inflicted. The relevant act
of sexual intercourse would provide
a context for the violence but could not
make the offence significantly more serious. In many cases the offender would
escape with
a non-custodial sentence and if a sentence of imprisonment were to
be imposed it would not involve any element of punishment for
what amounted to
an actual or attempted rape.
It might be open to the Crown to raise
the absence of consent not as an element of the offence but as an aggravating
feature. However,
if it chose to do so the absence of consent would still have
to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. The issue would not have been
resolved by
the jury's verdict and the complainant might have to give further evidence and
be subjected to further cross-examination
during sentencing
proceedings.
Indeed, if lack of consent were not to
be an element of these offences then it would be difficult to see any point in
the enactment
of the relevant sections. Sections 19, 20 and 23 create offences
of intentionally or recklessly inflicting grievous or actual bodily
sections 24, 25 and 26 create offences of assault including assaults causing
grievous or actual bodily harm. In each case
the offence is not dependent upon
proof of any particular purpose. The only obvious reason for creating further
offences with the
additional element of intent to engage in sexual intercourse
was that such offences were intended to apply to cases in which the
offender had
committed violent acts done with the intention of overbearing the will of the
complainant to obtain sexual intercourse
with him or her. In that event the
offences would constitute aggravated forms of rape or attempted rape or at least
offences of
the same character. It would be difficult to see any sensible
reason for the enactment of separate offences requiring proof of
engage in sexual intercourse but not lack of consent because consensual sexual
intercourse would not be an aggravating
There would be no need for any such
provisions to cover acts of attempted rape because section 347 provides that a
person who attempts
to commit an offence against a law of the Territory is
guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction as if the attempted offence
been committed. It is difficult to envisage cases in which the infliction of
bodily harm with intent to engage in non-consensual
sexual intercourse with the
complainant would not amount to attempted rape even if that intent had been
There would also be many cases in which
prosecution for such offences might cause injustice or absurdity. The term
"actual bodily
harm" means no more than some bodily injury which need be neither
permanent nor serious. A small bruise, abrasion, scratch or even
"hysterical and nervous
may be sufficient to
establish an offence under section 92B if inflicted by the accused with the
requisite intent. There may be
many circumstances in which a very minor bodily
injury such as a small scratch or bruise may occur as a result of acts committed
with intent to engage in consensual sexual activity. For
a person who scratches a lover's
back with fingernails in an attempt to stimulate sexual arousal;
a person who playfully pinches
another with similar intent;
a couple who engage in bondage or
other forms of mild sado-masochistic behaviour for the purpose of mutual sexual
stimulation;
a person who infects his or her
partner with a venereal disease even if the partner is aware of the risk and has
intercourse with
full knowledge of the condition;
even the rupture of a hymen, a minor
cervical tear or some other minor injury of the kind that might be caused by
consensual sexual
intercourse during a honeymoon would be sufficient to
constitute `actual bodily
similar potential difficulties arise
in relation to a range of other consensual heterosexual and homosexual
a person who participates in any
such conduct could be deemed to have committed the same offence by virtue of his
or her role as an
Furthermore, even if some wholly
satisfactory means could be found of dispensing with lack of consent as an
element of the offences,
the issue would be likely to arise as an indirect
consequence of the need to prove other elements.
provides that evidence relevant to the issues
before the court is admissible 'save as otherwise provided in this Act'. The
Capital Territory could not validly enact laws disallowing the
admission of relevant evidence otherwise admissible under the Commonwealth
Counsel for the accused would almost inevitably argue that the complainant's
consent to the sexual intercourse was relevant
to the likelihood that any
assault was committed or bodily harm inflicted. Alternatively, it might be
argued that there was no reason
to act violently because his or her consent was
anticipated. It might also be argued that whilst there was some act of
there was no basis for any inference that it was committed with intent
to engage in sexual intercourse because any subsequent sexual
act occurred with
the complainant's consent and was unrelated to the violence. An accused might
contend that the injury was sustained
accidentally during the course of
consensual sexual intercourse or by playful behaviour associated with consensual
sexual activity.
Doubt that the sexual intercourse was not the product of some
antecedent infliction of harm or assault but was consensual would
be a relevant
and perhaps decisive consideration in relation to a number of issues and
evidence of consent could not be excluded.
Nor is there any apparent means of
circumventing these problems. There is usually nothing unlawful about one adult
having sexual
intercourse with another unless it occurs without
As the Royal
Commission on Human Relationships observed, absence of consent is basic to the
crime of rape. Any attempt to remove
it as an element of the offence would be
destructive of the very basis upon which the sexual intercourse may be regarded
as a criminal
offence or upon which an intention to do so may be regarded as an
aggravating feature of an offence. Whilst other elements such
as antecedent
violence or the youth of the complainant may be relied upon in lieu of lack of
consent to constitute an offence, the
nature of that offence will be quite
different and the penalty will necessarily be determined without regard to the
concept of rape.
For these reasons the Commission has
been forced to conclude that the apparent aim of conducting what would amount in
substance to
rape trials without the need to prove the absence of consent is
ultimately unrealisable.
It was presumably for reasons of this
kind that the sections were held to be subject to an implied requirement that
the intent to
engage in sexual intercourse extend to an intention to do so
without consent.
Whatever the
reasons, however, it seems clear that these sections did not effectively remove
the issue of consent as anticipated
and that there is no effective means of
doing so without substantially undermining the gravity of the
The focus on antecedent
A further objection to the manner in
which these sections have been drafted lies in the fact that the real gravamen
of most of the
offences, is not the fact that a person has been sexually
violated without consent but the bodily harm or assault which preceded
violation. In some cases that harm may have been relatively insignificant. A
complainant might be disconcerted to find that
the essence of the offence with
which the accused has been charged is not that he raped her but that he caused
her to have a small
bruise or to become hysterical. Such a shift in focus might
accord with the views of the Royal Commission on Human
Relationships,
but in cases where
any bodily harm has been very minor the conduct of the trials might give rise to
an uncomfortable feeling that
the prosecution has really missed the point. A
complainant may be left wondering whether a slap that left a mark is all that
or whether anyone really cares that she was then
Such a preoccupation with the preceding
violence might also mean that cases were likely to be decided upon issues
involving fine legal
and factual distinctions but which were of little relevance
to the real substance of the charge and of little concern to the complainant.
For example, a jury might be unable to convict the accused because the evidence
did not prove whether a bruise was inflicted 'with
intent to engage in sexual
intercourse' or whether it was later when the accused was trying to prevent her
from calling for help.
The former ACT Chief Police Officer referred to
significant problems encountered in investigating allegations of sexual assault
suggested that because of the present form of the offences greater emphasis
has had to be placed upon the need to prove the necessary
degree of violence.
He indicated that police supported the ‘collapsing’ of the present
series of offences in order to
protect the integrity of the offence of sexual
intercourse without consent.
Of course, pitfalls of this nature may
sometimes be avoided by the judicious exercise of prosecutorial discretion and,
in practice,
comparatively few charges are laid under sections 92A, 92B or 92C.
In most cases the charge is in fact one of sexual intercourse
without consent.
Overlooking other accompanying
However, the judicious exercise of
prosecutorial discretion could not overcome the obvious deficiency that the
language of the sections
does not extend to the infliction of bodily harm as an
incident of the rape or after the relevant sexual act has been completed.
the legislation stands, the gratuitous infliction of even grievous bodily harm
upon an unresisting complainant in the course
of a rape could not support a
conviction for a more serious sexual offence than sexual intercourse without
consent contrary to section
92D and the heavier penalties provided by the other
sections would not be available. Indeed, those heavier penalties would be
unavailable
even if a complainant had been permanently crippled as a result of a
savage assault committed during or after the rape due to a desire
to deter her
from making any complaint or simply as an act of sadistic
If there are to be offences which impose
heavier maximum penalties for sexual assaults involving aggravating features
then such penalties
should surely apply in circumstances such as these. It is
true, of course, that an accused could be charged with two charges, one
and one of intentionally or recklessly inflicting grievous bodily harm.
However, the law generally requires that 'where
two or more offences are
committed in the course of a single transaction, all sentences in respect of
these offences should be concurrent
rather than
consecutive'
. Hence, the
effective maximum sentence may be the higher of the sentences prescribed for one
or other of these two offences rather
than a sentence which truly reflected the
overall gravity of what had been done. The most sensible course would be to
introduce a
provision that will make the heaviest penalties available for the
worst cases without regard for whether the injuries were inflicted
during or after the act of rape.
The multiplicity of
It is also unclear that a legislative
scheme involving such a series of discrete offences is either necessary or
desirable. Prosecutions
for offences of rape under earlier statutory provisions
frequently revealed that the sexual act had been accompanied by violence
to serious injuries and sometimes revealed that the offender had acted in
company with others. However, such aggravating
features were not elements of
the offence and juries were obliged to return single verdicts of guilty or not
guilty. If the accused
was convicted the judge would then have to make separate
findings as to whether the aggravating features of the offence had been
The enactment of a series of discrete offences enabled the Director of Public
Prosecutions to lay charges in which particular
aggravating features were
incorporated as elements of the relevant offences and, perhaps, alternative
charges lacking those elements.
Consequently, juries now determine not only
whether the accused is guilty of engaging in sexual intercourse without consent
if so, whether particular aggravating features identified in the indictment
have been proven.
It may sometimes be desirable for juries
to make findings as to the existence of aggravating features of a crime,
especially where
such findings may make a substantial difference to the likely
sentence. The obvious difficulty lies in the almost unlimited range
aggravating features which may accompany particular offences. Apart from the
infliction of harm, sexual offences may have been
committed in breach of a
relationship of trust, in company with other offenders, with the aid of weapons,
or in circumstances involving
extreme cruelty or depravity. Furthermore, the
offender may have a previous criminal record, be on parole, on bail, be HIV
or have AIDS or other sexually transmitted diseases. Of course, some
offences are accompanied by two or more aggravating features.
obviously be impracticable to enact separate offences based upon each category
of aggravation and the present series of
offences does not reflect any apparent
attempt to do so. On the other hand, some aggravating features are so grave
that a further
offence involving a significantly greater maximum penalty is
required. However, it is undesirable to subdivide any category of criminal
behaviour into any more discrete offences than necessary.
Apart from any other objection which may
be raised to such a course, the need to prove additional elements will provide
further issues
for juries and may mean that some cases proceed to contested
trials when there may have been guilty pleas to more straightforward
This not only involves undue expense and inconvenience but the risk of
complainants having to give evidence unnecessarily.
The offences provided by sections 92A to
92D inclusive are differentiated by reference to the extent of violence involved
and in each
section there is a further differentiation based upon whether the
offender was acting in company with others. Hence there are now
eight offences
in lieu of what in earlier years would have been a single offence of rape.
Whilst differentiation on the basis of
these distinctions may be logically
defensible, other aggravating features are not similarly reflected in the
structure of this series
of sections. Furthermore, the multiplicity of offences
cannot be justified on the basis that it provides a diversity of sentences
commensurate with the gravity of the offences. Five of the eight are punishable
by maximum sentences of either 12 or 14 years imprisonment
whilst the other
three are punishable by maximum sentences of either 17 or 20 years imprisonment.
A similar range of sentences could
be provided even if the number of offences
was significantly reduced.
The Commission believes that the
multiplicity of offences gives rise to needless complexity, that the individual
offences are poorly
targeted and that, far from achieving the advantages
intended by the reformers, this series of sections has created confusion and
potential injustice.
Proposals to simplify the law
and increase penalties
The Criminal Law Consultative Committee
has recommended that in lieu of these eight offences there should be only two:
one of rape
and one of aggravated rape. This recommendation reflects a concern
that the present series of offences are poorly defined, needlessly
complex and
prone to diverting attention from what should be the decisive
The Commission agrees that there should
be offences of rape and aggravated rape and recommends that the latter offence
the offender has acted in company with another offender or other
offenders or has inflicted grievous bodily harm upon the complainant
before, during or after rape. There should also be provision for an alternative
verdict enabling a jury to find an accused
person guilty of rape when on a
charge of aggravated rape the jury is satisfied that the evidence is sufficient
to prove the rape
but not the aggravating feature of the infliction of grievous
bodily harm.
In each case any further aggravating
features would be taken into account in sentencing the
The maximum sentence for the existing
offence of sexual assault without consent is 12 years imprisonment. The
Commission regards
this as inadequate and recommends that the maximum sentence
for the offence, whether or not described by the word ‘rape’
suggested, be increased to 15 years imprisonment. It recommends that the
maximum sentence for aggravated rape be fixed at 20
imprisonment.
However, the Commission has concluded
that there should also be a third offence of assault with intent to rape. This
offence would
cover any unusual cases in which an antecedent assault or threat
was not sufficiently proximate to amount in law to an attempt to
have sexual
intercourse without the intended complainant's consent. For example, it would
cover a situation in which the assailant
intended that the complainant engage in
sexual intercourse with him or someone else at another time. A maximum penalty
of 15 years
imprisonment is also proposed for this offence.
RECOMMENDATION 2
The Commission
recommends that:
the existing 8 offences be replaced by
offences of rape, assault with intent to rape and aggravated
the term ‘rape’ be defined
to mean engaging in sexual intercourse with another person without that
person’s consent
and knowing that that other person does not consent or
being reckless as to whether that other person consents;
the maximum sentence for rape and
assault with intent to rape be set at 15 years
imprisonment;
the offence of aggravated rape be
defined to apply when the offender has acted in company with another offender or
other offenders
or has inflicted grievous bodily harm upon the complainant
whether before, during or after rape; and
the maximum sentence for aggravated rape
be set at 20 years imprisonment.
INTERCOURSE WITH A CHILD OR YOUNG PERSON
The provision dealing with sexual
intercourse with a young person or a child is contained in section 92E. That
section is in the
following terms:
(1) A person who
engages in sexual intercourse with another person who is under the age of 10
years is guilty of an offence punishable,
on conviction, by imprisonment for 17
(2) A person who engages in sexual intercourse with another
person who is under the age of 16 years is guilty of an offence punishable,
conviction, by imprisonment for 14 years.
(3) It is a defence to a
prosecution for an offence under subsection (2) if the defendant establishes
(a) he or she believed on reasonable grounds that the person
upon whom the offence is alleged to have been committed was of or above
of 16 years; or
(b) at the time of the alleged offence
(i) the person on whom the offence is alleged to have been
committed was of or above the age of 10 years; and
defendant was not more than 2 years older;
and that that person
consented to the sexual intercourse.
Distinctions by reference
to ages of offenders and complainants
The Commission believes that it is
important to distinguish between two broad categories of people who are
prosecuted under this section.
Those who fall within the first category are
paedophiles. They are often sexual predators who prey upon young children for
own perverted gratification. There may be exceptional cases in which some
leniency might be justified by convincing evidence that
the conduct was due to a
grave psychiatric illness. However, child molestation causes profound suffering
and complainants may carry
emotional scars throughout their adult life. It will
generally be appropriate for very heavy sentences to be imposed on adults who
cruelly exploit the trust of children in this manner. Those who fall within the
second category are usually teenagers who have a
relationship of affection
and/or infatuation with another person who is about the same age or only
slightly younger. It is plainly
inappropriate to approach such cases in the same
manner as one might approach cases of paedophilia. There are, of course,
who do not fit neatly into either category and the existence of both
younger people who molest young children and older people who
molest teenagers
must be recognised. It must also be acknowledged that even teenagers are
sometimes guilty of rape. Nonetheless,
justice requires that appropriate
distinctions be drawn.
The offence under subsection (1) applies
only to cases of sexual intercourse with children under 10 years of age.
Heavier maximum
sentences are available for such offences and the defences
provided by subsection (3) are not available. The Commission does not
reason to depart from the general structure of this offence but believes that
the maximum sentence should be set by reference
to the worst cases of offences
that might reasonably be anticipated. There have recently been a number of
highly publicised cases
of people who have apparently pursued a course of
paedophilia over many years and molested a very large number of children. Many
children, especially those who were very young when the offence was committed,
may be left with life long physical and emotional
disabilities as a result of
such exploitation. The maximum sentence prescribed by subsection (1) should be
adequate to cater for
serial child molesters. The Commission recommends that it
be increased to 20 years imprisonment.
Distinctions
by reference to consent
The position in relation to offences
under subsection (2) is quite different. In most jurisdictions when an alleged
offender is prosecuted
for having sexual intercourse with a young person between
10 and 16 years of age the nature of the offence charged depends upon whether
is alleged that the sexual act occurred without consent. If there is such an
allegation then the charge is one of rape and having
regard to the age of the
complainant heavy penalties are imposed. If there is no such allegation the
charge is one of 'carnal knowledge',
that is sexual intercourse with a person
under the age of consent, and the penalties whilst substantial are comparatively
less severe
Furthermore, there is often a provision that enables a jury to return an
alternative verdict in relation to an offence of this
kind if the alleged
offender has been charged with rape but lack of consent is not proven to the
requisite standard.
This almost universally recognised
differentiation between non-consensual and consensual sexual intercourse is of
great practical
significance in the prosecution of offences against children and
young persons for at least two reasons. First, it distinguishes
between rapists
and those who have had consensual sexual intercourse albeit with someone under
16 years of age. Hence, anyone aware
of the conviction may gain some real
appreciation of the nature of the criminality involved in the commission of the
offence. Secondly,
as mentioned earlier, the sentences imposed will be much
more severe in cases where a young person has been raped than in cases of
consensual sexual intercourse. If only for these reasons, it is appropriate
that offences be structured in a manner that enables
one to know whether a
jury’s verdict reflects, in essence, a finding of
This differentiation has not been
maintained in
. On the contrary, the penalty
even for an offence under subsection (2) is greater than that prescribed by
section 92D for an offence
of sexual intercourse without consent. Despite
evidence of greater sexual precocity and a drop in the age of puberty the
is of the view that the age of consent should remain at 16 and that
it should continue to be an offence to have even consensual sexual
intercourse
with a person under that age. However, it is difficult to understand why the
rape of a 14 year old should not constitute
a more serious offence than
consensual sexual intercourse even with a person of that age.
Of course, there is a theoretical
argument that, since such a person should be regarded as lacking the legal
capacity to consent,
the issue is simply irrelevant. However, the Commission is
unable to accept this argument. Criminal offences are normally differentiated
not only by reference to the type of conduct in question but by reference to its
comparative gravity. The conduct of a young boy
who has had consensual sexual
intercourse with a young girl in the context of a relationship of mutual
affection may properly constitute
an offence but it is less blameworthy than the
conduct of someone who callously rapes a person of that age. The gravity of the
should also be gauged by reference to its likely impact upon the
complainant. There is a vast difference between the emotional impact
young teenager who is brutally violated and the emotional response of one who
chooses to have sexual intercourse with someone
whom he or she loves or to whom
he or she is at least sexually attracted. It may be necessary to deny young
people under sixteen
the right to give an effective consent to sexual activity
in order to protect them from the consequences of such decisions but it
neither necessary nor desirable to dismiss their feelings as legally
irrelevant.
The failure to differentiate between
consensual and non-consensual sexual intercourse also gives rise to practical
difficulties.
A verdict of guilty will not mean that the accused may be
sentenced on the basis that sexual intercourse occurred without the consent
the complainant because that issue is not an element of the charge and could not
be taken to have been established by the verdict.
Yet that is likely to be a
crucial issue in the sentencing of the offender. If there is a conviction, the
sentencing judge will
have to determine whether he or she is satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that lack of consent has been established as an aggravating
feature of the offence. Since the jury’s verdict will not have revealed
any finding on this issue its views will not be known
to the judge and the
offender might be treated leniently due to the rejection of allegations which
the jury accepted or sent to prison
as a result of allegations the jury
rejected. Even a plea of guilty will leave the issue unresolved. Furthermore,
the need to address
this issue might conceivably require the complainant to be
recalled to give evidence in the sentencing proceedings before the judge
hence exposed to cross-examination for a second time.
Any finding that the sexual act occurred
without consent will not change the record of the offence for which the offender
convicted. Hence, an offender who has been, in effect, guilty of rape
will have a conviction only for an offence which other jurisdictions
relate to consensual sexual intercourse and his record will be misleading if he
is subsequently charged with a criminal offence
elsewhere in
There are other unfortunate
consequences. In other jurisdictions, if a young person who has made a
complaint of rape does not wish
to give evidence at trial, the matter is
sometimes resolved by a plea of guilty to a lesser offence of carnal knowledge
which involves
no element of lack of consent. In this territory it is very
difficult to achieve such a result because the 'lesser' offence carries
heavier penalty than rape. This may mean that more complainants are forced to
choose between reluctantly giving evidence or accepting
that the accused will
escape any conviction.
The reversal of the onus of
Further difficulties arise from the
statutory defence contained in subsection (3). In common with comparable
statutory provisions
in other jurisdictions, this subsection provides a defence
if the defendant can prove that at the time the sexual intercourse occurred
or she had believed on reasonable grounds that the young person in question was
over the age of 16 years. In the Australian Capital
Territory there is an
alternative defence where the accused is less that two years older than the
other young person. However, in
both cases the statutory formulation also
requires the accused to prove consent.
This reversal of the onus of proof, in
effect, deems young people to be guilty of offences carrying a maximum penalty
of 14 years
imprisonment unless they can prove their innocence. Furthermore,
they must do so in relation to an issue that is not even an element
offences. There may be perceived advantages in this reversal of the onus of
proof, but it involves a fundamental departure
from one of the most the basic
principles of criminal justice that every person is presumed innocent until
proven guilty. Furthermore,
since most people who engage in sexual intercourse
with young people under 16 years of age are likely to be teenagers themselves,
it involves denying to juveniles the presumption of innocence enjoyed by adults
even in relation to such grave crimes as murder or
treason. The Commission does
not accept that this denial of a basic legal right to young defendants is
The potential for injustice is even
further compounded by the fact that the onus of proof shifts according to the
actual age of the
complainant irrespective of any belief or understanding of the
accused that she was or may have been over 16 years of age. As mentioned
earlier there is a defence that enables an accused to raise that issue but in
doing so the accused is also required to prove consent.
The section does not
enable an accused to escape from the burden of proving his innocence in relation
to the issue of consent by
reference to his belief that the complainant was over
16 years of age. Hence, if a young man has sexual intercourse with a young
woman whom he believed was over 16 years of age, then the verdict may depend
upon whether his belief as to her age was objectively
correct. If it was, then
he will not be liable to be convicted of any offence unless the prosecution
proves beyond any reasonable
doubt that she did not consent. On the other hand,
if she was under the age of 16 then the onus of proof is reversed and he will
liable to be convicted unless he proves that she did consent and that burden of
proof will be imposed upon him even if she had told
him that she was over 16 or
his belief was otherwise based on reasonable grounds.
Furthermore, the relevant provision
extends beyond merely reversing the onus of proof. It removes one element of
the offence completely.
If an adult is charged with having sexual intercourse
without consent the Crown must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
committed the relevant act knowing that the complainant was not consenting or at
least reckless as to whether she was consenting
or not. The defence provided by
subsection (3) does not even permit that issue to be raised. In seeking to
discharge the burden
of proof imposed upon him the accused will be unable to
rely upon any belief that the young person had been consenting even if the
reasonableness of that belief is not disputed.
In practice, prosecutors often charge an
accused with an offence of sexual intercourse without consent under section 92D
alleged that the sexual act in question was without consent. However,
that gives rise to the anomaly that a young person may face
a lower maximum
penalty for having sexual intercourse without consent than for having sexual
intercourse with consent. Of course,
it is open to the Crown to proceed under
section 92E in both types of case. However, since the allegation of non-consent
is so important
it is often considered appropriate to have the issue determined
by a jury and that can only be done by laying a charge under section
a course may also be pursued in the interests of fairness. Furthermore, if that
is not done the issue will remain unresolved
by any verdict of guilty and, as
mentioned earlier, it may be necessary to call the complainant to give further
evidence and hence
expose her to further cross-examination in any sentencing
proceedings.
Yet, regrettably, even that course does
not exclude potential incongruities. Suppose, for example, a young man is
charged with one
count of sexual intercourse without consent and, in the
alternative, one count of an offence under section 92E relating to the same
of sexual intercourse. The jury hears contradictory evidence from the only two
people who were present at the time and are ultimately
left in some doubt as to
which version is true. In that event it would be their duty to find the accused
not guilty of the first
count because they could not be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the sexual act had occurred without consent but guilty of
the second on the basis that they could not be satisfied that it had occurred
with consent. Similarly, they might be obliged to
return differing verdicts on
charges relating to two acts of intercourse one week apart because, although the
evidence was virtually
identical, the complainant's 16th birthday had occurred
between them. It is plainly undesirable to require juries to return verdicts
which they may well feel are inconsistent and/or unfair.
The alternative defence that the
complainant was at least 10 years of age and the defendant was not more than two
years older can
obviously be invoked only by people who are themselves juveniles
and it is again difficult to see why such young people should be
presumption of innocence enjoyed by adults. It certainly creates unfortunate
incongruities. For example, if a 20 year
old person is charged with having
sexual intercourse with a 19 year old complainant the Crown bears the onus of
proving that she
did not consent and if convicted the accused faces a maximum
sentence of 12 years imprisonment. On the other hand, if a 16 year
charged with having sexual intercourse with a 15 year old complainant the
accused bears the onus of proving that she did consent
and if convicted faces a
maximum sentence of 14 years
imprisonment.
In short, this provision may also create
confusion, produce contradictory results and erode public confidence in the law
and the administration
of criminal justice.
For the reasons discussed the Commission
has concluded that whilst it is always a serious offence for anyone to engage in
sexual intercourse
with a young person between the ages of 10 and 16 years of
age the law should distinguish between acts of that kind committed with
and acts committed without consent. Where it is alleged that a person has
engaged in sexual intercourse with a young person
in this age bracket without
consent, the appropriate charge should be one of rape. This would ensure that
the gravity of the allegations
was reflected in the gravity of the offence, that
children and young people were protected from sexual violation and that other
people charged with offences were not inappropriately stripped of the
presumption of innocence and other fundamental human rights.
It would also
ensure that heavy sentences were available for crimes of that nature. Where
lack of consent is not alleged the accused
should not have to address that issue
and the maximum penalty should be considerably less. However, as the Director
of Public Prosecutions
has pointed out, it should still be sufficient to permit
the imposition of heavy sentences in the odd case in which an older person
sexual intercourse with a 13 year old, albeit with her consent.
The scope of the defences
As previously mentioned, the defences
provided by subsection (3) are presently available only in cases where the
relevant sexual act
involved a child or young person over 10 years of age. It
should be noted that the age in question is not the age of consent. A
person may give a valid consent to sexual intercourse only upon attaining 16
years of age and the Commission does not recommend
changing the law in that
MCCOC noted that there was widespread
confusion between the age of consent and an age under which no defences of the
kind described
should have any application. It also noted that there were many
different opinions as to the age that was most appropriate for the
purpose and ultimately refrained from expressing any concluded view on this
A similar diversity of
views was reflected in submissions to the Commission. Indeed, some respondents
argued that there should
be no defences of this kind and that the protection
afforded to young people by this section should be wholly
unqualified.
The Commission accepts that there are
genuine grounds for concern that the existence of statutory defences should not
compromise the
principle that sexual intercourse with a person under the age of
consent is unacceptable. It is certainly true that the provisions
92E should be directed to ensuring the protection of those who are young and
vulnerable. However, the law must reflect
society’s concern for all young
and the Commission does
not accept that some can be protected from sexual abuse or exploitation only at
the expense of treating others
unfairly. Furthermore, in cases of this nature
the distinction between offenders and complainants is not always clear and
prosecution is not always desirable. For example, but for the defence
contained in subsection (3)(b) two mutually infatuated 15
year olds could be
prosecuted for having sexual intercourse with each other. The fact that they
were having a sexual relationship
with each other at that age may well be a
matter for concern but there may be more appropriate social responses than their
conviction and imprisonment.
Of course, the authorities might well
take the view that it would be inappropriate for charges to be laid in such
circumstances.
However, such a view has not always prevailed. In earlier years
when offences of this nature were unqualified and in some jurisdictions
rigorously enforced, charges would sometimes be laid against a young boy even if
he was younger than the girl with whom he had had
a sexual relationship and
there was no issue of non-consent. In NSW there was a practice of interviewing
girls who had given birth
prior to the age of 16 years and 9 months and
demanding that they identify the father. One would sometimes see a young couple
to court hand in hand with their baby. If they had been able to marry
prior to a defended hearing the ‘complainant’
might refuse to give
evidence on the ground of marital privilege but she would otherwise be forced
into the witness box to reluctantly
give evidence. In some cases she would be
threatened with being charged with contempt of court if she refused to give
evidence or
perjury if she lied to protect her partner. On occasions the desire
to protect a ‘complainant’ from an ‘offender’
to a new teenage mother being left to look after the baby unaided whilst the new
teenage father served his sentence.
Ultimately, the view was taken that this
was an unnecessarily harmful process and, at least in this jurisdiction, the
defence in paragraph
(3) (b) of section 92E was enacted. The Commission does
not accept that there would be any real utility in returning to the approach
taken in earlier years.
The impact of the proposed amendment
should not be overestimated. At common law there is a presumption that a
defendant is not guilty
of an offence if he or she had an honest and reasonable
belief in a state of facts which, had they existed, would have made the relevant
act non-criminal.
The defence
provided by paragraph (a) merely reflects this presumption and, by expressly
applying it to offences under subsection
(2), impliedly denies it any
application in relation to offences under subsection (1). The defence is
usually invoked in cases where
consensual sexual intercourse occurred a few
weeks or months before the complainant’
birthday and a
defendant claims that she told him she was already over that age or
circumstances such as meeting her in licensed
premises or seeing her driving a
car led him to form such a belief.
The alternative defence provided by
paragraph (b) is only available to a defendant who is no more than 2 years older
than the complainant.
Hence the defence can never be invoked by anyone more
than 17 years old.
RECOMMENDATION 3
Commission recommends that:
the offence under subsection (1) remain
unqualified by any statutory defence;
the maximum penalty for such offence be
increased to 20 years imprisonment;
the maximum penalty for an offence under
subsection (2) be set at 12 years; and
the requirement that the defendant prove
Maintaining
a sexual relationship with a young person
Section 92EA is in the following
(1) In this section -
means a person who has attained the age of 18 years;
`sexual act'
means an act that constitutes an offence under this Part but does not include an
act referred to in subsection 92E (2)
or 92K (2) if the person who committed the
act establishes the matters referred to in subsection 92E (3) or 92K (3), as the
may be, that would be a defence if the person had been charged with an
offence against subsection 92E (2) or 92K (2), as the case
` young person' means a person who is under the age of 16
(2) A person who, being an adult, maintains a sexual
relationship with a young person is guilty of an offence.
the purposes of subsection (2), an adult shall be taken to have maintained a
sexual relationship with a young person if the
adult has engaged in a sexual act
in relation to the young person on 3 or more occasions.
proceedings for an offence under subsection (2), evidence of a sexual act is not
inadmissible by reason only that it does not
disclose the date or the exact
circumstances in which the act occurred.
(5) Subject to subsection
(6), a person who is convicted of an offence under subsection (2) is liable to
imprisonment for 7 years.
(6) If a person convicted under
subsection (2) is found, during the course of the relationship, to have
committed another offence
under this Part in relation to the young person
(whether or not the person has been convicted of that offence), the offence
subsection (2) is punishable by imprisonment -
other offence is punishable by imprisonment for less than 14 years - for 14
(b) if the other offence is punishable by imprisonment
for a period of 14 years or more - for life.
(7) Subject to
subsection (8), a person may be charged in 1 indictment with an offence under
subsection (2) and with another offence
under this Part alleged to have been
committed by the person during the course of the alleged relationship and may be
convicted of
and punished for any or all of the offences so
(8) Notwithstanding subsection 443 (1), where a person
convicted of an offence under subsection (2) is sentenced to a term of
imprisonment
for that offence and a term of imprisonment for another offence
under this Part committed during the course of the relationship,
the court shall
not direct that those sentences be cumulative.
(9) A prosecution
for an offence under subsection (2) shall not be commenced except by, or with
the consent of, the Director of Public
Prosecutions."
This subsection was enacted in an
attempt to overcome the difficulties recognised by the High Court of Australia
that case the accused had been charged with a number of offences of incest, said
to have been committed on unnamed dates within
specified periods and the
complainant gave evidence of numerous acts of sexual intercourse within those
periods. As the High Court
pointed out, this gave rise to two main
First, it was unclear which of the acts
of sexual intercourse referred to in the complainant's evidence were said to
constitute the
offences charged in the indictment. This meant that the
conviction for any offence may not have reflected any finding that a particular
act constituting such an offence had been proven beyond reasonable doubt.
Different jurors might have had different incidents in
mind when they agreed
upon a verdict in relation to a particular count on the indictment. Some might
have had no particular incident
in mind but taken a global approach and
convicted on the basis that a sufficient number of the allegations must have
been true to
justify convictions for at least the number of offences charged.
This was contrary to the fundamental principle that the facts relied
constituting the elements of any criminal charge must be proven beyond
reasonable doubt.
Secondly, evidence of other acts of
sexual intercourse would have been admissible as similar fact evidence and/or as
evidence of an
inappropriate sexual attraction for the complainant only if that
evidence had been of sufficient probative value in relation to the
commission of
the acts said to have constituted the offences to outweigh any risk of undue
prejudice. The court held that, at the
very least, it would have been necessary
for the trial judge to have made it clear to the jury what acts were said to
the offences charged and what acts were relied upon as similar facts.
It would then have been necessary to explain the legal significance
similar fact evidence and how it might be taken into account in the jury's
deliberations.
In addition, concern was expressed that
the lack of specificity might prevent an accused from raising a defence of alibi
and, whatever
the verdict, make it difficult to apply the principle that a
person should not be tried again for the same alleged
It is clear from the second reading
speech in the Legislative Assembly that
was perceived as
highlighting the difficulty of securing a conviction when the child could not
remember precise particulars of each
act of sexual abuse. Hence, subsection (4)
provides that evidence of a sexual act is not inadmissible merely because it
disclose the date or exact circumstances in which the act occurred.
However, that was not the real problem identified in
Court did not rule that the date on which and/or circumstances in which a sexual
act occurred had to be established with
precision nor even finally determine
that the evidence had been inadmissible. On the contrary, it indicated that it
had decided
the matter without determining the admissibility of the evidence and
any doubt as to that issue was not due to lack of specificity,
but to the fact
that much of the evidence related to allegations which were not the subject of
any charge. The real problems identified
by the High Court were, as mentioned,
the need to ensure that the jury knew what act was relied upon by the Crown as
constituting
each offence charged, what acts were relied upon for other purposes
such as similar fact evidence or proof of an inappropriate sexual
attraction for
the complainant and how evidence of other acts might be taken into
In practice, the relevant acts can
usually be distinguished from one another by reference to some identifiable
factor even if the
date or exact circumstances cannot be recalled. For example,
one may have occurred whilst the family was on holiday at a particular
another may have occurred in a particular part of the house whilst still another
may have involved a different act or occurred
during a particular activity. All
that is necessary is that particular acts alleged by the Crown can be identified
as forming the
subject of particular charges and that others can be identified
as being relied upon only as similar fact evidence.
It cannot be denied that real problems
are sometimes encountered in this area, but section 92EA simply does not address
fact, an offence under section 92EA may be even more difficult to
prove than individual offences such as those with which the High
Court had been
concerned. The section requires proof beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
engaged in a sexual act which would
have constituted an offence under
on three or more occasions. If circumstances such as those
discussed in
are encountered it will still be necessary to identify
each of the particular sexual acts relied upon by the Crown and prove the
commission of each such act beyond reasonable doubt. Similar difficulties may
arise in distinguishing between the acts relied upon
as constituent elements of
an offence under the section and other acts said to be relevant on a similar
fact or propensity basis.
The problems referred to in
overcome by requiring the Crown to prove three or more sexual acts rather than
In theory, of course, there is a
distinction between the maintenance of a sexual relationship with a child or
young person and particular
acts committed during the course of that
relationship. However, the High Court has held that the actus reus of the
comparable Queensland
offence lies in the commission of the sexual acts in
relation to the young person on three or more
. Hence, the section
merely creates an umbrella offence dependent upon proof of three or more
constituent criminal acts and the difficulties
encountered in
continue to be encountered in relation to the proof of each such
It has been suggested that the
comparable Queensland section may have been enacted to provide heavier penalties
when three or more
sexual acts have been committed upon the same child or young
. However, the ACT
provisions governing penalties are also quite illogical. Subsection (5)
provides a maximum penalty of 7 years
imprisonment. This is absurdly low given
that a jury must be satisfied that the accused has committed a sexual act
constituting
an offence under
on three or more
occasions. The maximum penalties presently prescribed for engaging in sexual
intercourse with a young person are
17 or 14 years imprisonment depending on the
age of the young person concerned whilst the corresponding penalties for
an act of indecency upon a young person are 12 and 10 years
respectively.
These sentencing provisions are subject
to subsection (6) which provides that if the offender committed ‘another
offence under
this Part’ in relation to the young person during the course
of the relationship then the maximum penalty is dependent upon
the penalty
described for the other offence. If the other offence is punishable by
imprisonment for less than 14 years, the penalty
for the offence under section
92EA is increased to 14 years but if that other offence is punishable by
imprisonment for a period
of 14 years or more then the maximum penalty for the
offence under section 92EA is increased to life imprisonment. In the context
an offence which is, in effect, characterised by the commission of 'three or
more' constituent offences of the relevant kind,
it is difficult to understand
the importance attributed to 'another offence' of that
Overall, one offence under section 92E
or 92K will expose the offender to a maximum sentence of 10 to 17 years
imprisonment, three
will result in a discount or 'package deal' involving a
maximum aggregate penalty of 7 years, whilst a fourth will increase that
aggregate to either 14 years or life imprisonment. However, the fourth sexual
act will apparently increase the maximum penalty only
if the prosecutor chooses
to treat it as 'another offence' rather than as being one of the three 'or more'
sexual acts upon which
the charge is essentially founded. The standard or
'discount rate' provided by subsection (5) otherwise
Subsection (7) permits a person charged
with an offence of that kind to also be convicted and punished for discrete
offences under
even though they were committed during the course of the
relationship in question. However, it seems that the same offence cannot
based upon one of the three or more acts relied upon to constitute the offence
under section 92EA or the offender would be punished
twice for the same
It is difficult to avoid the conclusion
that the section simply lacks any real utility. Since each of the relevant acts
must be proven
beyond reasonable doubt and each must constitute another offence
, the section does little more than create a new umbrella offence
consisting of a series of three or more constituent offences with
a discounted
aggregate penalty. It will inevitably be less complicated and more efficient to
charge the alleged offender with each
of those discrete offences. In that event
a failure to prove one of the series of acts relied upon would lead to an
acquittal only
in relation to a discrete charge based upon that act rather than
an overall acquittal in relation to a composite charge under section
would also be much easier for a jury to understand such an
As things stand the section gives the
impression of offering advantages that do not in fact exist. This impression
was reflected
in a number of submissions seeking to support its retention on the
basis of perceptions that it did somehow overcome the problems
encountered in
though none of the proponents were able to explain how it could do
The Commission is conscious of the fact
that MCCOC has also recommended the enactment of a similar
Regrettably,
however, whilst adverting to possible means of providing sufficient
particularity and acknowledging concerns as to
possible unfairness, MCCOC did
not seem to fully grasp the nature of the problems posed by
report quoted a passage from the judgment of Dawson J concerning the absence of
specificity and mentioned other criticisms
including difficulties in relation to
similar fact evidence.
the particular passage quoted did not refer to the fundamental problem that
because the particular act said to constitute
a particular offence could not be
identified a person might be convicted when all jurors were not satisfied that
the same act had
been proven. Indeed, he might be convicted simply on basis
that he was thought to have had a general disposition to commit offences
kind charged.
MCCOC envisaged
that each juror would have to be satisfied about the same three acts but did not
seem to realise that trebling the
number of acts that had to be proven would
merely mean that the more substantial problems posed by
would arise
in relation to each of the three acts. The commission intends no criticism of
MCCOC. It considered these issues at length
and its inability to find adequate
solutions merely reflects the intractable nature of the
In the only case in which a charge under
section 92EA has apparently proceeded to trial, the trial judge observed that
the inclusion
of a count alleging an offence of this kind had added nothing to
the Crown case and had caused unnecessary delay and
complication.
In fact, the most
significant consequence of the enactment of this section seems to have been the
creation of confusion and it is
always dangerous to inject confusion into a
criminal trial. It has also been suggested that the introduction of the
comparable Queensland
offence has increased the risk of unfair trials and
miscarriage of
The answer to every evidentiary
difficulty is not to be found in the enactment of legislation creating new
offences. Problems such
as those actually encountered in
almost always be overcome by a more thorough investigation and the exercise of
greater care in the formulation of discrete charges,
the "proofing" of witnesses
and the conduct of the prosecution case. In any event, as Gaudron and McHugh JJ
: ‘Whatever practical difficulties may exist, those
difficulties (even if amounting to impossibility) cannot justify a criminal
trial attended by such uncertainty that the verdict or verdicts must also be
seen as uncertain.’
Accordingly, the Commission is of the view that the section should be repealed.
The Director of Public Prosecutions supports that
It would be theoretically possible to
draft a new statutory provision that would overcome the legal obligation to
specify which acts
were relied upon in relation to particular counts in the
indictment. However, any such provision would involve a serious incursion
the fundamental principle that each charge must be specified with sufficient
precision to enable the jury to know what acts
are alleged to constitute the
offence and the accused to know what are the allegations he or she has to
address. Such imprecision
would not only create a risk of verdicts based on
generalised feelings that ‘where there’s smoke there’s
but prevent the accused from effectively testing the credibility of
the allegations or relying upon an alibi.
Furthermore, the creation of any offence
involving such generalised allegations might give rise to cross-examination as
to the complainants’
sexual experience. Whilst evidence as to sexual
history is normally excluded, suggestions that some other person might have been
responsible for the offence with which the accused has been charged must be
permitted. If the charge in question were to involve
a generalised history of
unspecified acts of sexual abuse over an extended period then it is difficult to
see how cross-examination
as to any sexual conduct during the same period could
be excluded.
The need for such a provision has
certainly not been demonstrated. There has been no suggestion that problems of
the kind in fact
discussed in
have prevented the
successful prosecution of any offenders in this territory. Indeed, it seems
likely that much of the impetus for
the enactment of section 92EA stemmed from a
misunderstanding of the nature and extent of the problems posed by
In the absence of any demonstrated need for such a provision, the Commission
would be unable to recommend its enactment. There
are grounds for fearing that
the introduction of some new and largely amorphous offence would create
substantial risk of injustice,
open the door to inquiries into the sexual
history of complainants and offer a ready excuse for inadequate
investigations.
RECOMMENDATION 4
Commission recommends that section 92EA be repealed.
The provisions dealing with acts of
indecency are as follows:
92F Act of indecency in the
first degree
A person who inflicts grievous bodily harm upon
another person with intent to commit an act of indecency upon, or in the
of, that other person, or a third person who is present or nearby, is
guilty of an offence punishable on conviction, by imprisonment
92G Act of indecency in the second degree
person who inflicts actual bodily harm upon another person with intent to commit
an act of indecency upon, or in the presence of,
that other person, or a third
person who is present or nearby, is guilty of an offence punishable, on
conviction, by imprisonment
for 12 years."
92H Act of indecency in
the third degree
A person who unlawfully assaults, or threatens to
inflict grievous or actual bodily harm upon, another person with intent to
an act of indecency upon, or in the presence of, that other person, or a
third person who is present or nearby, is guilty of an offence
punishable, on
conviction, by imprisonment for 10 years."
92J Act of indecency
without consent
(1) A person who commits an act of indecency upon,
or in the presence of, another person without the consent of that person and who
knows that that other person does not consent, or who is reckless as to whether
that other person consents, to the committing of
the act of indecency is guilty
of an offence punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 5
(2) A person who, acting in company with any other person,
commits an act of indecency upon, or in the presence of, another person
the consent of that other person and who knows that that other person does not
consent, or who is reckless as to whether
that other person consents, to the
committing of the act of indecency is guilty of an offence punishable, on
conviction, by imprisonment
for 7 years.
The term ‘act of indecency’
is not defined in the
and there have been few cases in which the
meaning of the term has been considered. However, it appears to refer to any
offends against the contemporary standards of propriety ‘accepted
by ordinary, decent minded but not unduly sensitive
The House of
Lords has observed that whether ‘right thinking’ people will
consider an action indecent will sometime
depend upon the purpose for which the
act is carried out. Hence, an act carried out for a legitimate medical purpose
considered indecent even though a similar act carried out for
prurient interest might well
The sections relating to offences
involving acts of indecency follow the same pattern as those dealing with sexual
assault and raise
much the same issues. However, sexual activity between
consenting adults would not normally offend against standards of propriety
according to contemporary standards of the Australian community and hence could
not constitute an act of
Nonetheless explicit
requirements that the act of indecency be committed without consent and with
knowledge or recklessness as to
that lack of consent are contained in section
92J but not in sections 92F, 92G or 92H. For reasons which have already been
in the context of offences relating to sexual intercourse, the
Commission does not accept that such a distinction is either necessary
desirable. The offences carry maximum penalties of 5 to 15 years imprisonment
and should be defined with due clarity.
It is appropriate that the legislative
scheme for offences of this kind follow the same pattern as that adopted in
relation to rape
so that the correlation of elements other than sexual
intercourse will facilitate the availability of alternative verdicts. Hence,
is again recommended that the number of offences be reduced to three, an offence
of committing an act of indecency without consent,
an aggravated form of that
offence and assault with intent to commit an act of indecency without consent.
The distinguishing features
of the aggravated offence would be either acting in
company or the infliction of grievous bodily harm immediately before, during
immediately after an act of indecency. Other aggravating features would be
taken into account in sentencing.
The Commission is of the view that 5
years imprisonment is an insufficient maximum sentence for offences involving
the commission
of an act of indecency. Such offences may vary widely in nature
and gravity. The Commission recommends that the maximum sentence
for an act of
indecency be increased to 7 years imprisonment and that the maximum sentence for
an aggravated act of indecency be
set at 15 years
imprisonment.
The Commission also recommends that
there be a third offence of assault with intent to commit an act of indecency
without consent.
This offence would again cover any unusual cases in which an
antecedent assault or threat was not sufficiently proximate to amount
an attempt to commit such an act. A maximum penalty of 7 years imprisonment is
also proposed for this offence.
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends that:
(a) the number of offences
relating to acts of indecency be reduced to 3. The offences should be:
aggravated act of indecency;
assault with intent to commit an
act of indecency.
(b) The maximum sentence for acts of
indecency and assaults with intent to commit acts of indecency should be 7 years
and the maximum
sentence for the commission of an aggravated act of indecency
should be 15 years.
Indecent assault upon a child or a young
The provisions dealing with acts of
indecency upon children or young people are contained in section 92K which is in
the following
(1) A person who commits an act of
indecency upon, or in the presence of, another person who is under the age of 10
years is guilty
of an offence punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 12
(2) A person who commits an act of indecency upon, or in
the presence of, another person who is under the age of 16 years is guilty
offence punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 10
(3) It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence under
subsection (2) if the defendant establishes that:
(a) he or she
believed on reasonable grounds that the person upon whom the offence is alleged
to have been committed was of or above
the age of 16 years;
(b) at the time of the alleged offence -
person on whom the offence is alleged to have been committed was of or above the
age of 10 years; and
(ii) the defendant was not more than 2 years
and that that person consented to the committing
of the act of indecency.
Section 92K adopts the same formulation
in relation to acts of indecency upon children and young persons as section 92E
relation to engaging in sexual intercourse in relation in relation to
young complainants and the same considerations arise.
RECOMMENDATION 6
The Commission recommends
that section 92K be amended as follows:
that the offence under subsection (1)
remain unqualified by any statutory defence;
the maximum penalty for such an offence
be increased to 15 years;
the maximum penalty for an offence under
subsection (2) be reduced to 6
that subsection (3) be amended by
deleting the words `and that that person consented to the committing of the act
of indecency'.
Incest and Similar
Section 92L is in the following
(1) A person who engages in sexual intercourse
with another person, being a person who is under the age of 10 years and who is,
the knowledge of the first-mentioned person, his or her lineal descendant,
sister, half-sister, brother, half-brother or step-child,
is guilty of an
offence punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 20
(2) A person who engages in sexual intercourse with another
person, being a person who is under the age of 16 years and who is, to
knowledge of the first-mentioned person, his or her lineal descendant, sister,
half-sister, brother, half-brother or step-child,
is guilty of an offence
punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 15 years.
person who engages in sexual intercourse with another person, being a person who
is of or above the age of 16 years and who
is, to the knowledge of the
first-mentioned person, his or her lineal ancestor, lineal descendant, sister,
half-sister, brother or
half-brother, is guilty of an offence punishable, on
conviction, by imprisonment for 10
person shall not be convicted of an offence under subsection (2) or (3) if there
is evidence that he or she engaged in the act
alleged to constitute the offence
under the coercion of the person with whom the offence is alleged to have been
committed unless
that evidence is rebutted by the Crown.
person charged with an offence under this section shall, unless there is
evidence to the contrary, be presumed to have known
at the time of the alleged
offence that he or she and the person with whom the offence is alleged to have
been committed were related
in the manner charged.
(7) In this
section, 'step-child', in relation to a person, means a person in relation to
whom the first-mentioned person stands in
loco parentis
It may be noted that the reference to a
`step-child' which appears in subsections (1) and (2) has been omitted from
subsection (3).
This is obviously intended to protect children from sexual
exploitation by step parents but to decriminalise sexual intercourse
person who is or has been a step parent and a current or former step-child who
has now attained the age of sixteen.
The former ACT Chief Police Officer
suggested that this provision should be amended to include persons performing a
parental role
at the time of the offence, including aunts and uncles, foster
parents and carers. The commission agrees that it would be appropriate
expand the ambit of the offence though at least in some circumstances some of
the people suggested as examples might fall within
the concept of persons 'in
loco parentis'. That phrase refers to a person 'in the place of a parent:
instead of a parent: charged,
factitiously, with a parent's rights, duties and
responsibilities'
. Such a person
must have acted in a manner evincing an intention to put himself or herself in
loco parentis and, it has been held,
must have assumed the duty of providing for
the child's financial needs. Jessel M.R. offered the following
description:
What is the meaning of a “person in
loco parentis”? I cannot do better than refer to the definition of it
given by Lord
Eldon ... Lord Eldon says it is a person, 'meaning to put himself
in loco parentis - in the situation of the person described as
the lawful father
of the child.' Upon that Lord Cottenham observes: 'But this definition must, I
conceive, be considered as applicable
to those parental offices and duties to
which the subject in question has reference, viz, to the office and duty of the
make provision for the child. The offices and duties of a parent are
infinitely various, some having no connection whatever with
making provision for
a child; and it would be most illogical, from the mere exercise of any such
offices or duties by one not the
father, to infer an intention of such person to
assume also the duty of providing for the child.' So that a person in loco
means a person taking upon himself the duty of a father to make
provision for the
This definition was offered 120 years
ago and in the context of proceedings by a mother to recover monies previously
loaned to her
son from his estate and a different construction of the phrase
might now be adopted in the context of section 92L. Nonetheless,
the section
should be couched in terms which make it quite clear that criminal liability is
not dependent upon the assumption of
financial support but the offender's
position in the family vis a vis the child. It is the betrayal of trust by a
person to whom
the child was entitled to look for nurture, protection and
innocent affection that makes incest upon a child such a grave offence
the Commission’s view the section should apply to anyone fulfilling a
parental role.
RECOMMENDATION 7
Commission recommends that subsection (7) be amended to the following:
In this section, 'step-child', in
relation to a person, means a person with whom the first-mentioned person lives
and in relation
to whom the first mentioned person has assumed a caring role of
the kind that would normally be fulfilled by a
Section 92M is in the following
A person who abducts another person by force or
by any other means or who unlawfully detains another person with the intent that
other person should engage in sexual intercourse with the first-mentioned
person or with a third person (whether within the Territory
or otherwise) is
guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 10
The maximum sentence of 10 years
imprisonment set for this offence seems inadequate by comparison with sections
92B and 92C which
relate to the infliction of actual bodily harm or unlawful
assaults or threats with intent to engage in sexual intercourse. Those
carry maximum penalties of 14 and 12 years respectively.
Furthermore,
makes it an
offence to lead, take, entice away or detain a person with intent to hold that
person for ransom "or any other advantage
to any person". That offence is
punishable by imprisonment for 15 years or 20 years if the complainant suffers
grievous bodily harm.
The concept of "an advantage" has been widely construed
and abducting or detaining another person with a view to engaging in sexual
intercourse would appear to fall within this section were it not for the
existence of section 92M. However, it may be argued that
section 92M displaces
insofar as it might otherwise have extended to offences of this kind
by virtue of the
generalibus specialia derogant
rule of statutory
construction.
The most obvious means of resolving
these anomalies is to repeal section 92M. The offence created by that section
offers no obvious
practical advantages over that created by
section 92M were repealed the scope for any argument based upon the
generalibus specialia derogant
rule of statutory construction would be
removed. Any conceivable doubt about the application of
removed by adding a phrase making it clear that the necessary intent may be to
engage in sexual intercourse with any person.
If, despite this view, section
92M were to be retained the maximum penalty should be increased to correspond
with the penalties
RECOMMENDATION 8
The Commission
recommends that:
section 92M be repealed; and
be amended by adding after the
words ‘advantage to any person’ the words ‘including sexual
intercourse with the
person so detained or any other
Child Pornography
Offences of child pornography do not
fall clearly within the concept of 'sexual assault' and may appear to be outside
the Commission's
terms of reference. However, section 92EA defines a "sexual
act" to mean an act that constitutes an offence under
and at face value
that would extend to offences involving child pornography. Of course, not every
sexual act amounts to an assault
but the Commission has taken the view that it
is appropriate to extend the review which it was authorised to conduct to those
which seek to prevent the sexual exploitation of children and young
The relevant sections are as
92NA Employment of young persons for
pornographic purposes
(1) A person who employs or permits
the employment, whether for reward or not, of a person who is under the age of
16 years (in this
section referred to as the `young
(a) to engage in an act of a sexual nature, or to be in
the presence of another person who is engaged in an act of a sexual nature,
being an act that would, in the circumstances, offend a reasonable adult person;
(b) for the purpose of depicting or otherwise representing, by
means of a film, photograph, drawing, audio tape, video tape or any
other means,
the young person as being engaged in, or as being in the presence of another
person engaged in, an act of a sexual nature
where the depiction or other
representation of the young person in those circumstances would offend a
reasonable adult person;
is guilty of an offence punishable, on
conviction, by imprisonment for 10 years.
(2) In subsection (1),
`an act of a sexual nature' means sexual intercourse or an act of
indecency."
92NB Possession of child
pornography
(1) A person who knowingly has in his or her
possession a film, photograph, drawing, audio tape, video tape or any other
thing depicting
or otherwise representing a young person engaged in, or in the
presence of another person engaged in, an act of a sexual nature,
depiction or representation that would offend a reasonable adult person, is
guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction,
by imprisonment for 5
(2) It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against
subsection (1) that the defendant reasonably believed that the person
or otherwise represented as a young person was not under the age of 16
(3) In this section -
young person' means a
person who is under the age of 16 years.
The former Chief Police Officer pointed
out that subsection (1) unnecessarily confines the concept of child pornography.
In particular
it requires that the young person depicted be engaged in an act of
a sexual nature. Hence, it would not apply to visual representations
sexual organs or anal region of a young person not engaged in such an
In many cases the nature of the pose
adopted for the photographer might be construed as 'an act of a sexual nature'
but there may
be circumstances in which such a construction would not be
available. For example, the child might be photographed whilst asleep.
obviously desirable to amend the legislation to ensure that all such cases are
However, there may be legitimate reasons
for taking photographs of, or otherwise depicting, such areas of the body. For
textbooks on gynaecology and other areas of physiology or human
development might contain such photographs or depictions. There may
circumstances in which visual representations of the sexual organs or anal
region of a particular child might be necessary
for some legitimate medical
purpose. Furthermore, if a child had been savagely beaten and criminal charges
laid against the offender
one might expect that the investigating police or
welfare officers would ensure that photographs were taken of the bruising even
if that was substantially on the buttocks. It is important to ensure that the
legislation does not actually restrict the obtaining
of relevant evidence and
hence hamper prosecutions for offences against.
The terms of section 92NB also fail to
deal with written material advocating sexual relations with children. The
Commission is of
the view that possession of such material should be an offence
if the possessor intended that it be used to be used to persuade children
submit to acts of paedophilia. However, there is again a need to ensure that
any amendment to section 92NB does not prevent the
possession of such material
for the purpose of drawing the matter to the attention of the police,
investigating the conduct of those
who may have prepared or distributed it or
some other legitimate purpose. For example, the submission by
enclosed a sample of an
internet web page setting out the type of things that paedophiles are said to
tell children. It would plainly
be inappropriate to criminalise the provision
of information to the authorities in circumstances of this
RECOMMENDATION 9
The Commission
recommends that section 92NB be amended by:
adding after the words 'sexual nature'
in subsection (1) the words 'or the sexual organs or anus of a young person';
adding to subsection (2) the words 'or
that the film, photograph, drawing, audio tape, video tape or thing was in his
or her possession
for a legitimate medical or educational purpose or for
purposes associated with the investigation of possible criminal offences and
the maintenance of legal proceedings.'
by the addition of the following further
subsections:
A person who knowingly has in his or her
possession a film, photograph, drawing, audio tape, video tape, document or any
other thing
with the intention that it be used in an attempt to persuade a young
person to engage in an act of a sexual nature is guilty of an
punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 5 years.
A person shall be taken to possess such
film, photograph, drawing, audio tape, video tape, document or thing with the
intention specified
in subsection (3) if he or she possesses it with the
intention of attempting to persuade a young person to engage in an act of a
sexual nature by making any statement or adopting any strategy of a kind
suggested in it.
Other issues relating to
paedophilia
Subject to the matters already discussed
the substantive law concerning offences of paedophilia would appear to be
adequate. However,
whilst it is obviously important to ensure that offenders
can be effectively prosecuted, it is also important to take any reasonably
available measures to minimise the risk of such offences occurring. A number of
issues have arisen in relation to the objective
of averting the risk of
paedophilia.
The issue of known or suspected
paedophiles loitering near places frequented by children has been one area of
significant concern.
Various strategies have been suggested and some have
actually been adopted. Regrettably, none appears wholly
satisfactory.
One strategy has been the compilation
and publication of paedophile registers. There may be sound reasons for the
authorities to
maintain registers of that kind but whilst understanding the
concerns that may have led individuals to publish lists of names, the
does not believe that the practice is acceptable. Lists of that kind may lead
to violence or harassment. Any measures
to prevent crime should involve
enforcing the law; not subverting it. There are other potential problems. The
wrong people could
be the subject of such assaults or harassment. The
information relied upon could be unreliable, there could be an error in the
transposition
of names or the name of a person previously convicted of such an
offence might remain on the list after the conviction had been set
appeal. Furthermore, in any city there are many people with the same names and
the publication of even correctly recorded
names might well involve destroying
the reputation of innocent people and exposing them to inappropriate hostility.
A spate of defamation
cases would be virtually inevitable unless defaming the
innocent were to be authorised by statute and any remedy
In any event, the measure would be of
limited utility. The information so published would not necessarily enable a
school principal
to put a name to the face across the road from the school each
afternoon. Nor would it authorise the principal or anyone else to
A further strategy has been to make it
an offence for a person convicted of certain offences to loiter near places
frequented by children
without reasonable excuse. Under
section 60B
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) it is an offence punishable by imprisonment for one
year for a person who has previously been found guilty of certain specified
offences to loiter without reasonable excuse in or near a school, kindergarten
or child care centre.
The Commission is concerned to ensure
that the civil liberties of people who may have no criminal intent are not
unduly infringed,
but believes that there is an overriding need to ensure the
protection of children. However, it considers that the Victorian offence
wide in scope and that it is unlikely to provide an adequate remedy for the type
of situation commonly encountered. For example,
the section extends to
loitering in or near 'a public place within the meaning of the
Vagrancy Act
(Vic) regularly frequented by children and in which children are
present at the time of the loitering'. The problem is that this
description is
almost all embracing. Libraries, parks, and even streets and footpaths could
fall within this description. Such
inappropriately wide provisions may either
be abused or fall into disuse
It is important to ensure that any provisions of this nature are carefully
drafted so that they achieve the protection sought.
The Victorian provision is also
inadequate because it operates only in relation to people who have been found
guilty of offences and
contains no mechanism for establishing the identity of
people seen loitering. Hence there is no way of establishing whether they
been so convicted.
Whilst it may involve some incursion
into the usual right to privacy the Commission has concluded that police
officers should be authorised
to demand the name and address of persons found
loitering near schools, kindergartens or child care centres. Police would, of
be expected to exercise due discretion in deciding whether such a power
should be exercised in particular circumstances. Compliance
should be compelled
by making it an offence to refuse to supply such information or to supply
information which is false.
The Magistrates Court should also be
empowered to grant orders restraining people from loitering in or near schools,
kindergartens
or child care centres when there are reasonable grounds for
suspecting that children might be in danger from such a person. The
power provided by section 197 of the
Magistrates Court Act 1930
the court to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the person has
caused or threatened personal injury or damage
to property or has behaved in an
offensive or harassing manner. However, a person sitting in a car outside a
school, handing out
chocolates and offering to drive children home may not fit
into any of these categories.
It may be necessary to limit the range
of people entitled to apply for such an order because people may watch schools
for legitimate
reasons and there may be circumstances in which those reasons
should remain confidential. For example, police surveillance with
detecting drug dealing should not be hindered by constant applications, whether
made by well meaning but uninformed parents
or people with more sinister
motives. However, the Commission is of the view that police officers, school
principals and those in
charge of kindergartens or child care centres should be
entitled to seek such orders.
Of course the fact that a person has
been convicted of an offence under sections 92A to 92NA of the
would clearly be relevant but the granting of relief would not be dependent upon
proof of such a conviction. The other provisions
Magistrates Court Act
would also apply to such orders, including the
provisions of section 206L which provides maximum penalties for breach of such
of 2 years imprisonment for a first offence and 5 years imprisonment for
a subsequent offence. Those penalties are, of course, significantly
than those provided for an offence under section 60B of the Victorian
This proposal should overcome a number
of the deficiencies of the Victorian provision. It would provide a means of
ascertaining the
identity of anyone found loitering near schools in suspicious
circumstances, provide a remedy for such behaviour even if the person
previous convictions and enable any prosecution to proceed on the clear cut
basis of breach of a restraining order without
recourse to arguments about
concepts of reasonableness.
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends:
that police officers be authorised to
demand the name and address of persons found loitering near schools,
kindergartens or child
care centres;
that it be made an offence either to
refuse to supply such information or to supply information which is false in any
material particular;
that section 197 of the
Magistrates
be amended to authorise the court to grant orders, on the
application of police officers, school principals or those in charge of
kindergartens or child care centres, restraining people from loitering in or
near schools, kindergartens or child care centres when
there are reasonable
grounds for suspecting that children might be in danger from such a person.
RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE
CONCEPT OF CONSENT
The concept of consent is not presently
defined by the
Crimes Act 1900
. However, section 92P does provide that consent
'is negated' in certain circumstances. That section is in the following terms:
(1) For the purposes of section 92D, paragraph 92E (3)
(b), section 92J and paragraph 92K (3) (b) and without limiting the grounds
which it may be established that consent is negated, the consent of a person to
sexual intercourse with another person, or to
the committing of an act of
indecency by or with another person, is negated if that consent is
by the infliction of violence
or force on the person, or on a third person who is present or
(b) by a threat to inflict violence or
force on a person, or on a third person who is present or
(c) by a threat to inflict violence or force on, or to use
extortion against, the person or another person;
(d) by a threat
to publicly humiliate or disgrace, or to physically or mentally harass, the
person or another person;
(e) by the effect of intoxicating
liquor, a drug or an anaesthetic;
(f) by a mistaken belief as to
the identity of that other person;
(g) by a fraudulent
misrepresentation of any fact made by the other person, or by a third person to
the knowledge of the other person;
(h) by the abuse by the other
person of his or her position of authority over, or professional or other trust
in relation to, the
(i) by the person's physical
relation to which the consent
is given; or
(j) by the unlawful
detention of the person.
(2) A person who does not offer actual
physical resistance to sexual intercourse shall not, by reason only of that
fact, be regarded
as consenting to the sexual
intercourse.
(3) Where it is established that a person who knows
the consent of another person to sexual intercourse or the committing of an act
of indecency has been caused by any of the means set out in paragraphs (1) (a)
to (j) (inclusive), the person shall be deemed to
know that the other person
does not consent to the sexual intercourse or the act of indecency, as the case
The concept of consent is of fundamental
importance to this area of the law. In earlier years the legality of sexual
acts was frequently
dependent upon societal judgements about the intrinsic
morality of the behaviour in question. Such behaviour was criminalised if
perceived to be contrary to biblical commandments or unnatural. Hence,
adultery, homosexuality and sodomy were all crimes. The
contemporary approach
adopted in Australia and most western countries has been to criminalise the
commission of sexual acts by and
upon adults only if they are committed without
the other person's consent.
This approach has been sometimes been
challenged. Robin West has suggested that women often redefine themselves as
'giving selves'
and that consent is little more than a defence against fear
borne of a general threat of masculine
. Catharine MacKinnon
has gone further, suggesting that consent has no useful role to play in
delineating lawful from unlawful sexual
acts because the concept of consent
presupposes a choice which women in fact do not
. Whilst not going so far as
to suggest that women lack the capacity to choose whether to participate in
sexual conduct, Dr Easteal
raised somewhat similar concerns in her submission,
suggesting that 'the consent/non-consent dichotomy itself may be too narrow to
allow for women's experience ...'. She referred to coercion in relationships
that have at some time involved consensual sexual activity
and explained: 'The
language and legal interpretation of consent neither correspond with the
victims' reality nor capture the range
of coercive behaviours such as
interpersonal intimidation that involve threats that are not physical (her fear
that he will leave
her if she refuses) and social
expectations.'
The American legal philosopher, David
Luban, has advocated a somewhat different test, maintaining that the critical
issue should not
be 'consent' but 'assent'. He has suggested that the basis of
an offence of rape could be reformulated as having sexual intercourse
another person 'without making sure that she wanted
It is by no means clear
that Prof Luban was suggesting that there could be assent only if those in
question were motivated by an
actual desire for sexual intercourse rather than
affection, consideration for the needs of people they loved or even financial
However, in suggesting the use of the word 'assent' rather than 'consent'
he may have been attempting to articulate a similar concept
to that which Dr
Easteal and others have described as 'a positive consent standard'. Dr Easteal
explained: 'Thus, importantly, if
a woman said nothing, it no longer could be
interpreted by the court as meaning yes'. Her belief that Victoria is the only
in which 'the complainant no longer has to prove that she
communicated her lack of consent' is actually quite incorrect. The law
ACT certainly contains no such requirement, though the absence of a clear
legislative statement concerning the nature of consent
may contribute to
misunderstandings of that kind. In any event, the Commission is in general
agreement with Dr Esteal’s view
that a positive consent standard should be
articulated.
As presently formulated section 92P
offers little real guidance as to what is envisaged by the term 'consent'. It
merely provides
that, whatever it may be, consent is negated in the
circumstances stipulated. Whilst statutory definitions frequently require some
qualification, it is generally undesirable to attempt to cast light on the
meaning of important terms only by offering explanations
in purely negative
terms. Such an approach is particularly undesirable in this area of the law
because it inevitably tends to shift
the focus from the crucial issue of whether
there was actual consent to what are, at best, secondary issues, such as the
of violence or threats. Any provision that refers to consent only by
reference to the absence of certain factors is likely to be
at best confusing
and at worst misleading.
Unfortunately, section 92P is not only
cast in purely negative terms but fails to articulate even those negative
propositions with
due clarity. The concept of consent must be explained to a
jury in terms that are reasonably comprehensible to people with no legal
training and who have varying levels of intelligence and education.
Furthermore, consent will often be the decisive issue which
will determine
whether a person is convicted of one or more very serious offences, punishable
by heavy sentences of imprisonment
or acquitted and released. The concept must
therefore be defined in terms which will be clear and fair not only in common or
situations but in any circumstances with which a jury may be
confronted. Yet any attempt to construe, let alone explain, this section
attended by a number of serious problems.
First, the concept of consent being
`negated' is potentially confusing. Is it intended to mean that even though
there may have been
an appearance of consent there will have been no actual
consent if the acts or omissions creating such an appearance have been brought
intended to mean that even if there has been actual
consent, that will be
'negated' in the sense that it will be deemed never to have been given, if it
was brought about by one of the
circumstances mentioned in the section? Are
both meanings embraced by the term? The reference to such matters as force and
would appear to suggest that the first of these interpretations must be
correct because consent must be free and
. On the other hand,
the reference to the abuse of a position of trust suggests the latter
construction may be correct. It seems
to imply that even if there has been a
free and voluntary consent, the legal effect of that consent may be in some way
impugned by
reference to the nature of the relationship which had existed
between those concerned. This distinction may be of great significance
certain types of cases.
Secondly, the phrase 'caused by' gives
rise to difficulties in interpretation. Is it intended to mean the sole cause,
the dominant
cause, or a contributing factor? Does it require anything more
than the so called 'but for' test? The 'but for' test is satisfied
if 'but for'
one thing something else would not have occurred. Hence, a sunny day may be
said to ‘cause’ someone to
go swimming. It is obviously necessary
for a jury to understand what impact the relevant factors must have on the
consent or apparent
consent if this requirement is to be
Thirdly, problems arise in relation to
the manner in which the factors said to negate consent have been defined. For
example, it
is unclear whether the reference to the 'effect of intoxicating
liquor, a drug or an anaesthetic' is intended to mean that the person
rendered unconscious, that she has become incapable of understanding what is
intended or of exercising a free choice, that
her judgment has been impaired, or
merely that her inhibitions have been lowered. Is it sufficient that but for
the effect of the
alcohol she might not have been in the mood to consent? The
inclusion of the term 'anaesthetic' tends to suggest that some serious
interference with her capacity to understand and make a decision is required.
However, even that supposition would not dispel every
difficulty of
interpretation. Is every person who gets drunk and has sexual intercourse with
someone else to be taken to have been
raped? If both were drunk should each be
taken to have raped the other?
Of course, it is by no means uncommon for people to get drunk or use narcotic
drugs and then to have sexual intercourse. It should
not be necessary for
police or lawyers to have to guess at the meaning of vaguely worded statutory
provisions or to operate in a
state of uncertainty until a case is appealed and
a Full Court's hypothesis becomes authoritative.
In some cases the overall effect of the
provision of section 92P will make it almost impossible to define the boundaries
of the offence.
For example, the reference to “the abuse of any
professional or other relationship of trust” is so vague that it virtually
defies interpretation. This provision, which is found only in the ACT, is not
confined to professional relationships, such as medical
practitioner and
patient, teacher and pupil or counsellor and client, in which one person may be
thought to be emotionally vulnerable
to any potential exploitation by the other.
It is expressly extended to 'other' relationships that are undefined save by a
to the description 'of trust'. It remains a matter of speculation
whether this description is intended to apply to such relationships
friends or lovers. Indeed, a marriage might be described as a relationship of
trust. The paragraph also offers no guidance
as to what is meant by 'an abuse'
of the relationship. It is presumably intended to mean some sort of emotional
manipulation or
exploitation of the other. In some cases it may be contended
that the mere fact that the other person has engaged in sexual activity
more vulnerable person constitutes abuse. However it is by no means clear that
that is what is intended. The section simply
does not say. Suppose, for
example, a solicitor forms a relationship with a client involving consensual
sexual activity. Would
that amount to a relevant abuse of the solicitor-client
relationship negating consent? If so, then despite the terms of section
would it make any difference if they married? If not, what would
be required to constitute an abuse of the relationship, negating
consent and
exposing at least one of the participants to the risk of conviction? Would
there have to be discrete acts of misconduct
directed to overcome the
complainant's resistance to engaging in the relevant act of sexual intercourse
or could the Crown rely upon
more generalised allegations of abuse of the
relationship? What is the nature and extent of the conduct that would need to
The section provides no answers to any of these
These problems have a cumulative effect
with one layer of confusion being added to another. A jury may have to grapple
with critical
questions of guilt or innocence without really knowing what facts
have to be proven to the requisite standard and what significance
they may have
if they are. Hence, in the example postulated the section would offer little
guidance as to the significance of any
abusive behaviour they found proven.
Should the jury be asked whether in the light of that behaviour they were
satisfied that the
complainant did not give free and voluntary consent to the
sexual act in question or should they be asked whether they were satisfied
any such consent was thereby 'negated'? Should they be asked whether they were
satisfied that the behaviour found to be an
abuse of the relationship was the
sole or dominant cause of any consent, a contributory factor or that consent
would not have been
given but for such behaviour? Whatever the answers to these
questions it is difficult to see how the relevant issues could be effectively
litigated without detailed particulars and evidence of the whole history of the
relationship, the personalities of the parties, their
background, educational
attainments and incidents of behaviour which might cast light on their
respective confidence and assertiveness
relationship.
Some of the other factors listed in
subsection (1) are so inadequately delineated that findings of guilt could be
obtained in wholly
inappropriate cases and absurdity could be avoided only by
the absence of complaint or the exercise of prosecutorial discretion.
example, if consent is negated if caused by 'a fraudulent misrepresentation of
any fact', then the consent of a rock star who
has sexual intercourse with a 15
year old may be negated if she assured him that she was over 16. In that event
she could be taken
to have raped him.
Subsection 92P (2) merely states an
obvious truism and adds nothing to the concept of consent. Indeed, the
statement that a person
should not be regarded as consenting 'by reason only' is
potentially confusing. It may give rise to a suggestion that if are other
unspecified factors together with an absence of physical resistance the person
may be 'regarded as consenting'. However, the real
issue is simply whether the
person actually consented to the sexual act in question; not whether he or she
should be regarded as
having done so. The potential for confusion is compounded
by the fact that, in contrast to the provisions in subsections (1) and
provision applies only to sexual intercourse and not other sexual acts. That
may give rise to a further suggestion that
a person can be regarded as
consenting to an indecent assault by reason only of a failure to resist. There
is no justification for
the continued intrusion of such imprecise and confusing
Subsection 92P(3) is, of course largely
dependent upon subsection (1). It also gives rise to further and obviously
unintended complication.
Sections 92D and 92J prescribe alternative mental
elements of knowledge or recklessness as to consent but the deeming provision
this subsection applies only to knowledge. This may suggest that an accused
could be convicted if he had known that her consent
had been due to a belief
that he was another person but could not be convicted if he had been reckless as
to whether she had consented
for that reason. This is a further instance of the
incongruity and confusion that seems to characterise this
In short, the section lacks the
precision and clarity necessary to enable a trial judge to explain the elements
of an offence in a
manner that will be sufficiently comprehensible to enable
jurors to determine an appropriate verdict. When conviction and imprisonment
may follow a decision that the conduct of the accused falls on one side of a
conceptual line rather than the other it is of critical
importance that the line
be drawn clearly and that verdicts are not influenced by confusion. It is also
important that attention
is not diverted from the real issues in the case to
technical arguments about the meaning of relevant statutory provisions and that
there is no unnecessary risk of retrials due to appeals based upon such
Whilst the ambit of particular concepts
is sometimes spelled out by a series of provisions intended to cover every
conceivable circumstance
it would seem impracticable to attempt to define the
concept of consent in this manner. The range of circumstances that may be
encountered
in trials for sexual offences is simply too great for all
conceivable issues to be foreseen and pre-determined. There may be a diversity
in the nature of the allegations, the circumstances in which they arose, the
relationship between the complainants and defendants,
and the intellectual
development, psychological state, sobriety, knowledge and perception of both.
Furthermore, there would be an
inevitable potential for injustice if the code
was not drawn with sufficient precision to prevent the guilty 'slipping through
cracks' or the innocent wrongly convicted. Consent is best defined by
articulating a positive consent standard which can be applied
to whatever facts
and circumstances are proven.
The Commission recommends that section
92P be repealed and consent defined to mean a consent freely and voluntarily
given with knowledge
of the nature of the act in question and the identity of
the other person or persons involved. No further provision is either necessary
or desirable.
It is true, of course, that there are a
multiplicity of circumstances in which a person may be said to have acted
unconscionably by
engaging in sexual intercourse with someone who was over the
age of consent and gave a free and voluntary consent. One obvious example
the seduction of another person's spouse or lover. However, it is generally
accepted that the public interest would not be served
by criminalising adultery
or other acts of disloyalty. Within the infinite range of human behaviour
perceptions may differ as to
the point at which immoral behaviour should become
subject to criminal conviction and punishment. For present purposes the
suggests that consensual sexual intercourse between adults should not
be regarded as reaching this point even if it may have been
unwise for one
person to have given that consent or unconscionable for another to have taken
advantage of
Some submissions have included a
suggestion that section 92P be retained and a positive definition such as that
proposed be simply
added. Whilst the Commission understands that some people
may see the repeal of the existing provisions as dismantling reforms of
past, the perceived advantages have not been realised and, as mentioned
earlier, they have proven a source of confusion and
Some negative provisions could be
drafted in a manner likely to avoid further confusion but such a course would
serve no useful purpose.
They would, at best, state obvious truisms such as
consent is not freely and voluntary given if compliance is secured by violence
or threats or if the complainant's mental faculties have been so impaired that
he or she is unable to exercise a free choice. Furthermore,
if not drafted with
much greater care than that presently reflected in the language of section 92P
they might create further unforeseen
problems. For these reasons the
Commission does not support the enactment of negative
provisions.
RECOMMENDATION 11
Commission recommends that:
The negative and piecemeal approach reflected
in section 92P be replaced by a positive consent standard in the following
For the purposes of this Part "consent" should be taken to mean a
consent freely and voluntarily given with knowledge of the nature
of the act in
question and the identity of the other person or persons
Inducing sexual intercourse by fraudulent
representation
Whilst honesty in relationships is
obviously desirable, most people would baulk at making it a criminal offence to
engage in any duplicity
even if with a view to inducing consent to sexual
intercourse. There is a vast range of flattery, boasting and hyperbole that
fall within such a wide description but not necessarily warrant criminal
prosecution, as in the example of the fifteen year old telling
a rock star she
was over the age of consent. Nonetheless, it is important to ensure that
appropriate criminal sanctions are available
in some circumstances where consent
is induced by fraudulent misrepresentation. One such situation is where the
representation falsely
suggests that there is some medical need for the relevant
act. Another is where a person has been deceived into believing that there
been a valid ceremony of marriage between the complainant and the accused. Such
conduct involves an extraordinary betrayal of
In cases of this kind it might be argued
that any apparent consent has not been freely and voluntarily given and that the
act of engaging
in sexual intercourse in those circumstances could be prosecuted
as rape. However, a contrary view has been
In any event, the few
cases that have been reported suggest that misrepresentations of that kind may
tend to arise primarily in
the context of particular professional, ethnic or
religious groups and there may be some advantage in the enactment of a new
specifically criminalising such behaviour.
RECOMMENDATION 12
The Commission
proposes the enactment of a new offence in the following terms:
who induces another person to have sexual intercourse with that person by
fraudulently representing that such act has a
legitimate medical purpose or that
such persons are lawfully married is guilty of an offence, punishable on
conviction by imprisonment
for 12 years.
CONCEPT OF MENS REA
At common law an honest albeit mistaken
belief in consent will absolve an accused of criminal responsibility for rape or
assault at least in the absence of recklessness. This principle which
was established in Morgan's Case
has been codified for more than twenty years in
. In the ACT the
principle was left substantially unchallenged by subsection 92P(3) and is
actually entrenched in the terms of sections
92D and 92J. Nonetheless, there
have been repeated criticisms of this area of the law and a number of
suggestions for reform have
One criticism has been that the law
concentrates on the perceptions and understanding of the defendant rather than
that of the complainant.
This criticism has been vividly expressed in the
following passage which was quoted in submissions made to the
Commission:
Rape law also discriminates implicitly on
the basis of sex since it takes the point of view of the rapist, who is,
overwhelmingly,
male. In a situation where there may be two quite different
realities, two totally opposed understandings of an event which cannot
reconciled into a single version of the facts, as it is figured at the moment,
the law simply must determine one truth, and it
does this by filtering facts
through a value-system which is
phallocentric
As mentioned earlier in this report, the
Commission is conscious of the concerns expressed by many complainants at the
manner in which
the criminal justice system deals with allegations of sexual
assault. Nonetheless, this statement appears to reflect some misunderstanding
both as to the nature of the criminal justice system and as to the basis of
criminal responsibility.
The observation that there may be two
totally opposite understandings of an event is perceptive but the suggestion
that the law must
determine one truth is misconceived. A jury is not asked to
determine truth in the sense of choosing between competing understandings
what occurred. Whether the charge is one of sexual assault or any other type of
offence, a jury is required only to determine
whether the elements of the
offence have been proven beyond reasonable doubt. It determines truth only to
that extent. Where it
is so satisfied of those elements and returns a verdict
of 'guilty' it does so because it has, in essence, accepted the Crown case
almost invariably depends upon the evidence of the complainant. Where it is not
so satisfied and returns a verdict of 'not
guilty' it does so not because it has
accepted one truth or understanding but simply because the evidence was not
sufficient to exclude
any reasonable doubt as to one or more of the elements of
the charge.
Those elements invariably include some
mental state
that the accused
must be shown to have had at the time the relevant act was committed. It is a
fundamental principle of criminal
liability that one should not be exposed to
conviction in the absence of mens rea, or what has been described as a 'guilty
In many cases that element will be the decisive issue at the trial.
Hence, a person cannot be convicted of murder unless he or
she intended to cause
the death or was reckless to the probability of doing so. It is only the
intention and understanding of the
accused that distinguishes murder from
accidental death. It is primarily in this sense that the law examines the
matter from the
viewpoint of the
. It is not that the
interests of the accused are preferred to those of the complainant or, in the
case of murder the deceased and
the bereaved family, but rather that his or her
mental state is an element of the offence.
In the case of sexual intercourse
without consent, those elements are the act of sexual intercourse between the
defendant and the
complainant, the absence of the complainant's consent and the
defendant's knowledge or recklessness as to that absence of consent.
of these elements is a matter of objective fact: did the relevant sexual act
between the complainant and the accused occur
This element will be the
decisive one in cases where it is identity of the offender that is in issue.
The second element is a matter
of the subjective state of mind of the
complainant: did she consent? The third element is a matter of the subjective
state of mind
of the accused: did he know that the complainant was not
consenting or, alternatively, was he reckless as to whether she was consenting?
These three elements may, therefore, be regarded as three truths, the objective
truth of the commission of the sexual act, the subjective
truth of the
complainant and the subjective truth of the accused. As previously mentioned,
the law seeks to determine these truths
only to the extent of making judgments
as to whether they have been proven beyond reasonable doubt. The law does not
involve any
suggestion that these elements should in some way be transmuted into
a single truth though, of course, there can ultimately be only
one verdict:
guilty or not guilty.
If the statement that the law determines
one truth by 'filtering facts through a value-system which is phallocentric' is
the view that the retention of a mental element in sexual offences is
discriminatory then this is wholly misconceived. The need to
prove the necessary
mens rea does not involve discriminating on the basis of gender: it applies
whether the accused is male or female
and applies across the whole spectrum of
serious criminal
Even when a serious offence involves no
apparent mental element, there is a common law presumption that a defendant will
not be guilty
if he or she had an honest and reasonable belief in a state of
facts which, had they existed, would have made the act innocent.
The application of such a
presumption could no doubt be prevented by statute and at least one of the
approaches suggested was that
sexual offences should involve strict liability.
It was not entirely clear whether this proposal involved merely removing any
of mens rea or whether it was contemplated that an accused would also be
denied the opportunity to claim that he had an honest and
reasonable exculpatory
belief. However, the latter and more extreme approach seems to have been
Such a proposal would certainly make it
easier to convict the guilty but it would also give rise to significant
potential for injustice.
For example, if a person went through with, and
consummated, an arranged marriage because of threats by her parents or other
the other party would be guilty of rape even if he had been unaware of
the threats and thought her decision and subsequent conduct
had both been
voluntary. If a person got into another person's bed and made a sexual advance
to him before realising that she was
in the wrong room she would be guilty of
committing an act of indecency and if he responded he would be guilty of a
similar offence.
If two people, each so affected by alcohol or drugs as to be
incapable of exercising a free and voluntary choice, had sexual intercourse
each would be guilty of raping the other. Other examples could be cited. The
proposal could cause injustice in a wide range
circumstances.
Alternatively, it was suggested that the
law should require that any belief in consent be held on reasonable grounds or,
in Dr Easteal's
formulation, grounds which were acceptable according to a
'non-gendered' standard and appropriately circumscribed. These propositions
reflect an obvious concern that people should not be permitted to escape
conviction merely by claiming to have held a belief, no
matter how unreasonable,
that the complainant was consenting to the sexual act in question. The concern
is understandable and the
suggested reform is superficially attractive.
However, it would run contrary to important principles of the criminal law and
rise to practical problems.
The first such problem has already been
mentioned: the moral culpability of a person is dependent upon his or her state
It is difficult to justify convicting people of serious crimes if they
really did not know some crucial fact and hence did not know
that they were
doing anything wrong. If an accused genuinely believed that the other person
was consenting to the sexual act then
a finding of guilt and the imposition of a
substantial sentence of imprisonment would need to be justified on some other
The formation of belief unsupported by objectively reasonable grounds
or grounds deemed acceptable on the basis of a 'non-gendered'
standard may
demonstrate low intellect, disordered thinking or poor judgment. However, it
provides little justification for a conclusion
that the accused had a guilty
mind warranting conviction for rape. Some submissions seemed to reflect an
assumption that lack of
awareness could only be attributable to the accused
being so heedless of the other person’s feelings and autonomy that he
to make sure that the other person was consenting. However, an
unreasonable belief may have been wholly or partially attributable
factors. Apart from bigotry and a heedless disregard for the rights of others,
there may be presuppositions or perceptions
influenced by particular ethnic,
religious or cultural backgrounds, youth, earlier experiences of life,
intoxication, mental retardation,
psychiatric illness and/or simple stupidity.
The moral culpability of the person may vary accordingly. For example, a person
an intellectual disability, should not be convicted and punished merely
because he failed to realise what a person without that disability
readily deduced.
Secondly, it might be difficult to
establish an objective standard of reasonableness in this context. The manner
in which people
relate to one another in relation to sexual matters may vary
according to many factors. Should the concept of reasonableness vary
to the gender of the accused and his or her age, maturity, intelligence,
education, social class, ethnic, or cultural backgrounds,
religious beliefs,
previous sexual experience, sobriety and other factors? In other areas, issues
of this kind are resolved by reference
to generally prevailing standards but in
this area there may be no such general standards and a moralistic approach might
rather than clarify the issue. For example, it is doubtful whether
there are some generally accepted community standard as to how
one embarks upon
sado-masochistic activity or even drunken adultery.
Thirdly, conviction for an act done in
an honest though unreasonable belief that the other person was consenting to it
would provide
little justification for the imposition of a substantial
sentence. The only real advantage of such a requirement is that it would
the scope for false denials of knowledge. However, it is difficult to see how
the basic principles of fairness which are
fundamental to the criminal law in
this country could be reconciled with a provision depriving an accused person of
the opportunity
of raising an otherwise potentially exculpatory issue merely
because of the risk that he might lie about
Recklessness
Recklessness may be distinguished from
negligence on the basis that it usually requires some advertence to the
possibility of the
consequences.
Some submissions
contained the suggestion that having regard to the decision in
the concept of recklessness should be expanded to include attitudes of
indifference to whether or not the other person was consenting.
It was argued
that any person who believes that women need not be consulted as autonomous
agents in their sexual relations actually
has a culpable state of mind and that
this should be sufficient to satisfy the requirement of mens rea. The
Commission agrees with
this statement and would have supported a change in the
law had it been necessary. However, despite apparently widespread perceptions
to the contrary, the principle was acknowledged in
Morgan’s case
itself. That is evident from the following passages from three of the judgments
in the case:
'Rape ... imports at least indifference as
to the woman's
would have the necessary mens rea if he set about having intercourse either
against the woman's will or recklessly without
caring whether or not she was a
consenting party';
'the mental element is and always has been the intention to
commit that act, or the equivalent intention of having intercourse willy-nilly
not caring whether the victim consents or
The principle that an attitude of
indifference to the feelings and wishes of the complainant may amount to
recklessness was subsequently
recognised in other English
and the same approach has
been adopted in Australia.
Perhaps the clearest statement of principle was made by Kirby P, the President
of the NSW Court of Appeal, when rejecting the proposition
that recklessness in
this context required an actual advertence to the possibility that the
complainant might not have been consenting:
criminal law, in its important function of controlling behaviour, should promote
standards of acceptable consensual sexual behaviour
of the community. In a
sense this is more important today than in earlier times when many judgments in
this area were written.
Since the so-called "sexual revolution" in the 1970s
perceptions of sexual morality have changed in our society. Sexual intercourse
outside marriage is more common. So long as it is between consenting adults
(and involves no risk of disease etc) it is none of
the law's business... But
lack of consent does make it the law's business. Lack of the merest advertence
to consent in the case
of sexual intercourse is so reckless that it is also the
criminal law's business. In this, the law does no more than reflect the
community's outrage at the suffering inflicted on victims of sexual violence.
To allow accused persons to escape conviction merely
because they do not realise
the significance of what they have done, where they have completely ignored the
requirement of consent
as a prerequisite for sexual interaction, is completely
antithetical to the attainment of the goals which the criminal law properly
for itself in this
A further suggestion was that the law
should require an accused to have considered and evaluated the possibility that
the other person
may not have been consenting. In the absence of advertence to
the possibility that the complainant may not have been consenting
the accused
would be taken to have been reckless as to that issue. This suggestion seems to
reflect the same concern that men should
not be acquitted of rape if they have
been indifferent to the issue of consent. In this context it is understandable
that a further
requirement of this kind be sought. In practice, however, a jury
is unlikely to accept that an accused did not realise that the
other person had
not been consenting only if circumstances were such that the contrary
possibility never occurred to him.
Issues of mistaken belief are usually
raised in other areas of the criminal law. Take the example of a person who
walks around a
corner, sees two men apparently attempting to drag a screaming
young girl into a car and proceeds to punch both of them so that he
may pull her
from their grasp. It then emerges that all three were playing parts in a drama
being filmed for television. In that
event the person might be entitled to be
acquitted of assault if he struck the men in the belief that he was acting in
her defence,
even though she was actually in no danger. If in fact he was so
sure she was in danger that a contrary possibility never occurred
would only confirm the fact that he had acted innocently and it would be quite
wrong for him to be convicted because of
a perceived failure to have considered
and evaluated other possibilities.
There will be few circumstances that may
be relied upon to raise a similarly confident belief in consent but in the rare
which an accused could sensibly raise such an assertion it would be
unjust to prevent reliance upon it on the basis suggested.
On the other hand,
recklessness requires only advertence to the possibility that the other person
might not have been consenting.
Hence, in most cases in which an accused has
considered and evaluated that possibility, the very fact that he has done so
sufficient to demonstrate that he has acted recklessly. The Commission
could not recommend any change in the law that might have
the effect of making
such advertence an exculpatory rather than an incriminating
Some writers have suggested that the
need to prove recklessness could be overcome by the adoption of a
'communicative' model of consent.
This model would involve a presumption that
there could be no consent other then one expressly communicated. Whilst this
is attractive it inevitably confronts two apparent
difficulties.
The first is that it involves confusing
form and substance. The critical issue is not whether or how the complainant
may have communicated
or failed to have communicated her consent but whether she
in fact consented. If a complainant has said or done nothing to communicate
or her consent to the other party then that will tend to confirm both the
absence of consent and the absence of any basis for
a belief in consent. At
least in the great majority of trials, little would be gained by attempting to
elevate already strong evidentiary
factors into independent elements of the
offence and in many cases it would only validate and entrench the assault upon
the complainant's
words and conduct.
The second difficulty arises from the
way in which people tend to communicate consent. Sexual intimacy between people
rarely develops
as a result of a sequence of clearly articulated verbal
agreements. Suppose, for example, a couple commence to kiss and then become
increasingly more intimate with each other as one step leads to another. The
escalation may occur without a word being spoken and
progress as one person's
response to a level of intimacy emboldens the other to move to the next. Whilst
it is clear that if one
person indicates an unwillingness to proceed further
then that decision must be respected, it is less clear how consent might be
expected to be communicated if that person is in fact consenting. The answer
presumably lies in a range of non verbal and perhaps
subtle signals the
significance of which might vary according to the nature of the understanding
which has developed between them.
In this context it is difficult to see how a
communicative model of consent could be accommodated to the way people relate to
other or how such a model could be applied. A number of issues would need
to be explored. How would consent need to be communicated?
If non verbal
communication were to be accepted, then how could either the complainant or the
accused be expected to recall subtle
movements or nuances of expression and
intonation when giving evidence perhaps two years later? How frequently would
be expected to communicate continuing consent? The answers to these
questions might depend upon the nature of any relationship that
between the accused and the complainant, their age, personalities, background,
culture, sexual naivete or experience and
the manner in which any previous
sexual contact between them has developed. The Commission does not believe that
any model of communicative
consent would materially assist a jury in determining
the critical question of whether there had been an absence of real consent
what occurred between the particular people
Suggestions of rape by
At one stage MCCOC suggested the
possibility of an offence of sexual intercourse without consent in which the
relevant mental element
would not be knowledge or recklessness as to lack of
consent but negligence. It was proposed that the maximum penalty would be
significantly
less than those applicable to other offences involving sexual
intercourse without consent. In support of this recommendation the
argued that acts of sexual intercourse committed without the consent of the
other person caused profound suffering and
it was therefore incumbent upon any
person contemplating a sexual act to exercise due care to ensure that the other
person was in
fact consenting. Subject to the qualifications previously
mentioned concerning mentally dysfunctional people or very unusual cases
Commission agrees with this statement.
As mentioned in the introduction to this
paper, sexual acts inflicted upon people without their consent cause great
trauma and severe
emotional, if not physical, injury. The impact of such
offences is long-standing and may even be permanent. Accordingly, it cannot
doubted that a person who intends to engage in sexual activity with another
person has a duty to ensure that the other person
is consenting to the activity
in question. The force of the argument in favour of the creation of such an
offence is, therefore,
clear. Furthermore, the law already contains offences of
causing grievous bodily harm by the commission of a negligent
and as a matter of
principle a negligent act resulting in a person engaging in non-consensual
sexual intercourse with another person
should attract similar criminal
However, any proposal to create a new
offence necessarily requires due consideration of the extent to which it might
affect the prosecution
of existing offences or otherwise affect the interests of
justice. An offence in which the mental element consists of mere negligence
generally regarded as much less serious than one in which it consists of
deliberate intention or recklessness. For example, an
offence of causing
grievous bodily harm by a negligent act is punishable by a maximum sentence of
two years imprisonment,
is the same maximum sentence as that appropriate for common
whilst an offence of
an offence of intentionally inflicting grievous bodily harm carries a maximum
sentence of 15 years
imprisonment.
This disparity
in penalties reflects the essential difference in moral culpability between
deliberately harming another person and
making an honest though negligent
mistake which causes unintended harm. If this approach to the comparative
gravity of offences
were to be maintained in relation to offences of the kind
proposed there would be a real likelihood that the majority of people convicted
would receive non-custodial sentences. That likelihood would not, of itself,
warrant the conclusion that such an offence should
not be created. However, the
limited benefit of such an offence would need to be balanced against other
considerations.
There would be very few cases in which
sexual acts were committed in circumstances which might fairly be ascribed to
negligence rather
than actual knowledge or at least recklessness as to the
absence of consent. Indeed, it is not easy to envisage circumstances in
such a situation could realistically be expected to occur. Any assertion of
belief that the complainant was consenting will
usually be tested by
cross-examination as to the grounds for that belief. In most cases that will
elicit assertions of particular
acts and the case will then turn on whether
those acts occurred. As a matter of practical reality, an offence based on
would almost always be an alternative count to a more serious charge
involving actual knowledge or at least recklessness as to consent
and that may
give rise to a real risk of compromise verdicts or sympathy verdicts, especially
if the accused is a first offender.
It might also lead to compromises in the
form of plea bargains. In any of these events the true gravity of the
conduct is likely to be grossly
understated.
Accordingly, notwithstanding the cogency
of the arguments advanced in support of the MCCOC suggestion, there are strong
grounds for
fearing that the creation of such a charge might significantly
undermine the prospects of obtaining convictions in relation to the
more serious
offences that presently exist. Conversely, there are grounds for fearing that
it might lead to some convictions in
cases where the evidence did not establish
the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt but the jury thought he had
behaved badly
and was reluctant to see him wholly
The Commission understands that most, if
not all, of the other jurisdictions consulted have rejected this proposal and
MCCOC has not
included it in the relevant chapter of the proposed Model Criminal
Code. Whilst it may be theoretically attractive, the Commission
believes that
in practice it would cause more problems than it would
In fact, whilst issues of this kind have
assumed significant prominence in academic literature, it is unlikely that many
acquitted on this basis. As Simon Bronitt has observed the
'interminable controversy over subjective versus objective guilt has
rape law reform' and there are grounds for concluding that the likelihood of
acquittal on the ground of mistaken belief
in consent are
overestimated
. Kirby P has
gone further, stating that ‘the accused may assert unawareness of
non-consent in very rare
. The reason that such a
belief can be asserted only rarely is that the credibility of the relevant
assertion may be judged by reference
to the absence of any reasonable grounds
for the belief. This was acknowledged in Morgan's
. Furthermore, as
mentioned earlier, if the accused were to concede that he had entertained any
doubt about the matter or the jury
were to conclude that he must have had some
such doubt then he could be taken to have adverted to the possibility and hence
be convicted
on the basis of recklessness. On the other hand, if he were to
create the impression that he had not adverted to the possibility
because he did
not care whether the complainant was consenting or not he could again be
convicted on the basis of recklessness.
Accordingly, as a matter of practical
reality such an issue is unlikely to lead to an acquittal unless the jury can be
that he had such a firm belief in consent that the contrary
possibility never occurred to him. That is likely to occur only in most
circumstances.
RECOMMENDATION 13
Commission recommends that there be no change to the common law
PRESUMPTION AS TO INCAPACITY DUE TO AGE
Section 92Q provides as follows:
(1) For the purposes of this Part, a person shall not,
by reason only of his or her age, be presumed to be incapable of engaging in
sexual intercourse with another person.
(2) Subsection (1) shall
not be construed so as to affect the operation of any law relating to the age at
which a child can be found
guilty of an offence.
The effect of this provision is to
abrogate the common law principle that a child under the age of 13 was presumed
to be incapable
of engaging in sexual intercourse. It does not, of course,
affect the normal rule that a child under a particular age is presumed
incapable of committing of any offence. In the ACT that age is 8
The Commission sees no reason to
recommend any change to this provision.
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends that there be no change to this
NO BAR TO CONVICTION
Section 92R is in the following
The fact that a person is married to a person
upon whom an offence under section 92D is alleged to have been committed shall
bar to the conviction of the first-mentioned person for the
The validity of a comparable section in
the South Australian
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
was upheld by
the High Court of Australia in
. There had previously
been some support for the view that at common law a woman who married was taken
to have given an irrevocable
consent to sexual intercourse throughout the
currency of the marriage
High Court decision in R v L confirmed that if there had ever been such a
principle it had been effectively abrogated by legislation
in similar terms to
section 92R.
The enactment of legislation of this
kind was vehemently opposed by many people on the basis that there were strong
public policy
reasons for insisting that the intimacy of marriage should remain
a matter of the utmost privacy and that the law should not intrude
area of people’s lives. On the other hand, proponents of the legislation
pointed out that privacy should not be
a cover for abuse. The Commission
supports the latter view.
It must be conceded that there is a
strong argument to the effect that proceedings should not be instituted or
maintained in relation
to sexual offences within the context of a marriage or
long-standing relationship against the wishes of the alleged complainant.
However, there may be circumstances in which a complainant may ask for the
proceedings to be discontinued as a result of threats
or other psychological
pressure exerted upon her by the accused. Furthermore, even if the
complainant's expressed wishes genuinely
reflect her views there may be other
reasons such as the risk of physical harm to children of the relationship or
evidence that the
accused may be a serial offender which would make such a
prosecution desirable.
The Commission takes the view that the
section should not be amended to impose any statutory limitation on the
circumstances in which
a prosecution could be initiated or continued and that
issues of this kind should be left to the responsible exercise of prosecutorial
discretion.
RECOMMENDATION 15
Commission recommends that there be no change to this provision.
ALTERNATIVE
VERDICTS & DESCRIPTION OF OFFENCES
Section 92S contains various provisions
enabling a jury which is not satisfied of one of the elements of a more serious
return a verdict of guilty in relation to a lesser charge not
involving that element. These provisions would appear to be adequate
the present structure of offences are concerned. However, they would need to be
reviewed in the context of other changes
to the substantive law recommended in
this paper.
Section 92T provides that in an
indictment for an offence under section 92D of sexual intercourse without
consent a further count
may be added for an offence under section 92J of
committing an act of indecency without consent. This provision would appear to
be unnecessary but there is no need for its removal.
Section 92U provides that in an
indictment for an offence under 92J or 92K, which relate to acts of indecency,
it shall not be necessary
to describe the act constituting the act of indecency
with which the accused is charged. This provision may also be unnecessary.
However, if it is to remain it should be
extended to any
other offences involving acts of indecency. Offences of that nature are
presently provided by sections 92G, 92H and
92S though the Commission has
recommended that the number of such offences be
RECOMMENDATION 16
The Commission recommends that
the operation of the principle in section 92U be extended to all offences
involving acts of indecency.
The two most obvious issues concerning
sentencing are the determination of appropriate maximum penalties and the use of
victim impact
statements. The former has been dealt with in the context of the
discussion of the particular offences and the latter will be discussed
chapter 5. However, public concern about sentencing plainly extends beyond
these specific issues.
There is a widespread perception that
the sentences actually imposed for criminal offences are generally too lenient.
The accuracy
of this perception is difficult to evaluate since every case is
different and the press reports from which such perceptions are generally
are often incomplete or inaccurate. Furthermore, some of the examples cited to
the Commission were from other jurisdictions.
In any event, there is no obvious
reasonable alternative to the present system of case by case assessment. Any
sentence must ultimately
reflect a judgment based upon numerous and sometimes
competing considerations. In the ACT these considerations are set out in the
though in sentencing juveniles courts are also bound by the
provisions of the
Children and Young People Act
. Nonetheless, further
suggestions were made involving the formulation of sentencing guidelines and
judicial education.
Sentencing guidelines are to be
distinguished from minimum sentences or statutory fetters upon sentencing such
as those imposed by
the notorious 'Minnesota grid' system of sentencing which
require judges to impose sentences falling within stipulated maximum and
limits. They involve an indication that offences of a particular kind are
likely to attract sentences of a particular level
but preserve the discretion of
sentencing judge to deal with each case on its merits whilst taking any such
guideline into account.
This leaves it open to a judge to deal with the odd
case in which there is some exceptional circumstance which requires either
severity or greater leniency than would normally be
appropriate.
The Commission is not opposed in
principle to sentencing guidelines of this kind, but takes the view that they
should be set, if at
all, by appellate courts providing ranges of sentences that
might be expected in relation to commonly recurring combinations of factors.
This approach has recently been adopted by the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal
though a similar course has previously been followed
by a Full Court of the
Federal Court on appeals from the Supreme Court of the
The provision of
guideline judgments in this manner may enable greater consistency in sentencing
whilst respecting the separation
of powers and avoiding undue
It was also suggested that there should
be guidelines consisting of statements about what factors should generally be
considered relevant
and/or what should generally be regarded as aggravating or
mitigating features. As previously mentioned, both the
Children and Young People Act
contain provisions governing the
factors which must be taken into account in sentencing offenders. It may be
argued that further
factors should be specifically identified though most of
those suggested fall within general descriptions already mentioned in the
such as the seriousness of the offence. Furthermore, it is
unlikely that the enactment of provisions containing further generalisations
truisms would materially influence the sentences actually imposed. Offenders
must obviously be sentenced for what they did in
context of all of the relevant
circumstances actually prevailing. An understanding of what is generally true
may be important but
it can offer no substitute for a case by case assessment of
the particular facts established by the evidence.
Some of the guidelines suggested would
amount to legislative declarations as to the truth of various facts and/or
general propositions
Suggestions of this kind reflect a basic misunderstanding of the purpose of
legislation
which is, of course, to create laws. Facts must be established by
evidence not legislative decree. Furthermore, few generalisations
are true in
all cases. For example, it may generally be true that a person who has been
raped by a former husband or lover may have
suffered as great a trauma as
someone who has been raped by a stranger. In such an event the trauma may have
been compounded by
a profound betrayal of trust. However, that does not mean
that a rape by a stranger could never be worse. In some cases rape by
stranger may involve special terrors such as the fear of being murdered or of
contracting of AIDS. Much depends upon the circumstances
of the particular
The implications of such guidelines
might also be different from that intended by the proponents. To return to the
example cited
above, the existence of such a guideline might enable the defence
to argue that a sentence should not be increased on the ground
complainant’s fear of being killed by a masked and unpredictable stranger
because rape by a stranger had been effectively
equated with rape by a
non-stranger. Furthermore, it is difficult to see what assistance a sentencing
judge could derive by advertence
to such a theoretical comparison. In any given
case the judge is obliged to sentence the offender for the crime which has been
not for another crime which might have been committed by someone
Some of the submissions about judicial
education seemed to assume that judges were free to act upon any specialised
knowledge which
they may have derived from seminars, conferences or other
private sources. In fact judges must generally act upon the evidence adduced
the particular case and any facts which they may 'judicially notice' because
they are so well known that any reasonable member
of the community may be taken
to be aware of them. Judges may take judicial notice of the profound suffering
caused by sexual offences
but there is otherwise a significant difference
between what the judge knows or believes and what has been proven in a
case. For this reason, whilst judges are generally open to learn
more about the type of cases that come before them, it seems unlikely
judicial education could produce significant changes in sentencing patterns.
The Commission believes that it may be more productive
to ensure that
prosecutors have a sound knowledge of the relevant facts so that they may be
established in appropriate cases by evidence.
Ultimately, attempts to pre-determine
the relevance and/or relative importance of matters that may arise in future
cases are bound
to be at best of dubious utility and at worst a source of
injustice. It should be remembered that the Director of Public Prosecutions
a right of appeal against any sentences perceived to be excessively lenient.
Hence, if a judge appears to have taken the view
that some apparently irrelevant
matter was a mitigating factor or to have otherwise acted on an incorrect
principle then the issue
can be canvassed on appeal in the context of the
circumstances of the particular
RECOMMENDATION 17
The Commission
recommends that there no change to the legislative provisions concerning
sentences other than by amending maximum
penalties as recommended in other
sections of this report.
4. PROCEDURAL
Evidence by closed-circuit television
In the ACT children have been able to
give evidence via closed circuit television since 1989 and this privilege was
extended to adult
complainants of sexual assault offences in
. Whilst not all
complainants choose to give evidence in this manner, many apparently find the
procedure less onerous than being
obliged to give evidence in the presence of
the accused, a jury and others in the courtroom. However, doubt has been
expressed as
to whether evidence led in that manner is as effective in
proceedings before juries as evidence led in the usual
Ultimately, any decision as to the
continuing use of closed circuit television must be made within the context of
competing considerations.
On the one hand, the complainant's appearance on a
television screen involves some appearance of artificiality. Generally
the jury may hear what he or she is saying with clarity and may also
observe the facial expressions and demeanour of the witness.
On the other hand
there is a sense in which what they are seeing and hearing is a television
program rather than a flesh and blood
person reliving a traumatic event in his
or her life. The procedure also imposes some restrictions on both examination
and cross-examination. For example, if either counsel wish to show the
complainant a document there will be an inevitable delay
whilst it is taken out
of the courtroom to the room in which the witness has been located. There may
then be further delay whilst
the complainant finds the relevant passage in the
document the position of which will have to be described rather than pointed
In a case in which it is intended to show the complainant a significant
number of documents, photographs and/or damaged clothing
this can cause
significant interruption to the flow of the evidence. Such interruptions may in
turn influence the overall impression
created by the complainant and the
capacity of the jury to form a judgment as to his or her
credibility.
Differing perceptions have been
expressed as to the manner in which these factors may change the forensic
balance between the Crown
and the defence. For example, prosecutors have
expressed some concern that the forensic balance may be tilted in favour of the
because the evidence may have an appearance of artificiality and a jury
may not have the same degree of sympathy for a person whom
they see only on a
television screen rather than in person. Defence counsel have expressed fears
that the mere use of closed circuit
television may give the jury the impression
that the accused is such a violent man that it is not safe for the complainant
in the same courtroom with him or that she was so psychologically
brutalised by the incident that the authorities considered it inhumane
require her to be in the same room. Others have pointed out that the
traditional right of a defendant to confront his accusers
has been effectively
eroded. It may be easier to lie or exaggerate when the only other person who
knows the truth is not in the
room and cannot be seen. Defence counsel also
maintain that the loss of immediacy during cross-examination is inimical to
interests in ensuring that the evidence is adequately tested and the jury
has the best opportunity of assessing his or her
credibility.
Despite these competing considerations,
there seems little doubt that the use of closed circuit television does
significantly ameliorate
the trauma of having to give evidence in the more
threatening environment of a court room.
Furthermore, the emergence of new
technology such as video links by satellite or internet provides potential
options which may enable
the court to avoid the need to bring complainants to
court even to give evidence from an adjoining room via closed circuit
television.
However, those options have not yet been tested and the extent to
which their use may be appropriate may depend upon the nature
of the facility
thereby provided and the exigencies of particular cases. For example, if it
were necessary to have a complainant
identify signatures, the effectiveness of
the technology might depend on the clarity of the image. On the other hand, if
to be asked to identify clothing she might need to turn it over or
unfold it in order to look for distinguishing marks. Similar
considerations
apply to the evidence of other witnesses such as medical
Evidence Act
(Cth) is in the following terms:
The court may
make such orders as it considers just in relation to:
(a) the way
in which witnesses are to be questioned; and
(b) the production
and use of documents and things in connection with the questioning of witnesses;
(c) the order in which parties may question a witness;
(d) the presence and behaviour of any person in connection
with the questioning of witnesses.
This provision does not explicitly
authorise the use of closed circuit television, video links or other means not
involving the physical
presence of the witness in the court room and whilst the
issue does not seem to have been judicially determined it seems unlikely
such authorisation arises by implication. However, the Commission does not
believe that there is anything in the Commonwealth
enactment that would
invalidate the relevant ACT provisions or make them
unenforceable.
Having weighed all of the competing
considerations the Commission recommends that the present system involving the
use of closed-circuit
television be retained, but expanded to permit the court
to take evidence from witnesses in any manner which it considers appropriate,
having regard to the interests of justice, the needs and sensitivities of
witnesses and the expense and inconvenience of requiring
them to come to
. This will require an
amendment to certain provisions of
the Evidence (Closed Circuit Television)
(Amendment) Act 1991
or the repeal of that Act and the incorporation of
those provisions, appropriately amended, into Part 10A of the
Evidence Act
RECOMMENDATION 18
The Commission
recommends that the current closed circuit television system be augmented by
provisions enabling the Court to take
evidence in any manner it considers
appropriate.
Committal Proceedings
The Commission is conscious of the fact
that the Department of Justice and Community Safety has instituted a wide
ranging review of
the conduct of committal
proceedings
and has no wish to
pre-empt its findings or recommendations. Nonetheless, committal proceedings
for charges of sexual offences involve
special considerations and these have
been discussed in some of submissions made in relation to the present reference.
Consequently,
the Commission has taken the view that it would be appropriate to
raise relevant issues and discuss options for reform. However,
it accepts that
any final decision about the reform of the law governing this procedure should
be left in abeyance until the review
presently being undertaken has been
Committal proceedings are conducted in
relation to all charges triable on indictment in the Supreme Court. They are of
an administrative
rather than judicial character, though they are presided over
by a magistrate, involve the taking of evidence on oath or affirmation
adjudication on legal issues. It has been said that their purpose is to
determine whether the evidence discloses a case fit
for trial though they in
fact serve other purposes of considerable importance.
Magistrates Court
is in the following terms:
When all the
evidence for the prosecution and the defence has been taken
(a) if the court is of the opinion, having regard to all the
evidence before it, that a jury would not convict the defendant of an
offence - it shall forthwith order the defendant, if he or she is in custody, to
be discharged as to the information then
under inquiry; and
the court is not of the opinion referred to in paragraph (a) - it shall commit
him or her to take his or her trial for the
offence before the Supreme Court, in
the meantime either shall by warrant commit him or her to gaol, a lock-up or a
remand centre
to be there safely kept until the sittings of the Court before
which he or she is to be tried, or until he or she is delivered by
due course of
law or admitted to bail in accordance with the
Bail Act 1992
It is clear that if the prosecution
fails to establish a prima facie case then the Magistrate should readily be
satisfied that a jury
would not convict. Indeed, a jury could not lawfully
convict in those circumstances. However, the section also permits a defendant
to argue that even if there is a prima facie case the quality of the evidence is
so obviously unreliable that no reasonable jury
properly instructed would
convict. The scope offered for a magistrate to, in effect, pre-judge the matter
in this manner is extremely
limited. He or she may not discharge the defendant
on the basis of a personal assessment that the defendant should be acquitted
magistrates are not generally authorised to speculate about to the weight which
a jury might ultimately attach to particular
evidence. Nonetheless, there are
some circumstances in which there is a prima facie case but the charge is
plainly untenable and
a magistrate may be satisfied that a reasonable jury would
In some jurisdictions a system of
paperless committals has been initiated. There have been a number of reasons
for the introduction
of this system including the desire to spare complainants
from having to give evidence twice. It has been argued that the limited
function of a committing magistrate can be fulfilled by reference to statements
without cross-examination of the various witnesses.
However, committal
proceedings serve other purposes which are not always well
understood.
In the ACT committal proceedings
frequently facilitate the summary disposition of charges that would otherwise be
tried on indictment
before a jury in the Supreme Court. Section 477 of the
provides that a wide range of indictable offences may be tried
summarily if the magistrate is satisfied that it is a proper case
disposition in that manner and the defendant consents to that course. Charges
alleging some serious sexual offences cannot be
dealt with in this manner
because section 477 applies only to common law offences or offences punishable
by terms of imprisonment
not exceeding 14 years in the case of offences relating
to money or property or 10 years in any other case. However, charges alleging
other sexual offences such as those under sections 92H, 92J, 92K(2), 92L(2),
92M, 92NA and 92NB can be dealt with summarily. The
usual practice is for the
prosecution to be conducted as committal proceedings until the Crown case has
been concluded. The defence
counsel is then in a position to advise his or her
client as to whether to consent to summary trial and the magistrate is in a
to determine whether it is a proper case for disposition in that
manner. As a result of the availability of this procedure a significant
of charges alleging sexual offences are dealt with
Committal proceedings also provide an
opportunity for the defendant's legal representatives to ascertain the nature
and extent of
the evidence relied upon by the Crown. It has been argued that
this function could be adequately fulfilled by the provision of written
statements from each of the potential witnesses. However, those statements may
contain only that evidence which tends to favour
the prosecution case and
defence counsel may understandably wish to ask the witnesses questions about
other matters which may favour
the defence case. They may also wish to ask
questions with a view to testing the reliability and accuracy of the evidence.
example, if a witness says that he saw the defendant enter a building,
counsel may wish to explore the basis for the witness's conclusion
person was in fact the defendant. Was it based upon personal observation? If
so, under what circumstances was the observation
made? From what distance? In
what light? From what vantage point? Had the witness known the accused prior
to that sighting?
If so, for how long and in what circumstances? If not, what
was the basis for the identification? Such questioning has a number
advantages. Most significantly, it enables the weight of the evidence to be
assessed. That is important because it enables the
magistrate to assess the
strength of the evidence and hence make a sensible judgment as to whether he or
she could be satisfied that
a jury would not convict. However, as previously
indicated that is a quite stringent test. There may be circumstances in which
the weight of the evidence is such that a conviction seems unlikely but the
magistrate is unable to be affirmatively satisfied that
a jury would not
convict. It then remains for the Director of Public Prosecutions to decide, in
the exercise of his or her discretion,
whether to file a bill of
indictment.
That discretion is normally guided by
the principle that a prosecution must be in the public interest and that will
normally be the
case only if the prospects of obtaining a conviction are at
least reasonable. Accordingly, there is a second stage process in which
cases are weeded out on the basis of a pragmatic assessment of the strength of
the case in the light of the transcript of
the evidence which has been given
during the committal proceedings. In the case of charges of sexual assault this
assessment is
necessary for two reasons. First, legal ethics quite properly
preclude the making of grave public allegations against any member
community unless there is sufficient evidence available to justify the belief
that they are well founded. Secondly, it would
be irresponsible to expose the
complainants of a sexual assault to the further trauma of having to give
evidence in a Supreme Court
trial if there were no reasonable prospects of
obtaining a conviction and the trial was, in substance, a futile
On the other hand, where the committal
proceedings reveal that the Crown case is very strong, a corresponding
assessment by defence
counsel often leads to a plea of guilty in the Supreme
Court. This again has the effect of sparing the complainant from the ordeal
giving evidence in front of a jury.
Consequently, the conduct of committal
proceedings gives rise to at least three possible decisions each of which may
avoid the need
for a trial in the Supreme Court. If they were to be abolished
or their effectiveness substantially eroded by exclusive reliance
upon written
statements this might well result in a very substantial increase in the number
of trials that would have to be conducted.
This would have significant
implications for the cost of justice but, more importantly, would mean that more
complainants were forced
to give evidence at trials.
In those cases where the trial does
proceed the testing of the evidence during the committal proceedings will still
play an important
part in ensuring that the defence is fully informed of the
case which it has to meet and this is important to the fair trial of the
Indeed, in some cases in which an additional witness comes to light after the
committal proceedings have been completed the
courts have ordered that witness
to be cross-examined before a judge sometime prior to the commencement of the
trial so that the
defence may have the advantage of testing his or her evidence
by cross-examination before the trial
Hence, the adoption
of paper committals might involve transferring some of the pre-trial
cross-examination from the Magistrates
Court to the Supreme
The importance of committal proceedings
has frequently been discounted and they have been regarded as mere
administrative filters
intended to identify the occasional weak case which would
not justify the public expense of a trial. However, the High Court of Australia
has made it clear that they are an important part of the criminal justice
It is now accepted in England and Australia
that committal proceedings are an important element of our system of criminal
They constitute such an important element in the protection of the
accused that a trial held without antecedent committal proceedings,
justified on strong and powerful grounds, must necessarily be considered unfair.
For us to say, as has been suggested, that
the courts are concerned only with
the conduct of the trial itself, considered quite independently of the committal
proceedings,
would be to turn our backs on the development of the criminal
process and to ignore the function of the preliminary examination and
relationship to the trial. To deny an accused the benefit of committal
proceedings is to deprive him of a valuable protection
uniformly available to
other accused persons, which is of great advantage to him whether in terminating
the proceedings before trial
Any proposal to reform the manner in
which committal proceedings are conducted must be considered within the context
of the important
functions which they fulfil and the need to ensure that the
prospects of a fair trial is not unduly prejudiced. Nonetheless, the
system is sometimes abused and committal proceedings may become inordinately
protracted. This involves a significant cost
to the community as well as the
accused. More importantly, the complainant may be exposed to an unnecessary and
harrowing cross-examination.
Indeed, in some cases there have been grounds for
suspicion that the cross-examiner was endeavouring to make the exercise so
distressing
that the complainant would be reluctant to give evidence at the
For the reasons previously given, the
Commission is of the view that a purely 'paper committal' may not be adequate in
cases of this
nature. It would not facilitate the testing of the evidence in
the manner necessary to permit an adequate assessment of the likelihood
obtaining a conviction. Consequently, it is likely that many more cases would
go to trial and there would be fewer pleas of guilty.
The practice adopted in
New South Wales
witnesses called only if the defendant can establish to the magistrate's
satisfaction that there are substantial reasons
why, in the interests of
justice, the witness should attend to give oral evidence, is also inadequate.
Such a course may mean that
the defence is required to disclose the nature of
its case and that may give rise to legal argument and applications to the
Court to review the magistrate's discretion which in turn may involve
unacceptable delays. Experience in other jurisdictions also
suggests that
cross-examination may be so limited that most of the advantages presently
derived from the committal proceedings are
However, proceedings of this nature
should be more strictly controlled than trials intended to finally resolve the
issues in question.
There is no apparent reason why the evidence in chief of
the complainant and, perhaps, other witnesses should not consist of the
statement previously served and the oral evidence confined to cross-examination.
Furthermore, the Commission is of the view that
the committing magistrate should
be given adequate discretion to limit the cross-examination. It should be noted
section 41(1)
Evidence Act
(Cth) already authorises a
court to disallow questions asked in cross-examination which are misleading,
unduly annoying, harassing,
intimidating, offensive, oppressive or repetitive.
In exercising that power the court is enjoined to take into account the age,
personality and education of the witness. It is proposed that committing
magistrates be given further discretion to limit cross-examination
which appears
to be unnecessarily lengthy and to prevent cross-examination altogether about
matters which are of peripheral relevance
or which is otherwise not warranted by
the forensic needs of the case.
This Commission considers that this
proposal offers a reasonable compromise. On one hand, it would ensure that the
benefits of the
existing system were essentially retained and, on the other, it
should limit any waste of time and enable magistrates to intervene
complainants and other vulnerable witnesses from being harassed in
cross-examination.
RECOMMENDATION 19
Commission recommends that
Magistrates Court Act
to be amended to provide
for the following:
(a) the prosecution be required to serve copies of
statements of all witnesses upon the solicitors for the defendant prior to any
date being set for the hearing of committal proceedings;
defendant or his solicitors then be required to provide written notification of
any witnesses whom they wished to cross-examine
during the course of the
committal proceedings;
(c) in the event that such notice was not given it
be presumed that the committal proceedings would involve nothing more than
submissions
made on the basis of the documents so served and the hearing time
would be allocated accordingly;
(d) thereafter, no cross-examination of
any of the Crown witnesses be permitted without leave of the committing
magistrate;
(e) where notice was given of an intention to cross-examine a
particular witness or witnesses then sufficient time be allocated to
permit that
cross-examination; and
(f) committing magistrates be given discretion to
permit any evidence in cross-examination to be given by closed circuit
or video link and to limit cross-examination which appears to be
unnecessarily lengthy and to prevent cross-examination altogether
which are of peripheral relevance or which is otherwise not warranted by the
forensic needs of the case.
5. EVIDENTIARY
Trials for rape and other sexual
offences were formerly attended by a number of evidentiary rules of particular
if not unique application
to proceedings of that kind. These involved the need
for evidence of early complaint to show that the complainant had raised `the
and cry' at the earliest opportunity, the right of defence counsel to
cross-examine the complainant as to any prior sexual history
or reputation and
the obligation for judges to give directions to juries as to the need for
corroboration. Rules of this kind were
apparently based upon the view that
allegations of that kind were easy to make but difficult to refute and that
there was a special
need to protect men from false accusations. It was
eventually accepted that requirements of this kind were unfairly discriminatory
in that they suggested that people complaining of having been sexually assaulted
were not to be trusted.
It is now generally acknowledged that
the law should not reflect any assumption that people complaining of sexual
assault are any
less reliable than people who claim to have been complainants of
other criminal behaviour. It should be a hallmark of the system
adopted in this territory that all people are treated equally before the law.
However, this insistence upon equality
should not be permitted to obscure the
need to guard against the risk of pre-judgment based on stereotypical views or
complainants from further psychological or emotional damage as a
result of having to give evidence in open court. Complainants of
sexual assault
may be traumatised by the experience of having to publicly recount a uniquely
personal violation. The need to give
evidence may be unavoidable but any
opportunity for ameliorating the emotional impact should receive due
consideration.
On the other hand, any departure from
normal practice should not impinge upon the rights of the accused to an
unacceptable degree
or otherwise jeopardise the essential fairness of the trial.
In some instances it may be necessary to strike a balance between these
competing considerations by formulating a general rule but providing a judicial
discretion to take another course when demanded by
the interests of
Evidence Act
Evidence Act
1971 (ACT) contain relevant provisions. To the
extent of any inconsistency, the provisions of the Commonwealth enactment
over those of the Territory enactment, though some provisions of the ACT
enactment have been expressly preserved by section
However, section 56 of the
Commonwealth enactment makes evidence that is relevant to the issues before the
court admissible 'save
as otherwise provided in this Act'. The terms of this
section would appear to exclude any exceptions other than those stated in
subsequent sections of the Commonwealth Act or preserved by the operation of
section 8. Hence, the short answer to any suggestions
that the ACT should
legislate to make evidence of certain kinds inadmissible at trials for sexual
offences is that no law enacted
by the Legislative Assembly could have the
effect of excluding evidence made admissible by the terms of section 56.
Section 76C of the
Evidence Act
1971 (ACT) is in the following terms:
Any rule of law
or practice permitting evidence to be admitted in any proceedings in respect of
a sexual offence, being evidence relating
to the making of a complaint, or the
terms of a complaint, by the complainant, is abolished and no such evidence
shall be admitted
in any prescribed sexual offence
proceedings.
Nothing in this section effects the admissibility of
evidence in relation to a complaint or the terms of a complaint, by the
complainant
in prescribed sexual offence proceedings where that evidence is
otherwise admissible under any other rule of law or practice.
This provision was apparently one which
reflected the view that the rule permitting evidence of complaint was an
anachronism based
upon the now discredited requirement that a complainant who
had been raped must ‘raise the hue and cry’ at the earliest
opportunity. There is now greater understanding of the emotional dynamics that
may cause a person who has been sexually assaulted
to delay reporting the matter
to the authorities. As the concept of the ‘hue and cry’ had long
been abandoned a view
emerged that the rationale for the admission of evidence
of complaint no longer existed. Furthermore, the directions which a trial
had been obliged to give in relation to evidence of that kind had been
potentially confusing. The evidence was not admitted
as proof of the facts
alleged but merely to prove that she had made a complaint shortly after the
incident which was said to be consistent
with her evidence as to those
There was some concern that reforms of
this nature may have 'backfired'. At least in Canada it was been suggested that
the abolition
of rules permitting evidence of complaint had not prevented the
defence from raising any delay in complaining about the incident
in question and
that the prosecution had been denied a comparable opportunity of proving that a
complaint had been made
In any event, the Commonwealth has now
introduced a more general provision that enables the admission of evidence of
previous representations
even in criminal proceedings.
Evidence Act
(Cth) is in the following
(1) This section applies in a criminal
proceeding if a person who made a previous representation is available to give
evidence about
an asserted fact.
(2) If that person has been or
is to be called to give evidence, the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of
the representation
that is given by:
that person;
(b) a person who saw, heard or otherwise
perceived the representation being made;
if, when the
representation was made, the occurrence of the asserted fact was fresh in the
memory of the person who made the representation.
Whilst section 76C is one of the
provisions expressly preserved by section 8 of the Commonwealth Act, there is no
conflict between
that section and section 66 of the Commonwealth Act because of
the provision in subsection (2) that the ACT section does not effect
admissibility of evidence otherwise admissible under any other rule of law or
Section 66 plainly provides such a rule. Hence, it may enable
evidence of complaint to be admitted not on the basis of some arcane
anachronistic rule relevant only to sexual offences but on the basis of a
principle of general
application.
A further basis for the admission of
evidence of this kind may be found in section 72 of the Commonwealth Act which
provides that:
The hearsay rule does not apply to
evidence of the representation made by a person that was a contemporaneous
representation about
the person's health, feelings, sensation, intention,
knowledge or state of mind.
Once admitted under section 66 or 72 the
evidence is not be subject to the limitations that formerly applied to evidence
of complaint
but is probative of the facts alleged in the
representation.
It should be noted that sections 135 and
137 give the judge ample discretion to exclude evidence on the basis that it
would be unfair
to the accused to admit it in the trial.
The Commission regards the provisions of
the Commonwealth enactment as satisfactory.
It has also been suggested that the law
should require judges to explain to juries that there may be good reasons for
any delay in
complaint and/or that such delay does not, of itself, indicate that
the allegation is false. On the other hand, Dr Easteal has suggested
compulsory directions appear to be 'counter intuitive' and ultimately unfair to
the accused. The Commission agrees with this
view. Whilst it is obviously
necessary for the relevant legal principles to be explained to a jury, it is
generally undesirable
to prescribe standard directions as to axioms of human
behaviour which must be given in every case. The age, background and
temperament
of the complainants vary and so do explanations for behaviour
including delay. If a woman gives a particular reason for failing
contemporaneous complaint an explanation by the judge that 'there may be good
reasons' for such failure will be at best
patronising and at worst convey the
implication that the judge does not believe the reason she has given. An
assertion that delay
does not, of itself, indicate that the allegation is false
may be appropriate but again much will depend upon the
circumstances.
Dr Easteal has recommended that in cases
where there has been a delayed complaint the prosecution should be permitted or
perhaps even
compelled to lead expert evidence to explain why women delay
reporting sexual abuse. This is an interesting suggestion though the
believes it would be most unwise to require the prosecution to adduce expert
evidence without regard for the nature of
the case. The conduct of the
prosecution case in a jury trial requires a prosecutor to exercise judgment not
only as to what evidence
is likely to be admissible but as to what is likely to
be effective. In some cases the most effective strategy may involve calling
extensive evidence and embarking upon a painstaking and comprehensive
examination of the surrounding circumstances. In others it
may involve pruning
the case to the bare essentials so that case will be shortened and the evidence
of the complainant will be fresh
in the jurors' minds when they retire to
consider their verdicts. To tie the hands of prosecutors by requiring them to
call evidence
of a particular kind, even against their better judgment, might
well be counter-productive.
There is, of course, a wider issue as to
whether evidence of that kind would be admissible. The law governing the
admissibility of
expert evidence has been changed by the enactment of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) the relevant sections of which now provide
79 If a person has specialised knowledge based on
the person's training, study or experience, the opinion rule does not apply to
of an opinion of that person that is based wholly or substantially
based on that knowledge.
80 Evidence of an opinion is not
inadmissible only because it is about:
(a) a fact in issue or an
ultimate issue; or
(b) a matter of common knowledge.
The opinion rule referred to in
provides that evidence of opinion rather than fact is generally inadmissible.
abrogates common law rules that expert evidence was not admissible if
it related to either of the matters referred to in paragraphs
(a) and (b).
These sections involved a substantial departure from the stringency of the
common law principle that expert evidence
could be admitted:
'whenever the subject matter of inquiry is such that
inexperienced people are unlikely to prove capable of forming a correct judgment
upon it without such assistance, in other words, when it so far partakes of the
nature of a science as to require a course of previous
habit, or study, in order
to attain a knowledge of it.'
The scope for the admission of expert
evidence has now been significantly widened. The current requirements are as
• the evidence must be
• it must have sufficient probative value to outweigh any
danger of unfair prejudice to the accused and/or any potential to
confuse or to result in undue waste of
witness must have specialised knowledge based on study, training or
experience;
• the opinion expressed must be based wholly or
substantially on that knowledge.
The most common problems still
encountered in relation to expert evidence concern opinions expressed which
extend beyond the witness’s
or are based upon
factual assumptions not
The appropriateness of admitting expert
evidence as to the reasons for delay in making a complaint of sexual assault
will depend upon
a number of factors. First, it must be remembered that the
jury is not concerned with the whole range of possible reasons which
people falling within the class of complainants of sexual assault to delay
complaining. The jury is concerned only with
the reasons for any delay by the
complainant in reporting the particular sexual assault with which the accused is
charged. If she
gives evidence that the delay was due to a threat by the
accused it does not matter how many other reasons might have led other
complainants
to delay reporting offences against them. Secondly, whilst expert
evidence that other people have delayed reporting similar incidents
for similar
reasons might lend added credibility to the complainant's account, evidence
relevant only to credibility is generally
inadmissible.
Thirdly, the
significance of any delay will depend upon the circumstances of the case
including any explanation given by the complainant.
Much may also depend upon
whether any criticism of her is reliant on delay alone or delay in the context
of other acts or omissions
said to be significant. Fourthly, if expert evidence
were to be admitted as to the usual reasons for delay the experts might well
cross-examined on any aspects of the complainant’s conduct which seemed to
differ from the norm. Fifthly, once expert evidence
is admitted in the
prosecution case other experts would no doubt be called to give evidence on
behalf of the accused. This might
not only lengthen the trials but create a
situation in which the complainant’s credibility was gauged by reference
to the competing
opinions of experts and give rise to other unforeseen problems.
At face value,
sections 79
Evidence Act
(Cth) would appear to authorise the admission of
expert evidence in appropriate cases. The conditions of admissibility are not
onerous and it may be doubted whether there would be any real utility in
admitting evidence which did not meet such criteria. In
qualifies a general embargo on the admission of opinion evidence and it would be
beyond the legislative power of the ACT to enact
further laws authorising the
admission of expert evidence on a more liberal basis.
Dr Easteal has also raised the
possibility of feminist legal interest groups being permitted to intervene in
trials to present arguments
in answer to the pervasive myths and misconceptions
obviously of great importance; namely, that juries must put aside any such myths
or misconceptions and decide each case upon the
evidence of what actually
occurred. Feminist legal interest groups would no doubt be well aware of the
falsity of such beliefs and
equipped to offer convincing
refutation.
Nonetheless, the Commission is unable to
support this proposal. Prosecutions are brought on behalf of the Crown and the
ethical duties of prosecutors differ from those of other counsel. As
previously mentioned, the conduct of the Crown case requires
a prosecutor to
exercise judgment in relation to overall strategy. It is a truism that 'too
many cooks spoil the broth' and the
intrusion of a further legal team
representing neither Crown nor accused might cause unpredictable complications.
To take but one
example, there may be sensitive information which the
prosecution might not be at liberty to reveal and uninformed third parties
unwittingly take steps which would lead to the trial miscarrying. In any event,
such 'cameo appearances' might well prove
counter-productive. The intervention
of a second legal team calling evidence and presenting arguments supportive of
the complainant
might give rise to inconsistencies of approach or otherwise
disrupt the presentation of the Crown case in the manner the prosecutor
concluded is likely to be most effective. Juries might also feel that there was
something vaguely unfair about having two legal
teams apparently trying to
secure the conviction of a single accused.
Furthermore, the law must be
even-handed. If some legal interest groups were permitted to intervene then it
might be difficult to
justify the exclusion of other legal interest groups with
equally strong views about issues such as the dangers of 'false memory
or allegations of deliberately false complaints being made in the context of
proceedings for custody or access to children.
There would also be a problem of
delineating the role of counsel given leave to appear for a feminist legal
interest group in relation
to limited issues and preventing the risk of
demarcation disputes. What would the intervention involve? Would expert
evidence be
called or would the role be confined to the presentation of
argument? Would any argument be confined to matters of general experience
would it be tailored to the circumstances of the case? Would the role of
counsel be governed by the same ethical constraints
as those that bind
prosecutors? Would that role extend to cross-examining the accused if he gave
evidence of having believed certain
things about the incident in question? What
if the claimed belief was apparently based in part upon relevant myths or
misconceptions?
Would it extend to addressing the jury on such issues as
whether the complainant was telling the truth or the accused was lying?
would differences of view between counsel for the Crown and counsel for a
feminist legal interest group be resolved? The plethora
of issues that would
undoubtedly arise would cause considerable delay and, perhaps, prejudice the
prospect of a fair and efficient
trial being conducted.
There would also be a significant
increase in the public expense of trials.
The Commission is of the view that
arguments of this kind can most effectively be presented by prosecutors who can
tailor them to
the needs of the particular trial and incorporate them in an
overall strategy. That obviously requires an understanding of the relevant
issues and further education and/or liaison with feminist legal interest groups
may help to equip them to present any arguments that
might be appropriate.
However, the Director of Public Prosecutions is an independent statutory officer
and issues relating to the
training of prosecutors and the manner in which
prosecution cases might be presented are ultimately matters which fall within
or her area of
responsibility.
Corroboration
In earlier years judges were obliged to
warn juries that allegations of rape were easily made and hard to refute; hence
it was dangerous
to convict on the uncorroborated evidence of the complainant.
This practice was abolished in the ACT by section 76F of the Evidence
which was in the following terms:
(1) Any rule of law
or practice requiring the corroboration of evidence or requiring the judge to
give a warning to the jury in criminal
proceedings to the effect that it is
unsafe to convict a person on uncorroborated evidence is abolished insofar as
the rule applies
to or in relation to evidence given by the complainant in the
trial of a person for a prescribed offence.
(2) Nothing in this
section shall affect the right of the judge in prescribed sexual offence
proceedings to comment on any evidence
that may be unreliable but the judge
shall not, in such proceedings, give a warning to the jury to the effect that it
is unsafe to
convict the accused person on the uncorroborated evidence of the
complainant.
(3) Nothing in this section affects the operation of
any rule of law or practice which requires-
(a) a judge, on the
trial of a person for a sexual offence alleged to have been committed before 28
November 1985, to give the jury
a warning as referred to in sub-section (1);
(b) a judge, on the trial of any person, to give the jury a
warning to the effect that it is unsafe to convict the person on the
uncorroborated
sworn evidence of a child.
The intention of this legislative
provision was relatively clear. It abrogated the common law requirement for
corroboration in sexual
cases and hence removed any basis for an implication
that complainants may generally be considered less trustworthy than other
However, apart from the transitional provision dealing with offences
alleged to have been committed prior to the enactment of the
section, it
preserved other rules of law relating to the need for corroboration of evidence
given by children.
Only subsection (2) has been preserved
by section 8 of the Commonwealth Act and the effect of the section has been
substantially supplanted
by section 164 of that Act which deals with the issue
of corroboration in a more comprehensive fashion. Section 164 is in the
(1) It is not necessary that evidence
on which a party relies be corroborated.
(2) Subsection (1) does
not effect the operation of a rule of law that requires
corroboration
with respect to the offence of perjury or a similar or related
(3) Despite any rule, whether of law or practice, to the
contrary, but subject to the other provisions of this Act, if there is a
it is not necessary that the judge:
(a) warn the jury that it is
dangerous to act on uncorroborated evidence or give a warning to the same or
similar effect; or
(b) give a direction relating to the absence of
corroboration.
Section 165 provides as
(1) This section applies to evidence of the
kind that may be unreliable, including the following kinds of
evidence in relation to which
Part 3.2 (Hearsay Evidence) or 3.4 (Admissions)
identification
evidence the reliability of
which may be affected by age, ill health (whether physical or mental), injury or
evidence given in a criminal
proceeding by a witness, being a witness who might reasonably be supposed to
have been criminally concerned
in the events giving rise to the
proceeding;
evidence given in a criminal
proceeding by a witness who is a prison informer;
oral evidence of official
questioning of a defendant that is questioning recorded in writing that has not
been signed, or otherwise
acknowledged in writing, by the
in a proceeding against the
estate of a deceased person – evidence adduced by or on behalf of a person
seeking relief in that
proceeding that is evidence about a matter about which
the deceased person could have given evidence if he or she were
(2) If there is a jury and a party so
requests, the judge is to:
(a) warn the jury that the evidence may
be unreliable; and
(b) inform the jury of matters that may cause
it to be unreliable; and
(c) warn the jury for the need for
caution in determining whether to accept the evidence and the weight to be given
(3) The judge need not comply with subsection (2) if there
are good reasons for not doing so.
(4) It is not necessary that a
particular form of words be used in giving the warning or
information.
(5) This section does not affect any other power of
the judge to give a warning to, or to inform, the jury.
A submission from Family Support for
Victims of Paedophiles (ACT) Inc made a strong plea for judges to be prohibited
from warning
juries of any perceived dangers of acting on the uncorroborated
evidence of children. It also urged that judges be enjoined to tell
juries that
research has shown that the evidence of children can be trusted and that
children seldom lie in cases of sexual abuse.
These suggestions may reflect an
understandable response to scepticism about the credibility of children as a
class which was reflected
in the earlier practice. It was unfair and
unrealistic to assume that all children were potentially unreliable witnesses.
The submission
quotes the following passage from a recent report of the
Australian Law Reform Commission:
Recent research into
children's memory and the sociology and psychology of disclosing remembered
events has established that children's
cognitive and recall skills have been
undervalued. At the same time other research has demonstrated that adult
testimony is not
always reliable, showing that mature witnesses' memories can be
equally fragile and susceptible to the distorting influences of suggestion
misinformation. The presumed gulf between the reliability of evidence from
children and that from adults appears to have been
exaggerated
The Commission accepts that it is
generally inappropriate to make sweeping judgments about the credibility of the
evidence of children
as a class. It should be noted, however, that neither of
the present sections in the Commonwealth Act contains any rule which requires
warning as to the unreliability of children as a class. Section 165 is rather
concerned with evidence, whether from children or
adults, that may be
unreliable. The evidence of some children may fall within the description of
'evidence the reliability of which
may be affected by age, ill health (whether
physical or mental), injury or the like' but this description may also apply to
adults. Whilst the section refers to some categories of witnesses, such as
potential accomplices, prison informers and claimants
against estates, the
section is generally directed not to classes of people but to potentially
unreliable evidence. This is an important
departure from the earlier
In any event, the answer to concerns
in equally sweeping
affirmations that the evidence of children as a class can be
trusted. It lies rather in directing juries that they must put aside
preconceptions they may have about classes of people or types of allegations and
make a fair and objective assessment of the
evidence of each person who gives
evidence. It is generally quite inappropriate for judges to make statements
of any class of people, whether adults as an overall class
or specific groups such as women, Aborigines, migrants, homosexuals or
to particular religious groups or denominations. No matter how laudable the
motive, a judge should not seek to either
undermine or reinforce the credibility
of any class of person at the expense of any other. Furthermore, inflexible
rules based upon
the class of witness would inevitably jeopardise the essential
fairness of the system of justice. Juries should neither convict
because of some view as to the reliability of children as a class. The issue is
whether the evidence of particular people
is sufficiently cogent to prove the
Crown case beyond reasonable doubt. Any assumption that the evidence of one of
those people
should either be dismissed as unreliable or accepted as reliable
because he or she is under 18 years of age would be unrealistic
and unfair.
Warnings should be given only if there are genuine grounds for concern based
either upon a well documented history of
or upon specific
features of the evidence in the case. On the other hand, if such grounds exist
then an appropriate warning should
not be withheld merely because the witness is
a child. For example, if a person is suffering from psychotic delusions then
should be warned that his or her evidence might be unreliable whether
the witness is 12 years old or 50 years old.
Furthermore, whatever criticisms may be
made of the relevant provisions of the
Evidence Act
it is a Commonwealth
statute and, as mentioned earlier, can be amended only by the Commonwealth
Parliament. It is not open to the
ACT to introduce any laws inconsistent with
its provisions.
Cross-examination as to sexual
history or reputation
Section 76G of the
Evidence Act
(ACT) is in the following terms:
prescribed sexual offence proceedings, evidence relating to the sexual
reputation of the complainant is inadmissible.
(2) No evidence may
be adduced and no question may be asked in prescribed sexual offence
proceedings, except with the leave of the
judge, relating to any sexual
experience of the complainant with a person other than the accused
(3) The judge shall not give leave in pursuance of
subsection (2) for any evidence to be adduced or any question to be asked unless
(a) an application for leave is made to the judge, in the
absence of the jury; and
(b) the judge is satisfied that a refusal
to allow the evidence to be adduced or the question to be asked would prejudice
trial of the accused person.
(4) Nothing in this section
authorises the admission of evidence of a kind which was inadmissible
immediately before 28 November 1985.
Subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this
section were preserved by section 8 of the Commonwealth Act. They provide two
general rules
ensuring due protection from unwarranted attacks upon
complainants.
The first excludes evidence of the
sexual reputation of the complainant. This rule is in absolute terms
unqualified by any proviso.
The Commission is of the view that this rule
should be retained in its present form. The prohibition on evidence of prior
reputation should remain unqualified. No issue of sexual reputation
properly arises in trials for sexual offences.
The second rule excludes evidence of the
complainant's sexual experience with anyone other than the accused. This rule
to judicial discretion to permit evidence as to prior sexual history
in certain cases. The exercise of that discretion is constrained
by the need
for the judge to be satisfied that refusal would prejudice a fair trial.
It has been strongly argued that the
section should be amended to remove any discretion to admit evidence of prior
sexual experience.
This suggestion has been supported by reference to the
principle that the sexual experience of the complainant should be of no
because all people are equally entitled to the protection of the law.
The Commission wholeheartedly supports this principle. However,
that does not
mean that exceptional circumstances might not arise in which evidence falling
within the description of prior sexual
experience might be of
importance.
Take, for example, the case of a man
charged with aggravated rape said to have been committed to punish a former wife
for an affair
with another person. An unqualified prohibition on the admission
of such evidence might prevent the Crown from leading important
evidence of
motive. Furthermore, the complainant might be prevented from giving evidence of
him saying things about his knowledge
of that affair that might identify him as
the assailant even though she had not seen his face. Whilst she might still be
give evidence that she recognised his voice, if she were not permitted
to tell the jury what she heard him say that evidence would
carry little weight.
Without such evidence the prosecution case might be hopelessly weakened. On the
other hand the defence might
wish to establish that the complainant had never
had any such affair and that the whole basis of the Crown case was misconceived.
Alternatively, the accused might wish to explain that whilst there was such an
affair it occurred in the context of an 'open marriage'
in which both parties
had frequently had affairs and that one more would not have caused him to act so
The basic problem is that whilst the
argument in favour of an unqualified exclusionary rule may be valid in a 'run of
the mill' case,
courts are constantly confronted by cases with quite unusual
features and it is impossible to anticipate every contingency. In some
cases the exclusion of such evidence might prejudice the conduct of a fair and
effective trial.
The existing discretion is severely
constrained by the terms of subsection (3) and there is no evidence to suggest
that leave has
been granted inappropriately for evidence of this kind to be
adduced in the ACT Supreme Court. In these circumstances, whilst understanding
the concerns which prompted this suggestion, the Commission believes that it is
prudent to retain the discretion to avoid the risk
of injustice that inevitably
attends inflexible evidentiary rules.
There is no comparable provision in the
Evidence Act
(Cth) dealing specifically with the issue of
prior sexual experience.
might make such evidence admissible if it
could be shown to be relevant though, so far as the Commission has been able to
such a contention has not been maintained. In most cases the
evidence would not be relevant and even if it could be shown to have
peripheral relevance it might be excluded in the exercise of discretion under
section 135 of the Commonwealth Act.
Other issues
relating to cross-examination
A number of submissions were made to the
effect that courts should be empowered to intervene to prevent the
cross-examination of complainants
in a manner that was unduly harassing.
Further submissions raised issues relating to the particular vulnerability of
children being
cross-examined about the evidence of having been sexually abused.
Whilst the Commission is in broad agreement with the comments that
made it would appear that the power to deal with issues of this kind has now
been conferred by the Commonwealth Act.
Section 26 of that Act provides a
general power for courts to control the questioning of witnesses giving evidence
before them:
The court may make such orders as it
considers just in relation to:
(a) the way in which witnesses are
to be questioned; and
(b) the production and use of documents and
things in connection with the questioning of witnesses;
(c) the order in which the parties may question a witness;
(d) the presence and behaviour of any person in connection
with the questioning of witnesses.
Section 41 provides more specific powers
of intervention:
(1) The court may disallow a question
put to a witness in cross-examination, or inform the witness that it need not be
answered, if
the question is:
(a) misleading;
(b) unduly annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive,
oppressive or repetitive.
(2) Without limiting the generality of
the matters that the court may take into account for the purposes of subsection
to take into account:
(a) any relevant condition or
characteristic of the witness, including age, personality and education;
(b) any mental, intellectual or physical disability to which
the witness is or appears to be subject.
The Commission is of the view that these
provisions are sufficient to enable the court to deal with most of the issues
Some submissions did include the
contention that judges should be authorised to exclude questions on the ground
that as a matter of
general experience people who had been raped or otherwise
sexually assaulted may have behaved as the complainant said she had done.
Hence, it was suggested that defence counsel should not be permitted to ask a
complainant why she had delayed reporting the matter
because experience
suggested that there were valid reasons why a complainant might do so. Whilst
the Commission has no doubt that
this is so, it is unable to accept the
contention that the issue must therefore be irrelevant in any trial. The issue
of relevance
must always be determined not merely by reference to general
experience but by reference to the circumstances of the case. The question
not “why have other complainants delayed reporting similar
incidents?” but “why did this particular complainant
That question may arise in the context of other factual allegations such as
continued cohabitation, subsequent holidays
together, the terms of
correspondence between them and the like. As previously mentioned, it is not
possible to predetermine many
issues of relevance.
Furthermore, there is a real risk that
unnecessary fetters on cross-examination may prejudice the fair and effective
trial of an accused.
It is the view of many prosecutors that if questions which
jurors may think relevant are constantly disallowed they may feel that
prosecution is seeking to prevent the defence from eliciting the truth. On the
other hand defence counsel maintain that it is
unfair to the accused if
potentially incongruous behaviour cannot be raised in cross-examination because
it falls within one or more
'taboo' topics.
Again, however, the position is
determined by the provisions of the Commonwealth enactment and the ACT has no
power to add to the
grounds of exclusion.
maintenance of privacy
Evidence Act
(ACT) also contains two provisions which are intended to protect complainants
from further humiliation and embarrassment due to unnecessarily
publicity. Both provisions seem relatively
uncontroversial.
Section 76D is in the following
(1) Any evidence given by the complainant in
prescribed sexual offence proceedings (including evidence given under
cross-examination)
shall, if the court so directs, be given in
(2) Where the complainant in prescribed sexual offence
proceedings gives evidence in camera under subsection (1), a person nominated
the complainant is entitled to be present in court when the complainant gives
that evidence in those proceedings.
Section 76E is as
A person shall not, without the consent of the
complainant in any prescribed sexual offence proceedings, publish the name of
complainant or any reference or allusion by which the identity of that
complainant is disclosed or from which the identity of the
complainant might
reasonable be inferred.
Penalty: 50 penalty units or imprisonment
for 6 months, or both.
Both sections have been preserved by
section 8 of the Commonwealth Act and the Commission recommends that both
provisions be retained.
Victim impact
Section 429AB of the
requires a court to have regard to any victim impact statement that may have
been tendered when determining the sentence to be imposed
in relation to any
indictable offence for which the maximum penalty is at least 5 years
imprisonment. Sexual offences under
fall into this
The prosecution may tender such a
statement only if the complainant has consented in writing. A copy must be
given to the defence
and the complainant may be cross-examined about its
contents, though in practice that rarely occurs.
As mentioned earlier, there has been
some difference of view concerning the use of victim impact statements. There
has been opposition
to their use from some feminists who fear that they will
lead to discrimination, with the severity of sentences varying according
perceived respectability of the women upon whom the offences have been
committed. They argue that the offender should be
sentenced by reference to the
objective gravity of the crime. Some defence counsel have presented the same
argument: offenders should
be sentenced by reference to the objective gravity of
the crimes rather than the subjective feelings of complainants. Some have
argued that the process has an inevitable potential for injustice since any
sceptical cross-examination of the complainant is
likely to undermine any claim
of remorse and any failure to cross-examine is likely to mean that the
complainant's account is accepted
as effectively undisputed evidence. On the
other hand, it has been argued that complainants want the judge to know what
suffered as individuals rather than as members of a class or social
group. This point has been made strongly on behalf of women
from certain ethnic
groups within which a significant stigma still attaches to rape complainants.
Furthermore, such statements vividly
reveal the gravity of the trauma caused by
rape and other sexual offences in a manner not conveyed by advertence to more
or generalised sources of information.
The Victims of Crime Assistance League
(ACT) Inc ('VOCAL') has urged that they be retained, explaining that they are
the only way
in which a complainant can explain how 'the personal, financial,
psychological and social impact of the crime has changed their life.'
states that the 'feed back' received from complainants suggests that the
preparation and submission of victim impact statements
has been 'very
therapeutic'. The Australian Law Reform Commission has also observed that they
provide an opportunity for victims
of crime, including child victims, to
participate in the sentencing part of the criminal justice
Having carefully considered the
competing arguments, the Commission has concluded that, on balance, the
interests of justice would
best be served by the retention of the present
RECOMMENDATION 20
The Commission
is of the view that the present system should be monitored to ensure that it is
effective but sees no reason to introduce
a separate system for sexual
Issue of disclosures to counsellors
One controversial issue to emerge during
the past few years has been the practice of issuing subpoenas requiring
counsellors to produce
their notes of interviews with complainants. Access is
then sought to the notes so that defence counsel may cross-examine the
complainant
on anything which she may have said to the counsellor during
confidential sessions. As some counsellors have pointed out, many complainants
of sexual assault express feelings of guilt or at least doubts as to whether
they may have been to blame in some way. Those expressions
of guilt or doubt do
not mean that the complainant was not sexually assaulted. They merely reflect a
common psychological reaction
to what has occurred. It may be potentially
misleading for the defence to rely upon them as evidence of consent.
Furthermore, the
complainant may feel that she has bared her soul to the
counsellor only to have her confidence cruelly betrayed. Accordingly, it
been suggested that such notes should be privileged from
production.
On the other hand, it has been argued
that the court should have access to all evidence which impinges upon the guilt
or innocence
of the accused. Concern for the presumed sensibilities of someone
who may not be telling the truth should not prevent access to
potentially
exculpatory evidence of statements made when there was no obvious reason to lie.
The essence of the argument is that
the law should seek to ascertain the truth
no matter what the cost to a complainant or any other person, especially when
whom the law still presumes to be innocent is facing disgrace and
imprisonment. Hence, any privilege of the kind proposed would
inevitably pose a
serious threat to the system of justice.
No privilege presently exists in the ACT
that would enable either complainants or counsellors to maintain an objection to
the production
of records of this kind.
Furthermore, whilst it might be possible
for the ACT to pass legislation creating such a privilege, section 56 of the
Commonwealth
Act would prevail over any ACT provision to the extent of any
inconsistency. Hence, in the absence of any agreement from the Commonwealth
add the new provisions to those already covered by section 8, the privilege
could not effectively prevent evidence of relevant
disclosures from being
admitted at a trial. Having regard to the potential importance of this issue
the Commission has taken the
view that it should make some observations as to
the most appropriate form of such a privilege for the ACT even though no
could be effective without the cooperation of the
Commonwealth.
Whilst conscious of Andrew Ashworth's
admonition that bland assertions of balance lead to sloppy
the Commission is
of the view that there is a requirement to balance the need to protect the
against the risk of excluding important
It has been contended that a privilege
in relation to disclosures to counsellors should be unqualified by any judicial
discretion.
This contention has been supported by reference to fears that the
exercise of any such discretion may be influenced by underlying
sexist beliefs
held by trial judges. It has been argued that an absolute privilege preventing
disclosure in any circumstances is
the only means of obviating such a
Such unqualified rights of
confidentiality are virtually unknown in the law. Questions relating to the
extent to which confidentiality
should be maintained arise in many professions
and callings including medicine, the church, psychology, business and
journalism.
In each case the law recognises a duty of confidentiality but
qualifies that right in relation to disclosures required by the public
Thus a banker may encounter a situation in which the duty to his customer is
outweighed by danger to the state or by some
other public
, an employee may breach
the employer's confidence when the public interest so
and a psychiatrist or
other medical practitioner may breach a patient's confidence when necessary for
public safety or the prevention
though it has been said
that the circumstances must be
exceptional
. It is one thing
to recognise a duty of confidentiality and another to create a privilege
enforceable even in the face of a subpoena
or other order of a court. The law
acknowledges few such privileges and those few are generally subject to other
considerations.
Even the deliberations of the Australian Cabinet, which have
been held entitled to 'the highest degree of protection against disclosure',
not subject to an absolute
since the public
interest in immunity from production must be weighed against the competing
public interest in facilitating the due
administration of
The essential problem is again that one
can never anticipate every situation that may arise over the course of many
years. Even legal
professional privilege which derives its unique status from
its importance to the administration of
is subject to some
limited exceptions. A rule that leaves no scope for exceptional circumstances
is inherently dangerous.
is difficult to find any justification for excluding evidence if such exclusion
would genuinely prejudice a fair trial. Suppose,
for example, that the
disclosures to a counsellor revealed that a particular complainant was suffering
mental illness characterised
by delusions or that she had previously attributed
the assault to someone other than the accused. It could scarcely be claimed
the accused could have a fair trial if information of that kind were to be
withheld. It is true that such circumstances would rarely
arise but if they did
the consequences would be quite unacceptable.
Furthermore, a judge faced with a trial
the conduct of which seemed likely to be unfair in the absence of apparently
credible evidence
excluded by the operation of an unqualified rule, might well
feel that the only just course was to grant a permanent stay of
proceedings.
The New South Wales
Evidence Act
was amended in 1997 by incorporating two new privileges; a
'professional confidential relationship
, similar to that
recommended by the Australian Law Reform Commission in 1987, and a 'sexual
assault communications
The `professional confidential
relationships privilege' is effected by providing that a court may, and in some
circumstances must,
direct that evidence not be adduced if a 'protected
confidence', 'the contents of a document recording a protected confidence' or
'protected identity information' would thereby be
. In this context the
term 'protected confidence'
refers to a confidential
communication in the course of a relationship in which the confidant was acting
in a professional capacity
and was under an obligation not to disclose its
contents. The term 'protected identity information' refers to information
the identity of a person who made such a 'protected confidence'. In
the absence of such a direction the evidence is
admissible.
The `sexual assault communications
privilege' arises quite differently.
Section 126H
(1) provides that evidence is
not to be adduced of a 'protected confidence' or 'the contents of a document
recording a protected
confidence' without leave of the court. In this context
the term 'protected confidence' refers to a 'protected counselling
communication'
made by a person against whom a sexual assault has been or is
alleged to have been committed whether before or after the alleged
offence. The
term 'protected counselling communication' refers to a communication made in
confidence to a counsellor in the course
of a relationship in which the
counsellor is 'treating the person for any emotional or psychological
condition'.
The discretion to grant leave for such
evidence to be adduced is severely restricted by successive
subsections:
(2) Evidence of a protected confidence or
the contents of a document recording a protected confidence is not to be adduced
party adducing evidence has not given reasonable notice in writing of the
party's intention to adduce the evidence to:
(a) each other party,
(b) if the protected confider is not a party, the protected
confider, and
(c) if the counsellor is not a party, the
counsellor.
(3) The Court must not give leave to adduce evidence
of a protected confidence or the contents of a document recording a protected
confidence unless the court is satisfied that:
(a) the evidence
will, either by itself or having regard to other evidence adduced or to be
adduced by the party seeking to adduce
the evidence, have substantial probative
(b) other evidence of the protected confidence or the
contents of a document recording a protected confidence is not available,
(c) the public interest in preserving the confidentiality of
protected confidences and protecting the protected confider from harm
substantially outweighed by the public interest in admitting into evidence
information or a document of substantial probative
(4) Without limiting the matters that the court may take
into account for the purposes of subsection (3)(c), the court must take into
account the likelihood, and the nature or extent, of harm that would be caused
to the protected confider if evidence of the protected
confidence or document is
(5) The court must state its reasons for giving or
refusing to give leave under this section.
(6) A protected
confider or counsellor who is not a party to proceedings may, with the leave of
the court, appear in the proceedings.
These provisions have been set out in
full because they indicate the nature and extent of the provisions imposed in
NSW and provide
a concrete focus for the competing
The Commission notes, in passing, that
the meaning of paragraph (3)(b) has been described by the authors of
) as 'problematic',
and that they seem to have concluded that the terms of this paragraph at least
envisage that 'other evidence' of the protected confidence
or document might be
admissible. It is difficult to see why the section should apply to some
evidence but not other evidence of
the same confidence or document or, indeed,
what purpose this paragraph is intended to serve.
However, the heart of the controversy
relates to the criterion that the evidence must have 'substantial probative
value'. This term
has not been defined and it seems unlikely that any
definition could be of assistance since what is probative can only be determined
by reference to the issues that have arisen in a particular case. It plainly
means that the evidence must have a significant value
in tending to prove or
disprove facts of significant relevance to an issue between the parties to the
Dr Easteal has suggested that the way is
left open for a judicial officer who adheres to the myth that women have a
propensity to
lie about being sexually assaulted to interpret these words in a
way that gives life to the myth. She offers by way of example references
counselling notes to previous drinking, drug taking or affairs. Dr Easteal also
expresses the concern that the words could be
imbued with a cultural meaning in
which there was seen to be 'substantial probative value' in establishing that
the complainant was
an 'immoral' woman. Other submissions have contained
similar expressions of concern.
Whilst the Commission understands these
concerns it does not accept that there is any substantial risk of the discretion
abused. Such a construction would make a mockery of the spirit and
intent of the section. Furthermore, even if some magistrate or
judge were to
act on such a basis then it would be open to the Crown to challenge the ruling
by what is often referred to as a reference
and obtain a decision
that would be binding on future trial judges.
In recent years there has been an
increasing recognition of the inadequacy of rigid laws. Fears of capricious or
idiosyncratic decisions
have always tempted legislators to seek safety in
certainty. However, the cost has been great. The quest for justice has often
been subverted into the simplistic allocation of cases into designated legal
pigeon-holes and an equally simplistic application of
predetermined
consequences. Concerns have been expressed about the consequences of such
approaches for decades
trend toward more open-ended discretionary rules has gradually
For example, in the
civil law there has been an increasing willingness to restrain enforcement of
contractual rights where
unconscionable.
criminal law there has been an increasing emphasis on the discretion to exclude
evidence on grounds of unfairness or public
policy. The Commission does not
believe that the suggested risk of some judges or magistrates abusing judicial
discretion provides
any justification for returning to rigid rules and accepting
risks of real injustice.
Such an absolute privilege might produce
unintended consequences. Suppose, for example, that a person who has been
sexually abused
tells a counsellor that he or she intends to kill the
perpetrator. There have in fact been several such killings in Australia
Should a counsellor be compelled to remain silent and tacitly permit
Ultimately, whilst the Commission is not
insensitive to the concerns that have been expressed, it is unable to accept
that the law
should contain a privilege in such absolute terms that even
evidence capable of demonstrating the innocence of an accused person
to be suppressed and evidence of homicidal intent or other unacceptable
consequences left unreported.
On the other hand, the Commission does
not accept that the law should refuse to recognise any privilege in relation to
disclosures
to counsellors or that notes of such disclosures should be made
available to counsel merely to facilitate a ‘fishing expedition’.
It seems unlikely that many counsellors' records would reveal any evidence of
real importance to the outcome of a trial and in most
cases continuing to permit
unrestricted access would involve an unwarranted intrusion into expressions of
anguish communicated in
a relationship of trust. Such an intrusion may
obviously cause further distress if not further feelings of violation. It
not be permitted unless there are compelling reasons for
disclosure.
The NSW provisions reflect an attempt to
find some middle ground that would recognise the validity of these concerns
whilst ensuring
that evidence is available to establish relevant facts in
exceptional cases. That is plainly necessary. The section is not limited
disclosures made to rape counsellors nor even to disclosures about sexual
assaults. It applies to any communication made in confidence
to a counsellor
who is 'treating the person for any emotional or psychological condition' even
prior to the offence. If the discretion
to grant leave for counsel to examine
evidence of that kind were to be removed this might mean that evidence of a
mentally ill person's
long history of psychiatric illness was effectively
suppressed since even the obviously delusional statements upon which the
psychiatrists
had based their diagnoses could not be
Unfortunately, mentally ill people
continue to fall into the criminal justice system both as complainants and
defendants and their
psychiatric condition should be revealed if it is likely to
affect the reliability of their evidence. There are other exceptional
For example, the issue may be one of identity and the complainant may have
described her assailant to a counsellor in terms
wholly inconsistent with the
appearance of the accused. The Commission considers that any proposal that
would prevent a court from
ascertaining the truth when there were grounds to
fear that an innocent person might be wrongfully convicted and imprisoned would
be contrary to principle and unjustified.
The NSW provisions are somewhat
incongruous in that whilst purporting to create a privilege they do not identify
the person entitled
to the benefit of it nor authorise such a person to waive it
if he or she considers it appropriate to do so. The section requires
confider and counsellor be notified and that both may appear in the proceedings
with leave of the court. This suggests
that both may be entitled to the benefit
of the privilege. However, the privilege in other confidential disclosures is
almost always
that of the confider rather than the person to whom the
confidential statements are made. The Commission believes that the complainant
rather than the counsellor should be entitled to the benefit of the privilege
since it is the confidences of the complainant that
are threatened. The
question of waiver does not seem to have been addressed. That is unfortunate
because the operation of the section
is not confined to proceedings for sexual
offences. Hence, a person charged with, say, shoplifting who wishes to raise,
in mitigation,
the fact that she had been suffering emotional trauma due to
sexual assault might be forced to seek leave to obtain access to evidence
own disclosures to a counsellor.
The competing arguments could no doubt
be developed at length. Ultimately, however, the Commission is of the view that
be many circumstances in which it would be appropriate for any order
for production of records to be refused but some circumstances
in which justice
would demand that production be ordered. The complainant should enjoy a
privilege in relation to such confidential
communications and the right to waive
such privilege, but the court should have a discretion to admit evidence of the
communications
in appropriate cases despite the absence of
MCCOC has expressed the view that there
should be a sexual offences counselling immunity subject to the exercise of a
judicial discretion
confined by reference to a number of
The Commission is in
general agreement with this view. MCCOC has suggested that the discretion
should not be available in preliminary
criminal proceedings and that any
application for access to the records should involve two stages. First, an
applicant would be
required to demonstrate both a legitimate forensic purpose
for seeking that leave and an arguable case that the counselling communication
would materially assist his or her case. If those criteria were established
then the court would make a preliminary examination
of the evidence in the
absence of the parties and their legal representatives. Leave could be granted
only if, in the circumstances
of the case, the public interest in ensuring the
accused is given a fair trial outweighs the public interest in preserving the
confidentiality
of the counselling communication. In making that determination,
MCCOC has suggested, the court would be required to take into account
following considerations:
(a) the extent to which
disclosure of the counselling communication is necessary to allow the accused to
make a full defence,
(b) the public interest in ensuring that
victims of sexual offences receive effective counselling and other treatment,
and the extent
to which disclosure of counselling communications dissuades
victims from seeking such counselling or other treatment or diminishes
effectiveness of such counselling or other treatment,
(c) whether
the evidence concerned will have a substantial probative value to a fact in
issue and whether other evidence of similar
or greater probative value is
available concerning the matter to which the evidence
(d) the likelihood that disclosure of the counselling
communication will affect the outcome of the case,
(e) whether
admission of the counselling communication is being sought on the basis of a
discriminatory belief or bias,
(f) whether the victim or alleged
victim who made the counselling communication concerned, or to whom it was made
or relates, objects
to disclosure of the counselling communication,
(g) the nature and extent of the reasonable expectation of
confidentiality with respect to the counselling communication and the potential
prejudice to the privacy of any person, including the extent to which any
interest in confidentiality has been attenuated by the
passage of time or the
occurrence of any intervening event since the counselling communication was
The Commission doubts that there is any
real need to stipulate these criteria. Furthermore, criteria (a), (c), (d) and,
perhaps (e)
appear to address substantially the same issue, namely whether
disclosure is really warranted in fairness to the accused. However,
inappropriate and there is no obvious reason to oppose their
The Commission does oppose the
suggestion that complainants have no right to consent to disclosure. Any other
right to confidentiality
including legal professional privilege can be waived
and there is no apparent reason to withhold such a right from complainants.
suggested provision is intended to protect the rights of complainants, not
remove them. In some cases complainants might wish
to have evidence of such
disclosures admitted. There may be cases in the which the evidence would be
admissible under
sections 66
and/or 72 of the
Evidence Act
evidence of the facts disclosed. There may be other cases in which evidence
falling into this category would be admissible to
rebut suggestions of implanted
memories, delusional illness or recent fabrication. More fundamentally,
however, the Commission believes
that it is the complainants who should have
rights to confidentiality and those rights should extend to the right of
RECOMMENDATION 21
The Commission
recommends that the Commonwealth government be approached with a view to
obtaining agreement for amending the regulations
Evidence Act 1995
ensure that the Act does not apply to a further provision to be inserted into
the Evidence Act, 1971 in accordance with the recommendations
of MMCOC but
subject to a provision ensuring that complainants may waive any restriction on
disclosure should they choose to do so.
The former right of an accused person to
make an unsworn statement from the dock has been abolished by section 68A of
Evidence Act 1971
As previously mentioned, it must be
acknowledged that some measure of misogyny and bigotry remains within any
community and that some
jurors might be afflicted by such qualities.
Nonetheless, there is no basis for any fears that jurors are likely to be any
misogynistic or bigoted than other members of the community. In the ACT
jury panels are generally representative of the wider community
balanced in terms of gender, though the process of empanelling juries involves
drawing names out of a box at random and
some will have a majority of male
jurors and others will have a majority of female jurors. Nor is there any
obvious reason to suspect
that the role as juror might subvert those empanelled
from their usual values. Furthermore, the scope for trials to be influenced
inappropriate values is limited to some extent by the requirement that verdicts
be unanimous.
In any event, there is no procedure that
would enable prospective jurors to be 'screened' for inappropriate values. The
process followed
in some American jurisdictions of permitting opposing counsel
to cross-examine prospective jurors about attitudes and beliefs is
consuming and expensive and its utility is dubious. Such a system is not
employed in any Australian jurisdiction or in England
and the Commission could
not support the adoption of such an approach in the ACT.
It has been proposed that videotaped
documentaries addressing pervasive myths about the behaviour of rape victims be
screened to juries
prior to the commencement of trials involving allegations of
sexual assault.
The Commission agrees that there is a
need for greater community education on these matters but doubts that the
Supreme Court is an
appropriate venue for screening documentaries of this
nature. The court must be impartial and must avoid any appearance of
partiality.
If the trial begins with the screening of such a documentary some
jurors might form the impression that the court is taking sides.
such a documentary would also give rise to some incongruity with the standard
direction that juries should put out of
their minds anything they may have heard
or read and decide the case solely on the basis of the evidence adduced at the
trial. However,
there are more fundamental problems. One would have to
determine the status of such a videotape. Would it be evidence in the case?
so, then how could the admissibility of a videotape not yet prepared be
guaranteed by statute? If not, then how could a jury
be invited to act on the
basis of its contents? In either event, defence counsel would presumably seek
an opportunity to answer
the videotaped material and that might take the trial
into unexpected areas. For example, the producers or speakers might be
to attend for cross-examination, opposing experts might be called, or
there might be an application to play videotaped documentaries
tend to behave. Furthermore, if the complainant in the particular trial has not
behaved as the video tape suggests
complainants tend to behave then that may be
used against her.
Trials have to be conducted in
accordance with the rules of evidence and anything which might be seen as an
attempt to indoctrinate
the jury or to create a bias in favour of conviction is
bound to cause grave problems and, ultimately, give rise to the risk that
convictions may be set aside on appeal. For these reasons the Commission is
unable to support this proposal.
6. LEGISLATION
IS NOT ENOUGH
As mentioned in the Introduction, no
legislative scheme can provide a perfect system in which the guilty are always
convicted, the
innocent are always acquitted and trials cause no further anguish
to complainants. The criminal justice system should always strive
toward such
noble ideals but at the present stage of human development they are
unattainable. The legislative reforms suggested
in this report should make the
law simpler and the system more effective and fair for complainants as well as
the accused person.
However, legislation alone cannot meet every need. The
outcome of any given prosecution will depend upon a range of factors including
the adequacy of the police investigation, the level of preparation and the
standard of presentation of the Crown case, the credibility
of the witnesses and
the competence of the competing counsel. The substantive law and the rules of
evidence and procedure may play
an important part, but it is a human system
dependent upon human beings with normal human weaknesses.
Furthermore, the ACT does not have an
unfettered legislative power. There are many issues which can only be sensibly
addressed by
the Commonwealth. One obvious example is the prevalence of child
pornography and promotional material issued by paedophile groups
Internet. Another is the problem of child sex tours now prohibited by
Commonwealth legislation.
In any event, no legislative provision
will enable a judge to undo that which has occurred or assuage the pain so
caused. Regrettably,
the law must respond to the anguish of complainants by
asking them to undergo the further ordeal of giving evidence at the trial
alleged offender. The rules of evidence and procedure have been progressively
changed to provide some limited protection
from cross-examination as to prior
sexual history and reputation, and to permit evidence via video link, but there
are very real
limits to what can be done to reduce the ordeal. Complainants
need emotional support and specialised counselling facilities not
only to help
them come to terms with what has happened to them, but to help them cope with
the strain of having to give evidence.
There is a need for a protocol to be
developed in conjunction with the Director of Public Prosecutions to ensure that
complainants
are treated with respect and dignity from the time of the initial
complaint. Many complainants find the initial report and forensic
investigative procedures intrusive and unwelcome. Complainants should be
advised of each step in the process towards trial.
Basic matters such as where
to go when they arrive at court, how their concerns about protection and
avoidance of confrontation
with relatives or friends of the accused, should be
addressed. Most complainants have never been to court before and have no idea
what to expect. It will sometimes help to simply take them to court so that
they may see the layout of the courtroom, explain the
procedures including
taking an oath or making an affirmation and indicate the type of things that
they will be asked. It will also
be necessary to make firm arrangements so that
they will be protected during periods at court including the times immediately
any short adjournments and before the resumption of the
The Director of Public Prosecutions does
not have sole responsibility for the welfare of the complainant witness at
court. The AFP,
court staff including those at the public counter and in the
court, corrective services and custodial staff must all act in such
a way as to
reduce the trauma of the court appearance for the complainant. Consideration
should be given to the establishment of
a formal group to develop a plan of
management for the appearance of witnesses in a sexual assault case. Such a
plan would involve
all the personnel listed above in developing strategies to
ensure that complainants are treated with appropriate dignity and consideration,
with their need for security as paramount. The plan should include identifying
secure areas for the complainant to use when waiting
to give evidence or when
accessing and exiting the court building, so as to avoid contact with the
When the trial is over and the accused
has been either convicted and punished, or acquitted and returned to the
community, those who
have been sexually violated will still have to face the
anguish and somehow attempt to pick up the threads of their lives. Again
will need emotional support and specialised counselling facilities. The
Commission strongly recommends adequate funding be
provided to enable
organisations such as The Canberra Rape Crisis Centre to continue to operate
such facilities and that further
consideration be given to the needs of male
complainants in the light of the pilot project conducted by
The plight of child complainants is
particularly distressing and it is imperative that adequate specialist
counselling be available.
Such counselling should be available not only during
the court process but also after the the trial. Additionally, staff of the
sometimes need to consult with a child’s carers or counsellors to ensure
that the evidence they adduce from the child accurately
relays to the court what
the child means. Many young children communicate with words that have entirely
different meanings to those
adults might attribute to
Secure and private areas where children
and their supporters can feel safe are also needed in the courts. Consideration
given to making the current facilities at the court child friendly,
including the provision of child sized furniture and age appropriate
equipment to allow children to relax or release stress during breaks in giving
In summary, the processes of the
criminal justice system and those involved in it should treat complainants with
sensitivity and compassion.
The need to attend court, give evidence in chief
and be cross-examined will inevitably cause anxiety and distress but some things
can be done to alleviate the anguish without compromising the integrity or
fairness of the trial process. Those things may include
changes to the
legislation of the kind recommended in this report but a more holistic approach
is required.
Ultimately, there is a need for greater
understanding of the problem of sexual assault within the Australian
People need to
accept that sexual violence should never be tolerated and, notwithstanding the
traditional Australian abhorrence
of ‘dobbing’, the gravity of such
offences demands that any information that may enable the police to identify
be provided without hesitation. Those who have suffered from sexual
assault need comfort and support; not suspicion or condemnation.
attitudes have changed during the past two or three decades and it may be hoped
that those changes will continue. In
the interim those involved in the
administration of justice must seek to ensure that the system is fair and
effective and that the
processes employed are designed and implemented with due
sensitivity for the special needs of those who have already suffered so
Justice requires nothing
ATTORNEY-GENERAL’S DEPARTMENT
I, TERENCE CONNOLLY, Attorney General of the Australian Capital Territory,
REFER the following matter to the Community Law Reform
Committee as provided for
in the constitution of the Committee:
TO REVIEW the laws in force in the Territory in regard to sexual assault AND
TO REPORT on desirable changes concerning the existing
laws, practices and
procedures relating to sexual assault, including:
whether the current system
adequately deals with the needs of victims of sexual
on the need for further
measures or legislation to improve the current system;
any other relevant matter the Committee wishes to take into consideration.
IN MAKING ITS REVIEW AND REPORT the Committee should consider:
procedures in sexual assault
whether current evidentiary
rules relating to sexual assault are appropriate;
practices relating to the
sentencing of sexual assault offenders.
IN MAKING ITS REVIEW
AND REPORT the Committee is to have regard to:
any relevant recommendations of the
National Committee on Violence Against
any views of government
agencies, the community and individuals on this reference;
any relevant international
conventions adopted by Australia.
Signed this
day of January 1993
TERENCE CONNOLLY
List of Submissions received in response to the discussion paper and
the draft report
Dr Patricia
Family Support for Victims of Paedophiles
(2 submissions dated 29 October 1998 and 6 November
Women’s Health
ACT Community Care
Women With Disabilities
Victims of Crime Assistance League (ACT)
Ms Rosemary
Discrimination Commissioner,
ACT Human Rights
Canberra Rape Crisis Centre and The
Women’s Legal Centre (ACT and Region) (joint
submission)
Child At Risk Assessment
The Canberra Hospital
Children’s, Youth and Family
Services Bureau,
ACT Department of Education and Community
ACT Women’s Consultative
Service Assisting Male Survivors of
Sexual Assault (SAMSSA)
RECOMMENDATIONS
REPORT OF THE LAW REFORM COMMISSION RELATING
SEXUAL ASSAULT
RECOMMENDATION 1
The Commission
recommends:
(a) that paragraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of
‘sexual intercourse’ in section 92 be amended in each case by adding
a comma and the word ‘labia’ after the word vagina and before the
words ‘or anus’.
(b) that the words ‘and any contact
between the penis of the offender and the mouth of another person’ be
added to subparagraph
(c) of the definition of ‘sexual
intercourse’.
(c) that the following definitions be added to
section 92:
act of a sexual nature
means sexual intercourse or an act of
complainant
means a person upon whom an offence is alleged to have been
includes a child or a young
offence under section 92D;
includes a surgically constructed vagina;
young person
person under the age of 16 years.
(d) that sections 92EA,
92NA and 92NB be amended to remove the definition of ‘young person’
from those sections.
RECOMMENDATION 2
Commission recommends that:
(a) the existing 8 offences be replaced by
offences of rape, assault with intent to rape and aggravated
(b) the term ‘rape’ be defined to mean engaging in
sexual intercourse with another person without that person’s
consent and
knowing that that other
person does not consent or being reckless as to
whether that other person consents;
(c) the maximum sentence for rape and
assault with intent to rape be set at 15 years imprisonment;
the offence of aggravated rape be
defined to apply when the offender has acted in company with another offender or
other offenders
or has inflicted grievous bodily harm upon the complainant
whether before, during or after rape; and
the maximum sentence for aggravated rape
be set at 20 years imprisonment.
RECOMMENDATION 3
The Commission recommends
(a) the offence under subsection (1) remain unqualified by any
statutory defence;
(b) the maximum penalty for such offence be increased
to 20 years imprisonment;
(c) the maximum penalty for an offence under
subsection (2) be set at 12 years; and
(d) the requirement that the
defendant prove consent be repealed.
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends that section 92EA be
RECOMMENDATION 5
The Commission
recommends that:
(a) the number of offences relating to acts of
indecency be reduced to 3. The offences should be:
aggravated act of indecency;
assault with intent to commit an
act of indecency.
(b) The maximum sentence for acts of
indecency and assaults with intent to commit acts of indecency should be 7 years
and the maximum
sentence for the commission of an aggravated act of indecency
should be 15 years.
RECOMMENDATION 6
Commission recommends that section 92K be amended as follows:
that the offence under subsection (1)
remain unqualified by any statutory defence;
the maximum penalty for such an offence
be increased to 15 years;
the maximum penalty for an offence under
subsection (2) be reduced to 6 years; and
that subsection (3) be amended by
deleting the words `and that that person consented to the committing of the act
of indecency'.
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends that subsection (7) be amended to the
In this section, 'step-child', in relation to a person, means
a person with whom the first-mentioned person lives and in relation
to whom the
first mentioned person has assumed a caring role of the kind that would normally
be fulfilled by a parent.
RECOMMENDATION 8
Commission recommends that:
section 92M be repealed; and
section 37 be amended by adding after the
words ‘advantage to any person’ the words ‘including sexual
intercourse
with the person so detained or any other
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends that section 92NB be amended by:
adding after the words 'sexual nature'
in subsection (1) the words 'or the sexual organs or anus of a young person';
adding to subsection (2) the words 'or
that the film, photograph, drawing, audio tape, video tape or thing was in his
or her possession
for a legitimate medical or educational purpose or for
purposes associated with the investigation of possible criminal offences and
the maintenance of legal proceedings.'
(c) by the addition
of the following further subsections:
(3) A person who knowingly has in
his or her possession a film, photograph, drawing, audio tape, video tape,
document or any other
thing with the intention that it be used in an attempt to
persuade a young person to engage in an act of a sexual nature is guilty
offence punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 5 years.
person shall be taken to possess such film, photograph, drawing, audio tape,
video tape, document or thing with the intention
specified in subsection (3) if
he or she possesses it with the intention of attempting to persuade a young
person to engage in an
act of a sexual nature by making any statement or
adopting any strategy of a kind suggested in it.
RECOMMENDATION 10
The Commission recommends:
that police officers be authorised to
demand the name and address of persons found loitering near schools,
kindergartens or child
care centres;
that it be made an offence either to
refuse to supply such information or to supply information which is false in any
material particular;
that section 197 of the
Magistrates
be amended to authorise the court to grant orders, on the
application of police officers, school principals or those in charge of
kindergartens or child care centres, restraining people from loitering in or
near schools, kindergartens or child care centres when
there are reasonable
grounds for suspecting that children might be in danger from such a person.
RECOMMENDATION 11
The Commission
recommends that:
The negative and piecemeal approach reflected in section
92P be replaced by a positive consent standard in the following
For the purposes of this Part "consent" should be taken to mean a
consent freely and voluntarily given with knowledge of the nature
of the act in
question and the identity of the other person or persons
RECOMMENDATION 12
The Commission
proposes the enactment of a new offence in the following terms:
who induces another person to have sexual intercourse with that person by
fraudulently representing that such act has a
legitimate medical purpose or that
such persons are lawfully married is guilty of an offence, punishable on
conviction by imprisonment
for 12 years.
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends that there be no change to the common
law position.
RECOMMENDATION 14
The Commission
recommends that there be no change to this provision.
RECOMMENDATION 15
The Commission recommends that there be no
change to this provision.
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends that the operation of the principle in
section 92U be extended to all offences involving acts of
RECOMMENDATION 17
The Commission
recommends that there no change to the legislative provisions concerning
sentences other than by amending maximum
penalties as recommended in other
sections of this report.
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends that the current closed circuit
television system be augmented by provisions enabling the Court to take
in any manner it considers appropriate.
RECOMMENDATION
The Commission recommends that
Magistrates Court Act
amended to provide for the following:
the prosecution be required to serve
copies of statements of all witnesses upon the solicitors for the defendant
prior to any date
being set for the hearing of committal
proceedings;
the defendant or his solicitors then be
required to provide written notification of any witnesses whom they wished to
cross-examine
during the course of the committal
proceedings;
in the event that such notice was not
given it be presumed that the committal proceedings would involve nothing more
than submissions
made on the basis of the documents so served and the hearing
time would be allocated accordingly;
thereafter, no cross-examination of any
of the Crown witnesses be permitted without leave of the committing
magistrate;
where notice was given of an intention
to cross-examine a particular witness or witnesses then sufficient time be
allocated to permit
that cross-examination; and
committing magistrates be given
discretion to permit any evidence in cross-examination to be given by closed
circuit television or
video link and to limit cross-examination which appears to
be unnecessarily lengthy and to prevent cross-examination altogether about
matters which are of peripheral relevance or which is otherwise not warranted by
the forensic needs of the case.
RECOMMENDATION 20
The Commission is of the view that the
present system should be monitored to ensure that it is effective but sees no
reason to introduce
a separate system for sexual offences.
RECOMMENDATION 21
The Commission recommends that the
Commonwealth government be approached with a view to obtaining agreement for
amending the regulations
Evidence Act 1995
to ensure that the Act does
not apply to a further provision to be inserted into the Evidence Act, 1971 in
accordance with the recommendations
of MCCOC but subject to a provision ensuring
that complainants may waive any restriction on disclosure should they choose to
A copy of the terms of
reference have been incorporated as Appendix A.
A list of those who made
written submissions to the Commission has been incorporated as Appendix B. It
has not been practicable
to provide a list of all of those consulted verbally,
some of whom did not wish to be named. However, the Commission is nonetheless
grateful for their
assistance.
See paragraphs
331 et seq.
‘complainant’ is used in trials for offences of any kind to avoid
any appearance of prejudgment. It means a
person upon whom an offence has
allegedly been committed even if that person did not actually make a complaint.
It has generally
been used throughout this report to avoid the need to use
cumbersome phrases such as ‘victim or alleged
This feeling
was reflected in several submissions and has been documented in numerous
articles concerning complainants of sexual
Of course, there
is also a risk of wrongful conviction as the Australian cases of Chamberlain,
Splatt, McLeod- Lindsay, Anderson,
and others demonstrate. For a discussion of
such cases see,
, ed by K. Carrington, M. Dever, R Hogg, J.
Bargen & A. Lohrey, Academics for Justice, Macquarie University, Sydney,
Brown, M., & Wilson, P.,
Justice and Nightmares, Successes and
Failures of Forensic Science in Australia and New Zealand
, N.S.W. University
Press, Sydney, 1992. See also
Report of the Inquiry held under s. 475 of the
Crimes Act 1900
into the conviction of Johann Ernst Siegfried Pohl at Central
Criminal Court on 2nd November, 1973: Mr Justice McInerny
This does not mean,
of course, that there should be no constraints on the nature or extent of the
cross-examination that should be
permitted. See, for example, the discussion
at paragraphs 269 to 284.
Alison Young in ‘The Waste Land of the Law, The Wordless Song of the Rape
Victim’, [1998]
Melbourne University Law Review
, Vol 22, at
Most sexual offences
are triable on indictment before a jury though some may be dealt with summarily
before a Magistrate. See paragraph
Director of Public
Prosecutions, Annual Report
, 1999/2000, tables 2 and
Jerome Frank,
Courts on Trial
, Princeton University Press, 1949 at
This refers to the
process of people leaving behind mute evidence of their presence such as hairs,
tiny flakes of skin or bodily
fluids and taking away inadvertent souvenirs of
things they have touched such as dust, paint flakes or traces of
See for example,
Ashworth, A., ‘Crime, Community and Creeping Consequentialism’
Criminal Law Review
April 1996, 220-230 at 229. This aspect is also
discussed in the submission by Dr
creating criminal offences are ‘strictly construed’ and if there is
any potential ambiguity the interpretation
most favourable to the accused is
usually adopted. The inclusion of philosophical statements might result in
arguments that other
statutory provisions should be read down to the extent
necessary to give effect to the philosophical considerations stated and, in
turn, to arguments about the nature of the considerations conveyed by the words
used in the Act. Similarly, the use of examples
might lead to arguments that
the more general words of the section should be interpreted by reference to the
circumstances posited
and that the application of the section should be confined
to situations of the same general kind. It might also be observed that
examples may assist non-lawyers to understand general concepts they rarely
assist courts to determine whether the principle
they are intended to illustrate
is sufficiently broad to encompass particular circumstances or to resolve other
crucial issues of
interpretation.
DB., ‘Legal Realism for Lawyers’ (1990) 104
Harvard L.Rev
468 at 475-6.
example, few legislatures would have predicted the advent of
‘designer’ drugs or rave parties, and anticipated their
impact upon
the sexual mores of young people.
For example, if it were proven that the accused and the
complainant had sexual intercourse whilst she was only 15 years of age there
would be no judicial discretion to order an acquittal on the basis that they had
been married in accordance with traditional laws
of a particular cultural or
ethnic group, the complainant was a willing party to the sexual acts in
question, she was 30 by the time
the matter came to the attention of the
authorities, remained committed to the marriage and was vehemently opposed to
any prosecution
of her husband.
See, for example,
R v Clark (
unreported) NSW
Court of Criminal Appeal BC 9801258, 17 April 1998.
S Bronitt, Editorial,
“The Direction of Rape Law in Australia: Toward a Positive Consent
Standard”, October
Criminal Law Journal
Model Criminal Code
Officers’ Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorney’s-General,
Chapter 5, Report, ‘Sexual
Offences Against the Person’, May 1999,
There are many
circumstances in which the infliction of actual bodily harm is not unlawful.
Obvious examples are injuries inflicted
in boxing matches and other sporting
contests, injuries caused by acts in reasonable self defence and certain medical
and surgical
procedures.
Submission by the Canberra Rape Crisis Centre and the Women's Legal Centre (ACT
and Region) at 21
Commission on Human Relationships,
Final Report
, 1977, AGPS: Canberra,
vol 5 at 204.
Ian Cunliffe made
the same observation 17 years ago. See“Consent and Sexual Offences Law
Reform in New South Wales”
Criminal Law Journal
R v Schloss
(1897) 8 QLJ 21 at
It has been
suggested that consent may not be a defence because one cannot by consent
authorise another person to commit a crime.
See, for example
, R v Donovan
(1934) 2 KB 498. However, this proposition seems to beg the question because it
presupposes that the consensual causation of actual
bodily harm would be a
crime. The House of Lords has considered this issue in the context of
sado-masochistic incidents of gross
cruelty, deciding by a majority of 3 to 2
that absence of consent was immaterial to the offences which involved the
infliction of
wounds and bodily harm:
(1994) 1 AC 212.
However, the judges who supported this conclusion did so on somewhat different
bases. Lord Templeton (at 235-6) rejected the contention
that acts committed
for the consensual achievement of sexual satisfaction should not be a crime by
distinguishing between violence
which is incidental and violence which is
inflicted for the indulgence of cruelty. Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle (at
244-5) concluded
that consent was no answer to a charge of assault occasioning
actual bodily harm unless the relevant acts fell within ‘well
exceptions’ such as organised sporting contests or parental chastisement.
Lord Lowry (at 255) agreed with both bases
and said that he would decline to add
sado-masochistic acts to the list of exceptions referred to by Lord Jauncey.
None of these
approaches is reassuring and given such contemporary practices as
body piercing the stated principles might need to be revisited.
Furthermore,
Lord Templeton’s approach would not support the conclusion that consensual
sexual acts constitute unlawful assaults
if any injury caused was merely
incidental.
section 345
, 1900 provides that: ‘A person who
aids, abets, counsels or procures, or by any act or omission is in any way
directly or indirectly
knowingly concerned in, or party to, the commission of an
offence under a law of the Territory shall be deemed to have committed
offence and shall be punishable, on conviction, accordingly’.
The impression that the
offences were to be akin to aggravated rape or attempted rape is confirmed by
the fact that longer maximum
sentences have been prescribed than those for
sexual intercourse without consent.
Dr GD Woods, (then
Director, Criminal Law Review Committee),
Sexual Assault Law Reform in New
South Wales,
(unreported 24 September 1982) and
(1982) 2 NSWLR
The Commission has
confirmed that Higgins J has held that such a requirement must be implied. The
judgment was delivered extemporaneously
and no transcription of the reasons for
judgment has been located but the ruling was not challenged on
Wensleydale’s so called ‘golden rule’ is that ‘... the
grammatical and ordinary sense of the words is
to be adhered to, unless that
would lead to some absurdity, or some repugnance or inconsistency with the rest
of the instrument in
which case the grammatical and ordinary sense of the words
may be modified, so as to avoid that absurdity and inconsistency, but
Grey v Pearson
[1857] EngR 335
(1857) 6 HLC 61
[1857] EngR 335
at 1234. However this rule is usually seen as more conservative than other
suggested approaches to statutory interpretation, such
‘purposive’ approach by which a provision is construed in a manner
conducive to the presumed purpose of the legislature
‘mischief’ approach by which a provision is construed in the manner
most likely to address the problems which
led to its enactment. See, for
Jones v Wrotham Park Settled Estates
[1980] AC 74
Cooper Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1981] HCA 26
(1981) 147 CLR 297
at 321; and
Mills v Meeking
[1990] HCA 6
(1990) 91 ALR 16
It has been
assumed throughout this report that consent must be a free and voluntary consent
rather than acquiescence due to fear
or any other form of coercion. See
generally the discussion in chapter
The nature of an attempt
was explained by Murphy J in
Britten v Alpogut
[1987] VicRp 77
[1987] VR 929
‘(A) t common law a criminal attempt is committed if it is proven that the
accused had at all material times the guilty
intent to commit a recognised crime
and it is proven that at the same time he did an act or acts (which in
appropriate circumstances
would include omissions) which are seen to be
sufficiently proximate to the commission of the said crime and not seen to be
preparatory to it’. See also
R v Colingridge
(1976) 16 SASR
DPP v Stonehouse
[1978] AC 55
R v Alister
[1984] HCA 85
R v Holland
(1993) 117 ALR
[1954] 2 QB 282; 38 Cr App R 1. See also
R v Chan-Fook
[1993] EWCA Crim 1
(1994) 99 Cr App
Jennifer Temkin
has suggested that the husband should be able to argue that the wife’s
hymen was not ruptured deliberately
with the aim of having sexual intercourse:
Rape and the Legal Process
, op.cit at 113. However section 92B does
not contain any requirement that there be an assault or that actual bodily harm
be inflicted
deliberately. Recklessness is sufficient:
51 A Crim R 25
[1992] UKHL 1
[1992] 1 AC 699.
Hence he would be guilty if
he adverted to the possibility of rupturing the hymen but nonetheless proceeded
and did so with intent
to have sexual intercourse with
Ian Cunliffe, then
Secretary and Director of Research, Australian Law Reform Commission, suggested
that under the then existing provisions
of the NSW legislation if a couple were
relying upon coitus interruptus for contraception a man who delayed withdrawal
from consensual
intercourse might commit the same offence. See ‘Consent
and Sexual Offences Law Reform in NSW South Wales’
See footnote
Consent is not, of
course, a defence to incest and in the defence forces consensual sexual
intercourse between adults may sometimes
constitute a military offence of
‘fraternising’.
See footnote 33.
D .A. Thomas,
Principles of Sentencing
edition, 1979 at
For example, in New
South Wales
section 61I
provides a maximum penalty
of 14 years imprisonment for the offence of sexual intercourse without consent,
section 66C
provides a maximum penalty of 8 years imprisonment for an
offence of having sexual intercourse with a person who is between 10 and
years of age, or 10 years imprisonment if the young person was under the
authority of the offender at the relevant
Though such a
young person might have the charge dealt with summarily and in that event be
exposed to a lesser penalty. See sections
Children and Young
See ‘the no defence age’, Chapter 5, Report, ‘Sexual Offences
Against the Person’, May 1999, at
This concern is
reflected in the objects and principles referred to in sections 10 to 15 of the
Children and Young People Act
Proudman v Dayman
[1941] HCA 28
(1941) 67 CLR 536
per Dixon J at
For the reasons set
out in paragraphs 100 to
[1989] HCA 66
per Dawson J at 274-278, Toohey J at 279- 283 and Gaudron & McHugh
JJ at 283-288 (Brennan J
dissenting).
The principle
is reflected in the defences of autrefois acquit and autrefois
(1997) 149 ALR 693 per Brennan CJ, Toohey, Gaudron & Gummow JJ at
[1998] QCA 71
[1999] 2 Qd R 89
the Queensland Court of Criminal Appeal found that the evidence
had been sufficient to prove the same three acts to the satisfaction
jurors but observed that the evidence in that case had been exceptional. Their
Honours observed that the corresponding Queensland
section would need amendment
if it were to perform its intended
[1997] 1 Qd R 383
per Davies J at
(unreported No SCC 72 of 1997 2 December
‘Persistent sexual abuse of a child’, Chapter 5, Report,
‘Sexual Offences Against the Person’, May 1999,
The passage which
the MCCOC report suggest was at page 328 of the judgment may in fact be found
at page 275. It was followed by
the following statement at page 276: ‘The
case having proceeded as it did, it is theoretically possible that individual
identified different occasions as constituting the relevant offences so
that there was no unanimity in relation to their verdict.
That, of course,
would be unacceptable, but it is more likely that the jury reached their verdict
without identifying any particular
occasions. Indeed, that is virtually
inevitable because no means were afforded the jury whereby they could identify
specific occasions.
As I have indicated, such a result is tantamount to their
having convicted the applicant, not in relation to identifiable offences,
only upon the basis of a general disposition on his part to commit offences of
the kind charged.’
R v GB (op cit). The case was somewhat unusual. It had been contended that the
complainant had made false accusations due to resentment
at the break down of a
relationship between his mother and the accused. His mother had previously
accused her father of being a
serial rapist and the falsity of those allegations
had been conclusively established by DNA evidence. The accused was acquitted
and in a somewhat startling footnote to the trial, the complainant wrote to him
admitting that the allegations had been untrue and
apologising for the harm they
had caused. Proceedings by the ACT government to recover compensation paid as a
result of the false
complaints are currently
, op.cit. per Fitzgerald P, with the agreement of Shepherdson J, at
(unreported) [1998] SCACT 8 per Crispin J 24 February
[1989] 1 AC 28
per Lord Griffiths at 35. The expressions 'respectable
person’, ‘right-minded person’ and ‘decent-mined
person’ have also been used: see
(1988) 87 Cr App R 144
(1989) 38 A Crim R 296
[1999] NSWCCA 21
, 5 March 1999 at paragraph 62, the NSW Court of
Criminal Appeal said that consensual sexual intercourse between husband and wife
was obviously not of itself in any way indecent. There is no reason to suppose
that the principle would be confined to married
corresponds to the maximum penalty prescribed for comparable offences in NSW by
There is no
subsection 4
Black HC., Garner BA.,
Black’s Law Dictionary: definitions of the terms
and phrases of American and English Jurisprudence, ancient and modern
Edition, 1979, West Publishing Co: St Paul at
(1879) 10 Ch D 474
The Latin may be
translated into “special things derogate from general”. The rule
means that provisions dealing with
specific situations should normally be
treated as derogating from the application of more general rules at least to the
inconsistency.
Support for Victims of Paedophiles (ACT)
Such as the former
offences of misprision of felony or consorting with
“The Difference in Women’s Hedonic Lives: A Phenomenological
Critique of Feminist Legal Theory” (1987)
Wisconsin Women’s Law
MacKinnon, CA,
Towards a Feminist Theory of the State
, Harvard University Press,
Massachusetts: 1989, at 171-
‘Partisanship, Betrayal and Autonomy in the Lawyer-Client Relationship: A
Reply to Stephen Ellman’, (1990)
Columbia L. Rev
unreported) NSW Court of Criminal Appeal BC 9801258, 17 April 1998, per
Simpson J at 11.
offence of sexual intercourse without consent may be committed by males or
females and upon males or females. There has already
been one case in the
Supreme Court in which it has been argued that if a person was so drunk as to be
unable to remember engaging
in sexual intercourse then she must have been raped.
In another case, both participants were so drunk that neither could remember
the fact that sexual intercourse had occurred was established only by the
evidence of a friend of the complainant who said that
she had walked in to the
room whilst the relevant act was in progress. The first case resulted in an
acquittal whilst the latter
was resolved by the acceptance of a plea to a lesser
charge. Having regard to s76E of the Evidence Act 1971(ACT) it would be
inappropriate
to identify the
Similarly, the
law should distinguish between rape and sexual harassment. The latter commonly
involves a continuing course of conduct
for which summary proceedings can offer
a more timely but still effective remedy than the drawn out process of committal
Papadimitropoulos
[1957] HCA 74
(1957) 98 CLR
DPP v Morgan
[1975] UKHL 3
[1976] AC 182
Offences Amendment Act
‘Taking the Inside Out’, in
Sexing the Subject of the Law
eds N Naffine and R Owen, 1997, Law Book Sydney, at p.30 cited in submission
from Dr Easteal.
context the reference to a ‘mental state’ should not be taken to
suggest a static mental condition but rather
the knowledge, perceptions and
intentions of the accused throughout any period during which the relevant act
was committed.
sentencing phase the perceptions of both victim and offender are important; the
former because the trauma which the victim
has suffered is a measure of the
objective gravity of the crime and the latter because the offender’s
understanding and intention
at the time of the crime is relevant to an
evaluation of the level of the offender’s subjective
responsibility.
of course, the jury’s determination of this issue may be influenced by
subjective impressions of the various witnesses
including scientific experts and
the evidence they give.
Of course, the comment may merely reflect the view that juries apply such a
value system in determining issues of this kind. As
previously mentioned, some
measure of misogyny and bigotry no doubt remains within any society and there is
an inevitable risk that
jurors may be influenced by such qualities. However,
there is no reason to suppose that jurors are any more prone to prejudice than
others within the community from which they are
[1941] HCA 28
(1941) 67 CLR 536
op cit note
Though in cases of
murder advertence to the probability of death, or in some jurisdictions at least
grievous bodily harm, being caused
by the contemplated act is required: see
[1985] HCA 22
(1985) 58 ALR
, op.cit per Lord Cross of Chelsea at
Supra, Per Lord
Edmund-Davies at 225
supra, Per Lord Hailsham of St Marlybone at 215. See also at
See, for example,
[1983] 1 WLR 1118
per Lawton J at 1121, cited with approval in
R v Satnam S
[1983] EWCA Crim 5
(1983) 78 Cr App R 149
See for example,
[1975] 10 SASR 139
per Bray CJ at 147;
R v Kitchener
(1992) 29 NSWLR 696
(1995) 37 NSWLR
Crimes Act 1900
. In NSW, the nearest counterpart to section 19 is
creates an offence of maliciously wounding or inflicting grievous bodily harm
and that is punishable by a maximum penalty of
7 years penal
S., Editorial, “The Direction of Rape Law in Australia: Toward a Positive
Consent Standard”,
Criminal Law Journal 249
See section 72,
Children and Young
Persons Act
[1991] HCA 48
(1991) 174 CLR
Sections 60
Matrimonial Causes Ac
t 1959 enabled a husband to obtain an order
against a wife restoring his ‘conjugal rights’.
that such an order could not be enforced by ‘attachment’ i.e
imprisonment for contempt of court, but a failure
to comply with such an order
constituted a ground for
(1981) A Crim R 215
(Closed Circuit) Television (Amendment) Act
provisions allowing such flexibility already exist albeit only in relation to
civil proceedings. For example, section 34A
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1989
provides that the Tribunal may allow a person to
participate by telephone, closed circuit television or other forms of
communication.
discussion paper was issued in May
For example,
the Chairman was counsel in one case in which a magistrate dismissed a charge
that a defendant had fraudulently misrepresented
that he was a partner in a
firm. There was some evidence sufficient to give rise to a prima facie case
that this representation
was false, but the cogency of that evidence was
effectively demolished by the disclosure of Supreme Court declarations
that he was in fact a
Director of Public Prosecutions Annual Reports
1997/98, 1998/99
and 1999/2000.
(1989) 39 A Crim R
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
per Gibbs ACJ and Mason J at
Justices Act
Paragraph 8
(4) (a) of the
Evidence Act
(Cth) provides that until the day fixed
by proclamation under
subsection 4
(6) the Act does not affect, inter alia,
provisions of the
Evidence Act
1971 (ACT) that are specified in the
regulations. Regulation 4 specifies certain provisions of the ACT Act for the
purposes of paragraph
8 (4) (a) of the Commonwealth Act including Part 10A
(which deals with evidence in sexual offence proceedings) other than subsections
76F (1) and (3) and 76G 4). Subsections 76F (1) and (3) deals with the issue of
corroboration and section 76G(4) relates to evidence
of sexual reputation. The
significance of these sections having been overridden is mentioned in the
discussion concerning those
Evidence of Recent Complaint and Reform of Canadian Sexual Assault Law : Still
, Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of
Women, Ottawa, 1993 cited in the submission from Dr
(unreported) SCC No 43 of 1996, Miles CJ, 3 October 1997;
(unreported) SCACT 8, Crispin J, 24 February 1998;
R v Kirkman
(unreported)
[2000] ACTSC 2
, Higgins J, 3
February,2000.
Indeed, it has been suggested that section 66 has had the effect of completely
reversing the common law rule that evidence of recent
complaint would be
admissible only to prove the consistency of the complainant’s account. It
will now be admissible to prove
the truth of the facts alleged but not merely to
prove such consistency. See
R v Kirkman
[1960] HCA 42
(1960) 103 CLR 486
per Dixon CJ at
See ss 135 and
Evidence Act 1995
This may mean
that some assertions in an otherwise admissible expert report will be excluded.
See, for example,
Trust Company of Australia Ltd v Perpetual Trustees WA
(unreported NSW Supreme Court, 18 September 1996 per McLelland CJ in
Perpetual Trustee Company v George
(unreported NSW Supreme Court 18
November 1997, revised 1 December 1997 per Einstein
Hence evidence of
a psychiatrist’s opinion may be inadmissible if it is based upon a history
of events about which there is
no evidence:
(unreported NSW
Court of Criminal Appeal, 10 October
Evidence Act 1995
Australian Law
Reform Commission Report no. 84,
Seen and Heard: Priority for children in the
legal process
, Canberra:
As in the case
of warnings about the risk of mistaken
A., (1996) op.cit at
National Provincial and Union Bank of England
[1924] 1 KB 461
Services Ltd v Putterill
[1968] 1 QB 396
Lion Laboratories v Evans
[1985] QB 526.
Edgell & Ors
[1989] EWCA Civ 13
[1990] 1 All ER
(1988) 2 All ER 648
Hunter v Mann
(1974) QB 767.
For an example of
exceptional circumstances see:
Tarasoff v Regents of the University of
(1976) 17 Cal 3D
; W v Edgell
Commonwealth of Australia v Northern Land Council & Anor
[1993] HCA 24
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
per Gibbs ACJ at 43, Stephen J at 63-4
and Mason J at 98-9.
See, for example,
In Re Director of Investigation and Research and Shell Canada
D.L.R. (3d) 713.
The High Court has said that: “Legal professional
privilege is itself the product of a balancing exercise between competing
interests whereby, subject to the well-recognised crime or fraud exception...
the public interest in 'the perfect administration
of justice'...is accorded
paramountcy over the public interest that requires, in the interest of a fair
trial, the admission in evidence
of all relevant documentary evidence. Given its
application, no further balancing exercise is required.”
Waterford v
Commonwealth of Australia
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
per Mason & Wilson JJ at 64.
See also Brennan J at 74. Indeed, Sir Ronald Wilson has actually described it
as 'the essential
mark of a free society.' See
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
inherent danger of any absolute privilege can be illustrated by the American
Spaulding v Zimmerman
116 N.W. 2d 704
(1962) where the plaintiff
who was a minor brought a civil action relating to injuries sustained in a motor
vehicle accident. The
defendant's attorneys arranged a medical examination of
the plaintiff and were advised by a neurologist that he was suffering from
aortic aneurism which posed an 'imminent danger of death'. He also said that it
may have been caused by the accident. The attorneys
knew that the plaintiff was
unaware of it but to reveal it might increase the damages. Faced with this
dilemma they decided not
to warn him and instead settled his claim for a modest
verdict. It was not until two years later that his condition was discovered
during the course of a medical examination for the Army Reserve and he received
immediate surgery. The Supreme Court of Minnesota
subsequently set aside the
settlement and that decision was affirmed on appeal but, so far as the conduct
of the attorneys was concerned,
the court held that ‘no rule required or
duty rested upon defendants or their representatives to disclose this
knowledge.’
See Division
see Division
QC, Blackmore, AM & Hosking GS., SC,
Criminal Law (NSW
) Volume 1, LBC
Information Services Sydney at para
The procedure
does not involve challenging any verdict actually returned at the trial but
enables the Crown to challenge a ruling
made at the trial concerning an issue of
law and have it determined by an appellate court. In the ACT a reference appeal
Supreme Court may be brought by the Director of Public Prosecutions to
the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia – s.30A
Federal Court
of Australia Act 1976
(Cth), within 6 weeks of the acquittal of a person
from the whole or any part of the indictment in the Supreme
As early as
1934 Lord Atkin coined the oft quoted aphorism: ‘Finality is a good thing
but justice is better’:
Ras Behari Lal v The King Emperor
150 LT 3 at 5. Half a century later Lord Scarman said: ‘Certainty is
always an advantage in the law, and in some branches
of the law it is a
necessity. But it brings with it an inflexibility and a rigidity which in some
branches of the law can obstruct
justice, impede the law’s development,
and stamp upon the law the mark of obsolescence when what is needed is the
for development:
Gillick v West Norfold AHA
[1985] UKHL 7
(1986) AC 112
186. The need for flexibility has been a constant theme of law reform bodies
both in Australia and
example, the discussion provided by Keith Mason QC,
Constancy and Change
Federation Press, Sydney, 1990, at
See, for example,
Keith Mason QC,
Constancy and Change
, supra; Paul Finn, ‘Commerce,
the Common Law and Morality’
[1989] MelbULawRw 5
Whilst this was the
view of the majority of the Commission, Mr Walker dissented from the proposal to
allow a trial judge a discretion
to refuse to admit evidence of disclosures at
counselling sessions on the basis that the opportunity for an accused person
a serious criminal charge to obtain potentially relevant and perhaps
exculpatory evidence should not depend upon the exercise of
discretion.
5, Report, ‘Sexual Offences Against the Person’, May 1999, at 283.
MCCOC noted that this position had been
supported by the Office of the Status of
Women (Cth), Women’s Legal Service (SA), Australian Reproductive Health
Alliance (ACT)’
Catholic Women’s League and the Salvation
A study conducted
for the Federal Government as recently as 1995 revealed that there was
“less community awareness and understanding
domestic violence”.
Community Attitudes to Violence Against Women
July 1995, prepared by ANOP Research Pty Ltd for the Office of the Status of
Women. at 38
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter