URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Newman v Norfolk Island Police [2023] NFSC 1 (17 March 2023)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Newman v Norfolk Island Police
Appeal from:
Decision of the Court of Petty Sessions: Norfolk Island Police v Grant
Newman CC45/2020 and CC46/2020
File number(s):
SCA 1 of 2021
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
17 March 2023
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW –
conviction – nature of rehearing – whether a hearing de novo -
whether finding of guilt unreasonable having regard
– appeal dismissed – nature of hearing a
hearing de novo – conviction confirmed
Legislation:
Court of Petty Sessions Act 1960
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
Criminal Code Act 2007
(NI) s 118(1)
Criminal Procedure Act 2007
(NI) s 168E
Justices Act 1902
Cases cited:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
Builders Licensing Board v Sperway Constructions (Syd) Pty Ltd
[1976] HCA 62
(1976) 135 CLR 616
Charara v The Queen
[2006] NSWCCA 244
(2006) 164 A Crim R 39
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
[1997] HCA 2
187 CLR 384
Dansie v The Queen
[2022] HCA 25
(2022) 96 ALJR 728
Eastman v R
[2000] HCA 29
(2000) 203 CLR 1
Engelbrecht v Director of Public Prosecutions
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2022] NSWCCA 165
Lunney v Director of Public Prosecution (NSW)
[2021] NSWCA 186
(2021) 105 NSWLR 236
McNab v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2021] NSWCA 298
(2021) 106 NSWLR 430
Nobbs v Mewburn
[1999] NFSC 4
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
R v Longshaw
(1990) 20 NSWLR 554
Robinson Helicopter Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 331 ALR
Stanley v Director of Public Prosecutions
Sweeney v Fitzhardinge
[1906] HCA 73
(1906) 4 CLR 716
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Turnbull v New South Wales Medical Board
(1976) 2 NSWLR 281
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
17 August 2022
Counsel for the Appellant:
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms S Farnden
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
SCA 1 of 2021
GRANT NEWMAN
SENIOR CONSTABLE NATHAN WEAVER
NORFOLK ISLAND POLICE
DATE OF ORDER:
17 MARCH 2023
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal is dismissed and the conviction of the appellant for charge 46/2020 is
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
appellant was charged with two counts of committing an act of indecency without
consent under s 118(1) of the
Criminal Code Act 2007
prosecution particularised the acts relied on for each offence as follows: it
alleged “[o]n the night of 27
June 2020, the defendant
grabbed the complainant’s hand and tried to put it on his penis”
(First Count) and that “[o]n
the night of 27
June 2020, the
defendant touched the complainant’s breast on the outside of her
dress” (Second Count). The trial was
held in the Court of Petty Sessions
on 13 and 14 December 2021, and on 15 December 2021, the appellant was convicted
on the Second
Count. He was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment, wholly
suspended for 15 months.
note at the outset that although the appellant was found not guilty of the First
Count, the Court concluded at [23]:
With respect to the first charge, while we accept that [the complainant] is a
credible witness, and that she undoubtedly felt threatened
by Newman's unwanted
and uninvited sexual advances, and was extremely frightened by his conduct on 27
June 2020, we do not think
that her evidence, without corroborative accounts of
initial complaint of the specific act particularized, meets the standard of
proof required.
appellant filed a notice of appeal against his conviction on three grounds;
, the finding of guilt in relation to the Second Count is irrational
and inconsistent with the decision to dismiss the First Count;
the finding of guilt in relation to the Second Count is unreasonable and cannot
stand, having regard to the evidence and the decision
to dismiss the First
the appellant is not guilty of the charge.
at the hearing the appellant informed the Court that the only grounds being
pressed were ground three and that part of the
second ground that alleges that
the finding of guilt in relation to the Second Count is unreasonable and cannot
stand having regard
to the evidence. The parties consented for the depositions
from the Court of Petty Sessions to be read as evidence in this Court.
the reasons below, the appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary issue
addressing the grounds of appeal it is necessary to first address the nature of
the appeal. The appeal is brought pursuant
to s 234 of the
Court of Petty
Sessions Act
1960 (NI) (CPS Act), which is as follows:
Hearing of appeal
An appeal to the Supreme Court shall be in the nature of a
re-hearing.
The depositions of a witness called or examined before the Court of
Petty Sessions may be read as evidence for either party at the
hearing of the
appeal if —
(a) the other party consents;
(b) it is proved on oath that —
(i) where the depositions were recorded in the manner specified in subsection
158(1), the depositions were taken in the presence
of the other party or his
counsel, solicitor or agent, or, where the depositions were recorded by one of
the means specified in subsection
158(2), the record is a correct record of the
depositions and was made in the presence of the other party or his counsel,
or agent and the transcript is a correct transcript of that record;
(ii) the other party or his counsel, solicitor or agent had full opportunity of
cross-examining the witness; and
(iii) the witness is dead, is so ill as not to be able to travel, or cannot,
after such search or for such reason as to the Court
seems sufficient, be
produced by the party tendering the depositions; or
(c) the Supreme Court for any special reason so directs.
issue arose on the appeal as to the nature of the hearing.
summary, the appellant, relying on
Charara v The Queen
[2006] NSWCCA 244
(2006) 164 A Crim R 39
) submitted that the hearing was, in
effect, a hearing de novo, entitling him to a fresh hearing. He submitted that
the starting position
is that all of the witnesses could have been called afresh
during the appeal because s 234(2)(a) of the CPS Act provides for depositions
be relied on “if the other party consents”, therefore leaving scope
for the appellant not to consent. The appellant’s
position was therefore
that s 234(2) effectively leaves the door open to, if not a full hearing de
novo, at least options such as
the appellant requiring further
cross-examination. The appellant pointed to purported similarities between those
provisions considered
and s 234(1) of the CPS Act, and
submitted that accordingly, the principles enunciated in
applicable in the present case. Upon the appellant’s reading of
, it was not incumbent upon the appellant to demonstrate some
factual or legal error before this Court’s powers would be enlivened
appellant submitted that there is a wealth of authority establishing that this
Court is required to make its own "independent
assessment of the evidence" when
considering whether or not the guilt of the appellant is established beyond a
reasonable doubt,
[2022] NSWCCA 165
[44]-[52] and
Dansie v The Queen
[2022] HCA 25
(2022) 96 ALJR 728
) at [7]-[17]. The appellant submitted that
clear that the prosecutor continued to carry the onus of proof, and that the
prosecutor had to prove its case again. Moreover,
the appellant submitted that
affirm the position in
not incumbent upon the appellant to demonstrate some legal, factual or
discretionary error on the part of the lower court
as a prerequisite for having
a finding of guilt set aside.
respondent submitted that the terms of s 234 of the CPS Act make it clear that
it provides for a rehearing. The respondent submitted
in writing that on an
appeal by way of rehearing “the powers of the appellate court are
exercisable only where the appellant
can demonstrate that, having regard to all
the evidence now before the appellate court, the order that is the subject of
is the result of some legal, factual or discretionary error ... At
least that is so unless, in the case of an appeal by way of rehearing,
some statutory provision which indicates that the powers may be exercised
whether or not there was error at first instance”:
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
) at 180-181. The respondent
referred to
Robinson Helicopter Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
331 ALR 550
A court of appeal conducting an appeal by way of rehearing is bound to conduct a
“real review” of the evidence given
at first instance and of
the judge’s reasons for judgment to determine whether the judge has erred
in fact or law. If the court
of appeal concludes that the judge has erred in
fact, it is required to make its own findings of fact and to formulate its own
based on those findings. But a court of appeal should not interfere
with a judge’s findings of fact unless they are demonstrated
to be wrong
by “incontrovertible facts or uncontested testimony”, or they are
“glaringly improbable” or “contrary
to compelling
inferences”. In this case, they were not. The judge's findings of fact
accorded to the weight of lay and expert
evidence and to the range of
permissible inferences. The majority of the Court of Appeal should not have
overturned them.
(citations omitted)
respondent submitted orally that: s 234(1) of the CPS Act plainly sets out that
the appeal was to be in the nature of a rehearing;
s 234(2) does not inform or
alter that position; and s 234(3) provides, consistently with other
a court is when an appeal is conducted by way
of a rehearing, strengthening the respondent’s view of s 234(1).
Accordingly,
the respondent submitted that the appellant’s reliance on
was not correct because that appeal was not being conducted by
rehearing. The task of the Court was therefore said to be to conduct
review of the evidence, making its own findings of fact and formulating its own
reasoning, as described in the context of
a rehearing. This would involve
independently assessing the evidence without ignoring the findings below. The
respondent also submitted
that the test with respect to the onus of proof has
developed since
which the respondent expressed as being an onus
on the prosecution to have proven the case beyond a reasonable doubt. That was
to be the task of the judge when considering the evidence upon
Consideration
appeal is in the nature of a hearing de novo.
appeal is a creature of statute:
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
It is a question of statutory construction. The nature of the appeal will depend
on the terms of the legislation governing
the appeal. In
, Gleeson CJ,
Gummow and Kirby JJ at [20] referred to the various meanings of the term
“appeal”, referring to Mason J
(Barwick CJ and Stephen J agreeing)
Builders Licensing Board v Sperway Constructions (Syd) Pty Ltd
(1976) 135 CLR 616
at 619-620, as:
(i) an appeal
stricto sensu
, where the issue is whether the judgment
below was right on the material before the trial court; (ii) an appeal by
rehearing on the
evidence before the trial court; (iii) an appeal by way of
rehearing on that evidence supplemented by such further evidence as the
appellate court admits under a statutory power to do so; and (iv) an appeal by
way of a hearing de novo. There are different meanings
to be attached to the
word “rehearing”. The distinction between an appeal by way of
rehearing and a hearing de novo was
further considered in
Which of the meanings is that borne by the term “appeal”,
or whether there is some other meaning, is, in the absence of
statement in the particular provision, a matter of statutory construction in
, referring to the different meanings of rehearing, Gaudron,
McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ explained at [23]:
For present purposes, the critical difference between an appeal by way of
rehearing and a hearing de novo is that, in the former
case, the powers of the
appellate court are exercisable only where the appellant can demonstrate that,
having regard to all the evidence
now before the appellate court, the order that
is the subject of the appeal is the result of some legal, factual or
discretionary
error, whereas, in the latter case, those powers may be exercised
regardless of error. At least that is so unless, in the case of
an appeal by way
of rehearing, there is some statutory provision which indicates that the powers
may be exercised whether or not
there was error at first instance. And the
critical distinction, for present purposes, between an appeal by way of
rehearing and
an appeal in the strict sense is that, unless the matter is
remitted for rehearing, a court hearing an appeal in the strict sense
give the decision which should have been given at first instance whereas, on an
appeal by way of rehearing, an appellate
court can substitute its own decision
based on the facts and the law as they then stand.
of these meanings the term "appeal" has depends on the context of the use of the
term, the history of the legislation, the surrounding
circumstances, and
sometimes an express direction as to what the nature of the appeal is to be:
Eastman v R
[2000] HCA 29
(2000) 203 CLR 1
addressing the terms of s 234 of the CPS Act, it is appropriate to consider the
authority relied on by the appellant to found
his submission.
apparent from the recitation of the appellant’s submissions above, he
places significant reliance on
to support his construction.
concerned the construction of
(Appeal and Review) Act 2001
(NSW) (CAR Act), which were said to be similar
to the provisions in the CPS Act. The appellant misreads
does not support his contention. However, before considering that case, it is
appropriate to refer to
R v Longshaw
(1990) 20 NSWLR 554
), which considered the provisions which were the predecessor to
the provisions considered in
, Gleeson CJ,
with whom Wood J and Badgery-Parker J agreed, observed at 558-559:
An appeal, whatever form it takes, is a statutory remedy which, in specified
circumstances, is made available to a dissatisfied litigant.
The precise nature
of the remedy, and the procedures attendant upon it, will depend upon the
provisions of the statute creating the
right of appeal. In some cases the
statute, properly understood, provides for what has been called an appeal
stricto sensu. In such
a case the question for the appellate tribunal is whether
the judgment or order appealed from was correct on the material which the
tribunal had before it. Sometimes the statute provides for an appeal by way of
re-hearing, and this may take different forms.
The appellate tribunal may have
power to take fresh evidence, and draw inferences of fact, and its ultimate duty
may be to determine
the merits of the matter as at the date of the appeal,
having regard, inter alia, to any new evidence or changed circumstances. In
a case, however, the original witnesses are ordinarily not heard again.
There is yet another form of proceeding that is often referred to as an appeal
by way of re-hearing, although some judges have said
that it would more
accurately be described as a hearing de novo. That is the kind of appeal
provided for by Div 4 of
Justices Act
. In such a case, although the
unsuccessful defendant is the appellant, the informant or complainant begins and
is required to make
out again the case against the appellant.
Section 126
Justices Act
relieves the parties to an extent from the necessity to call and
examine afresh all the persons who gave evidence before the justice.
It provides
that the deposition of any witness called and examined at the hearing before the
justice may be read as evidence for
either party at the hearing of the appeal if
the other party consents or if certain prescribed conditions are fulfilled.
to those provisions, however, the evidence is taken afresh. The power of
the District Court judge hearing an appeal under Div 4 of
is set out in
That section reflects the nature of the appeal. The obligation of the
District Court is to determine the matter of the appeal, and
the Court has power
to confirm, quash, set aside, vary, increase or reduce, the conviction, order,
sentence, or adjudication appealed
against or to make such other order in the
matter as to the Court seems just. In exercising this jurisdiction the District
is exercising a power which until 1973 was vested in a Court of Quarter
can be seen from that passage, before
, the provisions provided
for a hearing de novo in relation to an appeal from the Local Court to the
District Court. Those provisions
were subsequently amended, with the Court in
concluding that the amended provision provides for a rehearing in
respect of an appeal against conviction. Section 18 of the CAR
18 Appeals against conviction to be by way of rehearing on the evidence
(1) An appeal against conviction is to be by way of rehearing on the basis of
evidence given in the original Local Court proceedings,
except as provided by
section 19.
(2) Fresh evidence may be given, but only by leave of the District Court which
may be granted only if the Court is satisfied that
it is in the interests of
justice that the fresh evidence be given.
(3) The parties to an appeal are each entitled to be provided with one free copy
of the transcripts of evidence relevant to the appeal
and, if fresh evidence is
given, one free copy of the transcript of the fresh evidence.
must also be had to s 19:
19 Circumstances in which evidence to be given in person
(1) The District Court may direct a person to attend and give evidence in
proceedings on an appeal against conviction if it is
(a) in the case of an appeal that relates to an offence involving violence
against that person, that there are special reasons
why, in the interests of
justice, the person should attend and give evidence, or
(b) in any other case, that there are substantial reasons why, in the
interests of justice, the person should attend and give evidence.
(2) An application for such a direction may be made by a party to the
proceedings in relation to a particular person only if notice
party’s intention to make such an application has been served on each
other party to the proceedings within such period
as the District Court may
relevantly concluded that an appeal under s 18 of the
CAR Act is a rehearing on the certified transcripts of evidence, obviously
supplemented by reference to exhibits tendered in the Local Court, and not an
appeal de novo: at [17]. It held principles governing
appeals from judges
sitting without a jury apply, namely that the appellate judge is to form his or
her own judgment of the facts
while recognising the advantage enjoyed by the
magistrate who saw and heard the witnesses called in the lower court and
the natural limitations stemming from proceeding wholly or
substantially on the transcript record: at [18]. Although the magistrate’s
reasons are not part of the certified transcripts of evidence referred to in s
18(1), recourse may be had to them since the appellate
function could not
properly take place without reference to them: at [23].
and the nature of the appeal there referred to, has since been refined or
McNab v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2021] NSWCA 298
106 NSWLR 430
), Bell P (as his Honour then was) observed at
[25]-[27] that:
[25] ... The task for a District Court judge in hearing a s 18 appeal is
to form his or her own judgment on the facts and to
determine, on the basis of
the evidence that was before the magistrate (supplemented by any further
evidence received pursuant to
s 18(2) of the CAR Act or as a result of the
calling of a witness pursuant to s 19), whether that evidence was
to demonstrate the appellant’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt.
If it did not, error will have been established. Error of law
in reaching the
conviction may also be established and the rehearing will involve the court
reaching a fresh conclusion as to the
appellant’s guilt on the basis of
evidence given in the Local Court, but without the error of law which tainted
at first instance. Such a hearing will, however, not be a hearing de
novo cf an appeal pursuant to s 17 of the CAR Act.
[26] No shifting of the burden of establishing guilt beyond reasonable
doubt will have occurred on either scenario. The prosecution
at all material
times bears the onus of establishing guilt beyond reasonable doubt.
[27] A dismissal of a s 18 appeal against conviction pursuant to
s 20(1)(b) of the CAR Act will necessarily carry the
conclusion that the
magistrate did not commit “some legal, factual or discretionary
at [23]. Conversely, the upholding of an appeal
leading to the setting aside of a conviction pursuant to s 20(1)(a) will
because the judge on the rehearing will have concluded that the
appellant’s guilt was not (and thus should not have been found
been) established beyond reasonable doubt. This will necessarily involve a
conclusion that the magistrate committed some
legal, factual or discretionary
error. In reaching such a conclusion, the District Court judge will be forming
his or her own judgment
as to the facts by way of the rehearing.
and McCallum JJA made similar observations at [89]-[91]. At [89] their Honours
observed that:
[89] The fact that the District Court can make findings which could have been
made by the Local Court, but cannot order a retrial,
demonstrates that it is not
a “court of error” in the sense used in
. It does not
demonstrate that the appellant need not demonstrate error to succeed on the
appeal; consistently with
, that is a common characteristic of
appeals by way of rehearing. There is nothing in the Appeal and Review Act to
contradict that
general understanding. As indicated in
understanding was not novel; a similar point was made in
McHugh, Gummow and Callinan JJ, stated:
[111] ... In
Attorney-General v Sillem
, Lord Westbury LC pointed out that
‘[a]n appeal is the right of entering a superior Court, and invoking its
aid and interposition
to redress the error of the Court below’. Appellate
of the court below was correct on the evidence and in accordance with the law
then applicable. In contrast, the Full Court
of the Family Court must decide the
rights of the parties upon the facts and in accordance with the law as it exists
at the time
of hearing the appeal. Speaking of the similar jurisdiction of the
English Court of Appeal, the Master of the Rolls, Sir George Jessel,
the appeal is a ‘trial over again, on the evidence used in the Court
below; but there is a special power to receive
further evidence’. ...
(citations omitted)
....the fact that the appellant must demonstrate error says nothing about the
onus of proof. If a defendant in civil proceedings
brings an appeal by way of
rehearing, it does not thereby incur responsibility to disprove the
plaintiff’s case. Demonstration
of error may mean no more than satisfying
the District Court judge that the magistrate should not have been satisfied
beyond reasonable
doubt as to the appellant’s guilt.
note that the conclusions in
Lunney v Director of Public Prosecution
[2021] NSWCA 186
(2021) 105 NSWLR 236
) are to similar
effect: see [2] and [24]. An issue that arose in
was the extent of
the necessary review, to which McCallum JA concluded at [44] (with whom White JA
agreed) that:
In any event, I am not persuaded that the direction in
(Appeal and Review) Act
that a conviction appeal under s 11(1) of the Act is to
be “by way of rehearing on the basis of evidence given in the Local
proceedings” is to be construed as a direction that the District Court
must, in every case, undertake a complete review
of the whole of the evidence
and form its own view as to the applicant’s guilt regardless of the issues
raised by the appellant.
The extent of the review required in any individual
case will depend on the circumstances of the case and the kind of error alleged
(as to which see AG at [34] (Basten JA) and the authorities to which his Honour
see Meagher JA at [4].
can be seen from this brief discussion of
and the other
authorities above, those cases do not support the appellant’s contention.
The appellant’s submission that
s 18(1) of the CAR Act and s 234(1) of CPS
Act are in “virtually... identical” terms, is incorrect. There are
differences between the provisions. An appeal to the District Court
under s 18 of the CAR Act does require demonstration of a factual,
discretionary error in order to succeed:
at [24] per Bell P;
[83]-[90] per Basten and McCallum JJA. Upholding or dismissing an appeal under
the section considered in
necessarily involves a conclusion as to
whether the decision-maker below “committed some legal, factual or
discretionary error”:
at [27]. That is because of the nature
of a rehearing.
said, it has been held that the nature of an appeal against sentence in s 11 of
the CAR Act, although described in the text of
s 17 of the CAR Act as a
rehearing, is a hearing de novo because of the unqualified entitlement in s 17
to lead fresh evidence on
the appeal:
Engelbrecht v
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2016] NSWCA 290
Engelbrecht
) at [93]-[95];
Stanley v Director of Public
Prosecutions
[2023] HCA 3
to the task of construing s 234 of the CPS Act.
nature of the appeal created by s 234 does not appear to have been the subject
of any substantive judicial consideration. The
only case which refers to s 234
Nobbs v Mewburn
[1999] NFSC 4.
In that case, Beaumont CJ stated that
“Although the appeal is in the nature of a re-hearing (s 234(1)), the
proceedings in
this Court were conducted in the main by reference to the
depositions and exhibits in the Court of Petty Sessions”, before
concluding: “Although this is a statutory appeal by way of a re-hearing,
the settled principle is that an appellate court should
not interfere with a
discretionary sentencing judgment except if there has been an error of principle
or fact or the sentence was
manifestly excessive, i.e. where the appropriate
inference is that the discretion must have miscarried. In my opinion, the
case does not fall into any of these exceptional categories”.
However, the nature of the appeal being conducted does not appear
to have been
the subject of debate, and the judgment does not contain any analysis of the
provision. The end result is that there
appears to be no considered authority on
this issue.
starting point for ascertaining the meaning of a statutory provision is its
text, having regard to its context and purpose:
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
[1997] HCA 2
187 CLR 384
the text of the provision describes the nature of the hearing as a rehearing,
that is not necessarily the end of the inquiry.
The terms of s 234(2) of the CPS
Act limit the circumstances in which the depositions of a witness called or
examined before the
Court of Petty Sessions may be read as evidence on the
appeal. The provision proceeds on the basis that but for one of the prescribed
conditions being satisfied, the evidence will be called afresh on the appeal.
Calling evidence on the appeal is the default position.
234 is the extent of the provisions relating to the nature of the appeal. There
is no provision that expressly addresses the
topic of fresh evidence. Although s
234(2) impliedly provides for evidence to be called afresh on appeal, the
parties’ ability
to do so is not unfettered. The Supreme Court can direct
that the appeal proceed on the basis of the depositions, for “any
reason”: s 234(2)(c). That phrase is not defined, and must apply on a case
specific basis. What may amount to a special
reason may alter over time, and may
depend on the nature of the offence. For example, although it is not necessary
to decide in this
case, it is difficult to see why a complainant in a sexual
assault who has given evidence and been cross-examined in the Court of
Sessions should be required to undergo that potentially traumatic process again,
simply because the appellant wants another
attempt to cross-examine. In those
circumstances, it may be that special reason exists.
legislative history of the provision is as follows. In 1960 Commonwealth
Parliament passed the
Court of Petty Sessions Ordinance 1960
Island) (the Ordinance), establishing the Court of Petty Sessions. This later
became the CPS Act. The provisions of the
Ordinance (and later the CPS Act) as
enacted included s 234 in relevantly the same terms as currently in force. No
substantive amendments
have been made.
s 234 is to be distinguished from the provision in
, it bears some
similarities to the provisions in force in New South Wales at the time of
Justices Act 1902
Div 4): see the
description of that legislation in
] above. One notable difference is that
the New South Wales provision had no equivalent to s 234(2)(c), which provides
that the depositions
may be read as evidence if the Supreme Court “for any
special reason so directs”. Although conveyed using different language,
the powers of the Court in determining the appeal discussed in
are relevantly similar to s 234. The reasoning in
therefore has
some application to the consideration of s 234. It supports the conclusion I
have reached.
described as a rehearing in the text of the provision, a consideration of the
provision, in context and given its purpose,
reflects that the appeal involves a
hearing de novo.
appellant’s reliance on the approach in
is misconceived. The
cases such as
relied on by the appellant relate to the common form
provision in
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW), and the ground
of appeal that the verdict is not supported by the evidence. Although an
independent review of the evidence
must be conducted, it is not a hearing of the
matter afresh. The appellant’s submission based on these authorities also
contrary to his submission that the nature of the appeal is a hearing de
a hearing de novo, all issues must be retried with the party succeeding below
enjoying no advantage:
Turnbull v New South Wales Medical Board
at 296, citing
Sweeney v Fitzhardinge
[1906] HCA 73
(1906) 4 CLR 716
, Gleeson CJ at 561
as holding that “the appeal was by way
of re-hearing, in the widest sense of the term, that is to say a hearing de
at [74], citing
at [15]. The matter is
considered afresh, and does not hinge or focus on demonstrating error. Although
the unsuccessful defendant
brings the appeal, the prosecution is required to
make out the case against the appellant again:
Engelbrecht
at [63] citing
at 558 and 561 and referring to
Goldfinch v R
(1987) 30 A
at 218-219.
Accordingly,
the hearing in this court is in the nature of a hearing de novo.
Grounds of appeal
noted above, the parties consented to the depositions taken in the Court of
Petty Sessions being read as evidence in this Court.
have considered and taken into account all the evidence before the Court of
Petty Sessions. The following is a recitation of aspects
of the evidence only,
provided to give relevant detail to the allegations and to enable the
submissions advanced to be understood.
The manner in which witnesses have been
referred to and the redaction of names from screenshots reproduced in these
reasons is to
protect the identity of the complainant.
trial proceeded as follows. The complainant’s evidence in chief was by way
of a recorded interview tendered pursuant to
s 168E of the
Criminal Procedure
(NI), after which she was cross-examined. The Crown also called the
complainant’s friend Ms B, boyfriend, and work colleagues
Ms M and Ms C in
relation to statements made by the complainant to them. With respect to Ms B,
Facebook Messenger exchanges were
tendered, as was a text message exchange
between the complainant and her boyfriend. The Crown also called Ms A, who was
cross examined
by the defence. A recording of a police interview with the
appellant was tendered, and the defence called the appellant who was
subsequently
cross examined by the Crown.
the complainant’s interview, which occurred on 29 June 2020, the following
Q8. ...So tell me what you’ve come here to talk to me about
there was an incident on Saturday night, where I felt threatened by an older
man. So Saturday was the twenty-seventh, um, and
it was about - it was about ten
or ten thirty at night. I can’t exactly remember. Um, because we were
playing board games,
um, at their house.
Q10. Mm-hmm.
was playing board games with five people. So two people that were there, and two
friends of theirs, um, and myself. And then I
had walked there because I knew I
would be drinking.
was going to walk home. And I was getting my shoes on and Grant, um, was putting
his shoes on at the same time, and I asked
him what he was doing, and he said he
was going to walk me home. And I said I didn’t need to be walked home,
And he was just like, “Well, I’ll just walk you
down, just down to the cattle grid.” At the end of the road, before
and I was like, “Okay,” Um, because he seemed pretty insistent on
walking me. Um, and then as pretty much as soon
as we got across their cattle
grid of their house and started walking down the road, he said, “So why
are you dressed like
that?” And I said, “What do you mean?”
And he said, um, and he said something that I was really hot tonight, or
something like that.
Q13. Mm-hmm.
and I was like, “Well, oh, thank you. That’s nice”. Um, and
then he said, “I really think we should go
somewhere.”
Q14. Mm-hmm.
I was like, “What do you mean?” And he was just like, “We
could just go - we could just go in here. Or we can
go find somewhere
quiet.” Um, and I said, “No.” Um, and then, he tried to, like,
grab my hands and pull me towards
Q15. Mm-hmm.
and he said that, um, I had given him a raging hard-on.
Q16. Mm-hmm.
and then he - and then I said - I kept trying to push him away. I kept saying,
“No. No, thank you. I’m fine.”
Um, and then he tried to put
his hands underneath my dress and grab my boobs.
Q17. Mm-hmm.
I said - and then that was when I, like, stopped and I said, “Look, I have
been raped before, and I don’t want that
to happen again.” And at
that point, he backed down and, um, he backed down and he said, “Okay. So
are you sure? Are
you sure you don’t want to - are you sure you
don’t want to have sex?”
was like, “Yes. I’m fine. I’ll walk home by myself.” And
then I left. And pretty much sped walked home.
later, when further detail was elicited:
Q70. And what happened then?
then, um, he asked if I wanted to go somewhere. And I said, “No.”
And then he said, “Oh, come on, please.”
Like, “You’ve
given me a raging hard-on.” And tried to make me feel it.
A Um, to which I pulled my hand up and I said, “No. I’m
Q72. So did you feel it?
A No. Oh, not until later when he was trying to rub up against me - - -
A - - - further down the hill. Um - - -
Q74. So after he said, “You’ve given me a raging hard-on.” He
grabbed for your hand? Is that correct?
A Yeah. He tried to pull my hand towards him.
A And I said, “No. I’m good. Thank you.” Um, and I just kept
trying to walk.
Q76. Mm-hmm.
A Um, and he actually kept trying to pull me back.
was just like, “Come on. We can go somewhere quiet.” Um, he said
that I would understand because I’m a more
mature woman. That he loves his
kids. He loves his wife. He loves his family.
A And that I would understand the situation. And I was like, “No.
I did say, like, I was trying to get more distance and I said, “Look,
thank you.” Like, “lt’s lovely
that you find me attractive.
That is a lovely compliment, but no, I’m good.”
I kept trying to say that directly at him and he kept going. “Oh, come
on.” And then - and then that’s when
I said, “Look, this has
gone too far.”
I had said, “I have been raped before.” I put my hand on his chest
and I said, “I have been raped before. I
don’t want it to happen
then that was when he backed down and he was like, “Okay. If you’re
sure. Are you sure?” I was like, “Yep.
I’m sure. I’m
walking home by myself. It’s fine.” And then I walked over the
cattle grid and past the hospital
and around the corner.
Q89. Yeah. So let’s go back to where, after he tried to grab your hand and
place it on his crutch. And then did he grab you
again after that?
A Yep. He grabbed my hand back again after I had said no.
A But he didn’t try and put it on him.
A Because I’d already said no.
A Um, but then he just kept trying to hold my hand to pull me.
Q93. Yep. So did he, I think initially you said he was grinding up against
That was when we got to the bottom of the hill when I’d said, “This
is far enough.” When I said, “Look,
it was a lovely
compliment.” And then he kept trying to hug me and trying to kiss me - -
and grab my boobs and rubbing himself on me. And I was just like,
Q95. Okay. So when you say “trying to”, did he touch your
Q96. Okay. And was that wanted or unwanted?
A Not wanted.
Q97. Okay. And was it outside of the dress?
A Outside of the dress.
A He tried to put his hands underneath my dress.
pulled his hand away and I said, “No.” Like, I kept trying to
untangle myself.
Q100. Yep. So did he grind up against you?
Q101. And what did you feel?
A I felt his penis.
complainant was cross-examined, inter alia, about how much she had had to drink,
the content of the conversations (and text messages)
she had with others and
purported inconsistencies in her evidence. I will return to consider those
issues when addressing the appellant’s
submissions.
B gave evidence that she had known the complainant for 10 years and considered
the complainant to be her best friend, “like
sisters”. Ms B’s
statement recounted Facebook Messenger exchanges with the complainant regarding
the incident and the
complainant’s report of the incident to the police.
Ms B noted her worry about how the incident would trigger the complainant.
convenient to set out extracts of the Facebook Messenger exchange
M gave evidence in Court that the complainant was crying at their workplace and
told Ms M ‘that she went to the Newmans for
a game night on Friday. He
walked her home, pushed her into the bush and she said, “I've been
raped”, and he stopped’.
Ms M described the complainant as
“pretty sad and stressed”.
C gave evidence of Ms M and the complainant approaching her at work, she being
the complainant’s boss. The conversation occurred
in Ms C’s office.
She said the complainant explained she had received unwanted advances from the
appellant on the Saturday
night. The appellant had “sort of
followed” the complainant, and “there were attempts, sort of offers
they were walking down the road together”. Ms C summed up what
the complainant told her in the following way: “she had
felt violated by
the approaches and the advances and that she was certainly uncomfortable”.
Ms C noted that the complainant
was “quite distressed through it
A also gave evidence that the complainant declined at least three offers of a
lift home from Ms A on the evening of the incident.
In cross examination, Ms
A’s evidence was that the complainant “seemed like she had quite a
bit” of alcohol and
agreed the complainant was carrying home “quite
a cumbersome” basket.
complainant’s boyfriend gave evidence that following their text exchange,
the complainant said to him in person that the
appellant had tried to force
himself on her. His evidence was that the complainant was “like
she’d been crying, upset
and not her lively self”. It is convenient
to set out sections of the text message exchange that was tendered:
explained above, a record of the interview conducted by the police with the
appellant was tendered in the Crown case. This included
the following
Q165. (indistinct) I understand.
(indistinct)
It’s still, you know, um - it doesn’t feel right, you know.
It’s - anyway, um, so -yeah. I - I offered
to go down on her and she
started telling me that, um, she - she - she, ah, had tried it a few times with
a few different people
and sort of gave me - started chatting about all, you
know, how she doesn’t like it. And I'm thinking, well, just sort of pick
you up, and just sort of started telling me a story about what you - what you
like and what you don’t like. So, um, yeah.
Q167. Okay.
was a bit vague.
Q168. So when you asked her that, where were you at the time?
outside the cattle stop.
Q169. So you’d walked from the house to - - -
just got over the cattle stop and said, “Hey, you sort of, you know,
you’re looking pretty hot. You turn me
on.” You know - you know, do
you want to - do you want to - you know. That’s what I said. I - I asked
did you want me
to do anything. You know, do you want - do you want me to go
down on you?
Q170. Okay. And to the best of your knowledge, she started then talking about
other things?
she said - we just started walking and she started chatting casually about how
she’s tried it. How she doesn’t like
lt. She’s done with a few
different people. And - and it’s never done anything for her and she
doesn’t like it.
And I’m, like, oh okay.
later in the interview:
Q245. Describe to me that.
just sort of - I didn’t get an answer to when I sort of hit on her. So I,
you know, I thought where are you at? Where
are we at? So I - I thought I
didn’t want to - you know. I just wanted to figure out what was going on.
So, I’ve moved
in close. I’ve put my hand on her hip and I - I said
to her, um, you know, “Are you keen? Do - do you want to have a
Q246. Okay. So which hand did you use?
we were standing - we were standing - I’m on the right-hand side.
I’ve turned to her. I think I had a drink in
my left, ah, my right-hand.
I’d - I’d walked out with a drink in my hand. I can’t remember
that. I - I can’t
remember if I’d - I’d - I’d poured a
drink and I’d walked down to the shed with the drink. I can’t
remember if I left it on the back of Ash’s car, or if I’d taken it
with us down the road. I’ve been trying to remember
that. I can’t
Q247. Okay. So you’ve turned towards her and you’ve indicated with
your left hand. You’ve just held your left hand
A Yep. Left hand.
Q248. And where have you put that?
it - put it on her hip, being conscious of her short dress, that I – I
found the hip. You know.
didn’t want to - I - I - I didn't want to, ah, touch her inappropriately
unless I sort of, you know, unless she’d sort
of said so. But I wanted to
make it clear that I was keen. So I sort of put my hand on her hip and went,
like, you know, into her
personal space. And that’s when she sort of said,
“I’m not that type of woman.” She - she would’ve
off, or turned or something. And, yeah, and then it was, like, oh,
Q257. And you’ve turned to her - - -
I didn’t know If she was keen.
put my hand on her hip to see if - you know. To - to move in. To - to have a
Because I didn’t get
any answer to when I asked her if she wanted oral sex.
Consideration
complainant was 27 years old at the time of these events, with the appellant
being 43. The complainant worked with the appellant’s
wife at an early
learning centre, where she had the appellant’s child in her care. The
events occurred after the complainant
left a small party at the appellant and
his wife’s house. There were two other guests. The party consisted of
playing board
and card games, with nibbles and drinks.
complainant planned to catch up with her boyfriend later that evening. She left
the party at about 10 pm. She planned to walk
complainant declined offers from the appellant to walk her home, and offers by
Ms A to drive her home. Despite those circumstances,
the appellant insisted that
he would walk her.
is the unchallenged context in which the events occurred.
count in issue relates to touching of the complainant’s breast on the
outside of her clothes. To convict the appellant,
it must be established beyond
reasonable doubt that the appellant touched the complainant’s breast on
the outside of her clothes,
and that he was reckless as to whether the
complainant consented to that act. There is no issue that the complainant was
not consenting
to the sexual advances.
considered all the evidence, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of each of
those elements.
circumstances where the parties consented to evidence before the Court of Petty
Sessions being read as evidence in this Court,
I am generally bound to give due
deference to the conclusions on credibility formed by that Court, although it is
open in limited
circumstances to reach contrary findings as to credibility:
Walsh v Law Society (NSW)
[1999] HCA 33
(1999) 198 CLR 73
any event, my independent findings as to the credibility of the complainant
align with those of the Court of Petty Sessions.
appellant accepted that he had a sexual interest in the complainant, and the
reason for walking with her was to further that interest.
That is, to engage in
sexual activity. He accepted during cross-examination that the only reason he
walked the complainant home was
to proposition her for sex (although later in
cross-examination he tried to minimise that position). In that context, the
complainant’s
evidence can readily be accepted, including that the
appellant asked her why she was “dressed like that”, said that she
was “really hot” and said that she was giving him a “raging
hard-on” in the circumstances described by her
in the passages recited at
] above. Accompanying those statements,
he made physical moves to act upon his sexual interest by grabbing and touching
included repeatedly trying to pull her to him, and grinding against
her such that she felt his penis. Relevantly, for present purposes
in relation
to the Second Count, this also included touching the complainant’s breast
on the outside of her clothes as he was
trying to put his hands under her dress
to grab her breasts. The appellant persisted despite being rebuffed by the
complainant when
first proposing that they “go somewhere” together,
and at every stage thereafter. In those circumstances, he continued
while, at the very least, being reckless as to her consent. He did not take no
for an answer until the complainant told him
she had been raped before, at which
time he asked if she was sure once more before desisting. The complainant was
“really frightened”
while these events occurred. This is not
surprising given the appellant’s conduct, which was plainly uninvited and
She complained to her friend, her boyfriend and colleagues about the
appellant’s conduct shortly after the events, in terms
consistent with
what she described had occurred in her evidence. It is plain that the
complainant was distressed when making those
complaints because the appellant
had acted as she described. Having considered the complainant’s evidence
carefully, I find
it is clear, reliable and compelling, and is supported by
evidence of complaint.
do not accept the appellant’s account of what occurred on that walk. I
note that the appellant accepted he had a couple of
double or triple shots of
spirits to drink that evening and experienced a hangover the next day. This may
go toward explaining his
conduct but it does not excuse it. His evidence that
the complainant was giving him signals via her clothes and bubbly personality
fanciful. It reflects an attempt to minimise his conduct and blame the
complainant for his actions. The appellant’s submission
that he should be
given some credit for agreeing to be interviewed by the police, and then making
some statements against interest,
must be considered in that context. The
complainant did not do or say anything that could have hinted she reciprocated a
sexual interest
in him. At his insistence, the appellant walked with the
complainant to provide himself an opportunity to pursue his sexual interest.
appellant persisted in those efforts despite her obvious and repeated rebuffs.
The appellant’s evidence that the complainant
told a story when he asked
whether she wanted oral sex, and that her body language left him unsure of her
position so that he “moved
in” on her, cannot be accepted. It is
inherently implausible. Nor does the appellant’s evidence cause me to have
reasonable doubt about the veracity or accuracy of the complainant’s
evidence. It raises no reasonable doubt as to proof of
the elements of the
offence in relation to the Second Count.
reaching that state of satisfaction I recognise that rejection of the
appellant’s evidence is insufficient to establish the
offence, as it is
not a question of which account is to be preferred. Rather, it is necessary for
the Court to be satisfied on the
evidence that the elements of the offence are
established beyond reasonable doubt.
being so satisfied I have taken into account all the evidence and, inter alia,
the submissions advanced by the appellant in this
Court and below, as to why the
offence has not been established.
is appropriate to address some of the appellant’s submissions in more
summary, the appellant’s submission focussed on what he said rendered the
complainant’s evidence unreliable such that
it could not, or ought not be
the appellant laid emphasis on evidence he said provided a reliable indication
that the complainant was intoxicated at the time,
and therefore that she was
unreliable. I do not accept the submission. The complainant was cross-examined
as to how much she had
had to drink that night. Although the complainant
accepted she had been drinking, and other evidence supported that, her evidence
was that she was fine. Indeed, the appellant accepted that she did not appear to
be intoxicated, and that she appeared fine. Nothing
in the evidence suggests
that the reliability of her evidence as to the course of events was in any way
adversely affected by alcohol.
In this context, I note the appellant also
submitted that the complainant had taken drugs after these events and before her
with the police. Having considered what was said to be the drug
taking, in the context of all the evidence, there is no indication
that may have
affected her account to the police.
the appellant also relies on what he said are inconsistencies between the
complainant’s evidence and what she communicated
with Ms B after the
events. The appellant placed most emphasis on a submission that the complainant
repeatedly described the appellant
as “trying” or having
“tried” to grab her breasts, rather than having touched her breasts
(the basis of the
Second Count). I do not accept that submission.
her police interview and during cross-examination, the complainant described
that the appellant touched her breasts. She explained
that occurred on the
outside of her clothes as he was trying to put his hand inside her dress to
touch it (recalling, that the Second
Count was particularised as a touching on
the outside of the clothes). The appellant submitted that that evidence was very
from the text message the complainant sent to Ms B shortly after the
event, which said “he kept trying to put his hands up
my dress” and
he “tried to grab my boobs”. The appellant submitted by that text
message, the complainant was describing
different acts. Considering all the
evidence in context, I do not accept those submissions and accept the
complainant’s account
of why she used the terms “trying” and
“tried” in the text message to Ms B.
complainant’s account under cross examination in relation to her text
message to Ms B makes this plain:
I ask you just to wait till I finish the question before you launch into an
answer. I want to take you to the - -
text message I’m referring to. This was sent by you to [Ms B] the day
after the alleged incident and you said this to her:
I kept saying, “No, no,
no” and he kept trying –
was the word you’ve used –
to put his hands up my dress
and tried grabbing my boobs.
That was him pulling at my dress at this time, pulling at my dress and trying to
lift it up, pulling at my dress trying to put
his hands into my top.
yes. You never told [Ms B] that he actually touched your breasts, did you?
don’t understand because that to me is the same thing. Him pulling at my
dress and touching my boobs to try and get into
my top, it’s still
touching my boobs.
to do something and doing something are two completely different things,
I’d suggest to you?
when he’s actually pulling at my breasts and touching my boobs to get into
my boobs. To get into my
complainant was doing no more than using that turn of phrase to convey that the
appellant was
to do more than he achieved, that is, to get his
hands under her clothes. In doing so, he touched her breasts on the outside of
this topic, the appellant also submitted the only evidence that he touched the
complainant’s breast in her police interview
was elicited by a leading
question, such that little or no weight could be placed on it. Again, given the
evidence, properly considered,
I do not accept that submission. For a start, it
was not a leading question that elicited the answer, but rather a question to
what was being said. Moreover, the suggestion implicit in the submission
is that the complainant was simply agreeing with whatever
was put by the police
questioner, and not describing what really happened. A consideration of that
interview reflects there were
a number of occasions where the complainant
responded “no” to questions demonstrating that she was not, contrary
appellant’s contention, simply agreeing with the police questioner
during the interview. Relatedly, I do not accept that the
complainant’s
reliability was undermined, as suggested by the appellant below, by the fact
that her initial description of
the incident given at the outset of her police
interview did not contain every detail she said occurred, but that they emerged
the course of answering questions. So much is to be expected.
appellant’s submission relying on the use of the word “tried”
is misconceived. It approaches the evidence in
an entirely artificial manner,
giving a meaning to the word it does not have in the context in which it was
used. It takes the evidence
out of its context.
and related to that, is the appellant’s submission that the evidence of
complaint is inconsistent with the complainant’s
evidence of the events. I
do not accept that submission.
evidence, if accepted, can be relevant to the complainant’s credit. The
significance of a complaint will depend on
all the circumstances in which it was
made. It is not necessary for a complaint to contain every detail of the
allegation. Insofar
as the alleged inconsistencies are said to relate to various
complaints made by the complainant, in assessing whether there is an
inconsistency and if so, what, if any, impact it may have on the
complainant’s evidence, regard must be had to the circumstances
alleged offending and in which each of those complaints were made. Any
assessment of alleged omissions from her complaint
accounts, and what
significance, if any, arises therefrom must be considered in that context.
evidence of complaint, considered in its proper context, is consistent with the
complainant’s evidence as to what occurred.
By complaining in the manner
she did, her conduct supports her account of what occurred. The complainant
appeared distressed, and
on one occasion was crying when recounting what had
occurred, reinforcing this point.
have addressed the purported inconsistency in relation to the
complainant’s communication with Ms B and use of the term
The appellant also submitted that there was some
inconsistency regarding a video call between the complainant and Ms B,
that Ms B had not corroborated that such a call occurred. However, Ms
B was never asked about that video call. That is different
to suggesting that Ms
B gave evidence that no call occurred. I do not consider that this lack of
evidence negatively impacts on the
credibility of the complainant.
appellant submitted that the complainant did not complain to her boyfriend on
the night of the incident, and gave no details of
the specific offences when she
did the following day. The complainant said that she did not want to worry her
boyfriend, or make
him angry or vengeful. The appellant said that is not
consistent with the complainant later telling her boyfriend that the appellant
tried to force himself on her. I do not agree. The attitude of the complainant
is entirely understandable. The evidence was that
she did text her boyfriend in
the early hours of the next day in terms consistent with her evidence about what
occurred. The appellant’s
submission regarding the complainant’s
failure to go into specific detail is unrealistic considering the complaint was
by text message. It is plain from the text messages recited above, that
the complainant was complaining of the incident of sexual
assault to her
boyfriend, and that she was distressed by the appellant’s conduct. I note
that the complaint did include that
“he kept trying to grab at me and put
his hands up my dress” with a sad emoji, and that is was not until she
had “been raped before” that he stopped. That is entirely
consistent with her evidence (and inconsistent with his).
respect to the complaint evidence from Ms M and Ms C, the appellant again
complained the evidence contained no detail in relation
to the two specific
offences. The appellant’s submission did not take account of the
circumstances in which those conversations
occurred. Ms M worked with the
complainant and approached her at their workplace when she saw the complainant
was crying. I note
the appellant also submitted that Ms M was very clear the
complainant told her the appellant had pushed her into the bushes, however
the complainant had not included this in her account to the police. This was an
oral conversation, and Ms M was relaying the
version given by the complainant
second hand. During her cross-examination, the complainant said that in fact she
had told Ms M that
she had pushed him into a bush. The complainant described
close and repeated contact by the appellant, that she tried to get away
and that they moved all over the road during the incident. Her evidence was that
the appellant was trying to pull her off
the road. Ms C was the
complainant’s boss, who was approached by Ms M and the complainant. That
the complainant, as she explains,
did not want to give them all the particular
details of the incident is entirely understandable given the nature of her
relationship
with each. In that context, I do not consider that anything in Ms
M’s or Ms C’s evidence adversely impacts the complainant’s
credibility or reliability. I note also that in relation to both witnesses, it
is relevant that the complainant found the events
embarrassing and distressing.
The appellant’s submission about the complainant’s failure to
provide certain specific
details to these witnesses is entirely artificial,
paying no regard to her position, or those of the witnesses.
the complaint evidence is consistent with the allegations and supports the
evidence of the complainant.
in the Court below the appellant relied on evidence that the complainant was
calm during and after the events, which he submitted
was inconsistent with the
events occurring as she describes. The appellant’s written submissions
highlighted that under cross
examination the complainant did not disavow the
suggestion she had said goodbye to the appellant at the end of the incident. It
submitted that such conduct is inconsistent with the complainant’s
version of events. However, those submissions fail to recognise
her evidence
that she was “trying not to panic” and walked as fast as she could.
Further, they proceed on an erroneous
premise that a complainant ought to act in
a particular way. Her distress was apparent thereafter from her communications
B and others.
also relied on below was a submission that the complainant held a basket and
phone, such that the events could not have happened
as the complainant
described. However, on the appellant’s evidence this did not prevent him
from moving in close and putting
his hand on her hip. There is no basis to
suggest that the complainant holding the basket or phone in any way impeded the
I note for completeness that although the Court of Petty Session found the
appellant not guilty of the First Count as it was particularised,
that does not
create any reasonable doubt in my mind as to the proof in relation to the Second
Count. It is plain from the reasons
of that Court, recited above at [
] that the conclusion was not based on the
credibility of the complainant. Having scrutinised the complainant’s
evidence, in
the context of all the evidence, I accept her creditability and the
reliability of her evidence.
I explained above, I have considered all the evidence and the submissions
advanced by the appellant in this Court and below.
am satisfied of the guilt of the appellant on the Second Count. The appeal is
dismissed. His conviction is confirmed.
I certify that the preceding eighty-four (84)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 17 March 2023
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (29.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter