URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2021/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk Island v Walsh [2021] NFSC 4 (11 June 2021)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk
Island v Walsh
[2021] NFSC 4
File number(s):
SC 2 of 2016
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
11 June 2021
Date of orders:
17 June 2021
Catchwords:
CONTEMPT OF COURT
– where Court in
2018 found respondent legal practitioner should be suspended from practice in
Norfolk Island for professional
misconduct – where court ordered
respondent to repay another practitioner with interest money paid by reason of
respondent’s
false representation and to pay Registrar taxed costs of
disciplinary proceeding – where Registrar brought contempt application
against respondent for failure over three years to comply with to Court’s
orders to pay other practitioner or Registrar’s
taxed costs
COURTS AND JUDGES
– inherent power of Supreme Court as
superior court of record – whether inherent power to punish for contempt
made by the Court – nature of inherent power – where
exercise of inherent power of superior court of record to punish
respondent for
contempt necessary when respondent deliberately flouts Court order – where
respondent had ample means to comply
with orders to pay legal practitioner and
to make payments towards Registrar’s taxed costs – where respondent
chose to ignore Court orders –
: respondent guilty of
Legislation:
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Norfolk Island Act 1957
(Cth) s 18(3)
Norfolk Island Act 1979
Bankruptcy Act 2006
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) Sch 2
Legal Profession Act 1993
Borrie and Lowe's Law of Contempt
(2nd ed, 1983)
Cases cited:
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’
Union v Mudginberri Station Pty Ltd
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 161 CLR 98
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Boral Resources (Vic)
[2015] HCA 21
(2015) 256 CLR 375
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1
Kazal v Thunder Studios Inc (California)
[2017] FCAFC 111
Matthews v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Reg. v, Forbes; Ex parte Bevan
[1972] HCA 34
(1972) 127 CLR 1
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk Island v Walsh (No 4)
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk Island v Walsh (No 5)
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
11 June 2021
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr G. Johnson
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Solicitor for the Respondent:
The respondent did not appear
SC 2 of 2016
REGISTRAR OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORFOLK
DATE OF ORDER:
17 JUNE 2021
PENAL NOTICE
John Walsh also known as John Walsh of Brannagh, Sir John Walsh of
Brannagh and the Duke de Ronceray
IF YOU (BEING THE PERSON BOUND BY THIS ORDER):
(A) REFUSE OR NEGLECT TO DO ANY ACT WITHIN THE TIME SPECIFIED IN THIS
ORDER FOR THE DOING OF THE ACT; OR
(B) DISOBEY THE ORDER BY DOING AN ACT WHICH THE ORDER REQUIRES YOU NOT TO
YOU WILL BE LIABLE TO IMPRISONMENT, SEQUESTRATION OF PROPERTY OR OTHER
PUNISHMENT.
ANY OTHER PERSON WHO KNOWS OF THIS ORDER AND DOES ANYTHING WHICH HELPS OR
PERMITS YOU TO BREACH THE TERMS OF THIS ORDER MAY BE SIMILARLY
This is a ‘
freezing order
’ made against you on 17 June
2021 by Justice Rares following the hearing on 11 June 2021 at which you did
not attend after
the Court was given the undertakings set out in Schedule A to
this order and after the Court read the affidavit listed in Schedule
THE COURT ORDERS
INTRODUCTION
order is to be served by the applicant sending an email addressed to the
respondent attaching a sealed copy of the order to the
following email
(a) johnwb.act@gmail.com;
(b) contact@itnj.org;
(c) contact@ITNJcommittee.org.
respondent is taken to have been served with a copy of this order seven (7) days
after the sending of the emails referred to in
paragraph 1 above.
to the next paragraph, this order has effect up to and including 6 August 2021
the Return Date
). On the Return Date at 10:15 am there will be a
further hearing in respect of this order before Justice Rares.
served with or notified of this order, including you, may apply to the Court at
any time to vary or discharge this order or
so much of it as affects the person
served or notified.
this order:
(a) ‘third party’ means a person other than
you and the applicant;
(b) ‘unencumbered value’ means value free of mortgages, charges,
liens or other encumbrances.
(a) If you are ordered to do something, you must do it
by yourself or through directors, officers, partners, employees, agents or
others acting on your behalf or on your instructions.
(b) If you are ordered not to do something, you must not do it yourself or
through directors, officers, partners, employees, agents
or others acting on
your behalf or on your instructions or with your encouragement or in any other
FREEZING OF ASSETS
(a) You must not remove from Norfolk Island or in any
way dispose of, deal with or diminish the value of any of your assets in Norfolk
Island assets
’) up to the unencumbered value of
AUD$144,209.36 (‘
the Relevant
(b) If the unencumbered value of your Island assets exceeds the Relevant Amount,
you may remove any of those assets from Norfolk
Island or dispose of or deal
with them or diminish their value, so long as the total unencumbered value of
your Norfolk Island assets
still exceeds the Relevant Amount.
(c) If the unencumbered value of your Norfolk Island assets is less than the
Relevant Amount, and you have assets outside Norfolk
Island, including on
mainland Australia (‘
(i) You must not dispose of, deal with or
diminish the value of any of your Island assets and ex-Island assets up to the
unencumbered
value of your Island and ex-Island assets of the Relevant Amount;
(ii) You may dispose of, deal with or diminish the value of any of your
ex-Island assets, so long as the unencumbered value of your
Island assets and
ex-Island assets still exceeds the Relevant
the purposes of this order,
(a) your assets include:
(i) all your assets, whether or not they are
in your name and whether they are solely or co-owned;
(ii) any asset which you have the power, directly or indirectly, to dispose of
or deal with as if it were your own (you are to be
regarded as having such power
if a third party holds or controls the asset in accordance with your direct or
indirect instructions);
(iii) the following assets in particular:
money in account 062-950 10004014 in the name of United Pacific Corporation Pty
Ltd - Australian Constitutional Trust at Commonwealth
Bank of Australia
Norfolk Island branch.
money in account 062-950 1000 4030 in the name of Dr John Walsh of Brannagh at
PO Box 223 Watermill Valley Norfolk Island 2899
at Commonwealth Bank of
, Norfolk Island
(b) the value of your assets is the value of the
interest you have individually in your assets.
PROVISION OF INFORMATION
to paragraph 10, you must:
(a) at or before the further hearing on the Return Date
(or within such further time as the Court may allow) to the best of your ability
inform the applicant in writing of all your assets world-wide, giving their
value, location and details (including any mortgages,
charges or other
encumbrances to which they are subject) and the extent of your interest in the
(b) within 15 working days after being served with this order, swear and serve
on the applicant an affidavit setting out the above
information.
(a) This paragraph (10) applies if you are not a
corporation and you wish to object to complying with paragraph 9 on the grounds
some or all of the information required to be disclosed may tend to prove
(i) have committed an offence against or
arising under an Australian law or a law of a foreign country; or
(ii) are liable to a civil penalty.
(b) This paragraph (10) also applies if you are a
corporation and all of the persons who are able to comply with paragraph 9
behalf and with whom you have been able to communicate, wish to object
to your complying with paragraph 9 on the grounds that some
or all of the
information required to be disclosed may tend to prove that they
respectively:
(i) have committed an offence against or
arising under an Australian law or a law of a foreign country; or
(ii) are liable to a civil penalty.
(c) You must:
(i) disclose so much of the information
required to be disclosed to which no objection is taken; and
(ii) prepare an affidavit containing so much of the information required to be
disclosed to which objection is taken, and deliver
it to the Court in a sealed
envelope; and
(iii) file and serve on each other party a separate affidavit setting out the
basis of the objection.
EXCEPTIONS TO THIS ORDER
order does not prohibit you from:
(a) paying up to $400 a week on your ordinary living
(b) paying $5,000 on your reasonable legal expenses;
(c) dealing with or disposing of any of your assets in the ordinary and proper
course of your business, including paying business
expenses bona fide and
properly incurred; and
(d) in relation to matters not falling within (a), (b) or (c), dealing with or
disposing of any of your assets in discharging obligations
bona fide and
properly incurred under a contract entered into before this order was made,
provided that before doing so you give
the applicant, if possible, at least two
working days written notice of the particulars of the
obligation.
and the applicant may agree in writing that the exceptions in the preceding
paragraph are to be varied. In that case the applicant
or you must as soon as
practicable file with the Court and serve on the other a minute of a proposed
consent order recording the
variation signed by or on behalf of the applicant
and you, and the Court may order that the exceptions are varied
accordingly.
(a) This order will cease to have effect if
(i) pay the sum of $144,209.36 into Court;
(ii) pay that sum into a joint bank account in the name of your lawyer and the
lawyer for the applicant as agreed in writing between
(iii) provide security in that sum by a method agreed in writing with the
applicant to be held subject to the order of the
(b) Any such payment and any such security will not
provide the applicant with any priority over your other creditors in the event
of your insolvency.
(c) If this order ceases to have effect pursuant 12(a) above, you must as soon
as practicable file with the Court and serve on the
applicant notice of that
costs of this application are reserved to the Court hearing the application on
the Return Date.
PERSONS OTHER THAN THE APPLICANT AND
off by banks
This order does not prevent any bank from
exercising any right of set off it has in respect of any facility which it gave
it was notified of this order.
withdrawals by the respondent
No bank need inquire as to the
application or proposed application of any money withdrawn by you if the
withdrawal appears to be permitted
by this order.
outside Australia
(a) Except as provided in subparagraph (b) below,
the terms of this order do not affect or concern anyone outside Australia.
(b) The terms of this order will affect the following persons outside
(i) you and your directors, officers,
employees and agents (except banks and financial institutions);
(ii) any person (including a bank or financial institution) who:
subject to the jurisdiction of this Court; and
been given written notice of this order, or has actual knowledge of the
substance of the order and of its requirements; and
able to prevent or impede acts or omissions outside Australia which constitute
or assist in a disobedience of the terms of this
(iii) any other person (including a bank of financial institution), only to the
extent that this order is declared enforceable by
or is enforced by a court in a
country or state that has jurisdiction over that person or over any of that
person’s assets.
located outside Australia
Nothing in this order shall, in
respect of assets located outside Australia, prevent any third party from
complying or acting in conformity
with what it reasonably believes to be its
bona fide and properly incurred legal obligations, whether contractual or
pursuant to
a court order or otherwise, under the law of the country or state in
which those assets are situated or under the proper law of any
contract between
a third party and you, provided that in the case of any future order of a court
of that country or state made on
your or the third party’s application,
reasonable written notice of the making of the application is given to the
REASONS FOR
(REVISED FROM THE TRANSCRIPT)
14 April 2016, the
of the Court commenced proceedings seeking
the removal from the
of Practitioners of the Court of the
respondent, who goes by a variety of names, including John
Walsh of Brannagh, Sir John Walsh of Brannagh, Sir John Walsh
Brannagh, Dr Sir John Walsh of Brannagh and the Duke de Ronceray.
names that he uses that appear in the evidence, including in his various
dealings with financial institutions. At one
stage, Mr Walsh had been a member
of the Victorian bar.
22 December 2017, Gilmour J found (
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk Island
v Walsh (No 4)
[2017] NFSC 7)
that Mr Walsh was guilty of professional
misconduct under the provisions of the
Legal Profession Act 1993
making false
representations to
, another legal
practitioner, that it was necessary for him to become a member of the Norfolk
Island Bar Association, by a payment
of the amount of $200 to that entity, in
order to obtain registration as a legal practitioner in Norfolk
Legal Profession Act
, when there was no such requirement and
that association was not a professional representative body for legal
practitioners practicing
in the Island,
making false
representations to the Court, as well as to the public generally through the
websites of the Victorian Bar and the International
Tribunal of Natural Justice
), that Mr Walsh:
(a) held a recognised judicial office as the
‘Chief Justice’ of the ITNJ when it was not a proper court of law or
established under any statute, international treaty or convention of
any kind, and
(b) is a knight under the Australian or Imperial honours system entitling him to
use the honorific of ‘Sir’.
Honour also found Mr Walsh guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
respond personally, and within a reasonable time, to the Registrar concerning a
complaint as to his professional conduct
made by Dr Sze, and
knowingly or
recklessly making false statements and comments of a discourteous and offensive
nature to the Court regarding other legal
practitioners in the
23 February 2018, his Honour ordered (
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk
Island v Walsh (No 5)
[2018] NFSC 1)
name be removed from the Register and his right to practice as a lawyer in the
Island be suspended for a period of
10 years, and
the Registrar
notify all professional bodies in Australia responsible for overseeing
professional discipline of legal practitioners,
as well as the International Bar
Association and the South Pacific Lawyers Association, of the orders made on
22 December 2017 and
23 February 2018, and
within 28 days
of 23 February 2018, Mr Walsh reimburse Dr Sze the sum of $200 with interest
payable from 1 July 2007, calculated by
the Court pursuant to Sch 2 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
Mr Walsh to pay
the Registrar’s costs to be taxed if not agreed.
1 March 2018, Gilmour J made the following order that quantified the total
amount to be paid to Dr Sze:
Pursuant to Order 4 of the Orders made on 23 February
2018, the respondent pay to Dr Ping-Fat Sze the sum of AUD
order, as entered, contained a notation that the sum included interest of
$233.69 on the $200 judgment sum calculated between
1 July 2007 and 23 February
appears in the Registrar’s affidavit made on 9 December 2020, the
Registrar’s solicitor emailed his Honour’s
order of 1 March 2018 to
an email address commencing “johnwb
email address
) that Mr Walsh later used on 28 May 2018 when instructing his
solicitors to pay the net proceeds of sale of the Norfolk Island real
jointly owned by himself and Pauline
to Ms Butler’s account,
notwithstanding that the named vendors were both of them. I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that
on or about 1 March 2018, Mr Walsh received the
email that his Honour’s associate sent on 1 March 2018 to the johnwb.act
address and that he had notice of the Court’s order that he had to
pay Dr Sze $433.69.
15 May 2020, the Registrar filed an application in proceeding seeking
declarations that Mr Walsh was in contempt of Court for failing
Sze $433.69, or the Registrar’s costs that had been taxed in the sum of
$143,775.67, and orders punishing those alleged
contempts. I began hearing that
application on 11 December 2020, but adjourned to today to enable
the Registrar to obtain further
Sze, who resides in Hong Kong, made three affidavits. The first, made on 22
April 2020, confirmed that he was the person to whom
Gilmour J had ordered Mr
Walsh pay $433.69 and that he had not been paid that money over the preceding
two years. Dr Sze made two
further affidavits, the most recently being made on
8 June 2021, confirming that he has not received any payment at all from Mr
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Dr Sze has not been paid anything by
or on behalf of Mr Walsh to discharge his judgment
debt of $433.69.
Mr Walsh’s awareness of the orders to pay Dr Sze and the
Registrar’s taxed costs
26 March 2018, Mr Walsh filed in the Federal Court of Australia an application
for an extension of time to appeal from Gilmour
J’s orders and
declarations made on 22 December 2017 and 23 February 2018.
12 July 2020, Mr Walsh appeared in person before Wigney J and made submissions.
On 19 July 2018, Wigney J, in the exercise of
the appellate jurisdiction of the
Federal Court, dismissed that application and ordered Mr Walsh to pay the
Registrar’s costs.
Wigney J found that none of Mr Walsh’s proposed
grounds of appeal appeared to have any discernible merit and that Mr Walsh
not given an adequate explanation for not having filed a notice of appeal in
can be no doubt at all, and I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, that in
prosecuting the application for extension of time
and leave to appeal, Mr Walsh
was fully aware of the orders that he had to pay, and had not done so,
, Dr Sze $433.69, and,
, the Registrar’s
taxed costs of the proceeding before Gilmour J.
Mr Walsh’s means and activities after 1 March
1 March 2018, despite having had ample means to pay Dr Sze, Mr Walsh
deliberately determined that he would not do so. In making
the following
findings, I have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that they are correct
based on the uncontested affidavit evidence
before me, including the documents
and financial records annexed or exhibited to those affidavits.
23 February 2018 and 7 December 2020, Mr Walsh received fortnightly deposits of
pension payments totalling $100,973.72 into
access account
the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (
) Norfolk Island branch that
he held initially in the name “Dr John Walsh of Brannagh”. He
upgraded his name on that
account to “Dr Sir John Walsh of
Brannagh”, as recorded on the statement for the period ended
28 November 2020. The
pension payments into the CBA access account varied
from between about $2,400 to $2,800 per month during the period between 23
2018 and 5 April 2019, then to about $3,400 per month until about
18 October 2019, when they reduced to about $2,000 per month.
Ms Butler began
receiving a pension payment directly into her bank account from about October
2019. Between 23 February 2018 and
4 October 2019, Mr Walsh transferred
fortnightly sums from his CBA smart access account totalling $29,387.59 to a CBA
Ms Butler’s name. Between 23 February 2018 and 7 December
2020, he transferred fortnightly from his CBA access account a total
$71,586.14 to a CBA account in the name of
United Pacific
Corporation Pty
Ltd. He then caused United Pacific to make payments from its CBA account for
his benefit to reduce his debt on the
ANZ 4727 card from what he had transferred
Pacific was incorporated on the Island on 14 January 1994. Mr Walsh held about
62.5 per cent of the issued capital in United
Pacific and Ms Butler the balance.
Mr Walsh used funds to the credit of the United Pacific account to pay off his
debts on his Australia
and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (
rewards travel adventures credit card ending in 4727 (the
ANZ 4727 card
and for other occasional expenses, throughout the period between
23 February 2018 and December 2020.
1 March 2018, Mr Walsh departed Australia and, according to his incoming
traveller card, returned here on 6 March 2018, having
spent most time in Japan
while overseas for those five days. His statement for his ANZ 4727 card for the
period ending 28 March
2018 recorded that he had paid a hotel bill in Tokyo of
11 April 2018, he and Ms Butler entered into a contract to sell their home on
the Island for a price of $590,000. Mr Walsh appears
at that stage to have had
no relevantly discernible financial inhibitions. On 12 April 2018, he flew
business class from Melbourne
to London on Singapore Airlines and returned to
Melbourne in business class on 25 April 2018. The Registrar obtained
screenshots
from the webpage of the ITNJ that indicated that that entity had
apparently held “sittings” in Westminster in London
between 16 and
18 April 2018 at which the supposedly presiding judge was described as
“Chief Justice” and
John Walsh of Brannagh”. That appeared to
be a continuation of what Gilmour J found was Mr Walsh’s professional
in making similar false representations.
statement for the ANZ 4727 card for the period ending 24 May 2018, recorded
that, during the preceding month, Mr Walsh had paid
ANZ a total of $3,741.20.
settlement of the contract for sale of his and Ms Butler’s home on 28 May
2018, the proceeds of sale were used to discharge
a mortgage to the CBA, Norfolk
Island branch, of $132,111.41, and the balance was paid to Ms Butler, pursuant
to Mr Walsh’s
email to which I referred at [#8] above. It is clear that,
at that stage, Mr Walsh had access to sufficient money to pay the debt
Sze, but by then he had chosen not to do so.
Registrar submits that the above factors, in combination with Mr Walsh’s
pattern of spending and conduct after Gilmour J
made the orders on 23 February
2018 and 1 March 2018 requiring payment to Dr Sze and the taxed costs, indicated
that at all relevant
times, Mr Walsh has had the ability to pay Dr Sze and has
deliberately chosen not to do so.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Walsh had the ability to pay Dr Sze
the sum of $433.69 throughout the period between
1 March 2018 to the present
Mr Walsh’s failure to pay any of the taxed costs
Registrar also alleges that, after the taxation of his costs, Mr Walsh also has
had the means to pay at least some of those taxed
costs, but has chosen not to
Walsh left Australia for Bali on 18 June 2019, returning on 27 June 2019. The
Registrar accessed the “Indonesia seatings”
link on the ITNJ’s
website for 23–24 June 2019, where apparently that entity dealt with the
topic of “Weaponization
of the Biosphere”. The Registrar gave
evidence of a screenshot of a YouTube video embedded in the ITNJ’s webpage
again, appeared to show Mr Walsh wearing a jacket and jabot with his name
prominently displayed at the bottom right-hand corner of
the screen as
“Sir John Walsh of Brannagh ITNJ Chief Justice”.
24 June 2019, while Mr Walsh was in Bali, the Deputy Registrar of the Court
issued a certificate of costs assessment pursuant to
the orders made by Gilmour
J on 23 February 2018, that certified the Registrar’s costs in the amount
of $143,775.67.
25 June 2019 the solicitors for the Registrar sent the costs certificate to Mr
Walsh at both his johnwb.act email address and another
email address with a
Norfolk Island domain suffix.
response, on 25 June 2019, Zahra
, styling herself as “Legal
Associate to Sir John Walsh of Brannagh”, emailed a secretary in the
Registrar’s solicitors’
office, saying:
As you may be aware, Sir John is currently in Indonesia
presiding over the International Tribunal for Natural Justice and is out of
office, and can not receive mail. We had received the email sent and are unable
to open the large attachment due to its size of
7.2MB. We do not know what has
been sent, what matter you are referring to and have not received any
documentation for reference.
Walsh wanted to make sure that the solicitors for the Registrar received Ms
Dixon’s email, which I infer he dictated. That
is because he later sent
an email to the solicitor for the Registrar from his mobile phone using his own
johnwb.act email account,
at 5:27pm on 25 June 2019, that contained forwarded
further emails from Ms Dixon, including the one just quoted. That demonstrates
that Mr Walsh received those emails while in Indonesia, including the one
attaching the costs certificate.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Walsh had notice of the attachment
to the Registrar’s solicitors’ email
of 25 June 2019 containing
the costs certificate, and that, not later than his return to Australia from
Bali on 27 June 2019, he
was able to open the attachment containing the costs
certificate because it was not a document of any particularly significant size.
then, Mr Walsh has still not paid any money either to Dr Sze or to the Registrar
in respect of any of the taxed costs for which
he was liable.
Mr Walsh’s other financial dealings and the
Registrar’s bankruptcy proceeding
2016 to the present, Mr Walsh has been in default on accounts for an American
Express platinum reserve credit card and an American
Express gold card that he
had in the name of the Duke de Ronceray, although the account details also used
the name Sir John Walsh
of Brannagh. Prior to the judgments of Gilmour J, those
two cards were inactive and he was in default in respect of over $53,000
Walsh also had a platinum credit card account with ANZ in the name “Sir
John Walsh Brannagh”. In May 2018, that card
had a debit balance of
$21,871.94, which was about $400 over the limit. He had made a $400 payment to
ANZ for that card on 8 May
2018. He continued making relatively small purchases
on it until January 2019, and made irregular payments to ANZ on it, sometimes
over $1,000 in a month, during that period.
Walsh also had a gold access cheque ANZ account in the ducal name albeit the
statements for that account also identified the holder
as “Sir John Walsh
of Brannagh”. That cheque account appears to have become inactive by May
Walsh made regular payments of $1074.15 to the Adina Apartment Hotel in Queen
Street, Melbourne for what appears to be his weekly
accommodation expense using
the ANZ 4727 card. Those payments continued until the last one on 5 April 2020.
at 1 April 2021, the ANZ 4727 account had a debit balance of $2,402.98. Mr
Walsh had continued, since March 2018, to use it and
make regular payments to
reduce its debit balance. The Registrar calculated that, over the period
between 1 March 2018 and 7 December
2020, Mr Walsh made regular monthly payments
to the ANZ 4727 card totalling $159,709.08 in respect of his expenditures on
that account.
That approximately matched the amounts he had expended on
purchases. It was one credit card account that he wished not to go into
20 February 2020, the Registrar commenced bankruptcy proceedings against Mr
Walsh under the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth) in the Federal Circuit Court.
20 July 2020, a judge of the Federal Circuit Court made a sequestration order
against the estate of Mr Walsh and ordered that the
petitioning creditor’s
costs be paid out of the bankrupt’s estate. That Court noted that the act
of bankruptcy occurred
on 24 January 2020 and that consent of joint trustees to
act had been filed with the Court. However, that order does not affect
Walsh’s obligations to make payments under the law applicable in the
Island. That is because the
Bankruptcy Act
(Cth) provides in
9A Act does not extend to Norfolk
This Act does not extend to Norfolk
Walsh’s CBA bank accounts and the CBA account of United Pacific are
situated in the Island and, by force of s 9A of the
Bankruptcy Act
(Cth), may not be property over which trustees in bankruptcy appointed
by the 20 July 2020 orders in the Federal Circuit Court can
exercise powers.
Bankruptcy on the Island is governed by the
Bankruptcy Act 2006
is not clear exactly what the bankruptcy trustees have done to control Mr
Walsh’s assets or bank accounts, save to
say that Mr Walsh seems to have
been able to operate freely on the CBA and ANZ accounts in evidence well after
he was made bankrupt
on mainland Australia. That may be because of the
serendipitous confusion which could be caused, perhaps intentionally, by Mr
use of various different names to describe himself to financial
institutions in the context that the relatively common name, John
without more, unlikely to be connected readily to his more exotic names in which
he opened the bank accounts and credit
cards. It may also be because those
accounts are located in the Island.
the explanation, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that, in this
assets over the period
between 23 February 2018 and 20 July 2020 with which he could pay readily the
$443.69 owed to Dr Sze and could
have made some payments to reduce the
indebtedness owed to the Registrar under the costs order.
at 9 December 2020, his CBA account in the name of Dr Sir John Walsh Brannagh
had a credit balance of $1,364.90, being an account
to which some pension
payments have been credited regularly. Mr Walsh appears to have ceased, after 1
December 2020, transferring
pension payments to the United Pacific CBA account
or using it to make payments to reduce the debt on his ANZ 4727 card. As at 30
March 2021, United Pacific’s Island bank account was over $15,000 in
credit and did not appear to have been operated for about
three months. There
is no more up-to-date information as to it or the other bank accounts in
evidence. There is no evidence of
any financial institution that Mr Walsh has
used since to continue to finance his lifestyle.
Service on Mr Walsh
Registrar had difficulties serving Mr Walsh with the documents in the present
application. On 8 March 2018 Mr Walsh emailed Andrew
, one of the
solicitors for the Registrar, stating:
Dear Mr Keevers,
As previously advised your attachments will not open and keep asking for a coded
app (whatever that means). You will recall that
I complained about your emails
previously to the court and you will recall that Justice Gilmour completely
ignored what I was saying
and ordered me to sit down and keep quiet. All of this
should make for interesting reading when the transcript is finally produced
shows the contemptible way your team and the presiding judge treated me and my
defence, even to the point of deliberately conducting
a trial when I was ill and
confined to my room known to the court and your prosecutor.
Yours sincerely, John Walsh of Brannagh
Walsh seemed very adept at being able to use, or obtain assistance in using,
including from persons like Ms Dixon, websites and
electronic communications to
serve his own purposes, yet claimed that he was unable to open emailed
documents. As that email suggested,
he appears, in his own words, to have
engaged in a similar charade before Gilmour J.
his affidavit of 3 July 2020, a solicitor acting for the Registrar, Tom
, deposed that he sent a letter to Mr Walsh at his address for
service, 205 William Street, Melbourne, being barristers’ chambers,
email to his email addresses (including the johnwb.act email address) attaching
the application filed on 15 May 2020 seeking
declarations that he had committed
contempt of court, together with Mr Hillyard’s affidavit of 23 April 2020
and Dr Sze’s
affidavit of 22 April 2020.
ANZ 4727 card indicates that Mr Walsh appears to have ceased to reside at the
Adina Hotel in about April or May 2020, at the time
of a national lockdown due
to the COVID-19 pandemic. As appears below at [#53], Mr Walsh confirmed so much
in text messages that
he exchanged with Mr Hillyard on 25 August 2020 when,
characteristically, he appeared to be evading any attempt to acknowledge service
or even the existence of this proceeding.
19 May 2020, Registrar Cho of the Federal Circuit Court made orders that listed
the creditor’s petition for hearing on 7
July 2020 and provided that Mr
Walsh could be served with relevant documents in that proceeding by leaving an
envelope containing
them addressed to him at the Adina Hotel, sending them by
prepaid ordinary post addressed to him there, scanning and sending them
as an attachment to his two email addresses, being the johnwb.act and the
Norfolk Island ones, and also to Ms Dixon. In
addition, Registrar Cho’s
orders also required that Mr Walsh be sent a text or SMS message on his mobile
telephone number
made similar orders for service on 13 July 2020 to those made by Registrar Cho
and ordered that the documents would be deemed to
have been served on Mr Walsh
14 days after the last event of service to occur, in accordance with those
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt by the affidavit of Malcolm Hadji, affirmed
30 July 2020, that on 16 July 2020 he left the
application in
proceeding filed on 15 May 2020 and the other documents set out in the orders of
13 July 2020 at the Adina Hotel.
his affidavit of 17 July 2020, Mr Hillyard sought further orders from this Court
as to how Mr Walsh should be served in the circumstances
of uncertainty as to
where he lived because the Adina Hotel had informed a process server that Mr
Walsh was no longer staying there
when he attempted to serve documents in
accordance with the orders made on 13 July 2020.
31 July 2020, I granted the Registrar leave to file, by 25 August 2020, an
amended application in proceeding giving full particulars
of the remedy he
sought. I ordered that Mr Walsh be served by scanning and sending the
amended application to his johnwb.act email
address with a link as an attachment
providing access to it and also sending an SMS to him on his mobile phone that
stated that the
Registrar had filed an application in a proceeding with the
Court and that documents had been sent to or left at the Adina Hotel.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt by Mr Hillyard’s evidence that Mr
Walsh was served in accordance with the orders made
on 31 July 2020. Mr
Hillyard sent an email to Mr Walsh on 25 August 2020 at the johnwb.act email
address that attached a letter
from his firm, the amended application as filed
on 24 August 2020 and the order that I made on 31 July 2020. Mr Hillyard
an SMS message to Mr Walsh on 25 August 2020. Mr Hillyard’s SMS
stated that an amended application in a proceeding had been
filed in the Court
and that one copy had been sent to the Adina Hotel and another copy emailed to
Walsh responded in an SMS to Mr Hillyard’s SMS stating that the Adina
Hotel had been closed because of the State of Emergency
declaration by the
Premier of Victoria, Daniel Andrews, and that “If you have any
genuine documents you can serve them on Daniel
Andrews”. Mr Hillyard
responded soon after on 25 August 2020, thanking Mr Walsh for confirming receipt
of his SMS, and said
“Please do not hesitate to advise me of an alternate
postal address. Otherwise, the documents have been served by email”.
Walsh did not reply.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that, by reason of Mr Walsh’s text
messages that he exchanged with Mr Hillyard on 25
August 2020, he was aware that
the present application had been filed in this proceeding. That is because the
text message gave
the proceeding number, being the same one as that in which
Gilmour J made the orders of 23 February 2018 and 1 March 2018.
am also satisfied beyond reasonable doubt by Mr Hillyard’s affidavit of 9
December 2020 that, on 27 November 2020, Mr Hillyard
sent another email to Mr
Walsh at the johnwb.act address that attached a letter of the same date from his
firm, the Registrar’s
submissions filed on 26 November 2020, together with
a copy of the email that Mr Walsh had sent on 8 March 2018 to the
for the Registrar, the Federal Court of Australia’s National
Practitioners/Litigants Guide to Online Hearings and Microsoft
Teams, and that
Mr Hillyard also sent a text (SMS) message to Mr Walsh. On the same day, Mr
Walsh exchanged SMS text messages with
Mr Hillyard in which he wrote, among
other statements:
I have no idea who you are but it is obvious you are an
ignorant person as everyone knows the Adina has been closed by government
and we are in lockdown. Who is this unnamed “applicant” ? and what
are these proceedings? This email is being reported
to the police and other
regulatory authorities.
Hillyard responded, noting Mr Walsh had confirmed his receipt of his earlier
text which drew the following response:
Who on Earth are you? You sent an offensive text message
which is being reported to the authorities
It is noticed you do not give a real name and a real address. Will leave it up
to the police authorities to unearth who and what
Hillyard did not give any evidence about any contact from “police
authorities”, despite Mr Walsh’s threats to
involve them.
Consideration
power to punish for contempt is an inherent power of a superior court of record
and does not require any specific statutory conferral
of such a power. In
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1
at 16–17, Dawson J, with whom
Mason CJ, Brennan J, Deane J (with a qualification not relevant for the
present purposes) and
Toohey J agreed, discussed the nature of inherent
Reg. v, Forbes; Ex parte Bevan
[1972] HCA 34
at 7], Menzies J. pointed out that:
Inherent jurisdiction' is the power
which a court has
simply because it is a court of a particular
description
Courts of Common Law without the aid of any
authorizing
provision had
inherent jurisdiction to prevent abuse of
process and to punish for contempt
. Inherent jurisdiction is
something derived by implication from statutory provisions
conferring particular jurisdiction; if such a provision is to be
considered as conferring more than is actually expressed that
accepted standards
of statutory construction and it would be
inaccurate to describe it as
'inherent jurisdiction', which, as the
name indicates, requires no
authorizing provision. Courts of
unlimited jurisdiction have 'inherent
it is undoubtedly the general responsibility of a
superior court of unlimited jurisdiction for the administration of justice which
gives rise to its inherent power. In the discharge of that responsibility it
exercises the full plenitude of judicial power.
It is in that way that the
Supreme Court of New South Wales exercises an inherent jurisdiction. Although
conferred by statute, its
powers are identified by reference to the unlimited
powers of the courts at Westminster....
A superior court, however, not only has power to punish contempt against
itself committed out of court
, but in the exercise of its inherent
with the due
course of justice in an inferior court: see
Reg. v. Lefroy
[(1873) L.R. 8 Q.B. 134].
(emphasis added)
Court was constituted as the superior court of record on the Island under s
18(3) of the
Norfolk Island Act 1957
(Cth), and has continued in
existence since then under
Norfolk Island Act 1979
(Cth). This Court is a court of the same character as the
Supreme Court of New South Wales. Therefore, it has all of the inherent
powers of a superior court of record, including the power to punish for
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
at 533, Brennan, Deane, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ said:
All orders, whether they be Mareva injunctions,
injunctions relating to the subject matter of the suit, or, simply, procedural
are made in the interests of justice.
Non-compliance necessarily
constitutes an interference with the administration of justice
the position can be remedied as between the parties
(emphasis added)
Honours observed that the differences that found the distinction between civil
and criminal contempt are illusory in significant
respects. They held that
because the remedy for both civil and criminal contempt was punishment, the
criminal standard of proof
should apply in all cases of alleged contempt
(183 CLR at 534: see too
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy
Union v Boral Resources (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 21
(2015) 256 CLR 375
388–389 [42]–[43] per French CJ, Kiefel, Bell, Gageler and
Keane JJ). They said that (183 CLR at 533):
...proceedings for breach of an order or undertaking
have the effect of vindicating judicial authority as well as a remedial or
effect... proceedings for breach of an order or undertaking have the
effect of vindicating judicial authority as well as a remedial
or coercive
Indeed, if the person in breach refuses to remedy the position,
as is not unknown (See, eg,
In re Davies
[1888] UKLawRpKQB 112
(1888) 21 QBD 236)
only effect will be the vindication of judicial authority
(emphasis added)
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union v Mudginberri Station Pty
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 161 CLR 98
at 107, Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and Deane JJ
held that the underlying rationale for every exercise of the contempt power is
it is necessary to uphold and protect the effective administration of
justice. They illustrated this by citing the following passage
and Lowe's Law of Contempt,
2nd ed. (1983) at p 3.
If a court lacked the means to enforce its orders, if
its orders could be disobeyed with impunity, not only would individual litigants
suffer, the whole administration of justice would be brought into
if a person disobeys a court order, the Court must have, and be seen by the
community to have, power to punish any such disobedience
as a contempt. The
exercise of the contempt power in such a situation will vindicate the rule of
law through the exercise of judicial
power as not only the means that our system
of government has selected to determine what the law is and how it is to be
a particular factual circumstance, but also to impose punishment for
a contravention of the law, including as expressed in the lawful
exercise of the
Court’s jurisdiction. The role of the Court in our society to administer
justice carries with it, necessarily,
the concomitant power to ensure that its
orders are obeyed and its authority is respected. This ensures that members of
do not take the law into their own hands or see the need to do so,
because the Court is not impotent to ensure that its orders are
Kazal v Thunder Studios Inc (California)
[2017] FCAFC 111
(2017) 256 FCR 90
110–111 [26], Besanko, Wigney and Bromwich JJ identified the following
principles relevant to a contempt of the kind here,
Matthews v Australian Securities and Investments
[2009] NSWCA 155
) at [16], Tobias JA (and
previously the trial judge in that case) reproduced with approval the following
passage from
Trading Ltd v Bunn (No 5)
[2009] FCA 16
, in which Finn J summarised the applicable principles as
, the order alleged to be
breached must be clear and unambiguous: see
Australian Consolidated Press Ltd
[1965] HCA 21
(1965) 112 CLR 483
at 515-516; and be capable of being complied
Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority v Siminton (No 7)
[2007] FCA 1609
, the proper construction of an
order is not a matter of fact but a question of law:
Australia Pty Ltd v Sharman Networks Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 41
(2006) 150 FCR 110
, it is not necessary for an applicant to prove that an alleged
contemnor intended to disobey the order: ibid, at [17]; nor is it
necessary to
prove that the alleged contemnor understood the true meaning of the terms of an
order or that he or she was aware that
his or her conduct constituted a breach
of the order:
Microsoft Corporation v Marks (No 1)
[1996] FCA 709
(1996) 69 FCR 117
143. Nonetheless it may be highly relevant to the question of penalty that the
alleged contemnor disobeyed an order because he
or she placed a construction on
it that was not its true construction:
Universal Music Australia Pty Ltd
deliberate conduct which is in breach of a court
order will constitute wilful disobedience of the order, and therefore a civil
unless the conduct be casual, accidental or unintentional
Louis Vuitton Malletier SA v Design Elegance Pty Ltd
[2006] FCA 83
(2006) 149 FCR 494
, the facts in issue in a contempt charge must be proved
beyond reasonable doubt:
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
(emphasis added)
Accordingly,
it is important to determine whether or not the act of the alleged contravener
is contumacious or intentional. A mere
casual or accidental failure to comply
with a Court order is not readily capable of being seen as defiance of the
Court’s authority,
but a deliberate one is. The Court must be able to
vindicate its authority and the status of its orders as requirements that the
law has imposed on a person to ensure that the community knows that those orders
will be obeyed and, if need be, enforced. No person
can seek to avoid or ignore
the governmental aspect of a court order that determines that the law requires
the person to perform
a particular action, such as obeying an injunction or
complying with a specific clear order, including an order for the payment of
society has moved well away from having debtors’ prisons, in a case such
as the present, it is obvious that Mr Walsh has
decided that he will simply
ignore or, indeed, flout, what the Court has determined his legal obligations to
be; namely, to repay,
with interest, the money that he obtained from Dr Sze
using false representations and to pay the costs that the Registrar incurred
the proceedings before Gilmour J. Those orders were pellucid and contained no
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Walsh has deliberately chosen not
to pay the relatively insignificant sum of $433.69
to Dr Sze and that by doing
so Mr Walsh has refused to recognise the authority of the Court.
Walsh had the means to pay Dr Sze, up to the time of his bankruptcy in
Australia. He clearly is not impecunious and has not been
so even though he had
directed the payment of the net proceeds of the sale of use of his and Ms
Butler’s house solely to her.
He has continued thereafter to have ample
funds located in the Island to make such a payment. He has used moneys
available to him
in his name or under his control after his Australian
bankruptcy as he pleased throughout the period from 1 March 2018 until the
documentary trail stops in March 2021. He has decided that he will not pay
the judgment debt to Dr Sze despite being well aware
of his obligation to do so.
Likewise, he has made no effort whatsoever to pay the whole or any part of the
costs as taxed.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that each instance of his conduct in
failing to pay,
, Dr Sze or,
, since 25 June 2019,
the Registrar any part of the $143,775.67 the subject of the certificate of
taxation, is a wilful and contumacious
defiance of the authority of the Court.
His conduct indicates that Mr Walsh regards himself as free to carry on his
lifestyle as
and when he chooses, and to ignore, entirely, his civil obligations
to obey the Court’s orders that he pay $433.69 to Dr Sze
and the costs due
to the Registrar. That defiance of the Court’s authority in a society
governed by the rule of law is unacceptable.
citizen must obey the law, including the law as determined by orders of the
Court, as the third arm of government. Mr Walsh
cannot be allowed continue to
ignore the Court’s authority or its orders in the way he has chosen
deliberately to do. He has
been aware of the Court’s orders and has
thumbed his nose at its authority for over three years. It follows that he is
of contempt of Court.
will enter convictions reflecting that Mr Walsh committed contempt of the Court,
, in contravening the order made by Gilmour J on 23 February 2018
that, within 28 days of that order, he reimbursed Dr Sze of the
sum of AUD200
with interest payable from 1 July 2007 that the order of 1 March 2018
quantified in the total sum of AUD433.69, and,
, in failing to
pay the Registrar the whole or any part of the costs of and incidental to the
proceeding, such costs to be taxed,
if not agreed, which costs were quantified
as $143,775.67 on 25 June 2019 and thereafter.
Registrar submitted that I should adjourn the proceeding to determine penalty
later. In my opinion, that is the appropriate course.
I will give Mr Walsh one
further opportunity to be heard and to purge his contempt, or to establish that
there was some matter that
does not appear in the evidence to suggest that he is
not guilty or would warrant the revisiting these orders made in his
the meantime, I am of opinion that freezing orders should be applied to Mr
Walsh’s bank accounts and other resources to preserve
them so as to be
capable of being sequestered or applied to satisfy the orders the subject of his
contempt. Once his access to money
is constrained, he may be motivated to
recognise the authority of the Court or accept the consequences of not doing so.
The Registrar
should prepare a draft freezing order which I will make in
I certify that the preceding seventy-one (71)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 23 June 2021
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (512 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter