URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions v Sadrata (No 2) [2024] NFSC 3 (3 June 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions v Sadrata (No 2)
[2024] NFSC 3
File number(s):
SCC 1 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
3 June 2024
Date of publication of reasons:
5 June 2024
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– where offender
pleaded guilty to four counts of assault occasioning actual bodily
harm contrary to s 82(1) of the
Criminal Code
(NI) – offences committed on Norfolk
CRIMINAL LAW
sentence – whether
comparable cases establish ‘correct range’ of sentences –
whether desirable in all the
circumstances to suspend sentence pursuant to s 39
Sentencing Act 2007
Legislation:
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
Criminal Code 2007
(NI) s 82(1)
Sentencing Act 2007
(NI) s 5, 39
Cases cited:
[2018] NSWCCA 129
[2019] 2 Qd R 334;
[2018] QCA 241
[2018] QCA 283
(2014) 244 A Crim R 447;
[2014] QCA 228
The Queen v Christian (No. 2)
[2018] NFSC 4
The Queen v Christian
[2020] NFSC 1
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
3 June 2024
Counsel for the Prosecutor:
Solicitor for the Prosecutor:
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Counsel for the Offender:
Solicitor for the Offender:
Mr J Brown of McIntyres Lawyers
Table of Corrections
4 July 2024
Order 2 amended to correctly read ‘3 June 2024.’
SCC 1 of 2023
COMMONWEALTH DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
EMOSI SADRATA
DATE OF ORDER:
3 JUNE 2024
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, is convicted of the four (4) counts of assault
occasioning actual bodily harm contrary to section
Criminal Code
(NI) in the indictment dated 18 December 2023.
respect of each of those offences, the offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, is sentenced
to a term of imprisonment for fifteen (15) months
commencing on 3 June
sentences of imprisonment in respect of each of the offences be served
concurrently.
to section 39(1) of the
Sentencing Act 2007
(NI), the execution of the
sentences of imprisonment be wholly suspended for a period of fifteen (15)
months from 3 June 2024, subject
to the following conditions:
(a) The offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, submit to the supervision of Community
Corrections NSW and obey all reasonable directions;
(b) The offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, report to the Bankstown Community
Corrections NSW office within seven (7) days;
(c) The offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, continue to consult with Ms Dee-Anne James,
psychologist, on at least a monthly basis; and
(d) The offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, complete the Taking Responsibility program
with Relationships Australia or such similar or equivalent
program as may be
provided by Relationships Australia or recommended by Ms Dee-Anne James.
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
it applies in Norfolk Island, for a period of twenty-four (24) months:
(a) The offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, must not do any of the following to the
protected person, Ms Sophie O’Connor, or anyone
with whom she has a
domestic relationship with:
(i) assault or threaten them;
(ii) stalk, harass or intimidate them; and
(iii) intentionally or recklessly destroy or damage property that belongs to, or
is in the possession of, them.
(b) The offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, must not approach the protected person, Ms
Sophie O’Connor, or contact her in any way unless
the contact is:
(i) through a lawyer;
(ii) to attend accredited or court-approved counselling, mediation or
conciliation;
(iii) as ordered by this, or another, court about contact with children; and
(iv) as agreed in writing between the defendant and Ms Sophie O’Connor
THE COURT DIRECTS THAT:
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
as it applies in Norfolk Island, the offences committed by the offender, Mr
Emosi Sadrata, be recorded on his criminal record
as domestic violence
FOR JUDGMENT
Revised from transcript
offender, Mr Emosi
, has pleaded guilty to four charges of assault
occasioning actual bodily harm, contrary to
(NI). Each of the assaults were committed against Mr
Sadrata’s de facto partner, Ms Sophie
. The task for
the Court is to pass a sentence on Mr Sadrata in respect of each of the offences
and give a direction, or make orders,
where appropriate, under the
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
(NSW), as it applies to
Norfolk Island.
The facts upon which the offender is to be sentenced
facts upon which Mr Sadrata is to be sentenced are set out in a detailed
statement of facts tendered by the prosecutor without
offences were committed on the evening of 5 June 2021 and in the early hours of
6 June 2021. At that time, Mr Sadrata was 45
years’ old and Ms
O’Connor was 31 years’ old. They had been in a domestic
relationship for a number of years,
and were, at that point in time, residing on
Norfolk Island. They had two young children: a daughter aged 15 months, and a
aged three years. Ms O’Connor also had a son aged 11 years from an
earlier relationship, and Mr Sadrata had adult daughters,
also from an earlier
relationship.
the evening of the 5 June 2021, Mr Sadrata and Ms O’Connor were at their
The other children were
staying the night at the homes of other family members. Both Mr Sadrata and Ms
O’Connor consumed
alcohol. During the course of the evening Mr Sadrata
became heavily intoxicated.
Sadrata and Ms O’Connor retired to bed at about 9.30pm. Shortly
thereafter they had an argument which arose because Mr Sadrata
wanted to have
sexual intercourse and Ms O’Connor did not. When Mr Sadrata raised his
voice in the course of that argument,
the couple’s daughter awoke. Ms
O’Connor went to the room where her daughter was sleeping to settle her.
course fell asleep in that room. At about midnight, however, Mr
Sadrata went into the room where Ms O’Connor was sleeping.
It was at that
point in time when the offences occurred.
Sadrata’s assaults on Ms O’Connor were violent, entirely unprovoked,
prolonged, and demeaning. The precise nature
of the assaults is detailed in the
statement of facts. They may be summarised as follows.
Sadrata first punched Ms O’Connor in the face with a closed fist, causing
Ms O’Connor pain and, in due course, a black
eye. That assault is the
subject of the first charge.
Sadrata then grabbed Ms O’Connor by the hair and dragged her to their
bedroom where he hit and kicked her to the face, back
of the head, arms,
buttocks, thigh, and stomach. That assault is the subject of the second charge.
that stage, Ms O’Connor was lying on the floor. Mr Sadrata then grabbed
Ms O’Connor around the neck and throat and
picked her up from the floor by
her neck so they were face to face. He then lifted her off the ground and threw
her towards the
bed. That assault is the subject of the third charge.
Sadrata then moved Ms O’Connor onto the bed and struck her. He then told
Ms O’Connor to stand up and struck her again,
causing her pain and
bruising to the upper and lower back. While Ms O’Connor was crouched on
the floor, Mr Sadrata kicked
and punched her in the stomach, vagina, and
buttocks, all the while saying to her words to the effect that he would make
she would not be able to have another baby. That assault is the
subject of the fourth charge.
Eventually,
Ms O’Connor was able to flee the house and seek refuge in a
neighbour’s house. The police were called, and
Ms O’Connor was
transported to a facility on Norfolk Island for medical treatment. Mr Sadrata
was in due course arrested.
He was, however, so intoxicated that he was unable
to be interviewed by the police that evening.
a result of the assaults, Ms O’Connor suffered a black eye, bruising to
her arms, legs and buttocks, swelling to the back
of the head and neck, a sore
wrist, and tenderness to the back and stomach. The prosecutor tendered
photographs which graphically
evidence those injuries. Ms
O’Connor’s injuries were not, however, limited to those physical
injuries. The assaults
were, no doubt, emotionally and psychologically
distressing.
could be no doubt whatsoever that these were very serious offences.
Impact on the victim, Ms O’Connor
O’Connor prepared, and read, a victim impact statement which described the
physical, psychological, and emotional effect
that Mr Sadrata’s assaults
had had on her. It took some bravery for Ms O’Connor to read that victim
impact statement.
It was evident that Mr Sadrata’s offending conduct had
had a profound and lasting impact on her. I take the harm and ongoing
Ms O’Connor arising from the offences into account in sentencing Mr
Relevant sentencing prinicples
purposes for which sentences are to be imposed on an offender are described in
Sentencing Act
(NI). They are, in
summary: to punish the offender in a way that is just in all the circumstances;
to provide conditions that will
the offender and others from committing the same or similar offences; to make it
clear that the community, through the court, does not approve the offending
conduct; and to protect the Norfolk Island community.
5(2) of the Sentencing Act sets out a number of factors that the court must,
where relevant, have regard to in sentencing
an offender. The factors of
particular relevance to this case include, in summary: the maximum penalty for
the offences; the nature
and seriousness of the offending conduct; the damage,
injury or loss caused by the offender; the offender’s character and age;
the presence of any aggravating or mitigating factors concerning the offender;
the prevalence of the offence; and whether the offender
pleaded guilty and at
what stage of the proceedings.
The nature and seriousness of the offences and other objective
circumstances
I have already indicated, there could be no doubt that the offences committed by
Mr Sadrata were very serious offences.
seriousness of the offences is reflected in the maximum penalty provided for
them in the Criminal Code, which is five years’
imprisonment.
Sadrata’s offending conduct was particularly serious because it involved
acts of violence towards his domestic partner in
their home, that being a place
which Ms O’Connor was entitled to regard as a safe haven. There is ample
authority, if authority
were indeed needed, for the proposition that domestic
violence offences are, and should be, viewed as serious offences which warrant
strong denunciation and condign sentences. As I have already made clear, the
acts of violence perpetrated by Mr Sadrata on Ms O’Connor
were entirely
unprovoked, shameful, prolonged, and demeaning, and caused her physical pain and
injury as well as psychological and
emotional trauma. The nature and
circumstances of the offences are such as to compel sentences that will have a
strong deterrent
effect, both on Mr Sadrata and others who might commit similar
offences. They also warrant strong denunciation by this Court.
prosecutor submitted that there was a need for the sentences imposed on Mr
Sadrata to provide protection for the Norfolk Island
community. While I accept
that protection of the community is a relevant consideration, for reasons I will
elaborate on shortly,
I do not consider that to be a particularly weighty
consideration in the circumstances of this case. I also consider that the
of the community is best achieved in the particular circumstances of
this case by sentences that will secure Mr Sadrata’s rehabilitation.
Mr Sadrata’s personal circumstances
Sadrata gave evidence. The following short summary of his personal
circumstances is taken from that evidence and to some extent
from a report
prepared by a psychologist on Norfolk Island, Ms Dee-Anne
was tendered by Mr Sadrata.
I have already indicated, Mr Sadrata was 45 years’ old at the time the
offences were committed. He is now 48 years’
old. He is of Fijian
heritage and has lived in Australia for about 13 years. He took Australian
citizenship in about 2015. When
he first arrived in Australia, he resided in
Norfolk Island for about seven years. It was then that he met Ms
Sadrata and Ms O’Connor resided on Norfolk Island for a period of time,
but at one point relocated to Sydney where they resided
for a short time. They
subsequently returned to Norfolk Island, mainly because Ms O’Connor wanted
to be with her family.
Sadrata left Norfolk Island shortly after he committed the offences. His
evidence was that he decided to leave the island in part
because he was
embarrassed and disgusted at his behaviour. He also said that Ms
O’Connor’s father had suggested that
it would be better if he left
the island.
Sadrata is currently gainfully employed at an organisation called Cat5 Rail as a
welder offsider and rail labourer. He previously
worked in Sydney for DHL. His
current position requires him to travel to Port Hedland in the north of Western
Australia for five
out of every six weeks. He is currently earning about $1,800
per week, after tax.
Sadrata has, whilst employed, provided some financial assistance to Ms
O’Connor for the care and support of their children.
Initially, he
endeavoured to send $150 per week. However, when he commenced his present
employment, he endeavoured to send $300
per week. He candidly acknowledged
that, on some occasions, he was unable to send those full amounts. He has also
provided financial
support in respect of his children when particular needs
arose. He referred to providing $1,000 for a particular need. While the
prosecutor suggested that these were relatively small amounts of money given Mr
Sadrata’s wages, that tends to ignore other
commitments that he might
have. He indicated, for example, that he sent money back to his family in Fiji.
I am satisfied that Mr
Sadrata has fairly contributed to the support of his
residing in Sydney, Mr Sadrata has remained in contact with his children,
primarily by way of a telephone call or other electronic
night, as permitted by his bail conditions and by arrangement with Ms
O’Connor. He has returned to Norfolk
Island on two occasions in the
period since the commission of the offences; on one occasion to attend the
Court; and, on another
occasion, for a weekend. He had some contact with his
children during those visits by arrangement with Ms O’Connor.
Sadrata is genuinely remorseful, contrite, embarrassed, and disgusted by his
offending behaviour. That was the effect of his evidence
and was readily
apparent from his demeanour when giving evidence. Mr Sadrata’s evidence
was that at one point he was so affected
by his offending conduct that he
considered suicide. Fortunately, he sought intervention by a doctor and began
taking some medication.
He also spoke with a pastor on Norfolk Island. As has
already been adverted to, Mr Sadrata also sought counselling and guidance
psychologist on Norfolk Island, Ms James. I will say something more about Ms
James’ report shortly.
Importantly,
Mr Sadrata has indicated that since the offending conduct, he has ceased
drinking alcohol. As indicated previously,
he was very intoxicated at the time
of committing the offences. His intoxication may provided some explanation for
his offending
conduct, which appeared, on the basis of the evidence before the
Court, to be out of character.
Mitigating circumstances
the very serious nature of the offences and offending conduct by Mr Sadrata,
there are a number of mitigating factors, mainly
arising from Mr Sadrata’s
personal circumstances. Those factors compel a degree of leniency in sentencing
Mr Sadrata. I have
already briefly adverted to some of those factors.
save for one relatively minor offence of driving while his licence was
suspended, Mr Sadrata has no prior convictions. The
prosecutor fairly conceded
that the prior conviction was essentially irrelevant.
Mr Sadrata pleaded guilty to the offences at a relatively early stage. He
initially pleaded guilty to six offences but was
later permitted to withdraw
those pleas. It was, however, made clear that Mr Sadrata only took issue with
one of the original charges.
After discussions with the prosecutor, that charge
was not pursued, and Mr Sadrata pleaded guilty to the current offences.
as I have already indicated, I am satisfied that Mr Sadrata is genuinely
contrite and remorseful. That is readily apparent
his early pleas of guilty,
his own evidence, and Ms James’ report.
and particularly significantly, Mr Sadrata has taken very positive steps to
rehabilitate himself. As I have already indicated,
he has sought treatment from
Ms James. He sought that treatment almost immediately after he was arrested and
charged, and has regularly
consulted Ms James, either in person or
electronically, ever since, save for a gap in 2023. In his evidence, he
indicated that he
would continue to seek Ms James’ counsel. It is also of
some considerable significance that Mr Sadrata no longer consumes
alcohol. In
her report, Ms James expressed very positive opinions concerning Mr
Sadrata’s rehabilitation.
over three years have passed since the offences were committed. As already
noted, Mr Sadrata has, on occasion, been able to
has visited his children. He also, no doubt, had some engagement with Ms
O’Connor in that context.
Those encounters have occurred without any
am, in all the circumstances, satisfied that the prospect or risk of Mr Sadrata
re-offending is very low and the prospects of his
further rehabilitation are
Comparable cases
prosecutor submitted that the nature and seriousness of Mr Sadrata’s
offences were such that the only appropriate sentence
was one that involved Mr
Sadrata serving a term of “actual imprisonment”. In that context,
the prosecutor drew the Court’s
attention to what were said to be
‘comparable’ cases where sentences of imprisonment were imposed for
domestic violence
offences. Those cases included
244 A Crim R 447;
[2014] QCA 228
[2018] NSWCCA 129
[2019] 2 Qd R 334;
[2018] QCA 241
[2018] QCA 283.
of those cases emphasise the seriousness with which sentencing courts view
domestic violence offences. As I’ve already
indicated, that proposition
could scarcely be doubted. Save for establishing that proposition concerning
the seriousness of domestic
violence offences, the comparable cases provide
little real assistance in determining the appropriate sentence in this
case. That is because they are not truly comparable, in the sense
that they involve like circumstances. Rather, they have several
including in relation to the seriousness of the offences and the
offender’s subjective circumstances, which distinguish
them from Mr
Sadrata’s case. Perhaps the closest case, in terms of the nature of the
offences, was the case of
. Even in that case, however, the
nature of the assaults and the injuries caused by them were more severe than is
the case with Mr
Sadrata’s offending.
there is obviously a need for consistency in sentencing, consistency in
sentencing is best secured by the application of established
principles, rather than strictly following what may have been done in other
cases, particularly cases which are not truly
comparable: see the observations
The Queen v Christian (No. 2)
[2018] NFSC 4
[2020] NFSC 1
The appropriate sentences
accept that the nature and circumstances of Mr Sadrata’s offences and
offending conduct is such that sentences of imprisonment
are called for, even
having regard to the mitigating circumstances to which I have referred. Mr
Sadrata, through his counsel effectively
conceded as much.
am, however, satisfied that it is desirable in the circumstances of this case to
order that the sentences of imprisonment be wholly
suspended pursuant to s 39 of
the Sentencing Act. The suspension should be subject to some conditions. I
will address those conditions
shortly. The circumstances which have persuaded
me that suspended sentences are desirable are primarily the mitigating
circumstances
to which I have referred: Mr Sadrata’s prior good
character; his contrition and remorse; his early pleas of guilty; his
commendable
and effective steps towards rehabilitation; and what I consider to
be the very low risk of him re-offending. I consider that suspending
sentences is almost certainly likely to assist Mr Sadrata’s ongoing
rehabilitation. That would not only be to his benefit,
but also the benefit of
his children and the community generally.
is necessary for me to impose sentences in respect of each of the offences. The
prosecutor conceded that it would, in all the
circumstances, be appropriate for
the sentences to be served concurrently. That was a fair concession given that
it is readily apparent
that while there were four distinct assaults, they all
arose from a single course of conduct. It is appropriate in those circumstances
to ensure that the total aggregate sentence to be imposed is not excessive as a
result of the accumulation of the sentences.
term of imprisonment that I consider appropriate in respect of each of the
offences is imprisonment for a period of 15 months.
That term of imprisonment
incorporates a 25% discount arising from Mr Sadrata’s early pleas of
already indicated, each of those sentences is to be served concurrently. The
overall effective term of imprisonment is accordingly
a sentence of 15
months’ imprisonment.
already noted, I will make an order pursuant to s 39 of the Sentencing Act
suspending the whole of the sentence. The date of the
order for the purposes of
s 39(6)(a) of the Sentencing Act is 3 June 2024. The suspension order will
operate for 15 months from
am satisfied that an effective sentence of imprisonment of 15 months, if
unsuspended, would be appropriate in the circumstances
having regard to the
Sentencing Act: see s 39(3) of the Sentencing Act.
suspension order will be subject to following conditions:
(a) The offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, submit to the supervision of Community
Corrections NSW and obey all reasonable directions;
(b) The offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, report to the Bankstown Community
Corrections NSW office within seven (7) days;
(c) The offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, continue to consult with Ms Dee-Anne James,
psychologist, on at least a monthly basis; and
(d) The offender, Mr Emosi Sadrata, complete the Taking Responsibility program
with Relationships Australia or such similar or equivalent
program as may be
provided by Relationships Australia or recommended by Ms Dee-Anne James.
should hasten to add that, in determining that it is appropriate to suspend the
sentences of imprisonment, I have applied the principles
I identified in the
judgment in
at [77]-[83]. While a suspended sentence does
involve some degree of leniency, a sentence of imprisonment can be a significant
effective punishment, even where execution of the sentence is suspended. In
my view, a suspended sentence in Mr Sadrata’s
case is an effective
punishment which will not only serve as a deterrent, but will promote and assist
Mr Sadrata’s rehabilitation
and, in that way, provide effective protection
for the Norfolk Island community.
in these reasons, I adverted to the need to consider whether to make a direction
and an order pursuant to the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
Section 12(2)
of that Act provides as follows:
If a person pleads guilty to an offence or is found guilty of an offence and the
court is satisfied that the offence was a domestic
violence offence, the court
is to direct that the offence be recorded on the person’s criminal record
as a domestic violence
am satisfied that the offences committed by Mr Sadrata are domestic violence
offences: see
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
will therefore direct that the offences committed by Mr Sadrata be recorded on
his criminal record as domestic violence offences.
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
provides, in summary, that
where a person pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, a serious offence, the
court must make a final
apprehended violence order for the protection of the
person against whom the offence was committed. The court need not make such
order if it is satisfied that it is not required.
I consider that the risk or prospect of Mr Sadrata reoffending is very low, I
nevertheless, consider, perhaps for more abundant
caution, that it is
appropriate to make a final apprehended violence order for the purposes of
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
. I will therefore make such
an order in the terms effectively agreed as between the prosecutor and Mr
Sadrata’s counsel.
That order will operate for two years. I will also
explain the effect and operation of that order to Mr Sadrata.
I certify that the preceding fifty-two (52)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 5 June 2024
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (371 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter