URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2021/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk Island v Walsh (No 7) [2021] NFSC 5 (24 September 2021)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk
Island v Walsh (No 7)
[2021] NFSC 5
File number(s):
SC 2 of 2016
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
24 September 2021
Catchwords:
CONTEMPT OF COURT
– sentencing
– where contemnor struck off barrister guilty of contempt for contravening
orders to pay by wilfully not
paying sums to third party and to applicant for
taxed costs – where contemnor earlier failed to appear and participate in
– where contemnor given further opportunity to purge contempt
or be heard as to why conviction should not be entered –
where contemnor
deliberately evaded giving full explanation for conduct constituting contempt
and continued intention not to comply
with Court’s orders – where
contemnor compounded contempt during hearing by making scandalous allegations
against judges
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
– where s 32
Supreme Court Act 1960
(NI) purported to create right of appeal to
Federal Court of Australia – where s 19(4) of
Supreme Court Act
(NI) applied
Court Procedure Rules 2006
(ACT) that created right
to seek leave to appeal in r 5072 – where s 77 of
Constitution
only source of power for any polity to confer jurisdiction
on a federal court other than High Court – where
Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) created right of appeal from Supreme Court
Legislation:
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Court Procedure Rules 2006
Supreme Court Act 1960
Federal Court Rules 2011
Cases cited:
Re Macks; Ex parte Saint
204 CLR 158
Re Wakim; Ex parte McNally
(1999) 198 CLR 511
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk Island v Walsh (No 3)
[2017] NFSC 4
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk Island v Walsh
[2021] NFSC
Taylor v Taylor
[1979] HCA 38
(1979) 143 CLR 1
The Mayor and Aldermen of The City of London v Cox
[1867] UKLawRpHL 17
LR 2 HL 239
Walsh v Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk Island
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
24 September 2021
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr G. Johnson
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Solicitor for the Respondent:
The respondent appeared in person
SC 2 of 2016
REGISTRAR OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORFOLK
DATE OF ORDER:
24 SEPTEMBER 2021
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The respondent be sentenced to a term of six months’ imprisonment,
such sentence to commence, unless the Court otherwise
orders, on 17 December
2. The respondent may apply to purge his contempt on affidavit at any time on
reasonable notice prior to the sentence coming into
effect on 17 December
3. The respondent pay the applicant’s costs on an indemnity basis.
THE COURT NOTES THAT:
4. Any affidavit that cannot be sworn or affirmed because of public health
orders may be filed on condition that, unless the opposing
party consents to it
being received as evidence of its truth, the deponent attend the Court on a date
to be determined to verify
its contents.
SC 2 of 2016
REGISTRAR OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORFOLK ISLAND
ORDER MADE BY:
DATE OF ORDER:
27 SEPTEMBER 2021
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
5. The orders made on 24 September 2021 be
amended by inserting, before order 1, the following order:
1A. On the charges of contempt in the amended application in proceeding filed
on 24 August 2020, it be declared that the respondent
is guilty and convicted of
contempt of the Court for contravening:
(a) order 4 made on 23 February 2018, as varied by order
1 made on 1 March 2018, namely that, within 28 days of 23 February 2018,
Dr Ping-Fat Sze the sum of AUD433.69 (inclusive of interest from 1 July 2007) by
wilfully and contumaciously not making any
payment to Dr Sze as ordered or at
(b) order 6 made on 23 February 2018, namely that he pay the applicant’s
costs of and incidental to the proceeding, such costs
to be taxed, if not
agreed, by wilfully and contumaciously not making any payment to the applicant
as ordered or at all of the whole
or any part of the costs as certified in the
certificate of costs assessment in the sum of $143,775.67 issued on 24 June 2019
served on the respondent on 25 June 2019.
REASONS FOR
(REVISED FROM THE TRANSCRIPT)
1 On 11 June 2021, I made findings, at that time in the absence of the
respondent, John
, that I would enter convictions reflecting that he
had committed contempts of the Court in contravening the orders made by Gilmour
J on 23 February 2018 that,
, within 28 days of that order he
the sum of AUD200 with interest payable
from 1 July 2007, that a further order made on 1 March 2018 quantified
in the total sum of
AUD433.69, and,
, he pay the applicant, the
of the Court, his costs of and incidental to the proceeding
payment orders
). On 23 February 2018, his Honour also made other
orders, including that Mr Walsh’s name be removed from the Register of
Practitioners
of the Court and his right to practice as a lawyer in Norfolk
be suspended for 10 years. The Registrar’s costs were later
quantified as AUD143,775.67 in a certificate of taxation issued
on 24 June 2019:
Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk Island v Walsh
[2021] NFSC 4
principal reasons
2 However, I did not then enter any convictions, but adjourned the proceeding
for a further hearing on penalty and gave Mr Walsh one
further opportunity to be
heard so that he could either,
, seek to purge his contempt or,
, establish there was some matter that had not appeared in the
evidence before me, adduced in his absence, to suggest that he was
not guilty or
would not support the entry of convictions. On 17 June 2021, I made orders
freezing Mr Walsh’s assets to seek
to ensure that there would be some
prospect of him meeting any obligation to make payments under the Court’s
existing orders.
3 On 6 August 2021, Mr Walsh decided that he would actively participate
in the proceeding by appearing at a case management hearing,
after avoiding or
flouting attempts to require him to participate (see principal reasons at
[41]–[55]).
4 On 6 August 2021, at the case management hearing, I made orders that Mr
Walsh file and serve any affidavits on which he proposed
to rely as to:
(a) why he had not appeared up to then on
the application that the Registrar filed on 15 May 2020 seeking that he be
convicted of
contempt of the Court for his contravention of the payment
(b) why he should not be convicted of contempt because he had not complied with
the payment orders in accordance with the principal
(c) any evidence of a medical practitioner in support of his asserted need for
an operation and its cost, and
(d) his assets and liabilities and why the freezing orders that I made on
17 June 2021 should be varied.
5 I stood the matter over for case management on 2 September 2021.
6 On 2 September 2021, Mr Walsh appeared and I ordered that the proceeding be
listed for today in respect of,
, his application to set aside the
freezing order,
, his application to set aside all other orders
made against him and
, any conviction or penalties that would be
imposed on him.
Mr Walsh’s evidence
7 Mr Walsh made two affidavits in support of his
position, the first on 27 August 2021 and the second on 16 September 2021.
no fault of his, he was not able to verify either affidavit before a
person authorised to administer an oath because of public health
applicable in Victoria. However, he verified both in his oral evidence today.
8 In his first affidavit, Mr Walsh asserted that he was unaware of the orders
that Gilmour J had made on 23 February 2018 “until
well after the
Hearing”, including the payment orders. He asserted that the
of Australia Registry wrongly rejected his attempts to file a notice
of appeal from Gilmour J’s orders of 23 February 2018
outside the 21 days
then prescribed in r 36.03 of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
asserted he had 28 days to do so “as prescribed under Norfolk Island law
and custom”, and that, on 19 July
2018, Wigney J wrongly refused to
allow the notice of appeal to be filed or grant him an extension of time in
which to do so:
Walsh v Registrar, Supreme Court of Norfolk Island
9 Mr Walsh said that:
No Contempt was intended as I was unaware of the
subsequent Proceedings. I was unaware of the outrageous, escalating costs and
have appealed them through the correct procedures. There was no taxation
of costs or I would have been notified and would, most certainly,
have defended
I have no liquid assets apart from my clothes and books
, as I now live in
Aged Care and on an Aged Pension, most of which is paid to the Brotherhood of St
Lawrence for my care and accommodation.
I have been advised by the Commonwealth
Bank that all funds have been removed from my bank accounts, as the freezing
order had been
I have no liabilities that I am aware of, but I will have in the future
(medical, Health Insurance, phone, etc if I am not allowed
to practice.
(emphasis added)
10 Mr Walsh asserted that all the funds in his bank accounts with the
Commonwealth Bank had “been removed” as a result
of the bankruptcy
petition that the Registrar filed in the
Federal Circuit Court
Australia in Sydney under the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth). However,
pursuant to s 9A (which was in force until repealed as of 2 August 2021),
that Act did not apply to Norfolk Island.
Mr Walsh gave evidence today that
when he attended at the Commonwealth Bank on 2 December 2020, an officer of the
bank told him
that he “had applied for bankruptcy, and as a result, they
had frozen all my accounts”.
11 He also said that:
At the case management hearing on 2 September 2021, I am
hoping we can reach an agreement about the validity of continuing a tainted
and its subsequent judgments, the failure to be granted an Appeal on a
action in the
wrong court,
12 In his second affidavit, Mr Walsh said that after Gilmour J made the
orders on 23 February 2018, “I believe I have become
overcome by
the injustice of it all”. He said that “while I have not paid Dr
Sze the money which is the subject of the
Contempt of Court charge, I have never
refused to pay him the sum awarded him by Gilmour J”. He asserted that he
opportunity to appear before a judge “who will give me a fair
go to receive justice”. He said that when he learnt of
Gilmour J’s
declarations, “I was devastated and could not believe it”. He
asserted that his application for leave
to appeal “was knocked back,
without giving reasons”.
13 He said that he had taken “great umbrage” at the bringing of
the professional conduct proceedings that Gilmour J ultimately
heard and decided
so that he had acted in a non-cooperative way.
14 He asserted that Gilmour J’s findings were
“erroneous”. He said, despite his Honour’s findings in
to the supposed International Tribunal of Natural Justice (
(which I summarised in the principal reasons), “Other people came up with
the name, ‘Chief Justice’, and I did
not change it”. He said
As for using the expression "Chief Justice" it is
acknowledged that the expression is usually applied to the holder of the senior
office of superior courts, however it is not an expression protected by patent
or any law in Australia. Thus, leaving aside a legal
practitioner, if a lay
person were to establish a tribunal to conduct inquiries into, say, animal
cruelty and was to call him/herself
"Chief Justice" it is submitted no law would
be contravened.
In the absence of a law to the contrary it is submitted that no disciplinary
consequences should apply, even though members of the
judiciary and the
profession may feel uncomfortable at that outcome.
15 Also, despite Gilmour J’s findings, Mr Walsh also said that there
was no evidence that he had made any false representations
using the honorific
“Sir”, and that he only acknowledged making one representation,
namely “I am entitled to use
the honorific ‘Sir’”
because, as he had told Gilmour J, it was “French in origin”. He
also sought
to challenge the credibility findings that Gilmour J made of
witnesses whose evidence he accepted.
16 Mr Walsh then asserted that the charges of contempt, in relation to his
failing to pay Dr Sze and the Registrar’s costs under
the payment orders,
“is most unusual”. He said that an application that claimed a
person was in contempt in respect
of a failure to pay money under a court order
was inappropriate. He asserted that Gilmour J had made orders that Mr Walsh pay
to Dr Sze “without affording me the opportunity to be heard amounted
to a denial of procedural fairness, even if the making
of an order for payment
was an appropriate thing to do”.
17 He said that “to take contempt proceedings against a person for
failing to pay a costs order is virtually unheard of in litigation
matters.” He asserted that it had to be remembered that the contempt
proceedings, which followed Gilmour J’s orders
against him, occurred in
the circumstances that “I was denied the opportunity to appeal because it
was found on a submission
by the Registrar of the Federal Court in Melbourne, he
: that Court officer or Wigney J] considered I relied on the wrong
procedures”. Mr Walsh continued to contend that he was wrongly
right of appeal from Gilmour J’s orders. Mr Walsh also made further
allegations against another witness called by
the Registrar in the disciplinary
proceeding.
18 Mr Walsh said, referring to the affidavits of the Registrar’s
solicitor, Tom
, including that of 10 September 2021, that he was
“not disputing that many communications took place between us and other
He asserted that his “biggest problems” occurred
when he had to move from his then place of residence at the Adina Hotel
Street, Melbourne, as a result of public health orders that required that that
Hotel be used for the purposes of providing
a quarantine facility. He said that
he had to move to other accommodation, was in constant pain and suffered from
failing eyesight
due to his glaucoma and cataracts and:
Moreover, as my disillusionment with the Court system
increased, so did my sense of rejection. I ask that you put yourself in my shoes
as this is my perspective of what happened. Looking back, a different approach
would have been preferable.
19 He also made numerous allegations against the Registrar, including that
his life had become more complicated because of the Registrar’s
institution of bankruptcy proceedings in May 2020 against him in the
Federal Circuit Court of Australia, as it then was called.
He claimed that
somehow that was the wrong jurisdiction and that the judge’s finding in
the bankruptcy proceeding that the
Court had telephoned him (Mr Walsh) on the
morning of the hearing of the bankruptcy petition was “totally
said that the judge had telephoned the Adina Hotel
switchboard, at which he no longer was staying, and he never answered in his
in the way that the judge had described in his reasons. He also made
numerous other complaints about the bankruptcy proceeding.
He also asserted
that the Registrar had breached (unidentified) obligations as a model litigant
in commencing the bankruptcy proceedings.
20 Mr Walsh suggested that a “solution” was to rescind all the
previous orders, allow an appeal to be heard in the Federal
alternatively set aside the decision of Gilmour J and order a rehearing in this
Court. He also asserted that this Court
should “request the Circuit Court
in New South Wales to rescind the Bankruptcy and Sequestration Orders. If it is
that this is impractical [then] that the matter be transferred to the
High Court for hearing of the matter pursuant to
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia”.
Mr Walsh’s submissions
21 Mr Walsh proposed the following as the orders
which I ought now make:
1. That the Respondent, John Walsh of Brannagh, is not a
bankrupt person as an incorrect name was deliberately used on the Application
for Bankruptcy by the Registrar of the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island
2. That the alleged bankruptcy in the Circuit Court of New South Wales has no
validity or effect on Norfolk Island, therefore assets
and moneys on Norfolk
Island are not subject to the aforementioned bankruptcy, in particular with
reference to S9A
3. That Commonwealth Aged Pension and Trust moneys seized by the Commonwealth
Bank be returned forthwith
4. That the Respondent be granted by Court Order extended leave to appeal to the
Federal Court of Australia under Court Procedure
Rule ACT Reg 6351 because he
has been denied Natural Justice through the administrative confusion of the
procedural rules between
Norfolk Island and Australia in regard to time to
5. That the freezing order be lifted on the bank accounts of the Respondent
6. That if there is any difficulty with the above Orders, the matter should be
uplifted to the High Court of Australia in accordance
with Sections 51 and
7. That the conviction for contempt be lifted because the Respondent has purged
his contempt by full explanation.
22 As I pointed out to Mr Walsh in the course of the hearing, the first three
orders he sought were beyond the jurisdiction of this
Federal Circuit Court had jurisdiction to make a sequestration order under the
Bankruptcy Act
(Cth), and the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island
has no jurisdiction in relation to the exercise of the Federal Circuit
, s 9A of the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth), which had applied since 1 July 2016
but was repealed effective from 2 August 2021, expressly provided that that Act
apply to Norfolk Island, and, as a consequence, the bankruptcy orders
applied to Mr Walsh’s estate on the Australian mainland.
whatever the Commonwealth Bank did on 2 December 2020 with moneys that it held
at the time of the conversation to which Mr Walsh
referred in respect of his
bankruptcy was beyond this Court’s jurisdiction.
23 The Commonwealth Bank appears to have acted in respect of Mr Walsh’s
Norfolk Island accounts only as a consequence of the
freezing order that I made
on 17 June 2021. Since then, moneys he had in bank accounts both on the Island
and on the mainland of
Australia are subject to those freezing orders. In my
opinion, the freezing orders flushed Mr Walsh out and caused him to decide,
belatedly, to engage in this proceeding that he has known of but was evading
participating in until early August 2021.
24 The fourth order that Mr Walsh seeks is that, somehow, this Court make an
order granting him leave to appeal from Gilmour J’s
orders under
rr 5072 and 6351 of the
Court Procedure Rules 2006
(ACT). Rule 5072
provides that an appeal to the Supreme Court requires that an application for
leave to appeal, an accompanying affidavit
and draft notice of appeal, be filed
not later than 28 days after the order sought to be appealed from is made, or
not later than
any further time allowed by the court. And, r 6351 gives
the Supreme Court the power to extend time on any application pursuant
25 While s 19(4) of the
Supreme Court Act 1960
(NI) provides that
the rules in force in the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory
apply in this Court to a matter or
class of matters of practice and procedure in
the absence of rules made by the Chief Justice of this Court, those rules have
to do with appeals
this Court.
26 I am unable to understand how the applied Rules of the Supreme Court of
the Australian Capital Territory can affect the jurisdiction
of the Federal
Court in any way. The Federal Court’s power to hear and determine appeals
is conferred by
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth), as Wigney J noted in
[2018] FCA 1075
said that it was unclear how s 32 of the
Supreme Court Act 1960
applied in light of the federal Act. Wigney J noted that s 24(1)(b)
appeared to be the source of the jurisdiction to appeal
to the Federal Court
from a decision of this Court. But, his Honour, in any event, refused Mr
Walsh’s application for an extension
of time in which to file his notice
of appeal because he considered that Mr Walsh’s proposed grounds of appeal
lacked any discernible
[2018] FCA 1075
[65]–[80]. That was same substantive exercise of jurisdiction which Mr
Walsh sought to invoke in seeking leave
to appeal under r 5072 and an
extension of time in which to appeal under r 6351.
27 In my opinion, in the absence of any law made by the Parliament of the
Commonwealth authorising the conferral of jurisdiction on
a court exercising the
judicial power of the Commonwealth, there is no apparent source of power for a
Territory legislature to make
a law or other instrument to give power to its
executive government or judiciary to make a legislative instrument or rule that
confer jurisdiction on this Court to hear appeals: see
Re Wakim; Ex parte
(1999) 198 CLR 511 at 573–575 [107]–[111] per Gummow and
Hayne JJ, with whom Gleeson CJ and Gaudron J respectively agreed
at 546 [25] and
[26]. Only the Parliament of the Commonwealth can create jurisdiction in courts
exercising the judicial power of
the Commonwealth and, as Gummow and Hayne JJ
Constitution
is the source of power of the Parliament
of the Commonwealth to confer the jurisdiction on a federal court in matters
and “no other polity
at 575 [111]). Mr Walsh’s application
for his fourth order is
misconceived.
28 Likewise, Mr Walsh’s sixth order sought, somehow, that this Court
“uplift” this proceeding to the High Court
Constitution
. As I understood his argument, he was asserting that he was
a resident of Norfolk Island, being a Territory, and that it fell within
meaning of “State” in
His argument, the nature of
which I could not comprehend, seemed to be that, as a resident of the Island
viewed as a State, which
plainly it is not, there was either a
“matter” between him and the State of New South Wales, because the
Court in New South Wales” had made the sequestration order,
or that there was some other dispute between him and an unidentified
resident of
another State. The Federal Circuit Court is a court created by the Parliament
has no connection to its exercise of federal jurisdiction
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth). Rather, that is a law made by the
Parliament under
that conferred jurisdiction on that Court under
to make Mr Walsh bankrupt. The submission was incomprehensible,
and I reject it.
29 Mr Walsh, in support of his seventh proposed order, also asserted that he
should not be convicted, and I should not act as foreshadowed
in the principal
reasons, because he had purged his contempt by a full explanation.
30 In my opinion, Mr Walsh has evaded, deliberately, giving a full
explanation. While he asserted that he had “no liquid assets”,
made no reference in either of his affidavits about what other assets he had or
might have had or their value. He gave evidence
that there was a
“procedural difficulty” in paying Dr Sze and the Registrar’s
costs because:
I’m not allowed to have a bank account, I’m
not allowed to pay any accounts, and in fact my pension was seized by the
Commonwealth Bank and not released. They still have it.
So I can’t pay
any accounts because I have no money. It has all been taken
HIS HONOUR: And have you put on all of your – you haven’t actually
disclosed all your assets and liabilities in this
proceeding, have you?
MR WALSH: Well,
I have no tangible assets
. The only asset I have is a
potential claim of $4 million against the Commonwealth, being the $4 million
that I invested in Norfolk
Island some years ago, and was given the endorsement
by the then-Prime Minister John Howard, when he came to the island, who then
a shift of policy basically destroyed that investment. And apart from that
I’ve got some outstanding fees from clients
, except the
list of outstanding fees and the client list was taken from my rooms at the
Adina hotel complex when I was away for that
11-month period where I
disappeared. The other thing that disappeared was £1500 and €2000
that were kept in separate
files. So that disappeared also, and the only
explanation I can get from the police authorities is someone must have broken
the room during the time it was locked up.
(emphasis added)
31 When he was making submissions, I raised my concern with him that he had
not given a verified statement of his assets and liabilities.
He responded that
“I am prohibited by public health orders from leaving the building to
visit my accountant in the city”.
When I suggested that he could have
used a telephone to contact his accountant, he responded that I could make an
order that, within
a specified time, he file a verified statement of his assets
and liabilities.
32 As Mr Walsh reminded me during this hearing and on previous occasions, he
was an experienced counsel of many years standing. He
is well aware of how to
provide an affidavit of assets and liabilities that set out frankly what his
real financial position was,
in accordance with the order made on 6 August 2021.
I am not satisfied by his evidence that he has made a full and frank disclosure
of his assets and liabilities. I am not satisfied that his only source of
income or capital is his pension.
33 Mr Walsh, in support of his fifth proposed order, asserted that I should
lift the freezing orders, and if I did that he would cause
Dr Sze to be paid the
money owing to him provided that he could use the balance for an eye operation.
He relied on a letter that
his specialist ophthalmologist, Associate Professor
Simon Skalicky, wrote, dated 3 September 2021, that “cataract surgery is
indicated in the near future” because of his moderate cataracts and
moderate glaucoma.
34 Mr Walsh made no other proposals about how he would purge his contempt.
He does not accept the binding authority of the Court’s
orders, the need
for him to obey them or to give a full explanation about any inability to comply
35 I find beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Walsh has no intention of complying
with the payment orders. That is because he resents
the orders that Gilmour J
made on 23 February 2018, believes they were wrongly made and that he does not
have to accept the authority
of the Court. He said in submissions:
MR WALSH: Justice Gilmour resigned straight after that
HIS HONOUR: So what?
MR WALSH: So what? He
resigned because he had a guilty conscience
that’s what.
(emphasis added)
36 Earlier today, he gave the following evidence in cross-examination:
Yes. And he made those findings against you, and he made
orders striking you from the roll in Norfolk Island. That’s right?---Yes.
he followed instructions given to him
HIS HONOUR: .....
Mr Walsh?---I beg your pardon? What did you say about
Justice Gilmour?---I said he followed instructions
Are you suggesting that somebody instructed Justice Gilmour to exercise his
judicial power in that way?---Yes. Yes
You said to me his Honour was instructed to do something, to make orders against
you?---Yes, he said that from the bench that he
discussed the matter with
Anthony Besanko and he was following in what Besanko was going to rule on before
he stepped down. It’s
in the transcript.
(emphasis added)
37 In cross-examination, Mr Walsh also gave the following evidence as to his
state of mind after Wigney J refused to extend the time
for him to file a notice
MR JOHNSON: And that being the end of that, Justice
Gilmour’s declarations and orders stood; correct?---
Provided they were
I’m sorry, Mr Walsh?---Provided they were lawful.
What do you mean by that?---So they were in accordance with the law because what
was behind it was flawed. There was no money owing
to Dr Sze at all.
charges that had been created by Justice Anthony Besanko were basically to keep
Well, Mr Walsh, you’ve described yourself as a barrister at law and you
were a practitioner both in Norfolk Island and in Australia.
You must accept,
don’t you, that a judgment of a court – of a superior court –
once made, and then once all appellate
avenues have been exhausted, is a
decision at judgment that you must comply with; correct?---
it’s lawful
So according to you, if your opinion is that the judgment of the – this
court is not lawful, for whatever reason you say that
is, you are not bound to
comply. Is that what you’re saying?--- ..... the judgement. It
the view in the profession. As one member put it fairly succinctly, he said,
“You’ve been railroaded.”
Well, but the – that’s your – that’s also your opinion,
Mr Walsh; is it not?---Well, no, I –
, that’s not the
expression that I would use.
Justice Wigney was supposed to be
sitting as an independent Federal Court judge who neglected to tell anybody that
he had accepted
a position to replace Justice Gilmour on the Supreme Court of
Norfolk Island bench, which would have caused a change of the judge
to hear the
application for leave to proceed to the Federal Court. He neglected. He must
have had a bad memory and he forgot to tell
Are you suggesting, Mr Walsh, that Justice Wigney was not acting independently
in the exercise of his Honour of the judicial - -
Sorry, you would have
to ask him that
HIS HONOUR: Well, what ...are you suggesting, Mr Walsh, when you say Justice
Wigney was supposed to be an independent Federal Court
judge? Are you suggesting
that he wasn’t or not?---
Well, I don’t know. All I know is that
he listened to the argument. He didn’t seem interested in it at all. Then
from the bench and then came back and said application refused, got up
and just walked out. So .....
one got the impression that he had already
made up his mind
MR JOHNSON: Well, Justice Wigney, Mr Walsh, delivered reasons for judgment,
numbering approximately 80 paragraphs dealing with your
application for an 20
extension of time - - -?---Yes.
(emphasis added)
38 Finally, in his cross-examination, he gave this evidence:
MR JOHNSON: Leaving aside those matters you’ve
just spoken about, Mr Walsh, 10 the reason you haven’t paid to date Dr
or the registrar’s costs is because, as you have given evidence this
afternoon, you disagree with Gilmour Js orders and
you believe that the whole
process is tainted and needs to be addressed by a higher court, as you put it.
Correct?---
Yes. I do, and I was hoping that today’s proceedings would
be able to resolve the issue, and then I could move on
. I’ve asked in
the submission that I made that this court applies the provisions of the rules
of court of Norfolk Island and
gives me leave to appeal to the Federal Court so
I can walk back into the Federal Court and say the court has given approval for
me to proceed with the appeal, which I would then do.
(emphasis added)
39 As noted above, in the principal reasons, I said that I would give Mr
Walsh a further and final opportunity to be heard and to
purge his contempt
[2021] NFSC 4
). In my opinion, Mr Walsh has compounded
his contempt today by making outrageous, scandalous, unsupported and serious
allegations
against three judges of this Court and the Federal Court, being
Besanko CJ, Gilmour J and Wigney J.
40 While the Chief Justice recused himself from the original hearing of the
disciplinary phase of this proceeding, Mr Walsh’s
assertion that the Chief
Justice or Gilmour J would give or receive instructions as to how Gilmour J
would discharge his judicial
functions is without the slightest shred of
evidence to support it. It was an outrageous and a contumacious attack on the
of the Court and the Court’s judges. Mr Walsh persisted, during
the hearing today, in his unfounded and scandalous allegations
against Besanko
CJ, Gilmour J and Wigney J. That conduct demonstrates that he has no intention
of respecting or complying with the
orders of the Court that is the duty of
every person bound by its orders.
41 In the principal reasons, I discussed the principles on which the
Court’s power to punish for contempt is founded and that
that govern its
[2021] NFSC 4
–[63]. As explained
there, the Court must have the ability to vindicate its authority where a person
who is in breach of its
orders refuses to remedy that default or to obey the
orders and the Court orders he made.
42 I find beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Walsh has no intention of obeying
the payment orders, and will continue to defy them, including
by denigrating
Gilmour J, because he strongly disagrees with, and does not accept, his
Honour’s findings.
43 While it is understandable that a party who loses a proceeding will be
disappointed with that circumstance, that situation does
not create a licence
for the litigant,
, to choose whether or not to obey the orders of
the Court, or,
, to make scandalous and unfounded allegations
44 When I asked Mr Walsh what punishment I should impose on him to vindicate
the Court’s authority other than to send him to
prison for not obeying the
payment orders, he suggested that I convict him and sentence him to community
service. However, such
an order would not communicate to Mr Walsh or to the
community the gravity of his repeated and flagrant breach of the Court’s
orders and his continued denigration of judges of this and other Courts.
45 I reject Mr Walsh’s complaint based on Gilmour J having heard the
trial when Mr Walsh was not present. It is important to
appreciate that every
court has inherent or implied jurisdiction to set aside an order made in the
absence of a party where that
party, through no fault of his, her or its own,
has not been able to appear at the time of the hearing:
Taylor v Taylor
[1979] HCA 38
(1979) 143 CLR 1
at 6–7 per Gibbs J with whom Stephen J agreed, 16 per
Mason J with whom Aickin J agreed and, 20 per Murphy J. However,
Mr Walsh had the opportunity to appear before Gilmour J at the trial after
his Honour had refused him an adjournment:
Registrar, Supreme Court of
Norfolk Island v Walsh (No 3)
[2017] NFSC 4
see esp at [13]. But,
thereafter, Mr Walsh chose not to appear before his Honour in person or by a
46 Mr Walsh’s assertion that he does not have to obey the payment
orders made by this Court because they are tainted in some
way is fundamentally
contrary to authority. This Court is a superior court of record. Even if it
makes an order for which it has
no jurisdiction (which is not this case), such
an order, while unreversed or without being set aside, is conclusive as to all
matters thereby decided:
The Mayor and Aldermen of The City of
London v Cox
[1867] UKLawRpHL 17
(1867) LR 2 HL 239
at 262 per Willes J, giving
the unanimous advice of Blackburn J, Pigott B, Shee and Smith JJ that Lords
Cranworth and Westbury (constituting
the House) adopted. The corollary is that
an order made by a superior court of record, including this Court, which the
no jurisdiction to make, is not a nullity, but rather it is valid and
binding until set aside on appeal or under
Constitution
Re Macks; Ex parte Saint
(2000) 204 CLR 158
[22]–[23] per Gleeson CJ, 185–186 [52]–[53] per Gaudron J,
215–216 [151]–[152] per
McHugh J, 235–236 [216] per Gummow J,
248–249 [255]–[257] per Kirby J, 279 [343]–[344] per Hayne and
47 In my opinion, none of Mr Walsh’s submissions have any substance
whatsoever. I am deeply troubled by the fact that he continues
contumacious disregard for the authority of the Court and the validity of its
orders, including the need for him to obey
the payment orders. I am of opinion
that I have little choice other than to send Mr Walsh, an 81 year old man who
has less than
perfect health, to prison, to vindicate the Court’s
authority and orders. He appears to have persuaded himself that he is
to do what he likes, regardless of this Court’s orders (and apparently
those made by the Federal Circuit Court) because
he disagrees with the outcome
of, and the circumstances in which the Registrar instituted, this proceeding .
48 I will convict Mr Walsh on the charges of
contempt contained in the Registrar’s amended application in the
proceeding filed
on 24 August 2020. Given that at the present time there is a
public health pandemic, and that Mr Walsh may need some time to reflect
consequences that his continued, outrageous, contumacious behaviour have brought
on him, I propose to impose a sentence of
imprisonment, but suspend its
enforcement for a period to enable Mr Walsh to remedy, fulsomely and properly,
his egregious contempt.
Accordingly, I sentence Mr Walsh to six months
imprisonment but order that the sentence not be enforced before 17 December
I will order him to pay the Registrar’s costs on an indemnity
basis, and grant him liberty to apply to the Court to purge
his contempt before
the sentence is executed.
I certify that the preceding forty-eight (48)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 29 September 2021
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (457 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter