URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2024/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stoffels v Piper (No 4) [2024] NFSC 6 (17 October 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Stoffels v Piper (No 4)
[2024] NFSC
File number(s):
SC 1 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
17 October 2024
Date of publication of reasons
21 October 2024
Catchwords:
REAL PROPERTY
– application for
orders to facilitate sale of a co-owned property – where a pre-existing
order allowed the Registrar
to execute documents to complete the sale –
where the defendant continued to obstruct the sale –orders and
declarations
made confirming the Registrar can facilitate sale
– application for indemnity costs – where the defendant
uncooperative and vexatious – where application otherwise
unnecessary
– indemnity costs awarded
Legislation:
Partition Act 1900
Partition Ordinance 1931-1964
Cases cited:
Stoffels v Piper
[2024] NFSC 2
Stoffels v Piper (No 2)
[2024] NFSC 4
Stoffels v Piper (No 3)
[2024] NFSC 5
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
17 October 2024
Solicitor for the Plaintiff:
J Brown of McIntyres Lawyers
Counsel for the Defendant:
The Defendant appeared in person
SC 1 of 2023
ERIKA LEE STOFFELS
ANDREW HARRY PIPER
DATE OF ORDER:
17 OCTOBER 2024
THE COURT DECLARES THAT:
execution by the Registrar of the contract between the Plaintiff, Erika Lee
Stoffels, and the Defendant, Andrew Harry Piper, as
vendors and Adam James
Shorter and Emma Louise Shorter as purchasers dated 16 September 2024 in respect
of the sale of the property
described as Lot 9 of section 30 portion 75e being
the land comprised in Title number 1813 Edition 8, known as 65 Captain Quintal
Drive, Norfolk Island (the Property) was and is valid execution of that contract
pursuant to order 7 made by the Court on 30 January
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Registrar be permitted and authorised to execute the transfer form, which is
attachment JB15 to the affidavit of John Terrence
Brown, sworn on 10 October
2024, on behalf of the Defendant, pursuant to order 7 of the Court dated 30
January 2024.
Registrar be permitted and authorised to complete the sale of the Property
pursuant to the contract between the Plaintiff and
the Defendant as vendors, and
Adam James Shorter and Emma Louise Shorter as purchasers, dated 16 September
2024, which is attachment
JB16 to the affidavit of John Terrence Brown dated 10
October 2024, pursuant to orders 7, 10 and 11 made by the Court on 30 January
Defendant pay the Plaintiff’s costs of this application on an indemnity
REASONS FOR
(Revised from transcript)
30 January 2024, I ordered that the property described as Lot 9 of section 30,
portion 75e being the land described in Title number
1813 Edition 8, known as 65
Captain Quintal Drive, Norfolk Island (the
) be sold pursuant to
Partition Act 1900
(NSW), in its application to Norfolk
Island under the
Partition Ordinance 1931-1964
(NI). The Property was
and is jointly owned by the Plaintiff, Ms Erika
defendant, Mr Andrew
(also known as Andrew Loveshire). I also made
ancillary orders to facilitate the sale of the Property, some of which provided
what should occur if Mr Piper or Ms Stoffels failed to take steps necessary
to facilitate the sale of the Property, including the
signing of documents.
Over nine months have passed since I made that order and the Property has still
not been sold. As will be
briefly explained in these reasons, that is in large
part due to the actions, or inaction, of Mr Piper.
Stoffels has applied for the Court to make orders that will allow for the
Property to be sold to prospective purchasers who have
signed a contract and
paid a deposit in respect of the purchase of the Property. The orders sought by
Ms Stoffels include:
That the Registrar execute the Transfer form which is Attachment JB15 to the
affidavit of John Terence Brown sworn on 10 October
2024 herein, on behalf of
the defendant pursuant to Order 7 herein dated 30 January 2024.
That the Registrar complete the sale of portion 75e in Captain Quintal Drive,
Norfolk Island (“the property”) pursuant
to the contract between the
plaintiff and the defendant as vendor and Adam James Shorter and Emma Louise
Shorter as purchaser dated
16 September 2024 (“the contract”), which
is attachment JB16 to the affidavit of John Terence Brown sworn herein on 10
October 2024, pursuant to Orders 7, 10 and 11 herein dated 30 January 2024
Piper opposes the making of those orders. Indeed, he contends that the sale
should be “stopped” and that the Court
should conduct an inquiry
into various matters, including why no better offers were sought.
the reasons that follow, I will make orders along the lines of those sought by
Ms Stoffels.
relatively comprehensive account of the background to the dispute between Ms
Stoffels and Mr Piper concerning the sale of the Property
may be found in my
earlier judgments in this matter:
Stoffels v Piper
[2024] NFSC 2
[2024] NFSC 4
[2024] NFSC 5.
reasons should be read together with those judgments.
I have already said, I made orders, including ancillary orders, in respect of
the sale of the Property as long ago as 30 January
2024. Order 4 of the orders
made on 30 January 2024 was in the following terms:
The agent in the first instance shall seek to sell the Property by private
treaty for such price as may be agreed between the parties
in writing, and
failing such agreement, the agent shall offer the Property for sale by public
auction, and for that purpose the reserve
price shall be the amount referred to
above as having been agreed between the parties in writing, and failing such
agreement the
reserve price shall be the average of market appraisals obtained
from each of the estate agents who carry on business on Norfolk
7 of the orders made on 30 January 2024 provided as follows:
The Registrar be authorised to execute all contracts, deeds, documents or paper
writings on behalf of the parties in his or her capacity
as the proprietors of
the Property that are necessary or desirable to effect and complete the sale of
the Property in accordance
with these orders, in the event that the parties or
either of them fail to do so within seven (7) days from the date on which the
documents or paper writings are submitted to them for execution.
the time the orders were made, Mr Piper occupied the Property. One of the
ancillary orders was that Mr Piper vacate the Property.
He did not comply with
that order. As a result, he was convicted of contempt:
Stoffels (No 2)
On 15 July 2024, the Court punished Mr Piper in respect of that contempt:
Stoffels (No 3)
the hearing on 15 July 2024 in respect of the imposition of a punishment for Mr
Piper’s contempt, the following exchange
MR BROWN: Yes, your Honour. Order 4 of 30 January provides for the property to
be offered for sale by private treaty initially.
But until this morning, Mr
Piper has not responded to any of my communications seeking his agreement to
setting a price of $415,000,
which is the higher of the market appraisals by
Norfolk Islander Realty. Mr Piper has sent an email this morning which I
as meaning that he agrees to the $415,000 price, but I would ask that
he confirm that to your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: Yes. Very well. Well, Mr Piper, so what the order initially –
well, what the order provides at the moment is that
it can be offered – in
the first instance, it would be offered by private treaty for sale for such
price as may be agreed between
the parties in writing. So if you, in fact, agree
to the property being offered for sale at $415,000 by private treaty at least in
the first instance, then it wouldn’t be necessary to amend the rules.
So do you agree on that being offered for sale at that price?
Yes, your Honour.
If a full sale of the entirety of the
property is to be undertaken, obviously the higher offer would be preferable.
But I do note,
your Honour, that with a $20,000 legal bill outstanding, as well
as a $118,000 asbestos clear-up assessment being made, plus a builders
that also says that the environment of the house is toxic and therefore cannot
be entered, so any clearance of anything from
within the house shouldn’t
be undertaken, and it’s structurally unsound, etcetera. With all those
taken into consideration,
I think the realistic price has already dropped down
to the $250,000 mark. And this is based on the assessments of all the experts
that Mr Brown has brought into the mix. And so while I acknowledge we’re
talking about a price that a real estate has made,
I’m very much aware
that with all the issues and the potential clean-up costs, etcetera, that the
actual true value to any
buyer that hasn’t been, you know – unless
the truth has been held from them, yes, the realistic price is closer to the
$250,000 mark.
(Emphasis added)
is clear from that exchange that Mr Piper agreed that the Property be offered
for sale at the price of $415,000. Indeed, he appeared
to suggest that a more
realistic price would be much lower than $415,000.
email referred to by Mr Brown during the hearing was part of an exchange which
commenced on 11 July 2024. Before referring to
that email exchange, I should
note that market appraisals in respect of the Property had been sought and
received by the parties
from the two real estate agents on Norfolk Island. A
market appraisal provided by Island Realty indicated that the “as
market value of the property was in the range of $375,000 to $415,000.
Norfolk Island Real Estate's market appraisal was that the
value for sale in the current market would be in the vicinity of $300,000 to
$325, 000. It is clear, therefore,
that a listing price of $415,000 was at the
very top of the two market appraisals.
then to the email exchanges that preceded the hearing on 15 July 2024, on 11
July 2024, Mr Brown sent an email to Mr Piper
in which he stated, among other
Ms Stoffels prefers that the property be offered for sale by public treaty,
initially at $415,000 which was the higher end of the
range suggested by Vaughn
Nicol of Norfolk Island Realty. Do you agree with that?
Piper’s unhelpful response to that email was: “I recommend the
property be listed as $290,000 or nearest offer”.
12 July 2024, Mr Brown sent another email to Mr Piper in which he
Ms Stoffels prefers the asking price to be $415,000 as stated in ... my
[previous] email to you”
Piper’s response, sent by email on 15 July 2024 was:
Sure ... less the $188K asbestos quote, less your almost $50k fees ... should
make under the mortgage amount as predicted.
the somewhat unhelpful nature of that response, Mr Brown sought to confirm that
Mr Piper in fact agreed that the Property be
listed for sale for $415,000. He
sent another email to Mr Piper on 15 July 2024 in which he stated:
Thank you for confirming that you agree to the property being listed for sale by
private treaty for $415,000.
Brown received no response to that email.
should note that at no point during that email exchange did Mr Piper suggest
that the Property be listed for sale without a listing
price, or that if an
offer was received to purchase the Property at the listing price of $415,000 it
should not be accepted because
a higher price might be obtained if the Property
remained on the market for a longer period. Nor did Mr Piper suggest that the
value of the Property exceeded $415,000, or that there was any prospect
that an offer might be received for the purchase of the Property
at a higher
price. Indeed, if anything, Mr Piper appeared to suggest that a more realistic
listing price was one which was well
below $415,000.
any event, it is abundantly clear that Mr Piper, in fact, agreed that the
Property be listed for sale by private treaty by Norfolk
Island Realty at the
listing or asking price of $415,000.
there is no direct evidence that the Property was in due course listed for sale
at that asking price, I would readily infer
that it was. The unchallenged
evidence was that in August 2024, Mr Andrew Shorter and Mrs Emma Shorter agreed
to purchase the property
at the listing price of $415,000. On 20 August 2024,
they paid a deposit in respect of the purchase and executed a contract for
sale of the Property. Ms Stoffels also executed the contract for the sale of
the Property.
Piper has, however, failed or refused to sign that contract, despite the best
efforts of both Mr Brown and the Registrar to have
him do so. I do not propose
to detail all the correspondence that has flowed between Mr Brown, the Registrar
and Mr Piper in relation
to the execution of the contract for sale. It suffices
to note that on 9 September 2024, the Registrar sent an email to Mr Piper
which he advised Mr Piper that if he did not sign the contract within seven days
of receipt of the contract for sale, the Registrar
would sign the contract on Mr
Piper’s behalf in accordance with order 7 made on 30 January 2024.
Piper did not sign the contract within the seven days referred to in the
Registrar’s email. The Registrar accordingly signed
the contract on
behalf of Mr Piper.
Piper’s failure or refusal to execute the contract eventually prompted Ms
Stoffels to file the application currently before
the Court. In a series of
email exchanges with Mr Brown, Mr Piper in effect indicated that he no longer
agreed to the sale of the
Property for $415,000. He claimed, among other
things, that $415,000 was “just a market appraisal”, that
sane person takes the first offer” and asserted that the sale
of the Property should be deferred for 10 weeks because it was
“higher offers will be made”.
an affidavit affirmed by Mr Piper and relied on by him in opposition to the
relief sought by Ms Stoffels, Mr Piper stated:
I am formally requesting a stay in the sale of 65 Captain Quintal Dr as i have
made requests for details about the sale price and
length of time on the market
as well as information about the purchasers from John Brown, with no resulting
answers forthcoming from
It is clear that the property was not listed on the market for 8-10weeks as i
had requested, and as a result no further offers were
sought, which is the right
of any owner of a property to seek the best offer.
It is clear that either the realtor and/or the purchaser were informed that the
amount $415k was all that should be offered.
Please investigate the reasons why no better offers were sought and why my
rights as owner were restricted to John Brown or the realtors
opinions and not an open market to maximize profit potential.
I request that sale be stopped and and court ordered explanations forthcoming.
fundamental problem with the bare assertions contained in Mr Piper’s
affidavit is that the real estate agent listed the
Property for sale at $415,000
precisely because Mr Piper had unequivocally agreed that the Property should be
listed for sale at
that price. Mr and Mrs Shorter agreed to purchase the
Property at that price. It is ridiculous to suggest, as Mr Piper apparently
does, that the agreement by Mr and Mrs Shorter to purchase the Property at the
listed price should somehow have been rejected because
someone else might offer
to purchase the Property at a higher price. In any event Mr Piper’s
various assertions concerning
how the Property should have been listed for sale
are in my view disingenuous and vexatious in light of his previous agreement
the Property be offered for sale at the price of $415,000 and his previous
assertions to the effect that the market value, and a
more realistic listing
price of the Property, was well below $415,000.
Piper has not applied for any order restraining the sale of the Property for
$415,000. Even if he had, I would have refused any
such application. There is
no evidence whatsoever to suggest that the listing of the Property for sale at
the price of $415,00 was
in any respect improper or inappropriate. Similarly,
there is no evidence that it was somehow inappropriate for Ms Stoffels or anyone
else to accept the offer to purchase the Property for $415,000 received from Mr
and Mrs Shorter. These is no evidence to suggest
that a higher offer was
received, or is likely to be received if the sale of the Property was or is
deferred. There is no evidence
that the sale price of $415,000 is below the
market value. Indeed, the evidence indicates that it is at the top of the
market value
range. There is no evidence to suggest that Mr and Mrs Shorter are
anything other than independent and bona fide purchasers. In
my view the sale
of the Property to Mr and Mrs Shorter for $415,000 should proceed.
brings me to the relief. On one view the relief sought by Ms Stoffels is
unnecessary. That is because it was plainly open to
the Registrar to execute
the contract of sale to Mr and Mrs Shorter pursuant to order 7 of the orders
made on 30 January 2024. Indeed,
it is open to the Registrar to execute any
documents that are necessary or desirable to effect the sale of the Property in
with the orders made on 30 January 2024, if Mr Piper refuses or
declines to do so. That would include any documents that may, for
example, be
required to ensure that the existing mortgage over the Property is discharged at
settlement. It follows that it would
plainly be open to the Registrar to
execute, on behalf of Ms Stoffels and Mr Piper, the Transfer document in respect
of the sale
of the Property.
can, however, well understand why Ms Stoffels sought the relief she has sought
and why she brought the matter back before the Court.
That is plainly a product
of Mr Piper’s disingenuous assertions and allegations concerning the sales
put the matter beyond doubt, I propose to make a declaration to the effect that
the Registrar has validly executed the contract
for the sale of the Property to
Mr and Mrs Shorter pursuant to order 7 of the orders made on 30 January 2024. I
will also make the
orders sought by Ms Stoffels to the effect that the Registrar
can sign the Transfer and may take all necessary steps to complete
the sale of
the Property on behalf of the vendors, Mr Piper and Ms Stoffels to Mr and Mrs
Stoffels has applied for indemnity costs in relation to this application on the
basis that Mr Piper had been entirely uncooperative
in relation to the
facilitation of the sale of the Property, and that had he done what he should
have done to facilitate the sale
of the Property, these proceedings would have
been entirely unnecessary. I agree.
my view, the evidence before the court demonstrates that Mr Piper's opposition
to the sale to Mr and Mrs Shorter at the price of
$415,000 and his refusal to
sign the contract was entirely disingenuous, if not vexatious. Accordingly, my
view an order for indemnity
costs is warranted in all the circumstances.
I certify that the preceding thirty-one (31)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 21 October 2024
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (326 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter