URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2023/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rodgers, in the matter of Anderson [2023] NFSC 7 (22 December 2023)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Rodgers, in the matter of Anderson
File numbers:
SC 7 of 2023
SC 8 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
22 December 2023
Date of publication of reasons:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
applications seeking orders under ss 102 and 103 of the
Lunacy Act 1898
(NSW), in its application to Norfolk Island pursuant to s 3 of the
(NI) — whether Mrs Anderson is of unsound mind and is
incapable of managing her own affairs — consideration of when a
of the person should be appointed — whether the orders are in Mrs
Anderson’s best interests — whether
the Court has the power to make
the orders sought — applications granted
Legislation:
Lunacy Act 1932
(NI) ss 3, 5
Lunacy Act 1898
(NSW) ss 102, 103
Cases cited:
[1981] 2 NSWLR 334
Northern Territory of Australia v EH
[2021] NTSCFC 5
Number of paragraphs:
Dates of hearing:
21 and 22 December 2023
SC 7 of 2023:
Counsel for the Applicant:
The Applicant appeared in person
SC 8 of 2023:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Ms K Dimes-Letters (21/12/23)
Ms A Lofaro (22/12/23)
Solicitor for the Applicant:
MinterEllison
SC 7 of 2023
IN THE MATTER OF THE LUNACY ACT 1898 OF NEW
SOUTH WALES IN ITS APPLICATION TO NORFOLK ISLAND RE: FLORENCE ANNE
DATE OF ORDER:
22 DECEMBER 2023
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
applicant be appointed without security to undertake the care and management of
the property of the said
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
pursuant to section 103
Lunacy Act 1898
(NSW) as applied to Norfolk Island by the
provisions of the
Lunacy Act 1932
applicant be empowered to sell, call in and convert into money such part or
parts of the estate of the said
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
whether real or
personal as the applicant thinks fit and for such purpose to execute or sign all
instruments necessary thereto.
applicant be empowered to retain as an authorised investment such part or parts
of the estate of the said
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
as the applicant thinks
applicant be empowered to apply the income and such part or parts of the capital
fund as he thinks fit in or towards the care,
maintenance, medical treatment or
support of the said
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
including as directed by, or in conjunction with the person(s) appointed
committee of her person for
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
applicant be empowered to commence appropriate proceedings to ensure that
adequate provision is made for the care and maintenance
of the said
ANNE ANDERSON
from the estate of her late husband.
THE COURT NOTES:
order is to be read in conjunction with the Order of this Honourable Court in
matter SC 8 of 2023.
SC 8 of 2023
IN THE MATTER OF MRS FLORENCE
THE NORFOLK ISLAND HEALTH AND RESIDENTIAL AGED CARE
ORDER MADE BY:
DATE OF ORDER:
22 DECEMBER 2023
THE COURT DECLARES THAT:
FLORENCE ANDERSON
is of unsound mind and is incapable of managing her own
affairs within s 102 of the
Lunacy Act 1898
(NSW) as applied to Norfolk
Island by the provisions of the
Lunacy Act 1932
(NI) and further lacks
legal capacity in respect of decision-making for personal matters, including but
not limited to decisions in
relation to her accommodation and
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
BRANDSTATER
be appointed as a committee of the person for
pursuant to section 102 of the said
Lunacy Act 1898
to make such decisions for and on behalf of
FLORENCE ANDERSON
necessary and in
FLORENCE ANDERSON’s
best interests, including as
to accommodation and care matters.
THE COURT NOTES THAT
It is in the best interests of
FLORENCE ANDERSON
that the above orders be
This order is to be read in conjunction with the Order of this Honourable Court
in matter SC 7 of 2023.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
BESANKO CJ:
Introduction
are my reasons for orders made on 22 December 2023. There were two actions
before the Court. The first was commenced by a Notice
of motion seeking orders
with respect to the affairs of Florence Anne Anderson under s 103 of the
Lunacy Act 1898
(NSW) (the Lunacy Act), in
its application to Norfolk Island pursuant to s 3 of the
Lunacy Act 1932
(NI). The applicant in the first application is Mr David Rodgers. The second
application sought orders to enable the applicant to
relocate Mrs Anderson from
a care facility on Norfolk Island to a more suitable aged care facility in New
South Wales. The second
application sought that orders be made either by way of
the Court exercising
parens patriae
the Lunacy Act. The applicant in the second application is the Norfolk Island
Health and Residential
Aged Care Service (NIHRACS). The applications were heard
together and on an urgent basis.
Anderson is 85 years of age, suffers from dementia and has been an inpatient at
NIHRACS since 20 October 2023 when her husband
Mr John Gilbert Anderson became
ill and then passed away on 7 November 2023. Prior to her husband’s death,
Mrs Anderson was
cared for by Mr Anderson at the matrimonial home. Mrs Anderson
has no family members or potential caregivers located on Norfolk Island.
the first application, Mr Rodgers seeks the following orders:
the applicant be appointed without security to undertake the care and management
of the property of the said FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
pursuant to section 103 of
Lunacy Act 1898
of New South Wales in it's application to Norfolk
the applicant be empowered to sell call in and convert into money such part or
parts of the estate of the said FLORENCE ANNE
ANDERSON whether real or personal
as the applicant thinks fit and for such purpose to execute or sign all
instruments necessary thereto.
the applicant be empowered to retain as an authorised investment such part or
parts of the estate of the said FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
as the applicant thinks
the applicant be empowered to apply the income and such part or parts of the
capital fund as he thinks fit in or towards the
care, maintenance, medical
treatment or support of the said FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON.
the applicant be empowered to commence appropriate proceedings to ensure that
adequate provision is made for the care and maintenance
of the said FLORENCE
ANNE ANDERSON from the estate of her late husband.
6. Any further Orders as the Court deems meet.
the second application, NIHRACS seeks the following orders:
declaration that Mrs Florence Anderson lacks legal capacity in respect of
decision making for personal matters, including but not
limited to decisions in
relation to her accommodation and care.
declaration in the following terms:
it is in the best interests of Mrs Florence Anderson to be transferred from her
current temporary accommodation at the Norfolk
Island Health and Residential
Aged Care Service (NIURACS) to the Cooranbong Dementia and Memory Unit
(Adventist Senior Living), New
South Wales, or other like service as may become
available from time to time, for her ongoing accommodation and care;
including by its medical practitioners, nurses and staff acting on its behalf in
providing medical, nursing or other accommodation
and care services to Mrs
Florence Anderson, are authorised to take all steps necessary to permanently
relocate Mrs Florence Anderson,
from the NIHRACS facility on Norfolk Island to
the Cooranbong Dementia and Memory Unit (Adventist Senior Living) in New South
including but not limited to:
of Mrs Florence Anderson from NIHRACS to the Norfolk Island airport, with a
NIHRACS staff escort;
of Mrs Florence Anderson by aeroplane from Norfolk Island to Sydney airport,
Sydney, New South Wales;
of Mrs Florence Anderson from Sydney airport to the Cooranbong Dementia and
Memory Unit (Adventist Senior Living), Cooranbong,
medical practitioners, nurses and staff acting on its behalf in providing
medical, nursing and other accommodation and care
services to Mrs Florence
Anderson are authorised to use reasonable force, as necessary, to ensure Mrs
Florence Anderson's safe transport
from the NIHRACS to Cooranbong Dementia and
Memory Unit (Adventist Senior Living) in New South
3. Further, or in the alternative to order 2, a declaration in the following
Julie Behrens and Loanne Brandstater shall be appointed as a committee of the
person for Mrs Anderson pursuant to section 102
Lunacy Act 1989
(NSW), as adopted into law in Norfolk Island pursuant to section 3 and section 5
Lunacy Act 1932
declaration that it is in the best interests of Mrs Florence Anderson that these
orders be made.
5. Any other orders that the Court considers appropriate.
first application is supported by an affidavit of Mr Rodgers. Mr Rodgers
deposes to that fact that he is the executor and trustee
of Mr Anderson’s
will. The will contains a provision to the following effect:
6.1 I give devise and bequeath my estate to my trustee upon trust to be dealt
with as follows:
(a) (i) to give (subject to the following bequests) the rest and residue of my
estate to be held upon trust for the care, maintenance,
medical treatment,
upkeep and management of my wife
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON (my wife)
unfortunately suffers from illness and effects of Dementia, should my wife
survive me for a period of 30 days after my death,
(the management and care of
my wife shall include the management and care of her personal and financial
affairs while she is alive
or to engage appropriate qualified professionals for
those purposes or any of them)”.
Rodgers submitted that the direction in the will in relation to the management
and care of Mrs Anderson’s personal and financial
“not an achievable direction at law”. He submitted that Mrs
Anderson has not executed an Enduring power of
attorney and has no living
relative or next of kin located on Norfolk Island to assist with the care and
management of her property.
Since Mrs Anderson has moved into NIHRACS and her
husband has passed away, there are no arrangements in place for the payment of
her care or any other expenses associated with her care and maintenance.
the hearing Mr Rodgers said he has known Mrs Anderson for “many, many
years” and has observed a decline in her mental
capacity. When he saw Mrs
Anderson while her husband was caring for her in the matrimonial home, she
didn’t recognise her husband
and would say “who’s this
man?”. Mr Rodgers recently visited Mrs Anderson at NIHRACS and said that
while Mrs Anderson
was cordial and pleasant, she was not aware of events
taking place around her and “had no idea her husband has died”.
Rodgers also relies on affidavits of Dr Jodie McCoy, medical superintendent at
NIHRACS and Dr Peter Hopcroft, medical practitioner
at NIHRACS. Both Dr McCoy
and Dr Hopcroft depose to the fact that Mrs Anderson suffers from an advanced
form of senile dementia which
is unlikely to improve. They also state that Mrs
Anderson’s memory is deficient and she is incapable of managing her own
Anderson’s nieces, Mrs Julie Behrens and Mrs Loanne Brandstater attended
the hearing in support of the application by NIHRACS.
Mrs Brandstater provided
an affidavit in support of the application and Mrs Behrens provided additional
information in support of
the application during the hearing. Although they have
been unable to see her recently, Mrs Brandstater and Mrs Behrens would
time with Mrs Anderson when she visited Australia. Mrs Behrens and Mrs
Brandstater live in New South Wales and care for Mrs Anderson’s
Mrs Mima Roberts, who is a resident at an aged care facility which provides
appropriate care for those suffering cognitive
difficulties. The orders sought
in the second application seek that Mrs Anderson reside at the same
facility as her sister. Mrs Roberts’
husband passed away recently and now
Mrs Behrens and Mrs Brandstater visit her about once a week. Mrs Behrens has a
power of attorney
and is the enduring guardian for Mrs Roberts and both of Mrs
Anderson’s nieces recall Mrs Roberts and Mrs Anderson always having
close relationship. Mrs Roberts is concerned for her sister’s welfare and
would like to be close to her if possible.
Behrens reported that Mrs Anderson has a nephew in Brisbane who is supportive of
the application by NIHRACS. Mrs Anderson also
has cousins in Queensland but has
had no connection with them for many years.
Maria McCann, Accredited Clinical Social Worker and Aged Care Assessor, works
for NIHRACS and has been involved with Mrs Anderson’s
care for two and a
half years. Ms McCann provided an affidavit in support of NIHRAC’s
application and attended the hearing.
Ms McCann’s affidavit annexes a
report from Professor Peter Gonski diagnosing Mrs Anderson with moderate to
severe Alzheimer’s
disease and a report of Specialist Geriatrician and
General Physician, Dr Sarah Fox, which indicates that “due to advanced
Alzheimers dementia she [Mrs Anderson] lacks decision making capacity... she
also lacks capacity as it related to healthcare and
accommodation”. Ms
McCann’s notes also record conversations with Mr Anderson before he died
in which he indicated Mrs
Anderson should move from Norfolk Island to be closer
to her sister once he passed away.
McCann explained that NIHRACS does not have a secure dementia setting, suitably
qualified staff or the resources to appropriately
accommodate a person with
advanced dementia. Mrs Anderson is currently in a room normally used for mental
health patients and that
room is sparse and not a suitable or stimulating
environment for a person in Mrs Anderson’s condition. There are no
other residential
aged care facilities and no secure dementia units on Norfolk
Island. Ms McCann reports that Mrs Anderson is becoming increasingly
For example, Mrs Anderson wants to go outside for walk and while nursing staff
try, they are unable to take Mrs Anderson
out for walks when the ward is too
busy and this has led to Mrs Anderson “disappearing” on her own on
several occasions
including on one occasion where the police needed to be called
to assist with locating her.
evidence in each application was not contested and the parties were content for
the evidence in one application to be considered
in the other and vice vera.
Relevant legislation
to ss 3 and 5 of the
Lunacy Act 1932
Lunacy Act 1898
(NSW) (the Lunacy Act) applies to Norfolk Island.
relevant sections of the Lunacy Act are as follows:
it is proven to the satisfaction of the Court that a person is of unsound mind
and incapable of managing his affairs, the Court
may make a declaration to that
effect, and may direct a reference to the Master to make inquiries concerning
the property of such
person, and may make all proper orders for rendering the
property of such person, or the income thereof available for the payment
debts and for the maintenance or benefit of himself and his family, and for
carrying on his trade or business (if any), and
may, if necessary, appoint a
committee of his estate, and also when desirable a committee of his person.
Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that any person is. through
mental infirmity, arising from disease, or age,
incapable of managing his
affairs, the. Court may make all proper orders for rendering the property and
income of the said person
available for the payment of his debts and for the
maintenance and benefit of himself and his family; and may make orders for the
care and management of his property in all respects as if he were an insane
person; and may, if necessary, appoint any person, either
with or without
security, to undertake the care and management of his property under the order
and direction of the Court.
(2) The person so appointed shall, subject to the said orders and directions and
to the rides of Court, have the same powers and
be subject to the same
obligations and control as a committee of the estate, of an insane person, and
the powers and provisions contained
in this Act relating to the management and
administration of the estates of insane persons shall apply to the estates of
Lunacy Act defines an incapable person as being “any person who has been
found or declared, whether by inquisition or under
this Act, or under any Act
hereby repealed, to be insane or of unsound mind and incapable of managing
himself or his affairs”.
I will explain, I have reached the conclusion that is appropriate that orders be
made in each application under the Lunacy Act.
As such, it is not necessary for
me to consider the
Parens Patriae
to NIHRACS’s application.
Should the orders be made ?
have considered the evidence in both applications, and I am satisfied that Mrs
Anderson’s diagnosis of advanced dementia means
that she does not have
decision making capacity and will not regain such capacity. For this reason, I
consider Mrs Anderson is of
unsound mind and is incapable of managing her own
affairs for the purpose of ss 102 and 103 of the Lunacy Act.
regard to Mr Rodgers role as executor of the Estate of Mr Anderson, location on
Norfolk Island where most of Mrs Anderson’s
assets are, long term
knowledge of Mrs Anderson and his experience as a previous Registrar of
this Court and a Master in Lunacy,
it is appropriate that he be appointed to
undertake the care and management of Mrs Anderson’s property pursuant to s
the Lunacy Act.
then turn to consider whether it is appropriate to appoint a committee of the
person under s 102 of the Lunacy Act. Counsel for
NIHRACS referred to the
decision of Helsham CJ in Eq in
[1981] 2 NSWLR 334
, in that case
his Honour considered when a committee of a person could be appointed and said
as follows (at 336):
It would be wrong to attempt to formulate in advance the criteria for judging
the desirability or otherwise of appointing a committee
of the person in any
particular case of a person who is mentally ill and incapable of managing his
affairs. But I think it can be
said that such an appointment would not be
desirable unless it is adjudged to be for the benefit of the person who is to be
Thus in relation to an order made under s 102 of the
Lunacy Act,
(Imp) (which is in virtually identical terms to s 38 of the 1958 Act),
which order included an appointment of a committee of the person
applicant, Lord Davey said:
“It must be remembered that this particular jurisdiction is one of some
peculiarity and difficulty. It exists for the benefit
of the lunatic, and the
guiding principle of the whole jurisdiction is what is most for the benefit of
the unhappy subject of the
application.”(
[1905] UKLawRpAC 17
[1905] AC 343
, at p 347.)
In another case Lord Halsbury said:
“The theory upon which proceedings in Lunacy are taken is, that the
proceedings are for the benefit and protection of the persons
who are believed
to be incapable, by reason of mental infirmity, of protecting themselves and
their property.”(
Re Cathcart
[1892] UKLawRpCh 188
[1893] 1 Ch 466
, at p 471.)
submitted that a committee of his or her person has the power to change the
subject person’s residence and the power
to use force to detain a
protected person, and authorise others to do the same. In support of this
proposition, counsel referred
Northern Territory of Australia v EH
[2021] NTSCFC 5
in which the Full Court considered Lunacy Acts in England and
Australia for the purpose of the historical context to the
Guardianship of
Adults Act 2016
(NT). The Full Court made the following observations (at
The appointment of substitute decision-makers for the protection of the property
and personal interests of vulnerable citizens developed
parens patriae
appoint a guardian (known as a “committee”) to look after the
property and
person of a ward, and developed special principles and concepts,
such as the “best interests” test, to be applied in
the exercise of
powers by guardians. That jurisdiction was given to the superior courts of the
Australian colonies, and the powers
conferred were inherent and plenary in
nature unless modified by legislation.
Lunacy Act 1890
(53 Vict ch 5) was enacted to govern mental health
law in England and Wales, and many of its features were copied in the Australian
colonies. The analogue legislation in Australia generally conferred a
lunacy jurisdiction on the relevant Supreme Court, but preserved
the operation
of the general law concerning the appointment and powers of a guardian (still
called a “committee”) except
to the extent that the general law was
altered by the legislation. The legislation provided that when proved to the
satisfaction
of the Court that a person was of unsound mind and incapable of
managing his or her affairs, a “committee of his estate”
appointed if necessary, and also “a committee of his person” when
The legislation also authorised justices to issue warrants for the apprehension
of an “insane” person, and to direct
that person to be received into
a hospital for the insane or a licensed house (subject to requirements for
medical certification).
The legislation was largely silent as to the powers of a
committee when appointed. However, the legislation assumed that a committee
the person appointed by the Court had authority at general law to direct the
represented person to be received into a hospital
for the insane or a licensed
house. A committee could also “settle and change at pleasure the lunatic's
residence”, and
“select a licensed house as the place of enforced
residence”. That included authority on the part of the committee, when
appointed, “to cause the removal of the lunatic from one place of
residence to another if circumstances justify such action”.
power extended to using force to detain a protected person, and to authorise
others to do the same.
(citations omitted.)
had regard to the authorities to which I was referred. I am satisfied that I
have the power to make the orders sought. I consider
that having regard to the
authorities, Mrs Anderson’s medical condition means she falls within the
terms of s 102 of the Lunacy
Act. Having regard to the evidence, it is
appropriate and in Mrs Anderson’s best interests for a committee of the
appointed and for that person to be Mrs Brandstater. I am also
satisfied that a committee of the person has the power to make decisions
behalf of Mrs Anderson, including as to her accommodation and care.
Conclusions
orders made were put before the Court during the hearing of the applications and
were similar but did not entirely mirror the
orders sought in the originating
the above reasons, I make the following orders in the first
application:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
applicant be appointed without security to undertake the care and management of
the property of the said
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
pursuant to section 103
Lunacy Act 1898
(NSW) as applied to Norfolk Island by the
provisions of the
Lunacy Act 1932
applicant be empowered to sell, call in and convert into money such part or
parts of the estate of the said
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
whether real or
personal as the applicant thinks fit and for such purpose to execute or sign all
instruments necessary thereto.
applicant be empowered to retain as an authorised investment such part or parts
of the estate of the said
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
as the applicant thinks
applicant be empowered to apply the income and such part or parts of the capital
fund as he thinks fit in or towards the care,
maintenance, medical treatment or
support of the said
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
, including as directed by, or
in conjunction with the person(s) appointed committee of her person for
FLORENCE ANNE ANDERSON
applicant be empowered to commence appropriate proceedings to ensure that
adequate provision is made for the care and maintenance
of the said
ANNE ANDERSON
from the estate of her late husband.
THE COURT NOTES:
order is to be read in conjunction with the Order of this Honourable Court in
matter SC 8 of 2023.
the above reasons, I make the following declaration and orders in the second
application:
THE COURT DECLARES THAT:
FLORENCE ANDERSON
is of unsound mind and is incapable of managing her own
affairs within s 102 of the
Lunacy Act 1898
(NSW) as applied to Norfolk
Island by the provisions of the
Lunacy Act 1932
(NI) and further lacks
legal capacity in respect of decision-making for personal matters, including but
not limited to decisions in
relation to her accommodation and
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
BRANDSTATER
be appointed as a committee of the person for
pursuant to section 102 of the said
Lunacy Act 1898
to make such decisions for and on behalf of
FLORENCE ANDERSON
necessary and in
FLORENCE ANDERSON’s
best interests, including as
to accommodation and care matters.
THE COURT NOTES THAT
It is in the best interests of
FLORENCE ANDERSON
that the above orders be
This order is to be read in conjunction with the Order of this Honourable Court
in matter SC 7 of 2023.
I certify that the preceding twenty-five (25)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Chief
Dated: 7 May 2024
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (387 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter