URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2022/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions v Sadrata [2022] NFSC 2 (6 December 2022)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions v Sadrata
[2022] NFSC 2
File number:
SCC 1 of 2022
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
6 December 2022
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– application
for variation to accused’s bail conditions – contemplated travel to
Fiji prior to sentencing hearing
– considerations in s 25(1) of
(NI) – whether accused considered a flight risk –
further bail conditions imposed to promote compliance with current
– variation made
Legislation:
Bail Act 2005
(NI) s 25(1)(a)
Criminal Code 2007
(NI) ss 82, 87
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
6 December 2022
Solicitor for the Prosecutor:
Ms G Smith for Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Counsel for the Accused:
Solicitor for the Accused:
McIntyres Lawyers
SCC 1 of 2022
COMMONWEALTH DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
EMOSI SADRATA
DATE OF ORDER:
6 DECEMBER 2022
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1 and 2 of the accused’s bail conditions imposed on 6 June 2021 be
suspended for the period 20 to 27 December 2022,
and the accused be permitted to
reside during that period at Lot 4, Natokowaqa Street, Lautoka, Fiji.
accused enter into an agreement and deposit acceptable security to forfeit the
sum of $2000 if he fails to comply with his bail
undertaking.
accused’s daughter, Ms Meresiana Nayagodanu Sadrata, enter into an
agreement, without security, to forfeit the sum of $10,000
if the accused fails
to comply with his bail undertaking.
prosecutor file and serve any evidence upon which the prosecutor proposes to
rely in opposition to the application to withdraw
the guilty pleas on or before
13 January 2023.
accused file and serve an outline of submissions in support of the application
to withdraw the guilty pleas on or before 20 January
prosecutor file and serve an outline of submissions in respect of the opposition
to the application to withdraw the guilty pleas
on or before 27 January
accused be discharged from the agreement entered into by him upon his return to
Australia on 27 December 2022, and the security
provided by him in support of
that agreement be also discharged.
accused’s daughter be discharged from the agreement to forfeit that she
entered into, again, upon the return of the accused
to Australia on 27 December
REASONS FOR
Revised from transcript)
accused, Emosi Sadrata, has been indicted on six charges under s 82 of the
Criminal Code
(NI) and one charge under s 87 of the
Criminal Code. Each of those charges arises out of a single alleged incident of
domestic violence
that occurred on 6 June 2021 on Norfolk Island.
accused has pleaded guilty to each of the charges, but has recently applied to
the court to withdraw his pleas of guilty to four
of the charges, including the
more serious offence under s 87 of the Criminal Code. That application is
currently listed for hearing
on 3 February 2023. The accused has applied to
vary his bail conditions so as to permit him to attend his daughter’s
in Fiji on 23 December 2022.
accused’s current bail conditions which were originally imposed by order
of the court on 6 June 2021, as identified in the
indictment information notice,
are as follows:
must live at Unit 5/168 Victoria Road, Punchbowl, NSW.
If you are required to be absent from that address for your employment for more
than 24 hours, you must advise the OIC Norfolk Island
Police and OIC Bankstown
Police, where you will be, and provide evidence, which can be a written roster,
or letter from your employer,
of your work requirement away from the Bankstown
area. You cannot live at another address unless, before you move to the other
you have the written permission of the Officer in Charge of the Norfolk
Island Police;
must report to the Officer in Charge of Bankstown Police Station between 8am and
4pm every Wednesday starting from Wednesday 16
February 2022 unless
you are away from the Bankstown area as provided for in condition No. 1;
to contact Sophie O'Connor, Bridget Sadrata, Navi Sadrata and Ollie Ralston
except when authorised by Sophie O'Connor for the
purpose of care of the
children, Bridget Sadrata, Navi Sadrata and Ollie Ralston;
to assault, harass, or threaten Sophie O'Connor;
to approach within 50 meters of Sophie O'Connor, Bridget Sadrata, Navi Sadrata
and Ollie Ralston except when authorised by Sophie
O'Connor for the purpose of
care of the children, Bridget Sadrata, Navi Sadrata and Ollie Ralston;
to attend 4 Longridge Road, Norfolk Island;
to attend Banyan Park Play Centre;
to attend Norfolk Island Central School;
to consumer [sic] intoxicating liquor;
submit to breath screening by Norfolk Island Police on request.
variation proposed by the accused is that the operation of conditions 1 and 2 be
suspended for the period 20 to 27 December 2022
and that he be permitted to
reside at Lot 4, Natokowaqa Street, Lautoka, Fiji, during that period.
prosecutor, the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions, opposed the
proposed bail variation. The prosecutor submitted that
the offences with which
the accused has been charged are serious offences, that the accused has
currently pleaded guilty to those
offences, and that the prosecutor has flagged
that it will in due course be pressing for a sentence in respect of those
which involve a period of full-time imprisonment.
prosecutor also relied on the fact that the accused is a Fijian national who
holds a Fijian passport, albeit one that expired
in March 2020. The accused
also holds Australian citizenship and an Australian passport. The prosecutor
also submitted that the
accused has family ties with Fiji and that he does not
reside with his children in Australia. In the prosecutor’s submission,
the accused is a flight risk, and the proposed bail variation would give rise to
an unacceptable further risk that the accused would
not appear in court when
required to do so.
should be noted in that context that s 25(1)(a)(i) and (iii) of the
(NI) relevantly provides that:
(1) In making a determination as to the grant of bail to an accused person, an
authorised members or a court shall take into consideration
so far as they can
reasonably be ascertained the following matters only:
(a) the probability of whether or not the person will appear in court in respect
of the offence for which bail is being considered,
having regard only to –
(i) the person's background and community ties, as indicated by the history and
details of his or her residence, employment and family
situations and, if known,
his or her prior criminal record;
(iii) the circumstances of the offence (including its nature and seriousness),
the strength of the evidence against the person and
the severity of the penalty
or probable penalty; and
should perhaps also be noted in the present context that there is currently no
bilateral extradition treaty between Australia and
Fiji. It was submitted on
the accused’s behalf that the accused had been aware for some time that
the prosecutor was, or would
be, pressing for a full-time custodial sentence,
and yet he had not absconded and had at all times complied with his bail
conditions.
The existing bail conditions did not include any condition
requiring the accused to surrender his passport or to avoid approaching
of international departure.
the accused’s submission, it would have been effectively open to him to
travel to Fiji and return during the period between
his reporting obligations,
and nobody would have been the wiser. Instead, he chose to seek a variation of
his bail conditions. It
was also submitted on the accused’s behalf that
the accused has no serious criminal convictions in Australia other than a fairly
minor traffic offence. As for the current offences, it was submitted, in
effect, that the accused had reasonable prospects of being
permitted to withdraw
his pleas of guilty in respect of a number of the charges, including the more
serious charge, and that a sentence
of imprisonment was by no means inevitable.
would also note that the affidavit evidence from the accused’s daughter
suggests that the accused has significant family ties
in Australia – in
particular, in Norfolk Island – and currently has secure employment in New
South Wales. While I acknowledge
that the proposed variation may give rise to
some added risk of flight, particularly given that the accused has Fijian
citizenship
and some family connections with Fiji, I am in all the circumstances
prepared to give the accused the benefit of the doubt in respect
of the bail
variation, subject to two additional conditions which I will say more about
my view, the prosecutor’s submissions somewhat overstate the extent of the
risk posed by the bail variation. I also consider
that there is merit in the
submissions advanced on the accused’s behalf that if the accused was, in
truth, a significant flight
risk, it would have been relatively easy for him to
abscond to Fiji during the fairly lengthy period he has been on bail. He has
not done so. It is also clear that while the accused has some family ties in
Fiji, all of his children reside in Australia, and,
as previously noted, he has
secure employment in Australia.
all the circumstances, whilst I am prepared to make the proposed bail variation,
the variation should be subject to two additional
conditions. Those additional
conditions are:
, that the accused enter into an agreement and
deposit acceptable security to forfeit the sum of $2000 if he fails to comply
his bail undertaking; and
, that the accused’s daughter,
Ms Meresiana Nayagodanu Sadrata, enter into an agreement, without security, to
forfeit the sum
of $10,000 if the accused fails to comply with his bail
undertakings.
I have said, in my view, those two additional conditions, which must be
satisfied prior to the proposed variation becoming operable,
significantly
reduce any risk that the accused will fail to comply with his bail undertakings.
I consider it fairly unlikely that
the accused would give his daughter a wedding
gift of a liability of $10,000 by not complying with his bail
undertakings.
I certify that the preceding thirteen (13)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 31 January 2023
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (317 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter