URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Deputy Curator of Deceased Estates, in the matter of Champion [2023] NFSC 3 (9 November 2023)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Deputy Curator of Deceased Estates, in
the matter of Champion
[2023] NFSC 3
File numbers:
SC 1 of 2022
SC 2 of 2022
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
9 November 2023
Catchwords:
— application by Deputy
Curator of Deceased Estates pursuant to s 130 of the
Administration and
Probate Act 2006
(NI) and pursuant to the
Trustee Act 1931
Trustee Act 1925
— where female deceased
died intestate in 1894 and was survived by her husband, the male deceased, who
was lost at sea in 1920
having left a will made in 1907 leaving all of his real
property on Norfolk Island to his five children — where both of the
deceased owned land on Norfolk Island — where the Court made an order in
1991 that the Curator collect and administer with
the will the estate of the
male deceased
— where the Court must specially authorise
distribution of assets by the curator
— where the five beneficiary
children of the deceased have since died
— whether there are
succeeding executors to the estates of the deceased beneficiaries
where there is no succeeding executor, consideration of appropriate
administrators to be appointed and whether Benjamin order
Orders for distribution sought by the Deputy
Curator should be made
Legislation:
Norfolk Island Act 1913
Administration and Probate Act 2006
(NI) ss 5, 8, 16, 23, 24, 50,
121, 125, 130
Administration and Probate Ordinance 1929–1953
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Cases cited:
Deputy Curator of Deceased Estates, in the
matter of Quintal
[2023] NFSC 4
Drummond v Registrar of Probates (SA)
[1918] HCA 58
(1918) 25 CLR
Maddock v Registrar of Titles (Vict)
[1915] HCA 10
(1915) 19 CLR
[2016] NSWSC 1433
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Date of last submissions:
23 August 2022
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Mr J F Grose, John Grose, Solicitor
SC 1 of 2022
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF WILLIAM
NIHILL CHAMPION
DEPUTY CURATOR OF DECEASED
ESTATES, IN THE ESTATE OF WILLIAM NIHILL CHAMPION (IN THE WILL DESCRIBED AS
WILLIAM NAHILL CHAMPION) LATE
OF NORFOLK ISLAND, DECEASED
SC 2 of 2022
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF SARAH CLARA CHAMPION
DEPUTY CURATOR OF DECEASED ESTATES, IN THE ESTATE OF SARAH CLARA
CHAMPION LATE OF NORFOLK ISLAND, DECEASED
ORDER MADE BY:
DATE OF ORDER:
9 NOVEMBER 2023
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
the extent necessary, the Deputy Curator be heard further on the form of the
orders to be made.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
BESANKO CJ:
Introduction
are two actions before the Court. Both were commenced by Originating
application and both involve applications under s 130
Administration
and Probate Act 2006
(NI) by the Deputy Curator of Deceased Estates (the
Deputy Curator) for the opinion, advice, directions and/or determinations and
orders of the Court on certain questions and issues arising in the
administration of an estate. The office of Curator of Deceased
Estates (the
Curator) is currently vacant. However, the Deputy Curator may exercise any
function of the Curator, subject to any
direction of the Curator
Administration and Probate Act 2006
(NI), s 5). The first application
involves the estate of William Nihill Champion late of, Norfolk Island,
deceased. The second
application involves the estate of Sarah Clara Champion
late of, Norfolk Island, deceased. William Nihill Champion and Sarah Clara
Champion were married and had five children. The children were Walter Hutton
Champion, William Anderson Champion, Malcolm Eadie
Champion, Isabella May
Champion and Alice Augusta Champion.
Nihill Champion was born in 1848. He was lost at sea on or about 4 September
1920 in the vicinity of Niue Island. Sarah
Clara Champion’s death
certificate is to the effect that she married William Nihill Champion in about
1873 and she died on
31 December 1894. William Nihill Champion married a second
time in 1900. His second wife was Clara Jane Champion.
Nihill Champion made a will on 26 April 1907. In that will, he left all of his
real property in Norfolk Island to his five
children and the residue of his
property to his second wife, Clara Jane Champion. Clara Jane Champion is named
as the sole executrix
of his estate.
28 May 1991, the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island made an order that the Curator
of Estates of Deceased Persons of Norfolk Island
Collect and Administer with the
will the estate of William Nihill Champion (the male deceased). This order
appears to have been
made under s 92 of the
Administration and Probate
Ordinance 1929–1953
(ACT) and under that provision (and its present
equivalent of s 125 of the
Administration and Probate Act 2006
Court must specially authorise any distribution of assets by the Curator. The
Deputy Curator seeks such an authorisation
in this proceeding.
the time of his death, the male deceased owned land described as Portion 44a
situated on Norfolk Island. In 1998, Portion 44a
was sold by the Curator to the
Administration of Norfolk Island for $110,000. The sale proceeds remain held in
trust by the Curator
and the present balance is approximately $112,000.
Clara Champion (the female deceased) died in Norfolk Island on 31 December 1894.
Her death certificate is to the effect that
she was born on Pitcairn Island in
female deceased died intestate and Letters of Administration in relation to her
estate were granted to the Curator of Deceased
Persons’ Estates on 27 May
1976. Further, on the same day, an order was made that the Curator be appointed
Administrator of
the estate with power to Collect and Administer the said
estate. This order appears to have been made under s 92 of the
Administration and Probate Ordinance 1929–1953
(ACT) and under that
provision (and its present equivalent of s 125 of the
Administration and
Probate Act 2006
(NI)), the Court must specially authorise any distribution
of assets by the Curator. The Deputy Curator seeks such an authorisation
this proceeding.
remains a portion of land described as Portion 3d1, registered in the name of
the Curator as administrator of the estate of
Sarah Clara Champion deceased.
The land is situated at 47 John Quintal Road, Norfolk Island. The area of
the land is 3.6080 hectares.
The land has been valued by CBRE Residential
Valuations Pty Ltd. The market value of the land is said to be $750,000. In
the Curator subdivided a small part of the land and sold that subdivided
lot to a neighbour for $12,000. There remains in trust
the sum of $10,306.59
which is the only other asset in the estate. There is an outstanding amount for
land rates of $4,284.64.
orders sought by the Deputy Curator are the same in the case of each estate,
save and except for the estate concerned and the
fact that in relation to the
estate of the female deceased, an additional order is sought by reason of the
fact that she died intestate.
Not only are the orders sought the same subject
to these exceptions, but the evidence relied on by the Deputy Curator in each
is identical as are the submissions made in the case of each estate.
The law governing the distribution of the female
deceased’s estate
will begin by addressing the additional order sought in the case of the female
deceased. The order is as follows:
the estate of Sarah Clara Champion having died intestate at Norfolk Island on 31
December 1894 be distributed in accordance with
the declaration and enactment of
William Thomas Dennison, Governor of Norfolk Island, dated 12 October 1860
titled “Laws for
regulating the transfer of, and dealings in land, in
Norfolk Island”.
Deputy Curator produced an extract transcribed from the preamble to the
Norfolk Island Act 1913
(Cth). The relevant chronology is as
29 September 1844
Norfolk Island severed from the Government of New South Wales and annexed to the
Government and Colony of Van Diemen’s Land.
24 June 1856
Norfolk Island separated from the Colony of Van Diemen’s Land (now
Tasmania) ... and that from that date Norfolk Island should
be a distinct and
separate Settlement, the affairs of which should until further Order ... be
administered by a governor to be for
that purpose appointed by Her Majesty ...
15 January 1897
Revoked the Order in Council of the 24 June 1856 and ordered that the affairs of
Norfolk Island should be administered by the Governor
of the Colony of New South
at the date of the female deceased’s death on 31 December 1894, Norfolk
Island was responsible for its own governance and
laws. Laws had been made by
Sir William Thomas Dennison as (inter alia) Governor of Norfolk Island on 12
October 1860 under an Order
of the Queen in Council dated 24 June 1856. Those
laws were known as “Laws for Regulating the Transfer of, and Dealings in
Land in Norfolk Island” (Land Laws). Clauses 9 and 10 of the Land Laws
relevantly provided as follows:
any person having an estate in land shall die intestate, leaving a husband or
wife surviving, the estate shall descend on such
husband or wife during his or
to such life interest, the estate shall go to the children of the intestate in
equal shares, the share of any deceased child
being equally divided among his or
her descendants, if any ...
Deputy Curator has established that at the date of the female deceased’s
death, Norfolk Island’s affairs were administered
as a separate settlement
by a Governor appointed by the Crown. Searches have been unable to locate any
relevant amendment or repeal
of the Land Laws.
male deceased survived the female deceased. He was lost at sea on 4 September
1920 thereby terminating the life interest in the
estate in land he was given by
s 9 of the Land Laws. The female deceased’s five children survived her
and there were no children
who predeceased the female deceased.
the circumstances I have outlined, the order sought by the Deputy Curator should
The orders sought in relation to each estate
turn now to the orders which are sought in the case of each estate. As I have
said, they are identical, except for the estate concerned.
They are as
the estate of William Nihill Champion deceased be distributed equally to the
estates of the deceased children of William Nihill
Champion who survived him,
(a) Walter Hutton Champion;
(b) William Anderson Champion;
(c) Isabella May Champion;
(d) Malcolm Eadie Champion; and
(e) Alice Augusta Champion.
Margaret Grace Jeans and Ilona Faye Champion be appointed administrators of the
estate of Walter Hutton Champion deceased limited
to administration and
distribution of his share in the estate of William Nihill Champion
without prejudice to the rights of any person to trace his, her or their share
into the hands of the recipient if it be established
that they are entitled to
share in the estate by Will or otherwise, the Curator is justified in
distributing the share of William
Anderson Champion deceased on the presumption
he died intestate.
Virginia Kay Sherriff and Thea Murdene Vennell be appointed administrators of
the estate of William Anderson Champion deceased
limited to administration and
distribution of his share in the estate of William Nihill Champion
Miles Selwyn Dillon is the succeeding executor under the estate of Isabella May
Champion deceased.
without prejudice to the rights of any person to trace his, her or their share
into the hands of the recipient if it be established
that they are entitled to
share in the estate by Will or otherwise, the Curator is justified in
distributing the share of Malcolm
Eadie Champion deceased on the presumption he
died intestate.
Richard Meikle be appointed administrator of the estate of Malcolm Eadie
Champion deceased limited to administration and distribution
of his share in the
estate of William Nihill Champion deceased.
Geoffrey Court Rendell is the succeeding executor under the estate of Alice
Augusta Champion deceased.
the Curator be authorised to make distribution of the estate of William Nihill
Champion deceased in accordance with the above
the Curator may apply for further orders or directions on seven (7) days notice
in writing to that effect.
the Curator be entitled to deduct statutory commission and expenses incurred in
the administration of the estate prior to distribution.
the case of each estate, the application is supported by three affidavits, one
of the Deputy Curator herself and the other two
of her solicitor, Mr Frederick
John Grose. The Deputy Curator’s affidavit is, for the most part,
directed to the factual matters
which I have already identified.
Grose deposes that he is assisting the Deputy Curator in the administration of
these estates. He has carried out a review of the
old files of the Curator of
Deceased Estates in relation to the estate of each deceased and he has made his
own further investigations.
Grose refers to the basic facts identified by the Deputy Curator. He then
states that a review of the Curator’s files in
the estates shows that
there has been correspondence and inquiries over time with the descendants of
those children to ascertain
who is entitled to benefit under the estates. In
his affidavit in the estate of the male deceased, Mr Grose refers to his
in the estate of the female deceased and states that what follows by
way of information and exhibits is the same in both cases.
Grose refers to a notice published in newspapers circulating in Australia and
New Zealand on or about 2 November 2002 directed
to the children and
grandchildren of the male and female deceased and asking them to contact the
Curator. Contacts were made as
a result of those notices and searches were
undertaken to identify the eligible beneficiaries. Mr Grose has undertaken
further communications
with family members and carried out searches and
inquiries on numerous websites in regard to the estates, wills, circumstances
families of each of the five beneficiary children. Those contacts,
communications, searches and inquiries have resulted in the information
in these reasons.
his second affidavit in the proceeding involving the male deceased, Mr Grose
deposes that he caused to be served by email, a copy
of the application,
affidavit of the Deputy Curator and affidavit of himself on the following:
Margaret Grace Jeans, Virginia Kay
Pinel and Thea Murdene Vennell, Miles Selwyn
Dillon, Richard Meikle, Geoffrey Court Rendell and Mark Chester Rendell. Mr
Grose states
that all family representatives have signalled that they agree with
the orders sought in the application. He served them with a
letter and the
documents in both the estate of William Nihill Champion and Sarah Clara
Champion. The family representatives only
returned one form on behalf of both
1. Walter Hutton Champion (Walter)
died in Auckland, New Zealand, on 7 November 1960. He left a will dated
1 October 1960 and probate of this will was granted
on 16 November 1960.
Walter divorced his wife, Alice Maud Champion, in August 1933 and she died on 22
February 1936. There were
five children of that marriage who survived Walter,
being Thomas Keith Champion, Margaret Esme Finlayson, Walter Neville Champion,
Selwyn Champion and Dorothy Sheffield. There was a son who predeceased Walter,
John Wilfred Champion, and he died on 22 August 1960.
He was not married and he
left no children surviving him. A daughter, Norma Champion, predeceased Walter
having died in 1926 at
the age of 11 years.
his will, Walter appointed his son, Walter Neville Champion, as his executor.
Walter Neville Champion died on 2 November 1970
and probate of his will which
was dated 6 December 1957 was granted on 11 December 1970. He appointed
his wife, Gwendoline Grace
Champion, as his executor. Gwendoline Grace Champion
died on 9 March 1978. She left a will under which she appointed her sons,
John Walter Champion and Paul Austin Champion, as her executors. Paul Austin
Champion died on 6 January 1991 leaving John Walter
Champion as sole surviving
executor under his mother’s will and also, by succession (see below), the
sole succeeding executor
under the will of Walter Hutton Champion. John Walter
Champion died on 10 October 2010. He appointed his daughter, Ilona Faye
as his executor. However, probate was not required nor obtained in
his estate.
Grose deposes that Margaret Grace Jeans, who is a daughter of Walter Neville
Champion and brother of John Walter Champion, has
undertaken a significant role
in assisting the Curator in the past and, in more recent times, the Deputy
Curator, by providing family
information and documents and has become the family
spokesperson for what he calls the Walter Hutton Champion family group. Ms
has agreed to act as representative of the Walter Hutton Champion family
group for the purpose of assisting and providing instructions
to the Deputy
Curator in the finalisation and distribution of the estate. Mr Grose deposes
that his dealings with Ms Jeans indicate
that she is an appropriate and
interested person to fulfill that role.
Grose expresses the opinion that with the assistance of Ms Jeans and other
family members and searches, he believes that they have
sufficiently traced the
entitled present beneficiaries of the five children beneficiaries under the will
of Walter and that Walter’s
share of his mother’s estate should be
distributed in accordance with the terms of his will.
specific orders sought in relation to Walter’s estate is that Margaret
Grace Jeans and Ilona Faye Hutton be appointed administrators
of his estate
limited to his share in the estate of the male deceased (or the female deceased
as the case may be).
common law rule as to the transmission of the power and estate of an executor
was stated by Griffith CJ (with whom Barton J agreed)
Maddock v Registrar
of Titles (Vict)
[1915] HCA 10
(1915) 19 CLR 681
in the following terms (at
At common law the power and estate of an executor was regarded as founded upon
the special confidence and actual appointment of the
testator. His estate was
therefore regarded as transmissible. It was held to be transmitted from a sole
or last surviving executor
to his own executor, but not from one of several
executors to whom alone probate had been granted. So long as the chain of
representation
was unbroken the ultimate executor was regarded as the executor,
and, as such the representative, of the original testator:
Williams on
, 10th ed., p. 180.
Drummond v Registrar of Probates (SA)
[1918] HCA 58
(1918) 25 CLR 318
Barton J said the following (at 321):
There are certain things in this case that seem to be clear. In the first place,
the rule laid down in
Tristram & Coote
, 15th ed., p. 68, is clear,
namely, that “an executor having taken probate of his own testator’s
will becomes executor,
, not only of that will, but also of the
will of any testator of whom the other was the sole or surviving
law is described in the following way in
Halsbury’s Laws of England,
4th ed, Vol 17(2) at para 47:
On the death of a sole executor, or of the last survivor of several executors,
the office devolves upon the executor of the sole
or last surviving executor who
has proved the will; and so long as the chain of representation is unbroken, the
last executor in
the chain is the executor of every preceding testator ...
On the death of an executor who has survived the testator but never proved the
will, the rights of that executor wholly cease and
the representation to the
testator and the administration of his estate devolve and are to be committed in
like manner as if the
executor had never been appointed executor.
(See also the discussion in Dal Pont GE and Mackie KF,
Law of Succession,
(2nd ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, 2017) at [10.83] and Croucher R and Vines P,
Succession: Families, Property and Death
(5th ed, LexisNexis
Butterworths, 2019) at [16.17]–[16.18].)
devolution of the office of executor is also the subject of a statutory
provision in Norfolk Island which is to similar effect
as the common law.
Section 50 of the
Administration and Probate Act 2006
(NI) is in the
following terms:
50 Executor of executor
(a) probate of the will of a testator has been granted to a person (in this
division called the
original executor
) as the sole executor, or as
1 of the executors, of the will of the testator; and
(b) the original executor was, immediately before his or her death, the sole, or
the last surviving, executor of the will of the
testator; and
(c) probate of the will of the original executor is granted to the executor, or
1 of the executors, (in this division called the
) of the will of the original executor;
the succeeding executor becomes, on the grant of probate of the will of the
original executor—
(d) the executor of the will of the testator; and
(e) the executor of the will of any other testator of whose will the testator
was, immediately before his or her death, the executor
under the application, or
successive applications, of this section.
the case of Walter’s estate, the evidence set out above shows that the
chain of representation was broken. John Walter Champion
died on 10 October
2010. He had appointed his daughter, Ilona Faye Champion, as his executor,
however, probate was not required
nor obtained in his estate.
is necessary then to move to consider whether, in the case of Walter’s
estate, an administrator can be appointed by the Court.
The Court has an
inherent power to appoint an administrator of an estate. There is also various
statutory provisions which empower
the Court to appoint an administrator.
[2016] NSWSC 1433
, Slattery J considered the scope of the New
South Wales Supreme Court’s power — statutory and inherent —
an administrator to an estate of a deceased person. His Honour said
the following (at [13]–[15]):
relevant law is clear. The Court has broad power to appoint an administrator in
circumstances such as the present under
Probate and Administration Act
and in its inherent jurisdiction.
J pointed out in
Firns v Firns
[2000] NSWSC 396
”) at 12, that the
Probate and Administration
confers broad jurisdiction on the Court to appoint
administrators.
Probate and Administration Act
gives statutory force to
the Court’s inherent jurisdiction before the enactment of that
legislation.
gives general jurisdiction for the grant of letters of
administration in respect of the estate of any deceased person leaving real
personal property in New South Wales. It is not necessary to bring the
circumstances within the particular powers to granted letters
of administration
under ss 63, 74 and 75 of the Act. As Young J pointed out in
“the way in which the Act has been construed over the years is that unless
there has been a statutory taking away of jurisdiction
the Court plainly has
power to grant administration whenever it considers it appropriate to do
Hamilton v Hamilton
(1913) 33 WN (NSW) 46. This is one of
those cases that does not clearly fall within the words of ss 69, 74 or 75.
failure of the plaintiffs to find Ronald Caldwell’s executor grounds the
Court’s jurisdiction to grant letters of
administration
These observations apply equally to this Court. Save for
and Administration Act 1898
each of the New South Wales
sections referred to in this passage has a counterpart in the relevant Norfolk
Island legislation (see
Administration and Probate Act 2006
16, 23, 24).
addition to noting the helpful general discussion as to the appointment of
administrators in Dal Pont GE and Mackie KF at 298 [10.21]
and following, I note
the following passages as to limited grants of administration and a grant of
administration
de bonis non
(at 362 [11.42]–[11.43]):
11.42 The law has long recognised various forms of limited administration,
dealing with the manifold scenarios that may arise in
cases where the
administration of the deceased’s estate could otherwise be compromised by
the lack of a person appointed for
this purpose. The forms of limited
administration discussed below, it must be understood, though the chief
illustrations of the court’s
11.43 A grant of ‘administration
de bonis non
‘of the estate not administered’) is apt in cases where the
surviving or sole personal representative
dies or goes missing before completing
administration of the estate (namely where, it is said, the ‘chain of
representation’
is broken). It is likewise apt where the administrator is
appointed pursuant to the revocation of probate to the appointed executor(s)
after the executorial function has commenced. Accordingly, it serves no useful
purpose, and so is not granted, where nothing of substance
remains to be
administered in the estate. An administrator
de bonis non
has the same
power and authority, vis-à-vis what remains to be administered, as the
original personal representative.
have already referred to Mr Grose’s evidence with respect to Ms Jeans and
the assistance that she has provided to the Curator
in the past and the Deputy
Curator in more recent times. Mr Grose states, and I accept, that they
have sufficiently traced the entitled
present beneficiaries of the five children
beneficiaries under the will of Walter Hutton Champion and that Walter’s
his mother’s estate should be distributed in accordance with the
terms of the will. I am satisfied that Margaret Grace Jeans
and Ilona Faye
Champion are appropriate persons to act as administrators of Walter’s
estate limited in the manner sought.
Deputy Curator put an alternative argument to the effect that should the Court
reach the view that it was not practical or available
to appoint the
administrators identified by the Deputy Curator, that the Court should order
that the Curator collect, administer
and distribute the shares of Walter (among
others) under s 121 or 125 of the
Administration and Probate Act 2006
(NI). The sections upon which the Deputy Curator relies are s 121 or s 125
Administration and Probate Act 2006
(NI) and they are in the
following terms:
121 Orders to curator to collect and administer
(1) The Supreme Court may, on the application of the curator, grant to the
curator an order to collect and administer the estate
of any deceased person
leaving real or personal estate within the jurisdiction in any of the following
(a) if the deceased leaves no executor, partner or next of kin, resident within
the jurisdiction, willing and capable of acting in
execution of his or her will
or administration of his or her estate;
(b) if the executors named renounce probate of the will of the deceased, and all
the persons primarily entitled to administration
by writing filed with the
registrar decline to apply for administration;
(c) if probate or administration is not applied for within 3 months after the
death of the deceased;
(d) if, after the end of 30 days from the death there is no reasonable
probability of application being made within that period of
(e) if the estate or any part of the estate is liable to waste and the executor,
any partner or the next of kin—
(i) is absent from
the locality of the estate; or
(ii) is not known; or
(iii) has not been found; or
(iv) requests the curator in writing to apply for the
(f) if the estate, or any part
(i) of a perishable
(ii) in danger of being lost or
(g) if great expense may be
incurred because of delay;
(h) if by the will of the deceased the curator of estates of deceased persons or
the curator is appointed to act.
(2) The Supreme Court may in any case require the curator to—
(a) give the notices; or
(b) cite the person; or
(c) produce the evidence,
it considers appropriate before granting the order applied for, or may make a
temporary order for collection and protection only
or limited to a part of the
estate or otherwise.
(3) The registrar may, on the application of the curator, supported by
affidavits on which the Supreme Court would, in the opinion
of the registrar,
grant to the curator an order to collect and administer the estate of a deceased
person, grant such an order as
of course in the name and under the seal of the
court, and the order shall be deemed to have been made by the court.
(4) In any application under subsection (3) the registrar may make any
requirement which the Supreme Court could, under subsection
(2), make on an
application to the court, and may make a temporary or limited order of the kind
referred to in subsection (2).
(5) The registrar shall not grant an order to the curator to collect and
administer the estate of a deceased person in any case in
which it appears to
him or her to be doubtful whether the order ought to be granted.
(6) In this section:
relation to a deceased person, has the same meaning as it has in part 3A in
relation to an intestate.
Order to curator to collect and administer in special
circumstances
(1) If it is made to appear to the Supreme Court that there is reasonable ground
to suppose that any person has died, either in or
out of the jurisdiction of the
court, intestate, leaving property within the jurisdiction, the court may order
and empower the curator
to collect and administer the estate, both real and
personal, of that person.
(2) The order shall be valid until revoked, and shall empower the curator
(a) collect, manage, and administer the personal estate of the supposed deceased
person; and
(b) enter on and receive the rents and profits and otherwise manage the real
estate; and
(c) pay and discharge the debts and liabilities of that person,
in like way as if he or she were
certainly dead and the curator had obtained an order to collect and administer
the estate of the
person under section
(3) The curator shall not proceed to any distribution of the assets without an
order of the Supreme Court specially authorising the
curator to make the
distribution.
was no analysis as to which paragraph in s 121(1) might be engaged in this case
and, at first blush at least, it is difficult
to see how s 125 might be engaged
on any basis. As I have reached the view that the persons nominated by the
Deputy Curator should
be appointed as administrators, it is not necessary for me
to consider the alternative advanced by the Deputy Curator.
2. William Anderson Champion (William)
died on 3 November 1945. William’s wife was Miriam Champion (nee
Christen). She died on 11 April 1940.
Grose wrote to the Public Trustee’s Office in New Zealand asking whether
the Public Trustee’s Office had administered
the estate of William
Anderson Champion and asking for a copy of his will, if any, and any relevant
order to administer or grant
of probate. The Public Trustee responded by saying
that they had been unable to locate any information on its current system or
previous system. Mr Grose searched the New Zealand Probate archives on the
internet and did not find any probate granted in
the name of William Anderson
Champion deceased.
Iza Stevenson is a granddaughter of William. She wrote to the Curator in May
1981 and in her letter included the following:
do not know, who administered my Grandfather’s estate, William Andersen
[sic] Champion. He died as I said before in 1945
in Auckland, I honestly
don’t think he had anything of consequence, and as far as the family were
concerned, everything went
to his then unmarried daughter, Gwendoline Rowena,
who died in 1975 without issue.
was survived by five children: Isabella May Sara Augusta Mackay who had three
daughters, George Roswell Champion who had
two daughters, Richard Homes Champion
who had no children, Hugh Champion who is recorded as “Biological son
adopted in New
Zealand – not eligible”, and Gwendoline Rowena Bush
who did not marry and had no children. All of William’s children
deceased. Mr Grose states that all reasonable inquiries and searches have
failed to locate any will or any grant of probate
relating to William. He has
made inquiries of the known descendants of William and searched the relevant and
available internet
sites and records and has been unable to locate a will of the
late William Anderson Champion. Based on his inquiries, Mr Grose believes
it is reasonable to assume that William died intestate survived by the five
children referred to above and that his share of
his mother’s estate
should be equally divided among the estates of the five children. Mr Grose
deposes to the fact that he
has sufficient information and documentation to
identify the current eligible next of kin and their eligible beneficiaries for
distribution
should it be assumed William Anderson Champion died intestate.
Grose prepared a family tree for William. He states that of the grandchildren,
two remain alive and they are Robin Gwendoline
Pope and Rowena Ida Mason. They
are both elderly and do not wish to undertake the responsibility as acting as
family representative.
Two great-grandchildren, Virginia Kay Pinel and Thea
Murdene Vennell, have been assisting Mr Grose and the Deputy Curator and have
agreed to act jointly as representatives of the William Anderson family group.
orders sought in relation to William are the appointment of Virginia Kay
Sherriff and Thea Murdene Vennell as administrators of
his estate limited to the
administration and distribution of his share of the estate of the male deceased
(or the female deceased
as the case may be) and a Benjamin order.
the case of William Anderson Champion, there is no question of a succeeding
executor. No will of William Anderson Champion has
been discovered. Based on
the evidence of Mr Grose, I consider it appropriate that Virginia Kay Sherriff
and Thea Murdene Vennell
be appointed as administrators of the estate of William
limited in the manner sought.
Deputy Curator also seeks an order to the effect that she is justified in
distributing the share of William Anderson Champion
deceased on the presumption
he died intestate, such an order being without prejudice to the rights of any
person to trace his, her
or their share into the hands of the recipient if it be
established that they are entitled to share in the estate by will or otherwise.
I refer to my discussion of Benjamin orders in
Deputy Curator of Deceased
Estates, in the matter of Quintal
[2023] NFSC 4.
accept the Deputy Curator’s submission that further inquiries and searches
are unlikely to locate any will for William Anderson
Champion nor any further
presently entitled descendants or next of kin and that it is convenient,
expeditious and practical to proceed
on the basis that he died intestate.
3. Isabella May Dillon (nee Champion) (Isabella)
died in Auckland, New Zealand on 13 January 1964. Her husband predeceased her.
She was survived by five children, being
Marsden Dillon, Neville Edwin Dillon,
Eulene Eliza Brown (nee Dillon), Mervyn Leslie Dillon and Olive Trevera Burns
(nee Dillon).
Isabella left a will. Her sons, Marsden Dillon and Mervyn Leslie
Dillon, were nominated as executors and her estate was left equally
to her five
children. The will was dated 12 August 1957 and probate of the will was granted
on 5 March 1964. The residuary beneficiaries
under her will were her five
surviving children.
Leslie Dillon died on 25 March 1979. Marsden Dillon died on 16 March 2003.
Lilian Dora Dillon, on the death of the last surviving
executor, Marsden Dillon,
and on the grant of probate, became the succeeding executor of Isabella’s
estate. She died on 25
July 2003 and probate was granted in her estate to her
son, Miles Selwyn Dillon, and her solicitor, Anthony Clive Sandlant. Mr Grose
asserts that Miles Selwyn Dillon would now be a succeeding executor under
Isabella’s will and has consented and agreed to act
in that capacity and
distribute her share of her parents’ estates to the descendants of
Grose states that Miles Selwyn Dillion he has been most helpful and has an
extensive knowledge of the Champion family. Mr Grose
states that the Deputy
Curator seeks confirmation that Isabella’s share of her mother’s
estate should be distributed
pursuant to her will and that Miles Selwyn Dillon
is the succeeding executor in her estate. Mr Grose states that he has
information and documentation to identify the eligible presently
entitled beneficiaries with the assistance of Miles Selwyn Dillon.
only order sought in relation to Isabella’s estate is that Miles Selwyn
Dillon is the succeeding executor under the estate
of Isabella May Champion
deceased. That is an appropriate order. There is no evidence as to the
position and circumstances of the
other executor, Mr Sandlant, but it does not
appear to me that there is any reason he needs to be involved.
4. Malcolm Eadie Champion (Malcom)
died in Auckland, New Zealand, on 26 July 1939. Mr Grose has conducted searches
on the relevant internet sites, but he has
been unable to locate any will or
probate for Malcolm. Malcolm was survived by his wife, Rose Ethel Champion, and
a daughter, Edna
Ruth Winifred Matson Champion.
19 December 1951, Rose Ethel Champion emigrated to Sydney to live with her
daughter, Edna Brooks (nee Champion). Rose Champion
died on 20 January 1953.
Edna Ruth Brooks (nee Champion) died in Sydney on 9 January 1966. She was
survived by a daughter, Lola
Brooks, and Lola died in Sydney on 15 August 1985.
Lola left a will dated 12 February 1985 and probate of that will was granted
5 March 1986. The residuary beneficiary of that will was Richard Meikle. He is
the only surviving descendant of Malcom Eadie
Champion and is entitled to
Malcolm’s share in the estate. He has agreed to act as the representative
of the Malcolm Champion
family and is the only known interested party. Mr Grose
holds the belief that further inquiries and searches will not locate a will
probate for Malcolm and seeks an order that the estate be distributed on the
basis that he died intestate and the only present
eligible beneficiary is
Richard Meikle.
are two orders sought in relation to Malcolm’s estate. First, an order is
sought that Richard Meikle be appointed administrator
of his estate limited to
the administration and distribution of his share of the estate of the male
deceased (or the female deceased
as the case may be) and a Benjamin order.
is no issue here about a succeeding executor.
is appropriate that these orders be made. On the evidence, it is appropriate to
proceed on the basis that Malcolm died intestate.
5. Alice Augusta Rendell (nee Champion) (Alice)
died on 27 September 1965. She executed a will on 13 October 1959 and there was
a grant of probate in respect of that will
on 26 October 1965. Alice was
survived by her husband, Frank Lambert Rendell, and she left her residuary
estate to him. She appointed
her husband and her son, Owen Stanmer Rendell, her
executors. Frank Lambert Rendell died on 4 August 1970 and Owen Stanmer
died on 30 May 1980. Owen Stanmer Rendell was the last surviving
executor of Alice’s will. His executors were his son, Geoffrey
Rendell, and Henry Bruce Johnson, who would now be the succeeding executors
under Alice’s will. Alice’s share
of the estate of William Nihill
Champion would form part of the residue of her estate which, under clause 4 of
her will, was bequeathed
to her husband, Frank Lambert Rendell, and would form
the residue of his estate. Frank Lambert Rendell’s will is dated 16
December 1969 and probate of the will was granted on 1 September 1970. In
clause 4 of his will he divided the residual of the estate
into 40 equal parts
and left those parts in various shares to various close relatives.
Court Rendell, who is the succeeding executor under the will of Alice Rendell
(nee Champion) is prepared to act as executor
under that capacity and with Mark
Chester Rendell as representatives of the Alice Rendell family group. Both are
agreeable to distribute
Alice’s share of the estate in accordance with the
will of Frank Lambert Rendell.
a result of Mr Grose’s investigations and assistance from both
Geoffrey Court Rendell and Mark Chester Rendell, he is confident
he will be able
to identify and distribute Alice Champion’s share of her mother’s
estate to the present day eligible
family descendants of those
beneficiaries.
only order sought in relation to Alice’s estate is an order recognising
Geoffrey Court Rendell as the succeeding executor.
That is an appropriate
order. There is no evidence as to the position and circumstances of the other
executor, Mr Johnson, but
again, as with Mr Sandlant, it does not appear to
me that there is any reason he needs to be involved.
The general orders for distribution: Estate of William Nihill
Champion (orders 1 and 9); Estate of Sara Clara Champion (orders 2 and
regard to the whole of the evidence and for the reasons already given, these
orders should be made.
making orders, I will give the Deputy Curator the opportunity to check that the
orders advanced accord with the conclusions
set out in these
I certify that the preceding sixty-one (61)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Chief
Dated: 9 November 2023
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (386 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter