URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2023/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Westpac Banking Corporation v Summerscales (No 2) [2023] NFSC 5 (21 December 2023)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Westpac Banking Corporation v
Summerscales (No 2)
[2023] NFSC 5
File number:
SC 4 of 2022
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
21 December 2023
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
— application
by the plaintiff for summary judgment against the defendant pursuant to r
1146(2) of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) — where the
plaintiff seeks an order for possession of land as mortgagee — where
defendant in default under loan
agreement and served with a Notice of default
under s 88 of the National Credit Code — where default notice not
complied with
— whether the defendant has a good defence to the claim for
relief on the merits or sufficient facts are disclosed to entitle
the defendant
to defend the claim for relief generally — where defence and amended
defence do not raise any matter which specifically
related to the loan agreement
or mortgage or the alleged default — held the plaintiff is entitled to
summary judgment
Legislation:
Supreme Court Act 1960
(NI) ss 5, 19
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) rr 1146, 2451, 2452, 6142, 6143
Cases cited:
Agar v Hyde
[2000] HCA 41
; (2000) 201 CLR 552
Aspen Medical
Pty Ltd v BA Capital Inc
[2021] ACTSC 321
Fancourt v Mercantile
Credits Ltd
[1983] HCA 25
(1983) 154 CLR 87
General Steel Industries
Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR
Westpac Banking Corporation v Glynn
[2022] NSWSC 1770
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
21, 28 November 2023
Counsel for the Plaintiff:
Ms N Bailey
Solicitor for the Plaintiff:
MinterEllison
Counsel for the Defendant:
The Defendant did not Appear
SC 4 of 2022
WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION ABN 33 007 457
GRANT OLIVER
SUMMERSCALES
DATE OF ORDER:
21 DECEMBER 2023
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
defendant’s Interlocutory process dated 31 May 2023 and the
defendant’s Application in proceeding dated 31 May 2023
be dismissed.
be judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant for possession of land as
mortgagee pursuant to the terms of Registered
Mortgage No. 8627 (Mortgage) given
by the defendant in respect of the land described as Lot 7 Section 32 Portion
145g Sheet Number
85 being the whole of the land contained in Title Number 2016
and known as 10 Berrys Lane (also known as Portion 145G Berrys Lane)
application under Chapter 2, Part 2.18, Division 2.18.13 of the
Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) be made for an order authorising an enforcement
officer to enter on the land referred to in the preceding order and deliver
possession of the land and appurtenances to the plaintiff before 12 February
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
BESANKO CJ:
Introduction
is an application by the plaintiff to a proceeding before the Court, Westpac
Banking Corporation (Westpac), for summary judgment
against the defendant, Grant
Oliver Summerscales (Mr Summerscales). The Application for summary judgment is
brought by Westpac pursuant
to r 1146(2) of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) (the Rules) (see s 19(4) of the
Supreme Court Act 1960
(NI)). That rule provides that the Court may grant summary judgment unless
the Court is satisfied that the defendant has a good defence
to the claim for
relief on the merits or sufficient facts are disclosed to entitle the defendant
to defend the claim for relief generally.
order which is sought by Westpac against Mr Summerscales is as
The Court gives summary judgment for the Plaintiff against the Defendant for
possession of land as mortgagee pursuant to the terms
of Registered Mortgage No.
given by the Defendant in respect of the land described
as Lot 7 Section 32 Portion 145g Sheet Number 85 being the whole of the land
contained in Title Number 2016 and known as 10 Berrys Lane (also known as
Portion 145G Berrys Lane) on Norfolk Island.
possession is given voluntarily, such an order is the first stage of the process
whereby Westpac may obtain possession of the
land. The second stage involves
Westpac obtaining an order for delivery of possession of the land (rr
2451–2452).
reasons are divided into three sections. The first section deals with the
evidence put forward in support of Westpac’s
claim. The second section
deals with the matters Mr Summerscales has raised in response to
Westpac’s claim. The third section
deals specifically with the events
surrounding Westpac’s application for summary judgment.
The Evidence in Support of Westpac’s Claim
first affidavit relied on by Westpac is that of Ms Lauren Clarke, who is a case
manager employed by Westpac. Ms Clarke gives
evidence of the loan agreement and
mortgage referred to below by reference to Westpac’s business
or about 15 September 2011, Westpac sent a letter to Mr Summerscales which
contained an offer by Westpac to provide a loan to Mr
Summerscales of $318,000.
The loan was to carry interest at the bank’s variable housing rate and was
repayable over a period
of 25 years. The loan was to be secured by a mortgage
and upon the loan being made, an existing loan was to be repaid.
letter contained a section entitled “Additional Terms and
Conditions” which included the following:
LOAN PURPOSE
The predominant purpose of this loan is repay existing Loan account 032855
141059 in the name of Grant Oliver Summerscales and Candida
Laura Langman and to
assist with Family settlements.
The following will be Security for this contract. You are not obliged to give
any new Security to the Bank but your loan cannot
be drawn until the Security is
completed and signed in the form required by the Bank.
An existing Mortgage by Grant Oliver Summerscales and Candida Laura Langman
over: Portion 145g Berrys Lane Norfolk Island (To be
A new Mortgage by Grant Oliver Summerscales over: Portion 145g Berrys Lane
Norfolk Island (to be taken).
The document is signed in two places by Mr Summerscales and dated 22 September
2011. Westpac’s terms and conditions included
terms and conditions in a
loan booklet which was referred to in the letter and accompanied it. The loan
booklet contains a statement
that it sets out the bank’s standard terms
and conditions for its home loans.
the terms of the loan agreement, Mr Summerscales was required to make monthly
repayments of $2,281 from 15 October 2011 to 15
September 2036. A mortgage
document was prepared and apparently executed by Westpac and Mr Summerscales and
is dated 19 December
the loan agreement, “default interest” becomes payable on the
overdue amount if the borrower does not make a payment
when due and is payable
from the day it was due until it is paid and is calculated daily at the default
rate divided by 365. The
security was to be completed and signed in the form
required by the bank before the loan could be drawn down.
Mr Summerscales’
security obligations are set out in, among other
documents, the loan booklet at clause 13 and those obligations include an
to do everything he promised to do under the mortgage or security for
the loan. The mortgage document includes a Memorandum of Common
Provisions and,
as Westpac pointed out in argument, those common provisions include the
(1) Clause B1 requires Mr Summerscales to pay to Westpac all money he owes to
the bank under the secured arrangements and the term
arrangement” is defined to include the loan agreement (including interest
and charges) and to pay all reasonable
amounts that Westpac reasonably spends or
incurs in relation to the enforcement of the mortgage;
(2) Clause C2 provides that if Mr Summerscales fails to pay Westpac an amount
due under the mortgage or fails to do what he has promised
to do and that
failure continues for at least 7 days, then Westpac may serve a notice on Mr
Summerscales outlining the failure and
then if the failure continues for a
further 31 days, Westpac may require Mr Summerscales to pay all of the
money secured by the mortgage
and may take possession of and sell the property;
(3) Clause E4 provides that a written statement by an officer of Westpac as to
amounts owing under the mortgage is sufficient evidence
against Mr Summerscales
unless he can prove that it is wrong.
loan was drawn down by Mr Summerscales.
15 September 2022, the amount in arrears under the loan agreement was
$134,696.16. At that point, Mr Summerscales was in default
under the loan
agreement and the mortgage and Westpac issued and served a Notice of default in
respect of those defaults under s
88 of the National Credit Code. As I have
said, the unpaid amount was $134,696.16 and if that amount was not paid within
then the amount payable was $362,607.16.
evidence provided in an affidavit of Rachel Maree Rouyanian, who is a solicitor
employed by Westpac’s solicitors, satisfies
me that the default notice
under s 88 was served on Mr Summerscales.
am satisfied that the default notice was not complied with.
we move forward a little under a year to 15 August 2023, the amount in arrears
at that point was $181,351.47 and the amount payable
by Mr Summerscales under
the loan agreement and the mortgage was $410,833.47. The evidence satisfies me
that there has been no deposit
into the account by way of reduction of the debit
balance of the loan facility since a deposit of $1,800 was made on 20 December
Clarke deposes to the fact that she has read Mr Summerscales’ Defence and
Amended Defence and that in light of the matters
set out in her affidavit, she
does not believe he has a good defence to the claim for relief on the merits and
there has been no
disclosure of sufficient facts to entitle Mr Summerscales to
defend the claim for relief and that Mr Summerscales has no prospects
Robert Kneen is a First Constable of Police on Norfolk Island. Affidavits from
him establish service on Mr Summerscales of the
Application for summary judgment
and accompanying affidavits and submissions.
Westpac commenced these proceedings, Mr Summerscales filed a Notice of intention
to respond to Westpac’s claim on 1 June
2023 challenging the jurisdiction
of the Court and asserting an irregularity.
is not without significance in terms of the merits of Westpac’s claim,
that Mr Summerscales told me at the first case management
hearing in this
proceeding on 22 June 2023 that he had asked Westpac to release him from
“this lease” and asked it “to
give me a payout figure so that
I could pay”. He said that Westpac had refused to do that.
Mr Summerscales’ Response to Westpac’s
divide this topic into matters raised in documents and matters raised in
hearings and start with matters raised in documents.
Summerscales has filed two Defences in the course of this proceeding.
first Defence was filed on 31 August 2023. In that Defence, he did not raise
any matter which specifically related to the loan
agreement or the mortgage or
Mr Summerscales’ alleged default under the provisions in either of those
documents. He purports,
however, to challenge the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court of Norfolk Island. He refers to various pieces of legislation and he
asserts that certain legislation was “unlawful and illegal and void,
and as to the constitution and/or composition of the so-called said
Supreme Court of Norfolk Island ...”. He also asserts
that any judicial
officer or registrar sitting in the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island was doing so
as a “persona designate”
and had no lawful capacity or jurisdiction
to do so. He further asserts that Westpac was trading unlawfully, illegally and
violation of the laws of “Norf’k Ailen” or Norfolk
Island people in every manner whatsoever. He challenges Westpac’s
standing to bring this proceeding.
his Amended Defence filed on 12 September 2023, Mr Summerscales reiterates these
“pleas” and adds the following “plea”:
in that at the outset, the standing of the Applicant Plaintiff to bring this
action whatsoever, is challanged [sic] in that pursuant
Territories
Legislation Amendment Act
, 2016 (Cth) [Act No 26 of 2016] [
Assented to on
23 March 2016
], the amendments to the
ACTS INTERPRETATION ACT
Norfolk Island
” was only included into the definition
“Australia”
meaning of the
Commonwealth of Australia
, on or after 24
March 2016, were
unlawful and illegal
as such and banking arrangements between the
Applicant/Plaintiff and the Respondent/Defendant which were concluded before the
abovementioned
date dictates that any such arrangement breaches any contractual
arrangement between the parties, rendering the arrangement
voidable ab initio
. and as such, also breaching the
Banking Act
1959 (Cth).
27 July 2023, Mr Summerscales filed an Interlocutory process and affidavit. In
the former document, Mr Summerscales made a request
for a number of
“orders”, including the following order:
An order that the plaintiff provide sufficient evidence that this Court, sitting
as the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island is a competent
court of record and is
legally and lawfully constituted, to be able to hand down confident judgment and
has the requisite jurisdiction
to bind this “court” and the parties
to this action.
the affidavit, Mr Summerscales alleged that “the only lawful and legal
government on Norfolk Island is that law introduced
to Norfolk Island by the
Pitcairn Settlers” and that the descendants of the Pitcairn Settlers still
survive and include Mr
Summerscales. As I understand it, Mr Summerscales
asserts that neither Westpac nor the Commonwealth of Australia nor the State of
New South Wales has any jurisdiction over Mr Summerscales or the Pitcairn people
(“me or my people”).
Interlocutory process was dismissed at the hearing on 10 August 2023 which is
described below.
7 August 2023, Mr Summerscales purported to file an Amended Interlocutory
process and affidavit. The main thrust of this seemed
to be that Mr
Summerscales will be seeking an order that Westpac pay a sum of “five (5)
times the sum of this action, to be
paid into Court as a ‘
Payments into Court’
. This Interlocutory process was also
dismissed on 10 August 2023.
9 August 2023, two documents were filed. One document was an “Application
for leave to intervene” filed by a person
purporting to be the
Attorney-General of the Norf’k Ailen Government. The document purported
to be an Application to intervene
and for orders that the current proceedings be
dismissed for want of jurisdiction of the Court. The affidavit was filed by a
claiming to be “‘RO’ of the clan
‘i.am.ro’” and claiming to be the current Attorney-General of
Norf’k Ailen Government. The person apparently swearing the affidavit
said that he was appointed to his current position by
the Norf’k Ailen
Chief Magistrate. He deposes that he did not appoint or establish any Supreme
Court on the “terra-firma”
known as Norf’k Ailen since his
tenure. He states that since his appointment, no Court known or addressed as
the Supreme Court
was in existence. He states that he did not appoint any Chief
Justice and he states that no such office existed upon his appointment.
states that any seals applied to the documents are not seals approved or
authorised by the Norf’k Ailen Government. As
to the Court, he states
that it is “not a Court that has any jurisdiction upon the
Constitution
and Laws of the Norf’k Ailen Government, either now or historically from
before these people arrived on Norf’k Ailen
from Pitcairn Island on
June 1856”. The Application for leave to intervene was
dismissed on 10 August 2023.
only matters raised by Mr Summerscales relating to the loan agreement or the
mortgage or Mr Summerscales’ alleged default
under the provisions of
either document were the provision of an account with respect to the amounts
owing under the loan agreement
and mortgage and the provision of a certified
copy of the mortgage. Those matters appear to be the subject of his
Interlocutory
process dated 31 May 2023 and his Application in proceeding
also dated 31 May 2023. As to the former matter, I am satisfied that
provision of the Westpac statements for the period from 15 February 2017 to 15
May 2023 attached to Ms Rouyanian’s affidavit
sworn on 21 June 2023
(Statements Nos 24 to 48) and as to the latter matter, the certified copy of the
mortgage attached to the same
affidavit are sufficient answers to those requests
in the absence of any evidence to suggest that that is not the case. The
with respect to the applications should be formalised and I will make
an order dismissing those applications.
other matter should be mentioned. Reference was made to the recording of the
mortgage on the certificate of title for the land
issued under the
Titles Act 1996
(NI). Although that was done and is shown on Edition 7 in
2019, for some reason unexplained in the correspondence from the Registrar
Titles, it appears it was omitted from Edition 8 in May 2022 and reinstated on
Edition 9 in August 2022. There is no suggestion
that this correction was not
lawfully made by the Registrar under the Land Titles Act. In any event, in the
absence of any persuasive
submissions to the contrary, I am unable to see how
the date of registration of the mortgage on the title is relevant to the
of the mortgage or its enforceability.
have been a number of hearings before the Court and I turn now to make some
relevant observations about what has transpired
at those hearings.
the first case management hearing on 22 June 2023, Mr Summerscales appeared in
person. He told me that he had a disability and
would like a friend to assist
him. I was informed that the name of that friend was a Ms Cherri Buffett.
Westpac had no objection
and I permitted that to occur, although in the result,
Ms Buffett made no comments to the Court and Mr Summerscales made oral
submissions
on his own behalf. I have already referred to
Mr Summerscales’ statement that he was seeking a payout figure so
that he could
pay out Westpac.
the first case management hearing, Mr Summerscales asserted that the Court did
not represent the people of Norfolk Island “people
like myself”. He
said that the Court that I was sitting in and the documents produced appeared to
be foreign to the people
of Norfolk Island. He asserted that he needed to be
satisfied that the Court had jurisdiction in Norfolk Island. I made an order
that Mr Summerscales file a Defence by 27 July 2023 and adjourned the matter for
a further case management hearing on 10 August 2023.
conducted a second case management hearing on 10 August 2023. At that time,
Mr Summerscales had not filed a Defence. He said that
that was because the
Court had not actually established its jurisdiction and that it was not possible
to go forward until the jurisdiction
of the Court was established. I referred
Mr Summerscales to the conferral of jurisdiction by s 5 of the Supreme Court Act
Island and asked Mr Summerscales to identify a basis upon which I
could go behind that conferral of jurisdiction. Mr Summerscales
asked whether
“my Attorney general” was in the Court in Adelaide. Mr Summerscales
asked whether it was possible for
“my Attorney general to speak for
me”. I told him that that was not possible. I again asked Mr
Summerscales to identify
the basis upon which I could go behind the conferral of
Mr Summerscales
then asserted that the Court was an unlawful court. As to
the Supreme Court Act of Norfolk Island, he said the following:
... those are all Acts that – pushed on us by Australia, not Acts made by
people of Norfolk Island or our Norfolk Island government.
or about this point, an adult female in the courtroom in Norfolk Island
interrupted the proceeding and asserted that she was the
Chief Magistrate
“as appointed by the people of Norfolk Island to act under the Pitcairn
Constitution
that was brought here and instigated in 1856”. There was
then an exchange between this person and myself which is recorded
transcript. The female adult asserting to be the Chief Magistrate then said the
following referring to a person she described
as “our Attorney
He has on file documents appointing an Attorney general under the Pitcairn
Constitution
, and he showing bias to the Australian judicial system by not even
imploring our request to have our Attorney general in court.
So you need to
explain why we do not have representation in your court.
Summerscales then asserted that Norfolk Island did not belong to Australia. It
was not in my jurisdiction and not in my
Constitution
. He asserted that I was
acting outside of my
Constitution
and violating “our constitution and our
court”. At that point, I asked Mr Summerscales whether he wanted an
opportunity
to put in writing why I should go behind the conferral of
the adult female said that the Court is a defunct court and a court not erected
by the Norfolk Island government and the people
of Norfolk Island.
then heard from Westpac. After they had completed their submissions, I noted
for the purposes of the transcript that the defendant
and Ms Buffett and the
person claiming to be the Chief Magistrate left the courtroom in Norfolk Island
before counsel for Westpac
commenced her submissions.
person identifying himself as Mr Ro was present in the courtroom in Adelaide and
I asked him whether he had anything to add to the
material that was put forward
in support of his Application to intervene. He made some observations. I then
dismissed the application
for leave to intervene.
will be clear from what I have set out above that nothing has been put forward
by Mr Summerscales to indicate that he has any defence
to Westpac’s
claim on the merits. Nor have sufficient facts been disclosed to entitle Mr
Summerscales to defend the claim
for relief.
Westpac’s Application for Summary Judgment
a case management hearing on 13 September 2023 at which Mr Summerscales appeared
(announcing that his name was “Grant”),
Westpac foreshadowed an
application for summary judgment. I made the following orders:
application for summary judgment (
Summary Judgment Application
by the Plaintiff by 20 September 2023.
Defendant file and serve any affidavit material in response to the Summary
Judgment Application by 4 October 2023.
Plaintiff file and serve a written outline of submissions in respect of its
Summary Judgment Application by 11 October 2023.
Defendant file and serve any written outline of submissions in respect of the
Summary Judgment Application by 25 October 2023.
Summary Judgment Application be listed for hearing on 10:30am Norfolk Island
time on 14 November 2023 or on the date next available
to this Honourable Court.
material to be filed in accordance with Orders 1 to 5 may be filed
electronically by sending it by email to the Registry at the
following email
addresses: allen.bataille@courts.gov.nf; Margaret.evans@courts.gov.nf; and
registrar@courts.gov.nf.
issued its summary judgment application on 20 September 2023 together with the
affidavits of Ms Clarke and Ms Rouyanian (order
1). It provided an outline of
submissions on 11 October 2023 (order 3). As it happened, I was not available
on 14 November 2023
and the parties were advised that the matter had been
relisted for 21 November 2023. I will come back to how Mr Summerscales was
advised of the change of date.
Summerscales did not file any affidavit material by 4 October 2023 in accordance
with order 2 or a written outline of submissions
by 25 October 2023 in
accordance with order 4 and he did not appear on 21 November 2023.
Mr Summerscales did do between 13 September 2023 and 21 November 2023, or
claimed that he did, was the following:
(1) It seems that on or about 14 November 2023, Mr Summerscales sought to file
an Interlocutory process and affidavit. The Registrar
of the Court refused to
accept the documents (r 6142). The documents were returned to Mr Summerscales
as required by the Rules (r
6143). As it happened, copies of the documents were
later sent to the Registry of the Court on Norfolk Island with “no
sender” via Officeworks which is not located on Norfolk Island.
In light of Mr Summerscales’ status as a self-represented
litigant and the
significance of the order being sought by Westpac, I considered the matters
raised in the documents in case they
raised something new that might be relevant
to whether or not summary judgment ought to be granted. They do not. The focus
foreshadowed defence is the jurisdiction of the Court and whether, to use
Mr Summerscales words, “the sitting of this Court
is under a foreign
additional defence (which of these
it is not clear to me) was that my
appointment as Chief Justice was and is invalid because it was made before
Ailen” became part of Australia on 24 March 2016.
Mr Summerscales also asserted that the Australian Government “are still
attempting to mask their unlawful behaviour to try to usurp control over
Norf’k Ailen (also known as Norfolk Island)”.
Mr Summerscales asserted that Westpac “acted unlawfully in its
dealings with the banking transactions related to
the core matters of the merits
of this Claim”. No particulars whatsoever of this serious allegation of
unlawful conduct are
provided. Mr Summerscales has had ample opportunity
to provide any relevant particulars of any alleged unlawful conduct by Westpac.
Had I thought that there was anything in these documents, I might have given
Mr Summerscales an opportunity to file a further affidavit,
but there is
nothing. In his affidavit, Mr Summerscales said that he attended the Court on
14 November 2023 and that he was then
told that the matter had been stood over
to 21 November 2023.
(2) There was then correspondence between the Registrar and Mr Summerscales
wherein Mr Summerscales complained about the Registrar’s
refusal to accept
his documents and the fixing of a new date. He said that he was unavailable on
the new date.
Mr Summerscales delivered a letter to the Registrar on 16 November 2023. He
complained about the reference to a post office box
on Norfolk Island. He
states that he is bewildered as to why the Registrar would address a letter to a
post office box number.
He states that he does not have a post office box. He
again raises the Registrar’s refusal to accept documents. He states
he has not been served with any advice or information of the orders made on 13
September 2023, nor any advice that the matter
was now stood adjourned to 21
November 2023. He states that he will appeal from the refusal to allow him to
file his Interlocutory
application. He states that he is unavailable to attend
Court on 21 November 2023. He states that should the Registrar be prepared
allow him to appear by video link, he will endeavour to accommodate matters.
(3) On the morning of 21 November 2023 and shortly before the hearing on that
day, Mr Summerscales sent a letter to the Court which
contained the
I, Grant of the Summerscales family hereby authorise Cherri Buffett, to act on
my behalf and to have a look at my file SC 4 2022
and to request copy of any
documents within that file.
If there is a Hearing today for SC 4 2022 then I request to appear by AVL and
would ask you to give Cherri Buffett the log in details.
I refused the request in the second paragraph of this letter. It is true that I
allowed Westpac’s counsel, who was located
in New South Wales, to appear
remotely. Mr Summerscales, however, was on Norfolk Island and the request
in the second paragraph
was made very late and without a reason being provided.
The nature of the request was unclear. The Court was asked to provide log
details to Ms Cherri Buffett and Mr Summerscales stated that he authorised
Ms Cherri Buffett to appear on his behalf. Precisely
what that meant was
unclear. Even if this was no more than a request to be assisted by a McKenzie
friend, I considered that allowing
a person to appear remotely assisted by a
McKenzie friend was a matter which was capable of creating difficulties.
terms of the notice given to Mr Summerscales of the change of date from 14
November 2023 to 21 November 2023 and then the adjournment
from 21 November 2023
to 28 November 2023, the following should be noted.
Summerscales filed a Notice of intention to respond on 1 June 2023, the notice
records his address for service as 10 Berrys Lane,
Norfolk Island, no other
Mr Summerscales.
14 June 2023, Mr Summerscales hand delivered a letter to the Registry dealing
with the post office box. The letter was in the
following terms:
Dear Deputy Registrar
Thankyou for your email and the information received from the Associate of Judge
I do not have an internet service and I would like to have any communication of
documents sent to c/- PO Box 8 Norfolk Island. This
way I can be assured that
the documents will be received by me.
Thank you for your assistance in this matter.
Grant: of the Summerscales family
14 June 2023, correspondence from the Court has been sent to the above post
office box.
note at this point that Westpac has copied in an email address for Mr
Summerscales in its correspondence to the Court. The Court
has also copied in
the email address for Mr Summerscales in addition to sending the
correspondence to the post office box. There
is evidence contained in an
affidavit filed by Westpac that Mr Summerscales has communicated with Westpac
using an email address.
The affidavit of Ms Rouyanian sworn on 21 June 2023
and, in particular, RR‑1 pages 13–14, show communications between
Westpac’s solicitors and Mr Summerscales in late May 2023 using an email
address for Mr Summerscales. The Court advised the
parties by email of the
change of date from 14 November 2023 to 21 November 2023. I do not need to rely
on this to conclude that
Mr Summerscales had notice of the hearing on 21
November 2023 because it is clear from the matters referred to below that he did
have such notice (see [
Summerscales appeared in person at the Norfolk Island courthouse for the case
management hearing on 13 September 2023. During
the case management hearing,
Mr Summerscales was provided with a hard copy of the proposed orders sought
by Westpac and the Court
adjourned for a period of time to allow Mr Summerscales
to consider those orders. The Court asked Mr Summerscales if he wanted to
anything about the orders. The orders were then made orally in the form
proposed by Westpac except for the date in order 5 being
extended to 14 November
2023 or on the date next available to the Court because Mr Summerscales had
“some other matters on”.
I have said, the parties were advised of the change of date from 14 November
2023 to 21 November 2023 by email on 2 November 2023.
A letter enclosing
the email and a copy of the 13 September 2023 orders were posted to the post
office box address provided by Mr
Summerscales. In addition, on his own
account, Mr Summerscales was also advised of the change of date when he
attended the Registry
to file documents on 14 November 2023. There is also
Mr Summerscales’ letter provided to the Court shortly before the
on 21 November 2023 and referred to in [
](3) above.
the hearing on 21 November 2023, counsel for Westpac appeared, but there was no
appearance by Mr Summerscales. I heard submissions
from counsel for
Westpac in support of Westpac’s application for summary judgment.
Although I considered Mr Summerscales had
adequate notice of the hearing on 21
November 2023, I decided to give him a further chance to appear and make
submissions. I then
made the following orders:
application brought by the plaintiff dated 19 September 2023 be adjourned to
Tuesday, 28 November 2023 at 10:30 am Norfolk Island
plaintiff serve the defendant with a copy of the transcript of this
morning’s hearing and a note as to the adjourned hearing
date and time by
4:00 pm on Thursday, 23 November 2023.
23 November 2023, Westpac filed an affidavit of Senior Constable of Police,
Robert Kneen. Senior Constable Kneen was instructed
by Westpac to serve Mr
Summerscales with a letter from Westpac’s solicitors stating that
Westpac’s summary judgment application
had been adjourned to 10.30 am
Norfolk Island time on Tuesday, 28 November 2023. A sealed copy of the order
and the transcript of
the hearing was also part of the instructions.
Constable Kneen attended Mr Summerscales’ property with Senior Constable
Mukhim on 23 November 2023 and he left a copy
of the documents that had
been placed in a clear plastic sleeve on the front doormat on the porch of the
property. Photographs of
the documents in that position are attached to Senior
Constable Kneen’s affidavit. Senior Constable Kneen deposes as
Mr Summerscales is known to me in my capacity as officer of the Australian
Federal Police. I have spoken to Mr Summerscales on two
previous occasions and
seen him on Norfolk Island on multiple occasions. I know the Property to be Mr
Summerscales’ place
of residence because I have personally served Mr
Summerscales at that location on one prior occasion and I have previously
to a noise complaint whereby the complainant stated Mr Summerscales
was trying to rest at that address and was being disturbed by
shooting on a
neighbouring property.
was also an affidavit by a solicitor employed by the solicitors for Westpac
(Harriet Campbell Lomas). The solicitor annexed
the same letter, transcript and
sealed order of 21 November 2023. The solicitor deposes to the fact that
she sent the letter and
transcript to Mr Summerscales at the email addresses she
had for him and shortly thereafter, a copy of the sealed order. Again,
need to rely on this in view of the other evidence previously outlined.
bundle of papers was handed to the Registrar by Ms Cherri Buffett before the
hearing on the morning of 28 November 2023. Those
papers included a letter
from Mr Summerscales dated 28 November 2023, a letter purporting to be from
the Chief Magistrate of the
Norf’k Ailen Government dated 28 November
2023, and two affidavits, one of Darryl Mark O’Bryan and the other of
his letter, Mr Summerscales refers to the refusal by the Registrar to accept
documents he put forward for filing. Mr Summerscales
asserts that he had not
been consulted as to his availability for another date for hearing and, in
particular, 28 November 2023.
He refers to the fact that he attended the
courthouse on 14 November 2023 and that it was closed. He states that he then
the Registrar’s office and was advised that the hearing had been
postponed. He had not been advised that the hearing would
not be held on 14
November 2023. He states that “for personal medical reasons” he
would not be able to attend a hearing
on 28 November 2023 and now did not have a
confirmed date as to when that may even be considered. He asserts that since
appearance in the matter, all of his documents have been ignored or
dismissed. He asserts that I have failed in various duties.
He states that
since the first hearing in the matter, he has continued to ask for evidence that
the Court is a lawful and legal
court of “Norf’k Ailen (also known
as Norfolk Island)”. He states that he considers that he is entitled to
the jurisdiction of the Court and that the Court must address the
Hansard shows
that Norfolk Island has never been part of the State of New South Wales since
Federation. He also refers to publicly
available Australian Government official
documents after 2014. He states that they show that Norfolk Island has never
of the State of New South Wales and is not part of, owned by, or
annexed to the Commonwealth of Australia. He asserts that the Australian
Government has no authority in law to be administering Norfolk Island. He
refers to the Acts Interpretation Act. He refers to the
fact that the
Government Act 1993
(NSW) does not include Norfolk Island. He refers to the
fact that further inquiries have revealed that these proceedings and the
itself, especially “with respect to Corporation only registered a
‘mortgage encumbrance’ on my property (to
which this matter refers)
August 2022”. He asserts (as he has in the past) that
“on the merits of the claim itself in this matter” he will
pleadings which demonstrate that Westpac has acted unlawfully in its dealings
with the banking transactions relating to the
core matters of the merits of this
claim. He also asks that Westpac provide written evidence to him and the court
that the court
sitting as the Supreme Court of Norf’k Ailen is a competent
court of record and is legally and lawfully constituted to be able
to hand down
competent judgments and that the so-called court has the requisite jurisdiction
to bind the parties to this action.
Finally, he states that he considers that I
have shown bias and that that is evident from the communication prior to the
on 21 November 2023 and to the email sent to his McKenzie friend dated
21 November 2023. He asserts that the content of that email,
which is set out
below, sent to his McKenzie friend denied him his human rights to be heard at
the hearing by AVL. He concludes
his letter by referring to the two affidavits
relating to the hearing on 21 November 2023. He also asserts that the Court
take into account Magna Carta. He asserts that the judge and the Court
have erred in relation to this matter and that the judge’s
statements and
orders are void and this whole matter, the judge, the courts are “Coram
non judice and nullity”.
letter from the person purporting to be the Chief Magistrate of Norf’k
Ailen Government is dated 28 November 2023. The
person, whose name does not
appear, referred to her appearance on 10 August 2023 when she presented herself
as the Chief Magistrate
of Norf’k Ailen. The letter refers to the Supreme
Court of Norfolk Supreme as “defunct”. The author of the letter
states that she has received a complaint from Mr Summerscales. She states
that neither she nor her Attorney General has appointed
me to office. She
states the following:
Let me remind you, the power, and laws of the
Constitution
of Pitcairn Island,
dated 1838 and those laws and
Constitution
which the Pitcairn Settlers brought
to Norf’k Ailen (also known as Norfolk Island), and along with the Great
Seal issued to
the Norf’k Ailenders in 1856, and the
Pacific Islanders
Protection Act 1875,
to name a few, are still very much the authority here
on this ailen.
I strongly advise yourself, and any other person who has not been appointed by
myself as Chief Magistrate of Norf’k Ailen (also
known as Norfolk Island),
or my Attorney General, to cease your actions effective immediately, or you may
find yourself and others
liable for prosecution for usurping the laws and
governance of Norf’k Ailen (also known as Norfolk Island).
letter states that copies had been sent to the Governor General of the
Commonwealth of Australia, the Attorney-General of the
Commonwealth of
Australia, the Chief Justice of the Federal Court of Australia, Westpac and the
O’Bryan is resident in Victoria. He states that he attended the
courthouse on Norfolk Island “for the purpose of entertainment
tourist to Norfolk Island on the 21st of November 2023”. On attending at
the courthouse, he witnessed a number of Federal
Police standing at the entrance
to the courthouse. That led him to believe that a court case was in motion. He
states that on approaching
the entrance to the courthouse, a member of the
Federal Police and a lady dressed in black attire restricted entrance to the
building. The Federal Police officer asked why he and his friend Darren
were entering the courthouse. Darren replied that they
were there to witness a
public court hearing. The Federal Police officer replied that the only matter
scheduled for hearing was
an AVL hearing. He states that he was confused as the
police, and it seemed like court staff, were in attendance for the purpose
public hearing. He states that he was reading the plaques placed near the
entrance to the court building. The lady dressed
in black came out and said
“Is Mr Summerscales here”. Mr O’Bryan said that this confused
him and he made a comment
to the effect that he thought that the event was an
AVL hearing. The lady did not reply.
Dickson’s affidavit is to broadly similar effect. He is also a resident
of Victoria. As he walked to enter the court to
attend an open public hearing,
he was approached by a police officer and a female court officer and asked what
he wanted. He replied
that he wanted to attend the court to watch a public
hearing. The police officer replied that there were none and that all hearings
were being held by AVL which he explained was by video link. On the way out of
the courtyard, Messrs O’Bryan and Dickson stopped
to look at the tourist
information plaques which explained the layout of the courtyard. The lady who
had accompanied the police
officer came out calling for Grant Summerscales. Mr
Dickson states that his friend Darren said that he thought it was an AVL court.
This confused Mr Dickson because he was uncertain as to why they would be
calling for someone to appear if the Court was closed
for AVL video link cases
matter came on again for hearing on 28 November 2023. There was no appearance
at that time by Mr Summerscales. There was no
proper basis to adjourn the
matter further. I indicated that I wished to deliver written reasons at the
time I made orders and,
in those circumstances, I reserved my decision.
recognise that the power to award summary judgment must be exercised sparingly
and the case must be clear. Nevertheless, I consider
that this is such a case.
Westpac is entitled to summary judgment (
General Steel Industries Inc v
Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
128–129 per Barwick CJ;
Fancourt v Mercantile Credits Ltd
(1983) 154 CLR 87
Aspen Medical Pty Ltd v BA Capital Inc
[2021] ACTSC 321
–[70] per Crowe AJ; and
Agar v Hyde
[2000] HCA 41
; (2000) 201 CLR 552 at 575–576).
regard to the nature of the order and the time of year, I will order that no
application for an order for delivery of possession
of land be made under
Chapter 2, Part 2.18, Division 2.18.13 of the
Court Procedures Rules
(ACT) before 12 February 2024 (
Westpac Banking Corporation v Glynn
[2022] NSWSC 1770).
I certify that the preceding sixty-two (62)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Chief
Dated: 21 December 2023
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (418 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter