URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stoffels v Piper (No 2) [2024] NFSC 4 (3 June 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Stoffels v Piper (No 2)
[2024] NFSC 4
File number(s):
SC 1 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
3 June 2024
Date of publication of reasons:
6 June 2024
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– enforcement
of court order – order for seizure and detention of property
CONTEMPT OF COURT
– failure to comply with court order
– sentenced for contempt – punishment for contempt deferred
Legislation:
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Partition Act 1900
Supreme Court Act 1960
(NI) s 5(2)(b)
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) rr 2442, 2446, 2470, 2471, 2500,
Cases cited:
Stoffels v Piper
[2024] NFSC 2
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
[1995] HCA 3
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
3 June 2024
Solicitor for the Plaintiff:
J Brown of McIntyres Lawyers
Counsel for the Defendant:
The Defendant appeared in person
SC 1 of 2023
ERIKA LEE STOFFELS
ANDREW HARRY PIPER
DATE OF ORDER:
3 JUNE 2024
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
2 and 3 of the orders made by Wigney J on 13 May 2024 be varied
by deleting the words “17 May 2024” and inserting the words
“22 May 2024”.
order for seizure and detention of property be made pursuant to rr 2442 and 2470
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), in the form annexed to these
orders, in respect of 65 Captain Quintal Drive, Norfolk Island, in execution of
order 9 of the
orders made by Wigney J on 30 January 2024, as varied by order 1
of the orders made by Wigney J on 13 May 2024.
defendant, Mr Andrew Harry Piper, be convicted of contempt for failing to comply
with order 9 of the orders made by Wigney J on
30 January 2024, as varied by
order 1 of the orders made by Wigney J on 13 May 2024.
punishment, if any, of the defendant, Mr Andrew Harry Piper, for the contempt
referred to in order 3 be deferred to 24 June 2024
at 10.15am AEST (11.15am
Norfolk Island Time).
defendant file and serve any evidence on which he wishes to rely and any
submissions in respect of punishment, if any, of him
for contempt on or before
17 June 2024.
plaintiff file and serve any evidence on which she wishes to rely and any
submissions in respect of punishment, if any, of the
defendant for contempt on
or before 20 June 2024.
proceeding be listed for hearing on 24 June 2024 at 10.15am AEST (11.15am
Norfolk Island Time).
REASONS FOR
Revised from transcript
30 January 2024, I delivered a judgment and made orders pursuant to the
Partition Act
(NSW), as it applies in Norfolk Island,
which provided for the sale of a property on Norfolk Island (the
) which was jointly owned by the plaintiff, Ms Erika Stoffels,
and the defendant, Mr Andrew Piper. These reasons for judgment should
together with that earlier judgment: see
Stoffels v Piper
[2024] NFSC 2
principal judgment
). Mr Piper has not appealed the principal
judgment. The issue currently before the Court concerns the enforcement of the
orders made on 30 January 2024 included ancillary orders to facilitate the sale
of the Property pursuant to the
Partition Act
of the orders
made on 30 January 2024 was that the defendant vacate the Property within 21
days from the date of the orders and deliver
the keys to the agent. Order 3
provided for the appointment of an agent agreed by the parties or, failing any
such agreement, an
agent selected by the Registrar. Mr Piper was in court on 30
January 2024 when I delivered the principal judgment and made those
is no dispute that Mr Piper has not vacated the Property. There was evidence
before the court to that effect, and Mr Piper
has not suggested otherwise.
Ms Stoffels’ enforcement application
19 April 2024, Ms Stoffels filed an application in the proceeding (the
enforcement application
) in which she sought various orders, including an
order that Mr Piper show cause why he should not be found guilty of contempt as
a result of his failure to vacate the Property in accordance with Order 9. The
application was supported by an affidavit sworn by
Ms Stoffels’ solicitor,
Stoffels’ application was listed for a case management hearing on 13 May
2024. Mr Piper appeared in person at that case
management hearing. Mr Brown
appeared for Ms Stoffels. Several issues were ventilated at the case management
it was made clear to Mr Piper that Ms Stoffels had filed the enforcement
application because he had not vacated the Property
in accordance with Order 9.
Mr Piper did not suggest that he had vacated the Property. Indeed, he made it
clear that he had not.
Mr Piper raised an issue concerning Order 9. That issue was that the order
required him to deliver the keys to an agent,
however no agent had been
appointed. He noted that he did not reach any agreement with Ms Stoffels about
the appointment of an agent,
and the Registrar had not appointed an agent
pursuant to order 3 of the orders. He suggested that he was therefore not able
comply with Order 9. In response to that rather technical argument, Mr
Brown applied to vary Order 9 by deleting the words “to
and inserting instead the words “to the Registrar.” I acceded to
that application and varied Order 9
accordingly. The effect of the variation of
the order was that, if and when Mr Piper vacated the Property, as required by
9, he was required to deliver the keys to the Registrar and not an
in relation to that part of the enforcement application that concerned the
allegation that Mr Piper was in contempt, I indicated
that it would be necessary
to give Mr Piper an opportunity to both adduce any evidence upon which he wished
to rely, and to advance
any submissions he wanted to advance, in defence or
opposition to that allegation. It was, however, made abundantly clear to Mr
Piper that, while the Court would obviously hear, and closely consider, his
evidence and submissions, if he did not vacate the Property
and was unable to
point to any lawful or legitimate basis for not complying with Order 9, he may
be convicted of contempt.
in response to queries raised by the Court about the Court’s power to make
some of the other orders sought in the enforcement
application, Mr Brown
foreshadowed that he was going to seek to amend the enforcement application to,
among other things, explicitly
include other enforcement orders which are
provided in the rules which apply to this Court, which are the
(ACT). The enforcement orders foreshadowed by
Mr Brown included, in addition to enforcement by contempt, an order for seizure
detention of the property, as provided for in rr 2442(2)(b) and 2470 of the
I made various procedural orders which included that Ms Stoffels’
foreshadowed amended enforcement application, and any
further evidence relied on
in support of it, were to be served on or before 17 May 2024, and that Mr Piper
serve any evidence upon
which he proposed to rely in response to the application
on or before 24 May 2024. The enforcement application was listed for hearing
3 June 2024. The effect of those procedural orders was explained to Mr
The amended application and Ms Stoffels’ evidence
Stoffels ultimately filed an amended application, though she did not do so by 17
May 2024. The amended application was filed on
22 May 2024. A further
affidavit sworn by Mr Brown was also filed on that day. That affidavit, among
other things, explained the
delay in filing the amended application and the
affidavit, and sought an extension of time. Mr Brown’s further affidavit
included evidence that Mr Piper continued to occupy the Property. The
amended application and Mr Brown’s affidavit were served
on Mr Piper on 22
May 2024. Also served on Mr Piper that day was a notice about the available
options and orders that might be made
in respect of the enforcement of the
principal judgment. That notice advised Mr Piper that the enforcement options
which were available,
if he did not comply with Order 9, included, among other
things, an order for seizure of the Property, and an order that he was guilty
contempt and that he be punished accordingly.
evidence in Mr Brown’s two affidavits (the one which accompanied the
original enforcement application and the one filed
on 22 May 2024) was
essentially formal and uncontroversial. They both annexed a series of emails
between Mr Brown and Mr Piper.
I do not propose to deal with the content of
those communications, save as to note that they evidenced Mr Piper’s
recalcitrance
and refusal to vacate the Property. Both affidavits contained Mr
Brown’s observation that Mr Piper has not vacated the Property.
already been noted, that is uncontentious. Mr Piper does not claim that he has
vacated the Property. Mr Brown’s second
affidavit also contained some
uncontentious evidence about the joint ownership of the Property.
Mr Piper’s evidence and submissions
Piper filed two affidavits in opposition to the orders sought by Ms Stoffels.
first affidavit, which is nine paragraphs in length, essentially made two
points. The first point was that the amended application
and Mr Brown’s
affidavit in support were filed and served after 17 May 2024, which was the date
specified in the orders made
at the case management hearing. As already noted,
the amended application and Mr Brown’s affidavit were filed and served on
22 May 2024. It is, however, abundantly clear that Mr Piper had had sufficient
time and an adequate opportunity to read and consider
both the amended
application and Mr Brown’s affidavit prior to the hearing of the amended
enforcement application. He did
not assert, at least in his affidavit, that
given the late service he was unable to respond to those documents, or that he
was otherwise
prejudiced by the late service in any way. In his submissions in
opposition to the amended application, Mr Piper did suggest that
effect, chosen not to fully read the amended application and Mr Brown’s
affidavit because they were served after
17 May 2024. That does not detract
from the point that he had every opportunity to read those documents, had he
chosen to do so.
I also have great difficulty in accepting Mr Piper’s
self-serving assertion from the Bar table that he had chosen not the
second point addressed in Mr Piper’s first affidavit was that Order 9
originally provided that he was required to deliver
the keys to the agent once
he vacated the Property. Mr Piper did not, however, suggest that he had taken
any steps towards vacating
the Property, either before Order 9 was varied, or
after the variation. He simply intimated, in effect, that had he vacated the
Property, he would have been unable to deliver the keys.
Piper’s second affidavit is eight paragraphs in length and has some
annexures. It addressed a different topic. It is a
topic that Mr Piper had
addressed in previous evidence and previous submissions, both in opposition to
the original orders under
Partition Act
and at the last case management
hearing. That topic relates to the position of St. George
Property is subject to a mortgage held by the Bank. It is common ground that
the mortgage is in default. Mr Piper referred
in his affidavit to several
conversations and correspondence he has had with officers of the Bank and its
parent company, the Westpac
Banking Corporation. He also annexed some email
correspondence between himself and officers of those banks. Mr Piper also
tendered a bundle of other communications, mainly email
communications between himself and the Bank over a lengthy period of time.
do not propose to refer to the details of the conversations referred to in Mr
Piper’s affidavit or the email correspondence
annexed to the affidavit and
tendered separately. The upshot of the communications is that the mortgage is
in default. However,
it is readily apparent that the Bank has not taken any
formal steps to enforce the mortgage. Indeed, Mr Piper candidly conceded,
his submissions, that no steps have been taken by the Bank to foreclose on the
mortgage. Mr Piper nevertheless claimed that the
Bank had somehow
“asserted its ownership” of the Property.
Piper’s submissions at the hearing of the enforcement application
essentially rehearsed and developed the points and claims
made in his
affidavits.
was and is no dispute that Mr Piper has not vacated the Property and not
delivered the keys to the Registrar in accordance with
Order 9 as varied. Mr
Piper’s evidence and submissions essentially raised three issues.
whether the late service of the amended application and further evidence somehow
prevented Ms Stoffels from prosecuting the
enforcement application.
whether the fact that Order 9 originally provided that Mr Piper was to deliver
the keys to an agent, in circumstances where
there was no agent, provided any
legitimate ground for Mr Piper’s opposition to the enforcement
application, including the
claim of contempt.
Mr Piper’s claims and assertions
concerning the position of the Bank provided any ground for his opposition to
the enforcement
application, including the claim of contempt.
Extension of time to file the amended application and further
relation to Mr Piper’s point concerning the late filing of the amended
application and Mr Brown’s affidavit in support,
in my view it is
appropriate to vary the order made at the case management hearing to, in effect,
grant an ex post facto extension
of time to file those documents. Mr Piper
clearly had adequate time to consider and respond to the amended application and
affidavit evidence. He did not claim to be prejudiced by the late
filing and service. Even if he did, I would reject that claim.
noted, Mr Brown’s further affidavit does not add much to his earlier
affidavit. It is in any event very short
and the evidence in it is essentially
uncontroversial. The amended application essentially addressed the issues that
were discussed
at the case management hearing and could hardly be said to have
taken Mr Piper by surprise.
therefore propose to make an order varying orders 2 and 3 of the orders made on
13 May 2024
nunc pro tunc
by changing the date “17 May 2024”
to “22 May 2024”. That effectively amounts to a retrospective
of time for Ms Stoffels to have filed the amended application and
affidavit in support.
The issue concerning the delivery of the keys
fact that Order 9 as originally made provided for the delivery of keys to an
agent in circumstances where no agent was appointed
does not provide any
legitimate ground for Mr Piper to oppose the enforcement application, including
the claim of contempt. It does
not provide any excuse or justification for Mr
Piper’s ongoing refusal to vacate the Property.
Piper claimed that it would have been irresponsible for him to vacate the
Property in circumstances where he was unable to leave
the keys with anyone.
There is no merit in the claim. Even before the variation of Order 9, Mr Piper
no doubt could have raised
the issue with Mr Brown, or delivered the keys to Mr
Brown, or the Registrar, if he had had any genuine intention to comply with
order. Mr Piper obviously had no intention to, and took no steps to, vacate the
Property at that time. The issue with the delivery
of the keys was in those
circumstances essentially irrelevant. In any event, whatever may have been the
position prior to the variation
of Order 9, since that time Mr Piper was able to
deliver the keys to the Registrar upon vacating the Property. He has not
the Property or delivered the keys to the Registrar.
The position of the Bank
Piper’s various claims and assertions concerning the position of the Bank
do not provide any legitimate ground for opposition
to the enforcement
application, including the claim of contempt. Whatever may be the Bank’s
position concerning the enforcement
of the mortgage, it does not provide any
excuse or justification for Mr Piper’s ongoing failure and refusal to
comply with
Order 9 as varied.
for Mr Piper’s claim that the Bank has somehow asserted ownership of the
Property, I do not entirely understand what Mr Piper
means in that respect. If
he intends to assert that the Bank is somehow in possession of the Property, or
has taken formal steps
to secure an order for possession of the Property so it
might be sold, or that the Bank is in some sort of position to prevent or
the Property being sold pursuant to the Court’s order, that assertion is
unsupported by the evidence and is rejected.
The Bank's interest is limited to
being the mortgagee of the Property. While the mortgage is in default, the Bank
has taken no
step to foreclose, or obtain possession of the Property, or sell
it. Mr Piper’s claim that the Bank has asserted ownership
is supported by
nothing more than an obviously unreliable and self-serving hearsay account of a
conversation or conversations with
officers of the Bank. In any event, if the
Bank believes it has a right to prevent the court-ordered sale, it will need to
to be joined as a party to this proceeding and seek appropriate relief.
It has not done so to date. Aside from Mr Piper's bare
assertion, I have seen
no evidence to suggest that the Bank has any rights in respect of the Property
other than rights as a mortgagee
which it has taken no steps to enforce.
should finally add on that topic that Mr Piper's various other assertions
concerning the position of the Bank and the sale of the
Property in that context
were addressed in the principal judgment at [13]-[16]. It is unnecessary to
revisit those issues.
Piper has not vacated the Property and delivered the keys to the Registrar as
required by Order 9 as varied. There is nothing
in either of Mr Piper's two
affidavits, or the documentary material he has tendered, or in his submissions,
which provides any lawful,
legitimate, or reasonable justification or excuse for
his non-compliance with that order.
infer and conclude on the basis of the evidence that Mr Piper has knowingly and
deliberately failed and refused to comply with Order
9 as varied. That
situation will no doubt persist unless and until the Court makes further orders
to enable the enforcement of Order
9 as varied.
Enforcement of the orders
is appropriate for the Court to make orders to enable the enforcement of Order 9
as varied. The two most appropriate means by
which to enforce Order 9 are:
first, enforcement by contempt; and second, making an order for seizure and
detention of the Property
by an enforcement officer. Both of those means of
enforcement are provided by r 2442 of the Rules.
will deal with the order for seizure and detention of the Property first.
Order for seizure and detention of the Property
2442(2)(b) of the Rules provides that an order for seizure and detention of
property is available where the order to be enforced
is a "non-money order" to
do an act within a stated time. Order 9 is plainly a non-money order and
requires Mr Piper to do an act
– to vacate the Property – within a
stated time – within 21 days of the making of the order on 30 January
preconditions to the making of an order for seizure and detention of property
are specified in r 2446: see r 2442(2).
2446(1) sets out certain preconditions, though subrule (2) provides that those
preconditions do not apply if the person who was
required to do an act has
notice of the order because the person was present when the order was made.
That is the position with
respect to Mr Piper. He was present not only on 30
January 2024 when the Order 9 was made, but also when that order was varied by
the Court on 13 May 2024.
are no other relevant preconditions to the making of an order for seizure and
detention of property.
2470 and 2471 provide as follows:
2470 Order for seizure and detention of property—making
The court may make an order (an order for seizure and detention of property)
authorising an enforcement officer to seize and detain
all real and personal
property (other than exempt property) in which the person liable to comply with
a non-money order has a legal
or beneficial interest.
Note Pt 6.2 (Applications in proceedings) applies to an application for an
order under this rule.
2471 Order for seizure and detention of property—preconditions
The court may make an order for seizure and detention of property only if the
non-money order being enforced stated a time for compliance
and the time has
am satisfied that Order 9, as varied by order 1 of the orders made on 13 May
2024, is a non-money order, and that the time stated
for compliance has passed.
In those circumstances, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to make an order
for seizure and detention
of the Property pursuant to rr 2442 and 2470 of the
Rules for the purposes of enforcing Order 9 as varied. Nothing in Mr
evidence or submission persuades me otherwise.
for contempt, this Court has jurisdiction to deal with contempt: see s 5(2)(b)
Supreme Court Act 1960
(NI). It is trite law that failure to
comply with a court order may constitute contempt.
Enforcement
action by way of contempt is addressed in Div 2.18.16 of the Rules. That
division applies, among other things, to a contempt
for contravention of an
order of the court: see r 2500(a).
2501 provides as follows.
2501 Contempt—applications generally
(1) A person applying for punishment of a person (the respondent) for contempt
must make an application to the court stating the
alleged contempt.
(2) The application may be made—
(a) in the proceeding in which the contempt was committed; or Note Pt 6.2
(Applications in proceedings) applies to an application
under this paragraph.
(b) by originating application.
Note Div 2.2.3 (Originating
applications) contains provisions about the contents of originating
applications, the filing and service
of originating applications,
(3) The application must set out particulars of the contempt.
(4) The application and any affidavit in support of it must be served on the
respondent personally.
(5) An affidavit in support of or opposing the application must not contain
evidence that the person making it could not give if
giving evidence orally.
Stoffels has made an application to the Court stating the alleged contempt and
setting out particulars of the contempt. Prayer
7 of the amended application
satisfies those conditions. It provides the following particulars of the
alleged contempt:
That the defendant be found guilty of contempt of court and punished accordingly
as a result of his failure to vacate the property
in accordance with the orders
made herein on 30 January 2024, in particular, order 9 thereof, and order 1 of
the orders made herein
dated 13 May 2024.
is abundantly clear, in my view, that Mr Piper is aware of the nature of the
alleged contempt.
amended application and the affidavit in support were personally served on Mr
Piper: see the affidavit of Christopher James Higgins
dated 22 May 2024.
standard of proof in a contempt proceeding is the criminal standard of beyond
reasonable doubt: see
Witham v Holloway
(1995) 183 CLR 525
[1995] HCA 3.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Piper has failed and refused to
comply with Order 9, as varied by order 1 of the orders
made on 13 May
in Mr Piper’s affidavit evidence or submissions casts any doubt, let alone
any reasonable doubt, on the fact that he
has failed to comply with Order 9 as
varied. Nor does anything in Mr Piper’s affidavit evidence and
submissions provide any
lawful or legitimate excuse or justification for his
ongoing failure to comply with that order. It is unnecessary to repeat what
have previously said concerning Mr Piper’s evidence and submissions in
that regard.
therefore find that Mr Piper is in contempt of Court by failing to comply with
an order of the Court.
2506 of the Rules applies if the Court decides that a person has committed a
contempt. I have found that Mr Piper has committed
a contempt. Rule 2506(2)
provides that if the person is an individual the court may punish the individual
by making an order that
may be made under the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
do not propose at this stage to make any order punishing Mr Piper for contempt.
Rather, I propose to defer imposing any punishment
for three weeks. I will hear
further evidence and submissions at a hearing in respect of punishment on 24
June 2024. I would envisage
that by that time the order for seizure and
detention of the Property will have been executed. Mr Piper’s conduct in
of the execution of that seizure and detention order may well bear on
the penalty, if any, that I impose on him for his contempt.
I certify that the preceding fifty-one (51)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 6 June 2024
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (374 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter