URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2023/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Deputy Curator of Deceased Estates, in the matter of Quintal [2023] NFSC 4 (9 November 2023)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Deputy Curator of Deceased Estates, in
the matter of Quintal
[2023] NFSC 4
File number:
SC 2 of 2021
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
9 November 2023
Catchwords:
— application by Deputy
Curator of Deceased Estates pursuant to s 130 of the
Administration and
Probate Act 2006
(NI) and pursuant to the
Trustee Act 1931
Trustee Act 1925
— where deceased died
intestate in 1922 and was survived by nine of her children — where Letters
of Administration granted
in 1971 and estate distributed but for the share of
one beneficiary who could not be located — where extensive investigation
and searches have not conclusively located the beneficiary — whether the
evidence supports a finding the beneficiary died intestate
without leaving a
spouse, issue or parents — whether a Benjamin order should be made —
whether half-brother entitled
to share in beneficiary’s estate —
consideration of common law choice of law rules relating to succession —
beneficiary died on 10 April 1954
Legislation:
Administration and Probate Act 2006
Administration of Estates Act No. 40 of 1954
(NSW) s 61A
Administration and Probate Ordinance 1929-1953
Inheritance Act No. 19, 1901
Probate and Administration Ordinance 1960–1961
Succession and Wills Act 1913
Trustee Act 1931
Trustee Act 1925
Wills, Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) ss 49, 50, 51
Cases cited:
Application of NSW Trustee & Guardian;
Estate of Meyerfeld
[2019] NSWSC 156
In the Estate of Cullen
(1976) 14 SASR 456
Re Benjamin; Neville v Benjamin
[1902] UKLawRpCh 26
[1902] 1 Ch 723
Wilcox v Poole
[1974] 2 NSWLR 693
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Date of last submissions:
1 December 2021
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Mr F J Grose, John Grose, Solicitor
SC 2 of 2021
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF AMY ARABELLA
DEPUTY CURATOR OF DECEASED
ESTATES, IN THE ESTATE OF AMY ARABELLA QUINTAL, LATE OF, NORFOLK ISLAND,
DATE OF ORDER:
9 NOVEMBER 2023
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
the extent necessary, the Deputy Curator be heard further on the form of the
orders to be made.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
BESANKO CJ:
Introduction
is an application by the Deputy Curator of Deceased Estates (the Deputy Curator)
pursuant to s 130 of the
Administration and Probate Act 2006
and pursuant to the
Trustee Act 1931
(NSW) for the opinion, advice, directions and/or determinations and
orders of the Court on certain questions and issues arising in
administration of the estate of Amy Arabella Quintal, late of Norfolk Island,
deceased (the deceased) and as trustee of funds
held in the estate. The
questions and issues arising in the administration of the estate and relating to
funds held in the estate
are as follows:
the Deputy Curator can cease any further searches, including advertisement, to
locate the beneficiary, John Edward Quintal,
and any next of kin claiming under
the Deputy Curator is entitled to presume the death of John Edward Quintal at
any, and if so, at what date;
without prejudice to the rights of any person to trace his, her, or their, share
into the hands of the recipient if it be established
that they survived the
beneficiary, John Edward Quintal, or otherwise as the case may be, the Deputy
Curator would be justified in
distributing the share estate of the deceased held
on trust for John Edward Quintal on the following basis:
(a) equally to the brothers and sisters of John Edward Quintal alive at the date
nominated by the Court, provided if any brother
or sister died before that date
leaving issue surviving at that date, those issue shall take their parent's
the Deputy Curator be entitled to deduct commission and the expenses incurred in
the administration and these proceedings from
the trust monies prior to
distribution; ...
application was supported by an affidavit of the Deputy Curator and two
affidavits of her solicitor, Mr Frederick John Grose.
The office of Curator of
Deceased Estates (the Curator) is presently vacant. The Deputy Curator may
exercise any function of the
Curator subject to any direction by the Curator (s
Administration and Probate Act 2006
deceased died on Norfolk Island on 31 May 1922. She was 46 years of age.
She was married to Mr Joseph Atkins Quintal on Norfolk
Island when she was 16
years of age. She had nine children who survived her and two who died before
13 April 1971, Letters of Administration were issued by the Supreme Court of
Norfolk Island in its probate jurisdiction in relation
to the estate, goods,
chattels, credits and effects of the deceased. The Letters of Administration
were granted to the Curator of
Deceased Persons’ Estates.
Edward Quintal was one of the deceased’s children. He was born on Norfolk
Island on 4 July 1912 and the deceased and Mr
Joseph Atkins Quintal are
shown as his parents on his birth certificate.
Deputy Curator has reviewed the files of the Curator. Those files indicate that
the only asset in the deceased’s estate
was land described as Portion 42f
which was an unimproved block of land on Norfolk Island with an area of
1.8 hectares. In about
1973, the land was partitioned and subdivided and
there was a distribution in specie, that is to say, individual lots were
transferred
to the deceased’s children. John Edward Quintal, as a son of
the deceased, was entitled to a share in the deceased’s
estate. I will
refer to him as the beneficiary. His whereabouts at the time of distribution
were unknown and inquiries with family
members and other searches and inquiries
failed to locate him. His share of the estate became land which was described
Portion 42f1 and was held in trust by the Curator. That portion
was sold in 1987 and the beneficiary’s share of the proceeds
$7,887.94. That amount was invested and the amount presently held by the Deputy
Curator is $24,972.48.
regard to the matters referred to in the first affidavit of her solicitor (as
summarised below), the Deputy Curator has formed
the belief that the whereabouts
of the beneficiary has been unknown for many years and that further
investigations and searches,
including by notices in the newspaper or other
means, are unlikely to progress matters further. Further, the Deputy Curator
that having regard to the beneficiary’s date of birth and the
fact that his last known contact with family members was in 1937,
presumed that he has died. Finally, the Deputy Curator believes that having
regard to his age and the lack of family information,
there is a real
possibility that a death certificate recording the death of a John Quintal in
Sydney on 10 April 1954 refers to the
beneficiary. The death certificate to
which the Deputy Curator refers records the death of a John Edward Quintal in
Sydney on 10
April 1954. The certificate shows the age of that deceased person
as 42 years. The beneficiary was born in 1912 and would have
been 42 years
of age in 1954.
Deputy Curator seeks permission to distribute the share of John Edward Quintal
to his brothers and sisters alive on 10 April 1954,
or at such other dates as
the Court may nominate, provided that if any brother or sister has died before
that date, leaving issue
alive at that date, those issue will take their
parent’s share.
orders sought by the Deputy Curator are as follows:
the Deputy Curator can cease making any further searches, including
advertisement, to locate the beneficiary, John Edward Quintal,
and any next of
kin claiming under him;
for the purposes of distribution of the beneficiary’s share in the estate
the Deputy Curator is entitled to presume the
beneficiary, John Edward Quintal,
has died intestate without leaving a spouse, issue or parents and the likely
date of death is 10
April 1954;
without prejudice to the rights of any person to trace his, her, or their, share
into the hands of the recipient if it be established
that they survived the
beneficiary, John Edward Quintal, or otherwise as the case may be, the Deputy
Curator would be justified in
distributing the share estate of the deceased held
on trust for John Edward Quintal on the following basis:
(a) equally to the brothers and sisters of John Edward Quintal alive at the date
nominated by the Court, provided if any brother
or sister died before that date
leaving children surviving at that date, those children shall take their
parent’s share;
the Deputy Curator be entitled to deduct statutory commission and the expenses
incurred in the administration and these proceedings
from the trust monies prior
to distribution;
Deputy Curator have liberty to refer the matter back to the Court on seven days
notice should any further question or issue arise.
his first affidavit, Mr Grose deposes to the fact that he has carried out a
review of the files of the Curator in relation to the
estate of the deceased
and, in addition, he has made his own further inquiries and investigations.
Grose states that the deceased was survived by her husband, Joseph Atkins
Quintal, and nine children, one of whom was the beneficiary.
Two other children
predeceased the deceased leaving no spouse or issue surviving them.
Grose’s affidavit exhibits a letter dated 22 March 1973 from the Curator
to Mrs Agnes May, who was a sister of the beneficiary.
The Curator wrote to
Mrs May seeking information about the deceased and her children. Mrs May
responded by letter dated 15 June
1973 and, among other things, she said
the following:
We advertised in the New Zealand newspapers to try & contact my two nieces
who lives [sic] there & also my brother John Edward
Dicketts who was last
known to be there & I also wrote personal letters to no avail ... I have no
idea of brother John Edward
Dicketts address. I only know he was in New Zealand
somewhere a few years ago.
1986 and 1987, the then Curator carried out extensive searches for the
beneficiary in New Zealand and in New South Wales. The
General’s office in New Zealand advised that searches made under the
names, “John Edward Quintal”, “John
Edward Dicketts” and
“Jack Kingston” failed to locate any record of death entries for any
of those names for the
period from 1970 to 1986.
Grose deposes to the fact that he has carried out internet searches for details
of any death certificates or notices, probates
and any other archival records
under those names or even under the surnames only of “Quintal” and
on various New Zealand internet sites. Mr Grose
found no death records under the name of “John Quintal” or
Edward Quintal”. He found one death and probate record under
the name “John Edward Dicketts” who died in Auckland,
New Zealand on
15 January 1940. He was not the beneficiary because the evidence in this
case establishes that the beneficiary was
alive and enlisted in the Australian
Armed Forces on 18 July 1941 in New South Wales. Mr Grose found four
immigration passenger
records under the names “John Quintal” and
“John Edward Quintal”. He exhibits those records. They indicate
that John Quintal transited in Auckland, New Zealand on his ship voyages between
Sydney and San Francisco or Sydney and Los Angeles,
USA in 1933, 1934, 1935 and
1936. As Mr Grose explains, the age of the person and dates of travel in
those records are consistent
with further facts set out in Mr Grose’s
affidavit and the age of the beneficiary at that time and appear to relate to
beneficiary. Mr Grose could not find any other records available on the
internet that appeared relevant to the beneficiary in New
Grose deposes to the fact that he has carried out extensive internet searches on
Australian government and other internet web sites
for information and records
relating to the beneficiary under the various names, “John Quintal”,
“John Dicketts”
and “John Kingston-Quintal”.
Mr Grose found a number of newspapers articles that appeared to relate to
the beneficiary.
Those newspaper articles were published in the period from
July 1933 to May 1937 and they show that the beneficiary was in Sydney
ward of Ms S F Irving-Cummings during at least part of that time. They also
state that he had worked as a hairdresser to
the movie stars in the United
Grose was unable to locate any further information relating to the beneficiary
until 1941 when the beneficiary enlisted in the
Australian Army as a Signalman
– Telephone Operator. Mr Grose exhibits the records of the
Australian Military Forces relating
to the beneficiary which he downloaded from
the National Australian Archives.
Grose refers to the last page of the Army records which state that the
beneficiary attained 7th class at a public school, but had
no Intermediate,
Leaving, Technical, University or other diplomas or qualifications. There is no
reference to him holding qualifications
in hairdressing, which (as I have said)
was an occupation referred to in some of the newspaper articles.
Grose deposes to the fact that in the past, the Curator had conducted searches
with the Registrar of Births Deaths and Marriages,
New South Wales, for death
certificates for the beneficiary under the names, “John Edward
Quintal” 1955–1986, “John
Edward Dicketts”
1970–1986, and “Jack Kingston” 1970–1986. The
Registrar’s reports indicate
that there were no records for John Edward
Quintal and John Edward Dicketts for those periods. A death certificate was
a Jack Arthur Kingston who died on 9 May 1978. He was born in
Queensland and is not the beneficiary.
Curator also made inquiries with the Commonwealth Department of Veterans’
Affairs. The response he received was that the
Department was unable to
identify J E Quintal as a beneficiary of that department.
Curator wrote to the Central Police Station in Sydney seeking information about
the whereabouts or death of the beneficiary and
the Police Missing Persons Unit
replied by letter dated 29 May 1986. The latter indicated that no trace was
found of any death certificate
relating to the beneficiary for the period from
1972 to 1974.
22 May 1986, the Curator wrote to the Australian Electoral Commission seeking
information relating to John Edward Quintal, also
known as John Edward Dicketts.
In his reply of 25 June 1986, the Electoral Commissioner indicated that he was
unable to locate any
information in relation to the beneficiary.
23 July 2021, Mr Grose conducted a search of the National Personal Insolvency
Index which provides information as to bankruptcies
from 1929 to the present
date. No record was found relating to a John Quintal.
Grose has conducted searches of the Registry of Births Deaths and Marriages, New
South Wales, on the internet under the names,
“John Quintal; John Edward
Quintal; John Dicketts and John Kingston”. It was those searches which
led to the discovery
of the death certificate of John Quintal, aged 42 years who
died in Sydney on 10 April 1954.
death certificate indicates that the deceased was married at the time of his
death. Mr Grose conducted searches in each accessible
State, but he was
unable to locate any marriage certificate for a John Quintal. Information in
the death certificate and information
on the website of the Rookwood Church of
England Cemetery indicates that John Quintal was buried with two others in a
grave which
had no headstone.
Grose carried out a search of the Registrar-General in Queensland in relation to
John Quintal and John Dicketts and found only
one entry for a John Quintal who
died in Townsville on 20 May 1976. He was aged 45 years and that did not match
the beneficiary.
Grose deposes to the fact that he has carried out internet searches of all State
and Territory Registries, except South Australia
and the Northern Territory
which do not have digital access to records, and he has found no death or
marriage records that could
relate to the beneficiary under the names of John
Quintal or John Dicketts.
Grose states that the beneficiary was a son of the deceased and her husband,
Joseph Atkins Quintal. They had the following children:
Stephen Christian Quintal (died 1967);
Byron George Quintal (died 19 October 1929);
Stanley Nathaniel Quintal (died 1933);
Herbert Atkin Quintal (died 1910);
Edward Allen Quintal (died 1945);
Agnes Maria Pearl May (died 1985);
Gilbert Lorenzo Quintal (died 1982);
Thomas Augustine Quintal (died 1965);
Audley Moore Mitchell Quintal (died 1921);
John Edward Quintal; and
Kenwick Herbert Kitchener Quintal (died 1940).
Atkins Quintal remarried after the death of the deceased. He married Amy Eliza
Adams on 20 March 1926 and the children of
that marriage were Amy Jocelyn
Quintal and George Roslin Quintal.
14 October 2021, I made an order that the Deputy Curator give notice of this
proceeding to Karenne Elizabeth Gatehouse and Marilyn
[Marylin] Mae Quintal and
any rights they may have in relation to the proceeding within 21 days.
Karenne Gatehouse and Marylin Cooper
are sisters and they are daughters of the
late George Roslin Quintal who was the deceased’s half-brother. Mr Grose
second affidavit on 30 November 2021. He deposed to the fact that on
22 October 2021, he forwarded a letter and an email to Karenne
attaching a copy of the Court order, a copy of the death certificate of John
Quintal and an amended draft affidavit he
had prepared and sent to her
previously. Mr Grose received no response to his letter and email and he
sent a further letter on 10
November 2021. He attempted to contact Karenne
Gatehouse on three occasions. However, his calls were not answered. Mr Grose
that prior to his emails, he had communicated with Karenne Gatehouse, both
by email and telephone, and that the draft affidavit was
prepared by him as a
result of those communications. He does not know any reason why Karenne
Gatehouse had now chosen not to respond
or acknowledge his letters and
9 November 2021, Mr Grose forwarded an email to Marylin Cooper attaching a
letter addressed to her, a copy of the Court order and
a copy of the death
certificate of John Quintal. On 10 November 2021, Mr Grose received an email
from Marylin Cooper acknowledging
receipt of his letter and advising that she
did not wish to make submissions in the matter.
Should the Orders be made?
the heart of the orders sought by the Deputy Curator are Benjamin orders which
are orders deriving their name from the case of
Re Benjamin; Neville v
[1902] UKLawRpCh 26
[1902] 1 Ch 723
Re Benjamin
Williams, Mortimer
& Sunnucks, Executors, Administrators and Probate
, (17th ed, Sweet &
Maxwell, 1993), the learned authors described Benjamin orders as follows: (at
It may happen that distribution is held up because the representatives cannot be
sure who is entitled. Thus, a person’s right
to share in the estate may
turn on the question whether another predeceased the testator, predeceased him
without issue, and it may
be uncertain on the facts whether this happened. In
these circumstances, the representatives may apply to the court for a
Re Benjamin
[1902] UKLawRpCh 26
[1902] 1 Ch 723
that is, an order permitting them to distribute the estate on the footing that
certain events have or have not happened. The effect
of such an order is to
relieve the representatives of liability in their capacity as representatives
should the hypothesis on which
they are to be permitted to distribute turn out
to be wrong. Thus, where a beneficiary who was thought to have predeceased a
subsequently appears, he will not be entitled to bring a claim against
the representatives for his share of the estate. He may, however,
be entitled to
claim in equity against the beneficiaries who have been wrongly paid or perhaps
bring a tracing action against the
recipients of the share –
[1951] AC 251.
Wilcox v Poole
[1974] 2 NSWLR 693
, Mahoney J quoted from
Daniell’s Chancery Practice,
8th ed, at pp 1539–1540 as to
the basis for making such orders as follows (at 697):
There are some cases in which, although the interest of a party in the fund is
not absolute, but subject to a contingency, it has
been ordered to be paid out
at once, the contingency being remote; and formerly the parties receiving the
money entered into a recognizance
or undertaking to refund it, in the event of
the happening of the contingency; but it is no longer the practice, on making
presuming death, to require security to refund. This has been done where
the right of the parties was subject to the contingency
of a female who is past
the age of child-bearing, having children, or where a person has been presumed
to be dead.
His Honour went on to describe the principle (at 697):
... a beneficial one which may enable parties to have the early enjoyment of
property to which they will, as a matter of practical
certainty, ultimately
become entitled.
His Honour also said (at 699):
the principle ... does not affect the legal rights of the parties in the strict
sense, and concedes that there is no entitlement
as of right to the distribution
of the property in question. The principle is one which is invoked merely by way
of convenience in
administration.
level of persuasion required before the hypothetical assumptions may form the
basis of such an order has been variously described
as “probable
inferences from the proved facts”, “practical probabilities”,
a contingency which is not “remote”
or events likely to occur as a
matter of “practical certainty”. The basis of the principle is that
it is convenient
to make the order in the administration.
facts of the case of
Re Benjamin
itself are instructive. The beneficiary
aged 24 disappeared in September 1892 and had not been heard of since. Under
his father’s
will made in 1891, he was entitled to a share of the
residuary estate in the event of him surviving the testator. The testator died
in June 1893. In 1900, a summons was taken out by the trustee to have it
determined how the beneficiary’s share ought to be
dealt with. The
Chancery Court (Joyce J) considered that it must be presumed that the
beneficiary was dead. The Court said that
there was no reason why he should
hesitate to come back to England now, although there might have been at first.
The Court said
that the question was as to when he died. The Court said that if
the beneficiary is to be presumed to be dead, then the onus of
proof was on the
administrator and the administrator had failed to adduce any evidence to show
that the beneficiary survived the
testator. The judge said that he himself
considered it highly probable that the beneficiary died on 1 September 1892, or
events shortly thereafter. The onus was on those claiming under him to
prove that he survived the testator. The Court said that
the trustees were at
liberty to distribute, but as the Court was anxious not to do anything which
would prevent his representative
from making any claim if evidence of his death
at any other time should subsequently be forthcoming, the Court would not
that he was dead.
Deputy Curator seeks a Benjamin order in respect of the distribution of the
estate of the deceased, in particular, the distribution
of the estate relating
to the share of a beneficiary, John Edward Quintal. The evidence establishes
that the deceased was survived
by her husband, Joseph Atkins Quintal, and nine
children. The whereabouts of John Edward Quintal is unknown and he could not be
located. The evidence relating to the extensive inquiries, investigations and
on behalf of the Deputy
Curator is set out above.
following summary of the results of the investigations provided by the Deputy
Curator is accurate:
The Beneficiary left Norfolk Island as a young
From at least 1933 until 1937, the Beneficiary resided in Sydney as a ward
of Sophia Fanny Irving-Cummins;
Travelled to the USA on two occasions in 1933 and 1936 respectively;
Resided in Sydney and opened a hairdressing salon in 1937;
Travelled to and from Norfolk Island for a holiday in 1937;
Enlisted in the Australian Army in 1941;
Listed as Absent Without Leave from Army from 1942 until 1946 when
discharged for misconduct on 10 September 1946 following issue
of a warrant for
arrest in 1942;
Visited his sister, Agnes Howard, in Victoria sometime shortly after World
No further record of the Beneficiary found except a Death certificate
relating to a male person, JOHN QUINTAL, in Sydney on 10 April
deceased person was aged 42 years at time of death, the same age as the
Beneficiary;
No record could be found of the marriage of the Beneficiary;
No record of any grant of probate under the name of the
Beneficiary;
(Footnotes omitted.)
Although it makes no difference to my conclusions, I note that the beneficiary
was three months short of his 42
birthday on 10 April 1954.
Deputy Curator submits that the evidence supports the following
assumptions:
(1) The beneficiary was born on Norfolk Island on 4 July 1912;
(2) The beneficiary died sometime after 1942;
(3) It is reasonable to accept the death certificate of John Quintal aged 42
years who died on 10 April 1954 may record the death
of the beneficiary;
(4) The John Quintal referred to in the aforesaid death certificate was buried
with two other persons in the same grave at Rookwood
Cemetery with no
(5) The beneficiary died intestate;
(6) At the time of his death, it is reasonable to assume the beneficiary was not
married and not survived by children or any other
issue despite the reference to
his status shown as married in the aforesaid death certificate;
(7) At the time of his death, the beneficiary was domiciled in New South
I agree that the evidence supports these assumptions to a level of practical
certainty and, in fact, I consider that on all the evidence
it is practically
certain, in the relevant sense, that the death certificate in (3) relates to the
beneficiary.
my opinion, all reasonable searches and investigations have been carried out to
ascertain the circumstances relating to the beneficiary
and further
investigations, searches or inquiries, including by way of public notices or
advertisements, are unlikely to provide
any further evidence, information or
assistance in determining the eligibility of the deceased’s estate. It
would be an unreasonable
impost on the estate to carry out any further
investigations or to incur the expense of any further advertisements.
is appropriate on the evidence to presume that the beneficiary died intestate
without leaving a spouse, issue or parents and that
the date of death was 10
April 1954. A Benjamin order should be made.
only remaining question is whether the beneficiary’s half-brother, the
late George Roslin Quintal, was entitled to a share
in the beneficiary’s
common law choice of law rules relating to succession, that is, the distribution
of the estate, it having been collected and debts
and taxes paid, are clear.
The law applied in the case of movable or personal property is that of the
deceased’s domicile,
whereas the law applied in the case of immovable or
real property is that of the place of the property (Davies M, Bell A,
P and Douglas M,
Nygh’s Conflict of Laws in Australia,
(10th ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2020) at 38.4 and
following).
the evidence in this case is not extensive, but so far as it goes it suggests
that the beneficiary’s domicile at the
time of death was New South Wales,
whereas the place of the land which was part of the deceased’s estate on
intestacy was Norfolk
her submissions, the Deputy Curator first noted that it is arguable the relevant
law is that of Norfolk Island because Norfolk
Island is the lex situs of the
original immovable property being the deceased’s land which was later sold
and converted to
money. The Deputy Curator then noted that the proceedings are
dealing with the distribution on intestacy of the beneficiary’s
which is a share in the trust fund and that it is the beneficiary’s
intestacy that is under scrutiny and not a question
relating to the
deceased’s intestacy or the distribution of her estate. It follows (so
the argument goes) that the relevant
rules governing the distribution of the
beneficiary’s share is the place of his domicile which may reasonably be
the evidence to be New South Wales.
answer to the issue of the applicable law is not as straightforward as might
first appear. For one thing, the conversion of the
beneficiary’s
intestate estate from land to a fund took place many years after the nominated
date of the deceased’s death
and the case to which I was referred
Application of NSW Trustee & Guardian; Estate of Meyerfeld
did not seem to me to clearly support the Deputy Curator’s
submission. Further, as helpful as the Deputy Curator’s submissions
I did not have the benefit of a contradictor. Finally, and decisively, I do not
need to decide whether the submission is correct
because at the relevant time,
the effect of the law in this respect of New South Wales and the effect of the
law in Norfolk Island
was the same.
law of Norfolk Island may be stated by reference to three periods. The
Succession and Wills Act 1913
(NI) adopted the New South Wales laws
relating to the succession and devolution of real and personal property on
death, in particular
Wills, Probate and Administration Act 1898
Inheritance Act No. 19, 1901
, to have force and effect on Norfolk
Island for persons dying after the enactment of that Act. In 1961, the
Probate and Administration Ordinance 1960–1961
(NI) adopted the
Administration and Probate Ordinance 1929-1953
of the Australian Capital
Territory in place of the New South Wales legislation deemed effective from 1
April 1960. For persons dying
intestate after 1 July 1967, the
distribution is governed under the
Administration and Probate Act 2006
the period 1942 to 1954, ss 49 to 51 of the
Wills, Probate and Administration
(NSW) provided for the distribution of an estate on intestacy.
Section 49 was in the following terms:
(1) Subject as aforesaid, and subject to the provisions of the next four
succeeding sections, the administrator on intestacy, or
in case of partial
intestacy the executor or administrator with the will annexed, as the case may
be, shall hold the real and personal
estate, vesting as aforesaid, as to which
any person dies intestate, in trust as to the personal estate for the persons
be entitled thereto under the Statute of Distributions, and as to the
real estate in trust for and as if the same had been devised
to such persons as
tenants in common.
relevant sections of the
Statute of Distributions 1670
are set out in the
In the estate of
(1976) 14 SASR 456
as follows (at
case there be no children nor any legal representatives of them, then one moiety
of the said estate to be allotted to the wife
of the intestate, the residue of
the said estate to be distributed equally to every of the next of kindred of the
intestate, who
are in equal degree and those who legally represent them.
there be no representations admitted among collaterals after brothers’ and
sisters’ children: and in case there be
no wife, then all the said estate
to be distributed equally to and amongst the children: and in case there be no
child, then to the
next of kindred in equal degree of or unto the intestate, and
their legal representatives as aforesaid, and in no other manner
whatsoever.
this context, the Deputy Curator referred to passages in Hastings R and Weir
Probate Law and Practice
, (2nd ed, Law Book Co, 1948) and, in
particular, at 764, 769 and 779 which are to the effect that for distribution
purposes, there
was at that time no difference between brothers of the half
blood and brothers of the whole blood (see also Hardingham I, Neave M
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Co,
1989) at 430 [2802]). The Deputy Curator submitted that if it is presumed that
the beneficiary died sometime
after 1945, then he was survived by four siblings,
being Stephen Christian Quintal, Thomas Augustine Quintal, Gilbert Lorenzo
and Agnes Maria May (nee Quintal). A brother, Stanley Nathaniel
Quintal, predeceased the beneficiary leaving children surviving
him and they
would be entitled to a share per stirpes.
I have said, the beneficiary was also survived by a half-brother, George Roslin
Quintal. The Deputy Curator submits that the half-brother
is entitled to a
share if the deemed date of death of the beneficiary is before 1 January 1955,
but not entitled to a share if the
deemed date is later than that. That follows
from a legislative amendment to the
Wills, Probate and Administration Act
Administration of Estates Act No. 40 of 1954
(NSW) introduced s 61A into
Wills, Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) and by that section,
reversed the common law position that there was no distinction between brothers
and sisters of the whole
blood and brothers and sisters of the half blood.
Section 61A is in the following terms:
(1) As respects a person dying intestate or partially intestate on or after the
first day of January, one thousand nine, hundred
and fifty-five, Division 2 of
this Part of this Act has effect subject to the amendments set out in this
(2) For sections forty-nine, fifty and fifty-one the following sections are
substituted:-
49.(1) Subject as aforesaid, and subject to the provisions of sections fifty,
fifty-two and fifty-three of this Act, the real and
personal estate, vesting as
aforesaid, as ta which any person (in this section referred to as “the
intestate”) dies intestate
(a) be held by the administrator on intestacy, or in the case of partial
intestacy by the executor or administrator with the will
annexed, as the case
(i) as to the real
and personal
(d) where the intestate leaves no issue or parent, in trust for the following
persons living at the death of the intestate, and in
the following order and
manner, namely:-
First, in statutory
trust for the brothers and sisters of the whole blood of the intestate; but if
there is no member of this class;
Secondly, in statutory trust for the brothers and sisters of the half blood of
the intestate; but if there is no member of this class;
conclusion, having regard to the finding that the beneficiary died on 10 April
1954, the beneficiary’s half-brother, George
Roslin Quintal, was entitled
to share in the beneficiary’s share of the deceased’s
making orders, I will give the Deputy Curator the opportunity to check that the
orders she has advanced accord with the conclusions
set out in these reasons.
I certify that the preceding fifty-two (52)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Chief
Dated: 9 November 2023
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (384 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter