URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pataki v Mukhin [2024] NFSC 7 (19 December 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Pataki v Mukhin
[2024] NFSC 7
File number:
SC 2 of 2023
Judgment of:
BROMWICH CJ
Date of judgment:
19 December 2024
Catchwords:
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION -
Question – whether or not plaintiffs’ goods subject to customs
control on entering Norfolk Island Airport from
aircraft travelling from Sydney
– application of the
Customs Act 1901
(NI) – HELD
(NI) operates to create a customs border between Norfolk Island and
mainland Australia and Tasmania – Separate Question answered
affirmative
Legislation:
Constitution
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Customs Act 1901
Judiciary Act 1903
Norfolk Island Act 1979
Norfolk Island Customs Ordinance 2016
(Cth) s 7(1), 7(1)(a), 7(2),
7(2)(a), 8(c), Schedule 1, items 3 and 8
Territories Legislation Amendment Act 2016
Schedule 5 items 1, 2 and 3
Court Procedure Rules 2006
(ACT) r 1521
Customs Act 1901
(NI) ss 6(1), 30 and 68
Customs Act 1913
Customs Ordinance 1993
Customs Ordinance 1993
Customs Regulation 2015
Customs Regulations 1986
Evidence Act 2004
Interpretation Act 1979
Jury Act 1977
Public Service Act 1979
Supreme Court Act 1960
(NI) s 19(4)
Explanatory Statement to
Norfolk Island Customs Ordinance 2016
Cases cited:
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v
(a pseudonym)
[2017] VSCA 292
; 54 VR 420
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
22 November 2024
Counsel for the
Plaintiffs:
Plaintiffs were self-represented
Counsel for the Defendants:
Solicitor for the Defendants:
Australian Government Solicitor
SC 2 of 2023
LASZLO STEVEN PATAKI
ANN MARIA PATAKI
Second Plaintiff
ALEXY MUKHIN
JAMES GOODWIN
Second Defendant
Third Defendant
BROMWICH CJ
DATE OF ORDER:
19 DECEMBER 2024
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
answer to the separate question ordered on 1 November 2024, pursuant to
r 1521 of the
Court Procedure Rules 2006
(ACT), applied by
s 19(4) of the
Supreme Court Act 1960
“At any time on 11 June 2023, were the first plaintiff’s goods and
the second plaintiff’s goods subject to customs
control for the purposes
of s 30 of the Customs Act 1901
(NI) by reason of those goods having been
imported into Norfolk Island?”
costs of the Separate Question be costs in the cause.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
BROMWICH CJ:
Introduction
plaintiffs, Mr Lazlo Pataki (first plaintiff) and Mrs Ann Pataki (second
plaintiff), are husband and wife and are not legally
represented. The three
defendants are two officers of the Norfolk Island Police Force, Senior
Constables Alexey Mukhin and James
Goodwin, and an officer of the Australian
Border Force (
), District Commander Gabrielle Henderson. The
defendants are represented by the Australian Government Solicitor (
and by counsel instructed by AGS.
plaintiffs sue the defendants arising out of what occurred at Norfolk Island
airport on 11 June 2023 after they arrived on a flight
from Sydney, and in
particular what is alleged to have been the unlawful detention and questioning
of Mr Pataki and the unlawful
detention and searching of Mrs Pataki.
The defendants deny any wrongdoing, including relying upon the lawful exercise
of statutory
powers. There is a live dispute between the parties as to the
operation of customs laws on Norfolk Island, which goes to the availability
the statutory powers that the defendants rely upon. The plaintiffs, in
asserting a different meaning to the legislation in dispute,
do not allege that
any legislative provision is invalid. That is, the dispute is as to what the
operation of those laws are on their
face, properly understood.
trial of the case brought by the plaintiffs is listed to commence on Norfolk
Island on Monday, 3 February 2025, with an estimate
of four days.
Separate question ordered and agreed facts for that
1 November 2024, I made the following order by consent under r 1521 of the
Court Procedure Rules 2006
(ACT), applied by s 19(4) of the
Supreme Court Act 1960
The Court hear, separately from any other question in the proceeding, the
following agreed question:
“At any time on 11 June 2023, were the first plaintiff’s goods and
the second plaintiff’s goods subject to customs
control for the purposes
of s 30 of the
Customs Act 1901
(NI) by reason of those goods having been
imported into Norfolk Island?” (
Separate Question
plaintiffs contend that the answer to the Separate Question should be
“No”. The defendants contend that the answer
above order for hearing of the Separate Question was made following the hearing
of an application by the defendants for that to
take place on 1 November 2024.
That application was not only agreed to, but actively supported by the
plaintiffs.
was prepared to hear and decide the Separate Question prior to the forthcoming
trial because of its importance to that trial and
to the evidence to be adduced,
and because the following facts had been agreed upon between the parties for
that purpose, and signed
by each of the plaintiffs on 12 September 2024 and
by a solicitor for the defendants on 13 September 2024:
Statement of Agreed Facts
s 191 of the
Evidence Act 2004
(NI) the plaintiffs and the defendants
agree to the following facts for the purposes of this proceeding, that are not
to be disputed.
all material times, Norfolk Island Airport was appointed as an airport for the
purposes of the
Customs Act 1901
all material times, Norfolk Island Airport was not an 'international airport'
within the meaning of reg 4 of the
Customs Regulation 2015
c. on 11 June 2023:
first and second plaintiffs boarded an aircraft at Sydney Airport, in Sydney in
the State of New South Wales, Australia (
in Norfolk Island, aboard the Aircraft;
getting out of the Aircraft, the first plaintiff entered the Norfolk Island
Airport arrivals hall;
the time of boarding the Aircraft to when in the Norfolk Island Airport arrivals
hall, the first plaintiff had with him his mobile
phone, his wallet, his
backpack, and was wearing his clothes (
the first plaintiff's goods
getting out of the Aircraft, the second plaintiff entered the Norfolk Island
Airport arrivals hall and collected a number of
bags from the luggage carousel
that was located inside the Norfolk Island Airport arrivals hall;
bags that were collected by the second plaintiff from the luggage carousel
contained personal goods that were owned by the first
or second plaintiffs
including clothes and other personal effects (
the second plaintiff's
second plaintiff's goods had been checked-in as the luggage of both the first
and second plaintiff at Sydney Airport and had been
transported from Sydney
Airport to Norfolk Island Airport aboard the Aircraft.
balance of the orders made on 1 November 2024 were for written submissions, a
bundle of authorities and to list the Separate Question
for hearing on 22
November 2024.
hearing of the Separate Question took place as scheduled on 22 November 2024.
Written and oral submissions were made by the plaintiffs
in person, and by the
defendants via counsel. I do not propose to summarise all the competing
arguments, but rather, after outlining
their respective stances, proceed
directly to my reasons for the answer to the separate question that I have
arrived at. In the
course of doing so, I will address some of the arguments in
more detail.
Pataki said in the course of oral submissions that Norfolk Island was subject to
its own Customs Act and Customs Regulation until
1 July 2016. That is, that
there had been a separate customs regime, and therefore customs barrier, for
Norfolk Island until 30
June 2016. Mrs Pataki’s stance, apparently agreed
to by Mr Pataki, accords with the defendants’ written submissions
(footnotes embedded), which I accept accurately describes the situation that
existed as at 30 June 2016 (footnotes omitted):
Prior to 1 July 2016, the
Customs Act 1913
(NI) regulated the importation
of goods brought from overseas into Norfolk Island, including by making such
goods subject to customs
control, so as to secure the payment of duties of
custom, and to prevent the importation of prohibited goods. The
Customs Act
, was administered by the Collector of Customs, being a person appointed
by the Administrator of Norfolk Island, and officers of Customs,
being officers
appointed under the
Public Service Act 1979
1 July 2016, the
Customs Act 1913
(NI) and the
Customs Regulations
(NI) were repealed, and the NI Ordinance commenced. A live question to
be determined in the course of answering the Separate Question
is whether, by
this change, a separate customs border between Norfolk Island and mainland
Australia and Tasmania was dispensed with,
or whether a differently constituted
separate customs border was implemented to replace the prior regime.
central proposition of the plaintiffs’ case on the Separate Question is
that the long-standing arrangement of having a customs
border regime between
Norfolk Island and mainland Australia and Tasmania had come to an end on 30 June
2016, and was not successfully
replaced. The plaintiffs contend that, from 1
July 2016, not only did Norfolk Island become integrated with mainland Australia
Tasmania, but that as a feature of this change the separate customs barrier
ceased to operate.
central proposition of the defendants’ case on the Separate Question is
that, while Norfolk Island became integrated with
the rest of Australia in many
important respects, a different version of a separate customs barrier between
mainland Australia and
Tasmania was implemented with effect from 1 July 2016.
That is, the defendants contend that the separate customs barrier that had
existed on 30 June 2016 was replaced with another separate customs barrier,
differently implemented, along with other changes to
the legal relationship
between Norfolk Island and mainland Australia and Tasmania. The changes the
defendants contend took place
from 1 July 2016 are summarised in their written
submissions at [39] (footnotes embedded):
(1) the definition of ‘
Commonwealth
’ within the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
was amended to include Norfolk Island – so that subject to
contrary intention Norfolk Island would be taken to be part of Australia
Commonwealth Acts [
Territories Legislation Amendment Act 2016
, Schedule 5 items 1 and 2];
Norfolk Island Act 1989
was amended so that Commonwealth Acts
applied in Norfolk Island of their own force, except so far as the Act or
another Act expressly
provided otherwise [
Territories Legislation Amendment
, Schedule 5 items 3];
Customs Act 1901
(Cth) definition of ‘Australia’ and
were not amended so that Norfolk Island continued to be excluded from the
operation of that Act [
Customs Act 1901
‘Australia’, and 6]; and
(4) the Customs Ordinance was made which applied the
Customs Act 1901
(Cth) in the Territory as if it was a law of the Territory, except to the extent
that it deals with duties of customs, with references
Customs Act
(NI) to Australia, when used in a geographical sense, taken to be
references to Norfolk Island;
(5) Schedule 1 to the Customs Ordinance modified the
Customs Act 1901
(Cth) so that an ‘officer of Customs’ remained an officer of Customs
within the meaning of the
Customs Act 1901
(Cth), so that Commonwealth
officers took over the performance of the customs functions on Norfolk Island
[Customs Ordinance, Schedule
1, item 3.].
defendants contend in [40] of their written submissions that as a result of the
changes that took place on 1 July 2016 (footnotes
(1) Norfolk Island was generally integrated with the Australian mainland in
relation to such things as tax and social security systems;
(2) the Commonwealth Government delivered essential functions for Norfolk
Island, such as immigration, biosecurity and customs;
(4) however, a customs border was maintained between mainland Australia and
Norfolk Island (consistent with the operation of customs
laws in the Indian
Ocean Territories) [See
Customs Ordinance 1993
Ordinance 1993
(CKI)] by continuing to exclude Norfolk Island from the
operation of the
Customs Act 1901
(Cth), however, enacting a parallel
Act, being the
Customs Act 1901
(NI), that applied in Norfolk lsland
[Explanatory Statement,
Norfolk Island Customs Ordinance 2016
balance of these reasons explain in more detail what the relevant aspects of the
1 July 2016 changes were, and resolve the conflicting
positions of the parties
by deciding what their legal effect is, so as to answer the Separate
The resolution of the Separate Question
issue that arises in relation to the Separate Question concerns the operation of
the legislative arrangements that were brought
into existence as a result of the
Commonwealth Government taking over control of Norfolk Island on 1 July 2016.
This gives rise
to the question of whether the intention expressed in the
Explanatory Statement
Norfolk Island Customs Ordinance
NI Ordinance
), made under the
Norfolk Island Act
(Cth) was given effect to by the legislation that was enacted by the
Commonwealth Parliament, insofar as this affects the Separate
definition of “Territory” and of “Norfolk Island” in
Norfolk Island Act
means the Territory of Norfolk Island,
and, when used in a geographical sense, means the area described in Sch 1. For
completeness,
Schedule 1 describes the area of Norfolk Island as “Norfolk
Island and all the other islands and rocks lying within the area
bounded by the
parallels 28 degrees 59 minutes and 29 degrees 9 minutes south latitude and
the meridians 167 degrees 54 minutes and
168 degrees east longitude.” In
these reasons, it is convenient to refer just to Norfolk Island, even if a
reference in the
Norfolk Island Act
is to the “Territory”.
Explanatory Statement for the NI Ordinance states as follows (paragraph
numbering added for ease of cross-referencing; and bold
emphasis added to the
definitions used for ease of identifying defined terms):
[1] Subsection 19A(1) of the
Norfolk Island Act 1979
) provides that subject to this Act, the Governor-General may make
Ordinances for the peace, order and good government of the Territory
[2] The effect of section 15 of the Norfolk Island Act is that after 18 June
2015, the laws in force in the Territory from time to
time include section 19A
Ordinances as in force from time to time.
[3] The purpose of the Norfolk Island Customs Ordinance 2016 (the
) is to apply the Customs Act 1901 (the
Customs Act
Customs Regulation 2015 (the
Customs Regulation
) and the Customs
(International Obligations) Regulation 2015 (the
Customs (International
Obligations) Regulation
) in Norfolk Island, as modified by the NI
[4] From 1 July 2016, the Australian Government will integrate Norfolk Island
with mainland tax and social security systems, and
will commence delivering
essential national functions such as immigration, biosecurity and customs.
[5] To give effect to these reforms,
Acts Interpretation
will be amended to include Norfolk Island in the definition of
‘Australia’ and new section 18 of the Norfolk Island Act
provide that a Commonwealth Act is in force in Norfolk Island, unless the Act
expressly provides otherwise. Both of these provisions
commence on 1 July
[6] Section 6 of the Customs Act provides that this Act does not extend to the
external Territories. As a consequence of this, and
the operation of new section
18 of the Norfolk Island Act, the Customs Act does not extend to Norfolk
[7] Instead, the NI Ordinance, made under section 19A of the Norfolk Island Act,
applies a modified version of the Customs Act, the
Customs Regulation and the
Customs (International Obligations) Regulation to Norfolk Island except to the
extent that they purport
to deal with duties of customs. This is consistent with
the operation of customs laws in the Indian Ocean Territories of Christmas
Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands. Application of the Customs Act and
associated regulations maintains a customs border that
is required to give
effect to the Australian Government reforms outlined above.
[8] The NI Ordinance is modelled on the Customs Ordinance 1993 for Christmas
Island (the CI Ordinance) made under the
Christmas Island Act 1958
additional modifications.
[9] As a consequence, the
Customs Act 1913
of Norfolk Island and the
Customs Regulations 1986
of Norfolk Island will be repealed at the same
time the NI Ordinance commences. This will be done in the
Norfolk Island
Continued Laws Amendment (2016 Measures No. 1) Ordinance 2016
. These laws
will be repealed because they are inconsistent with the Customs function being
assumed by the Commonwealth.
[10] The CI Ordinance and the Customs Ordinance 1993 for the Cocos (Keeling)
Islands establish a separate Indian Ocean Territories
Customs Service (IOTCS).
The Comptroller-General of Customs is the Comptroller of the IOTCS and all
officers of Customs are customs
officers of the IOTCS.
[11] However, a separate customs administration is not established under the NI
Ordinance. Instead, the Comptroller-General of Customs
and officers of Customs
will exercise their powers directly under the applied Customs Act, as Australian
Public Service employees
of the Department of Immigration and Border Protection
(the Department). This will simplify arrangements by not having to separately
appoint a Comptroller of a Customs Service for Norfolk Island, or the
Comptroller appointing customs officers. This will not affect
Department’s ability to undertake customs functions on Norfolk Island.
[12] In 2005, the Customs Act introduced mandatory electronic reporting
requirements for mainland Australia. For example, all cargo
reports under
section 64AB of the Customs Act must be communicated electronically.
[13] Norfolk Island does not have the information technology infrastructure to
meet the mandatory electronic reporting requirements
in the Customs Act. The
application of the Customs Act in Norfolk Island is therefore modified to allow
communications to be provided
either electronically or in documentary form. For
example, cargo reporting under section 64AB allows for both electronic and
documentary
reporting on Norfolk Island. These modifications account for the
operating environment on Norfolk Island.
[14] It is not expected that there will be licensed depots on Norfolk Island
initially. The application of the Customs Act and associated
regulations to
Norfolk Island is therefore modified to account for this.
Human rights implications
[15] No separate consultations were undertaken on the NI Ordinance as it is part
of the broader Norfolk Island reforms integrating
Norfolk Island with mainland
[16] The NI Ordinance is a legislative instrument for the purpose of the
Legislation Act 2003
[17] The NI Ordinance commences on 1 July 2016.
38(1) of the
Acts Interpretation Act
(Cth) provides
that “An Act passed by the Parliament of the Commonwealth may be referred
to by the word “Act” alone”.
Consistently with [5] and [6] of
the Explanatory Statement for the NI Ordinance reproduced above, the following
legislative changes
did take place on 1 July 2016 or were already in place by
that date, were in force on 11 June 2023, and are still in force:
(a) section 2B of the
Acts Interpretation Act
(Cth) defines:
(i) “Australia” to include Norfolk Island;
(ii) “external Territory” to mean “a Territory, other than an
internal Territory, where an Act makes provision
for the government of the
Territory as a Territory”; and
(iii) “internal Territory” as “the Australian Capital
Territory, the Northern Territory or the Jervis Bay Territory”.
(b) section 18 of the
Norfolk Island Act
provides that an Act applies to
Norfolk Island except so far as that Act or another Act expressly provides
otherwise – that
is, all Commonwealth Acts apply to Norfolk Island unless
one of those Acts expressly provide otherwise.
(c) section 6 of
Customs Act
Commonwealth
Customs Act
) expressly provides that it does not extend to the
“external Territories”.
(d) as Norfolk Island is not included in the internal Territories defined in
Acts Interpretation Act
, it is an external Territory to
which the Commonwealth
Customs Act
does not apply.
7 of the Explanatory Statement for the NI Ordinance reproduced above describes
the way in which a version of the CCA was
intended to apply to Norfolk
... the NI Ordinance, made under section 19A of the Norfolk Island Act, applies
a modified version of the
Customs Act
, the Customs Regulation and the Customs
(International Obligations) Regulation to Norfolk Island except to the extent
that they purport
to deal with duties of customs ...
legislative device of picking up legislation created in one context, and
applying it in another context, as a form of legislative
shorthand, is
unexceptional. For example, it is the means by which State and Territory laws
are applied as surrogate federal law
to federal proceedings conducted in State
and Territory courts exercising federal jurisdiction by the operation of the
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth). This is sometimes done selectively and
sometimes qualified by the limits of Commonwealth constitutional power. This
that those laws, as amended from time to time, apply to such proceedings,
without the need for the amendment of any federal law.
On occasion, the
mechanisms for achieving this are imperfect, and a degree of statutory
construction may be involved. But the technique
is ordinarily effective and
convenient.
explain how this mechanism works in a different setting, in a jury trial for a
federal offence in the District Court of New South
(NSW) is picked up and applied by
Judiciary Act
as surrogate federal law. However,
makes provision for majority verdicts, is not picked up because
Constitution
has been interpreted by the High Court as requiring that the
verdict of juries for federal offences must be unanimous. Thus, a modified
version of the
applies to jury trials for federal offences in
modified version of the Commonwealth
Customs Act
that applies to Norfolk Island
as described in [7] of the Explanatory Statement for the NI Ordinance has been
put into effect by
subsections 7(1) and (2) of the NI Ordinance, which are
as follows:
Application of Commonwealth Customs
legislation
(1) Subject to this Ordinance, the following laws of the Commonwealth apply in
the Territory as if they were laws of the Territory,
except to the extent that
they deal with duties of customs:
Customs Act
Customs Regulation 2015
Customs (International Obligations) Regulation 2015
(d) other regulations as in force from time to time under the
Customs Act
(e) subject to subsection (4), an instrument as in force from time to time
subsection 4A(1)
or (1A) of the
Customs Act 1901
(2) For the purposes of this Ordinance:
Customs Act 1901
in its application to the
(i) is modified in
accordance with Schedule 1; and
(ii) may be cited as the
Customs Act 1901
Customs Regulation 2015
in its application to the Territory:
(i) is modified in accordance with Schedule 2; and
(ii) may be cited as the
Customs Regulation 2015
Customs (International Obligations) Regulation 2015
application to the Territory:
(i) is modified in accordance with Schedule 3; and
(ii) may be cited as the
Customs (International Obligations)
Regulation 2015
is important to note that s 7(1)(a) and (2)(a) of the NI Ordinance do
not amend the Commonwealth Customs Act itself, even though
that is the language
used in the process of picking it up and varying what is picked up. The
Commonwealth Customs Act, as the source
Act, is not changed at all by this
process. Instead, those provisions operate to create a new Act, but one that,
being constructed
from the terms of the Commonwealth Customs Act, is able to
change at its source as it is amended from time to time. When a provision
the Commonwealth Customs Act is changed, the corresponding provision in the
modified version that has been picked up are also
changed. In the case of this
mechanism being provided by the
Judiciary Act
, this has been done for
well over a century. It is using a form of legislative shorthand in place of
laboriously creating separately
and inflexibly an entirely new and separate
legislative regime. There is no difference in principle or in effect between
that mechanism
and taking an electronic copy of the Commonwealth Customs Act,
changing its name, and making all the changes to it, and then enacting
changed Act as a new Act.
effect of s 7(1)(a) and (2)(a) of the NI Ordinance is that a modified
version of the Commonwealth Customs Act applies to Norfolk
Island, with the
variations in Sch 1. However, dealing with duties of customs are not a
part of what is applied, as is made express
by the chapeau to s 7(1).
Schedule 1 contains 59 modifications to the applied Commonwealth Customs Act
which, as modified, and excluding
dealing with duties of customs, constitutes a
separate Act, the
Customs Act 1901
technique has produced a number of anomalies that have been identified by the
plaintiffs. However, most of them do not apply
to the provisions presently
under consideration and therefore do not affect the answer to the Separate
Question. It is neither necessary
nor appropriate to consider how those
anomalies will be resolved if and when they arise for consideration. The
existence of those
anomalies does not impact the applicability or validity of
the sections of the NI Customs Act that are relevant to this Separate
Some of the changes that are relevant to the Separate Question are addressed
all of the changes made by Sch 1 of the NI Ordinance are models of clarity
or consistency, and this may potentially create some
problems in their legal or
practical application from time to time. But none of those shortcomings ended
up being material to the
Separate Question. The key changes relevant to the
Separate Question are as follows:
(a) The definition of “officer of Customs” was substituted with
“an officer of Customs within the meaning of the
Customs Act 1901
(Commonwealth)”, which allowed Commonwealth officers to perform customs
functions on Norfolk Island despite the Commonwealth
Customs Act
not applying
there: see item 8 in Sch 1 to the NI Ordinance; and
(b) all references to “Australia”, when used in a geographical sense
in the Commonwealth
Customs Act
, are to be read in the NI
Customs Act
being a reference to Norfolk Island in a geographical sense: see section 8(c) of
the NI Ordinance.
8 of the NI Ordinance provides as follows:
References to certain terms in applied customs law
Customs Act 1901
(NI), in regulations in force under that Act and
in an instrument under subsection 4A(1) or (1A) of that Act:
(a) a reference to the Minister is a reference to the Customs Minister; and
(b) a reference to the Department is a reference to the Department administered
by the Customs Minister; and
(c) a reference to Australia or the Commonwealth, if used in a geographical
sense, is a reference to the Territory.
plaintiffs contend that the word “reference” in s 8(c) of the NI
Ordinance is insufficient to change references to
“Australia” or
“the Commonwealth” (in the geographical sense) as they appear in the
Commonwealth Customs
Act to mean references to “Norfolk Island” in
the NI Customs Act, upon the basis that if that replacement had been intended,
the word “replacement” would have been used. I am unable to accept
that is so. The deployment of the word “reference”
in this way does
have the effect of replacement. It has no other apparent purpose.
is not an unusual device deployed in either legislation, or delegated
legislation such as an Ordinance. Just like the process
of creating surrogate
legislation, this is a shorthand, but well-understood, way of bringing about a
global change, without needed
to go to every instance in which change is
intended to occur. It is a device that functions in much the same way as a
or deeming provision. Provided it is clearly enough expressed
– and it is sufficiently clear in s 8(c) of the NI Ordinance
– it has the legal and practical effect of changing the word that is
referred to so that it is read instead as though another
word is present. Thus,
wherever “Australia” appears in the Commonwealth Customs Act in a
geographic sense, in the separate
NI Customs Act that is to be read as
“Norfolk Island”. It is a simple transposition. Nothing more was
plaintiffs rely upon s 6(1) of the NI Customs Act providing that, apart
from an exception in subsection (2) that does not arise,
that Act does not apply
to the “external Territories”. The plaintiffs seem to interpret
this to mean that the NI Customs
Act does not apply to Norfolk Island.
There are two reasons why that cannot be accepted. First and foremost,
s 7(1)(a) of the NI
Ordinance reproduced at [24] above provides that
the Commonwealth Customs Act applies in the Territory, meaning Norfolk Island,
if it were a law of that jurisdiction. S 6(1) of the NI Customs
Act does not displace this.
the term “external Territories” is not defined in the
Interpretation Act 1979
(NI), and the definition of “external
Territories” in the
Acts Interpretation Act
does not apply.
Norfolk Island does not have any external Territories for which exclusion of its
application is needed or even possible.
The result is that
NI Customs Act has no work to do. This is not ideal, but it is the legal
and practical effect.
plaintiffs also characterise the NI Customs Act as dealing with goods taken
from Australia to Australia, but that is not correct.
Norfolk Island is not
part of Australia in a geographic sense for the purposes of the Commonwealth
Customs Act, the NI Customs Act
deals with customs (but not customs duties)
in Norfolk Island. Accordingly, goods taken from mainland Australia to Norfolk
are, for customs purposes, being brought from a geographic concept of
Australia that does not include Norfolk Island, to Norfolk
effect of this modified application of the Commonwealth Customs Act to create
the NI Customs Act was to replicate the customs
regime, and thus customs
border, that applied between Australia and the rest of the world (apart from
Norfolk Island) to Norfolk
Island, with the modifications in Sch 1 to the
NI Ordinance, except as to duties of customs. This preserved in a
different form
the substance of the regime that had existed prior to the
Commonwealth Government taking control of Norfolk Island. Goods that are
imported into Norfolk Island are subject to customs control.
is important to note at this juncture that the effect of having the Commonwealth
Customs Act expressly not apply to Norfolk Island,
and instead for the
NI Customs Act to apply to Norfolk Island, being a modified version of the
Commonwealth Customs Act, is that
there are two Customs Acts that relevantly
exist. There is a Customs Act for the mainland of Australia and Tasmania, and a
Customs Act for Norfolk Island. For completeness, but noting it is
otherwise irrelevant to the Separate Question, it should be noted
that there is
in parallel yet another customs regime for the Indian Ocean Territories of
Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, referred to at [7] of the
Explanatory Statement for the NI Ordinance.
breadth of the concept of “imported”, relevantly in the
NI Customs Act, but also in the Commonwealth Customs Act that
apply to Norfolk Island, is also important. The exclusion of duties of customs
in the Norfolk Island Act means that these
are not levied upon goods imported
into Norfolk Island, but that the other important functions of customs control
are maintained.
This was an issue in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v
(a pseudonym)
[2017] VSCA 292
; 54 VR 420, a case about
the Commonwealth Customs Act involving the question of whether mobile phones of
a person charged with conspiracy
to import tobacco products with intent to
defraud were within the control of customs so as to be lawfully obtained by
Maxwell P and Beach JA, in rejecting an argument advanced that the
movement of goods that was merely incidental to the movement of
a passenger,
namely the mobile phones intended for personal use, were not imported, said at
[26] (omitting footnotes):
Contrary to the respondents’ submission, this construction is supported
neither by the purposes of the Act nor by the statutory
language itself. As to
purpose, the respondents’ written submission contended that the purpose of
making goods subject to the
control of Customs under s 30 was “to secure
the payment of customs duty”. That contention is directly contradicted by
the provisions of the Act, which make unambiguously clear ... that the
legislature is equally concerned with preventing the import,
and export, of
prohibited goods. Import prohibitions on drugs, firearms and child pornography
are familiar illustrations of this
quite separate legislative concern.
JA, who was otherwise in dissent in
, made similar and further
observations about the distinction between fiscal concerns (which are not a part
of the regime under the
NI Customs Act in the sense of liability for
customs duties), and concerns about prohibited and restricted goods, including
in particular
those which may be harmful in a range of ways, albeit in the
context of talking about exports: see [205]-[206]. Importantly, such
not evade customs control on the mainland simply by being imported into Norfolk
goods of anyone arriving in Norfolk Island from mainland Australia, or indeed
anywhere else, are able to be treated the same way
as the goods of anyone
entering any other part of Australia from overseas. In particular:
(a) section 30 of the NI Customs Act dealing with Customs control of goods,
which is not modified by Sch 1 to the NI Ordinance; and
(b) section 68 of the NI Customs Act dealing with entry of imported goods,
which is also not modified by Sch 1 to the NI Ordinance,
apply to persons arriving by aircraft from mainland Australia.
control of the importation of goods into Norfolk Island is maintained in
substantially the same way as the control of goods into
the rest of Australia in
a geographical sense, apart from customs duties not applying in Norfolk Island.
The apparent main reason
for this is for the prevention and control of
prohibited and restricted goods into the Australian mainland and perhaps
Tasmania by
evading customs control, as referred to in
reproduced above. Without a regime such as this in place, the control of
prohibited and restricted goods into the rest of
Australia in a geographical
sense would have been weakened. Norfolk Island would be a gap in the detection
and prevention of that
taking place. To make this functional, officers are
given a range of powers, duties and responsibilities, to be exercised lawfully
within that regime.
follows that the answer to the Separate Question is “Yes”. That is,
by reason of Mr and Ms Pataki’s goods having
been imported into
Norfolk Island on the aircraft in which they arrived on 11 June 2023, those
goods were imported goods for the
purposes of s 68 of the NI Customs
Act and subject to customs control for the purposes of s 30 of the
NI Customs Act. It is not
appropriate at this stage to venture further
into how that regime works in relation to what took place on 11 June 2023,
having regard
to the particular goods in question, that being a matter for the
the Separate Question would otherwise have needed to be determined in the course
of the trial, or in the judgment following the
trial, it is appropriate that the
ultimately successful parties be paid their costs by the ultimately unsuccessful
parties. The appropriate
costs order is therefore that the costs of the Separate
Question be costs in the cause.
Accordingly,
the trial of this proceeding listed to commence on Norfolk Island on Monday,
3 February 2025, will proceed as scheduled
upon the basis of the Separate
Question having been answered in the affirmative.
I certify that the preceding forty-two (42)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Chief
Dated: 19 December 2024
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (505 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter