URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Deputy Curator of Deceased Estates, in the matter of Green [2024] NFSC 1 (25 January 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Deputy Curator of Deceased Estates, in
the matter of Green
[2024] NFSC 1
File number:
SC 1 of 2021
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
25 January 2024
Catchwords:
— application by Deputy
Curator of Deceased Estates pursuant to s 130 of the
Administration and
Probate Act 2006
(NI) — whether document purporting to be final will
of the deceased is a valid will — where only one witness subscribed
will — whether, if the will is not valid, the estate be distributed on
intestacy — whether adoption orders made under
Adoption Act 1955
(NZ) are effective adoption orders for the purposes of the
Adoption of
Children Act 1932
(NI) — consideration of common law principles for
the recognition of foreign adoption orders — whether the relevant adoption
orders were made in breach of the rules of natural justice — whether
legislation of New Zealand or Norfolk Island determines
succession rights of
adopted children
Legislation:
Administration and Probate Act 2006
ss 3, 5, 58, 61, 63, 121, 130, Part 2.2 Sch 2
Adoption Act 2000
Adoption of Children Act 1932
(NI) ss 2, 4, 9
Supreme Court Act 1960
Supreme Court Act 1933
Succession Act 2006
Wills Act 1973
Wills Act 2012
Adoption Act 1955
(NZ) ss 2, 7, 16
Cases cited:
Bouton v Labiche
(1994) 33 NSWLR 225
Buick v Equity Trustees Executors & Agency Co Ltd
[1957] HCA 65
(1957) 97 CLR
In re H deceased
[1946] VicLawRp 71
[1947] VLR 170
In the Estate of Searle, Deceased
[1963] SASR 303
[1959] VicRp 36
[1959] VR 213
MacAlpine v MacAlpine
[1958] P 35
Matthews v Williams
[1941] HCA 32
(1941) 65 CLR 639
Re DG and The
Adoption Act 2000
[2007] NSWCA 241
Re N (Recognition of Foreign Adoption)
[2016] EWHC 3085 (Fam)
[2017] 2 FLR 297
[1946] VicLawRp 21
[1946] VLR 356
Re Valentine’s Settlement
[1965] 1 Ch 831
[1965] 2 All ER
Re Walker (deceased)
[1973] 1 NZLR 449
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
31 March 2022
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Mr F J Grose, John Grose, Solicitor
Solicitor for Mr P Edwards and Ms T Edwards:
Mr J T Brown, McIntyres Lawyers
Counsel for Ms P Stevens:
Solicitor for Ms P Stevens:
McDonald, Slater & Lay
SC 1 of 2021
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF WILLIAM KENNETH GREEN
DEPUTY CURATOR OF DECEASED
ESTATES, IN THE ESTATE OF WILLIAM KENNETH GREEN, LATE OF SHORTRIDGE ROAD,
NORFOLK ISLAND, DECEASED
DATE OF ORDER:
25 JANUARY 2024
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
questions raised in the Deputy Curator’s Originating application be
answered as follows:
(1) No. The document titled “LAST WILL OF W.K.GREEN” dated 25
January 2005 and signed by William Kenneth Green (the
Deceased) is not a valid
will and the Deceased’s estate be distributed on intestacy pursuant to the
provisions of the
Administration and Probate Act 2006
(2) Yes. The adoption orders made on 27 October 1971 in the Magistrates Court
at Napier, New Zealand, under the
Adoption Act 1955
(NZ) regarding Peter
Simon and Tracy Huia Simon (the Deceased’s Biological Children) are
effective adoption orders under the
Adoption of Children Act 1932
and pursuant to s 9 of that Act, the Deceased’s Biological Children are
not entitled to benefit on intestacy under the
Deceased’s estate and the
Deceased’s estate be distributed to Patricia Rosanne Stevens, the
Deceased’s sister,
as the only eligible next of kin.
(3) Does not arise.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
BESANKO CJ:
Introduction
is an Originating application brought by the Deputy Curator of Deceased Estates
(the Deputy Curator) in Norfolk Island pursuant
to s 130 of the
Administration and Probate Act 2006
(NI) in which she seeks the opinion
or direction of the Supreme Court on certain questions and issues arising in the
administration
of the estate of William Kenneth Green, late of Shortridge Road,
Norfolk Island, deceased. Although the office of the Curator is
vacant, the Deputy Curator may exercise any function of the Curator, subject to
any direction of the Curator (s 5 of the
Administration and Probate Act). An
order under s 121 of the Administration and Probate Act to Collect and
Administer the estate
of the deceased was granted by this Court to the Deputy
Curator on 25 September 2020.
questions and issues arising in the administration of the estate of the deceased
appear in the Deputy Curator’s Originating
application and are as
the document titled “LAST WILL OF W.K.GREEN” dated 25 January
2005 and signed by William Kenneth Green (“the
Deceased”) is a valid
Will and if not whether the Deceased’s estate be distributed on intestacy
pursuant to the provisions
Administration and Probate Act 2006
the adoption orders made on 27 October 1971 in the Magistrates Court at Napier,
New Zealand, under the
Adoption Act 1955
(a) PETER SIMON; and
(b) TRACY HUIA SIMON.
(“The Deceased’s Biological
are effective adoption orders under the
Adoption of Children Act 1932
(NI) and pursuant to section 9 of that Act the Deceased’s biological
children are not entitled to benefit on intestacy under
the Deceased’s
estate and the Deceased’s estate be distributed to PATRICIA ROSANNE
STEVENS, the Deceased’s sister,
as only eligible next of kin.
alternative question or issue in the Originating application is whether the
adoption orders are not effective orders under the
Adoption of Children Act
(NI) and the deceased’s biological children are entitled to
benefit on intestacy under the deceased’s estate and the
estate be distributed to the deceased’s biological children as the only
eligible next of kin.
document referred to in the first question is a single page handwritten document
dated 25 January 2005 purporting to be the final
will of William Kenneth
Green. By the document, the deceased purports to leave all of his estate to
Tracy Leeann Edwards. The deceased
died on Norfolk Island on 21 June 2009 and
his death certificate records his “issue” in order of birth as being
Edwards (daughter) and Peter (son)”. Other information
before the Court which I accept is to the effect that Peter was born
Tracy. The point is immaterial for present purposes.
the handwritten document is a valid will according to the law of Norfolk Island,
then the estate is to be distributed to Tracy
Leeann Edwards as the person named
in the document as the person entitled to his estate. If the handwritten
document is not a valid
will, then the deceased’s estate is to be
distributed on intestacy.
precise issue raised on the facts about the validity of the handwritten document
is whether it was executed in accordance with
the requirements of s 7 of the
Wills Act 1973
(NI) and, if not, whether the Court has the power (and
should exercise it) to declare the document a valid will despite the
non-compliance.
There was a previous proceeding in this Court for a grant of
probate of the handwritten document by the person named as the executor
handwritten document, but ultimately that application was discontinued (P17 of
the handwritten document is not a valid will, then the question or issue is who
takes the deceased’s estate on intestacy.
The rules for distribution on
intestacy are set out in s 58 of the Administration and Probate Act and,
relevantly for the purpose
of this case, Part 2.2 of Schedule 2 of the Act.
On the face of it, under the Act the deceased’s biological children as his
issue are entitled to the whole of the estate. The word “issue” is
defined in s 3 of the Act as all issue, whether legitimate
or illegitimate. If
there are no issue or eligible issue, the next in line are a parent or parents.
If there is no parent or parents,
then the estate is distributed to the next of
kin ascertained in accordance with s 63 of the Act. In this case, the
sister is his next of kin. The order of distribution under the
Administration and Probate Act is subject to the effect (if any)
of adoption
orders made by the Magistrates Court in Napier, New Zealand in relation to the
deceased’s biological children.
I have said, the Administration and Probate Act defines the word
“issue” as meaning all issue whether legitimate or
illegitimate.
The meaning of “issue” at common law is addressed later in these
reasons (at [
]). Subject to the
effect of the adoption orders, Peter and Tracy are issue of the deceased.
orders made under the
Adoption of Children Act 1932
(NI) have the effect
specified in s 9 of that Act. Section 9 contains principles concerning the
effect of an adoption order in relation
to matters of custody, maintenance and
education and in relation to matters of succession to real and personal
property. One such
principle is that upon the making of an adoption order, the
adopted child shall not have any right of succession to any real or personal
property of that child’s natural parent or parents which, if the adoption
order had not been made, might have been claimed
(whether under any intestacy or
disposition) by such child as a child born to its natural parent or parents in
lawful wedlock, unless
in the case of a disposition the child is expressly named
therein (s 9(3)(b)). That paragraph is in the following terms:
(3) Except as hereinafter provided, on, from and after the making of the
adoption order, the adopted child —
(b) shall not have any right of succession to any real or personal property of
its natural parent or parents which, if the adoption
order had not been made,
might have been claimed (whether under any intestacy or disposition) by such
child as a child born to its
natural parent or parents in lawful wedlock, unless
in the case of a disposition such child is expressly named therein: ...
Adoption of Children Act 1932
(NI) does not contain a section or sections
which provide for the recognition in Norfolk Island of adoption orders made in
Deputy Curator has described the deceased’s estate as consisting of a
house and land on Norfolk Island worth approximately
$125,000 to $145,000 and a
term deposit of $125,908. It appears that the house and land were sold for an
amount in excess of the
estimate, but the precise details are not material to
the issues on this application.
The Evidence
Deputy Curator’s application was supported by an affidavit sworn by her
and an affidavit sworn by her solicitor, Mr Frederick
John Grose. Mr
Grose’s affidavit includes as exhibits some of the documents filed in the
earlier probate proceedings. One
such document is an affidavit of Norah Scadden
“(formerly Edwards, nee Simon)”.
deceased’s biological children, Peter Rameka Edwards and Tracy Leeann Huia
Edwards, filed Notices of intention to respond
in the proceeding. They relied
on two affidavits, being an affidavit of their solicitor, Mr John Terrence
Brown, and an affidavit
of Mrs Scadden filed in this proceeding.
deceased’s sister, Ms Patricia Rosanne Stevens, also filed a Notice of
intention to respond in the proceeding.
was assisted by written submissions provided by each of the parties, namely, the
Deputy Curator, the biological children, and the
deceased’s sister. In
addition, I heard brief oral submissions from the parties.
deceased was born in Bentleigh, Victoria on 23 February 1943 and, as I have
said, he died on Norfolk Island on 21 June 2009.
The deceased’s death
certificate states that he lived on Norfolk Island for 30 years.
respective birth certificates for the deceased’s biological children,
hereinafter referred to as Peter and Tracy, record
that they were born on 25
June 1967 and 13 July 1968 respectively, and that each was given their
mother’s maiden name, Simon.
The biological mother was recorded as Norah
Simon, but there was no record on either birth certificate of the name of the
her affidavit in the probate proceeding, Mrs Scadden deposed that she is the
mother of the children of the deceased person. Mrs
Scadden did not marry the
deceased and she separated from the deceased at Rotorua, New Zealand on 1
October 1969. Mrs Scadden then
married Louis John Edwards at Rotorua on 10
November 1969. Adoption orders with respect to Peter and Tracy were made on 27
1971 by the Magistrates Court in Napier, New Zealand, and by those
orders, Peter was given the name Peter Rameka Edwards and Tracy
was given the
name Tracy Leeanne Huia Edwards.
Scadden divorced Louis John Edwards on 8 November 1989 and she married
Geoffrey Charles Scadden on 21 November 1992.
Scadden swore an affidavit in this proceeding after a number of written
submissions had already been filed. She deposed that,
with respect to the
adoption orders made in New Zealand on 27 October 1971, she did not provide the
deceased with copies of the application
papers or the orders in relation to
either of the adoptions and nor did she ask or authorise any other person to do
so. She believes
that she first told the deceased about the adoptions when he
called at her home a few days after the orders were made. She had no
recollection of telling him beforehand.
should be noted that in an affidavit explaining the delay in obtaining an
affidavit from Mrs Scadden in this proceeding, Mr Brown
deposed to being
told that she is elderly and in poor health and that it was difficult to arrange
for her to leave home.
deceased’s mother died at Hampton, Victoria on 10 January 1975 and his
father died at Sandringham, Victoria on 14 January
1988. The deceased is
survived by a sister, Patricia Rosanne Stevens.
Grose’s affidavit also included as exhibits two other affidavits filed in
the earlier probate proceedings.
first affidavit is an affidavit of the person named as the executor in the
handwritten document, Denis Harold Christian. Mr Christian
deposed that the
handwritten document is what he believes to be the last will of the deceased
person and that he is not aware of
any other document containing the
testamentary intentions of the deceased person. Mr Christian was present when
the document was
executed and Penelope Anne Franke “attested the
Christian deposed that he believes that the deceased person considered that his
domicile was in Norfolk Island. He bases that
belief on the fact that the
deceased person had lived and worked in Norfolk Island for many years, received
Norfolk Island social
security benefits and for over 10 years had only left
Norfolk Island for holidays or medical treatment.
second affidavit is an affidavit of Ms Franke. She deposed that she was present
when Mr Green executed the handwritten document
and that Mr Christian was
also present. She wrote out the document in her own handwriting and she did
that in accordance with Mr
Green’s instructions to her. She did that
immediately before it was executed by Mr Green. She has no doubt that
intended to execute the document as his last will and testament
and that Mr Green fully understood what he was doing at that time.
deposed that she signed the will in the presence of both Mr Green and Mr
Christian. They were both present at the same time
and in her presence when she
signed the document.
Is the Handwritten Document a Valid Will?
evidence establishes that the deceased signed the handwritten document and when
he did so, Mr Christian and Ms Franke were present.
However, only Ms
Franke signed the document.
am satisfied on the evidence that the handwritten document contains the
testamentary intentions of the deceased and that there is
no other will or
document containing a statement of the testamentary intentions of the
the date of the deceased’s death, s 7 of the
Wills Act 1973
was in the following terms:
Will to be in writing and signed before two witnesses
7. (1) Subject to this Act, a will is not valid unless —
(a) it is in writing;
(b) it is signed at the foot or end by the testator, or by another person in the
presence of and by the direction of the testator;
(c) the signature of the testator is made, or the signature of the person who
signs the will by the direction of the testator is
acknowledged, by the testator
in the presence of two or more witnesses present at the same time; and
(d) two or more of those witnesses each attest that signing of the will or that
acknowledgement of the signing of the will and subscribe
the will in the
presence of the testator and of the other witness or witnesses.
(2) The last preceding subsection shall not be taken to require any form of
attestation on a will.
The requirement in issue is that in s 7(1)(d) to the effect that two witnesses
“must each attest that signing of the will ...
and subscribe the will in
the presence of the testator and of the other witness or witnesses”.
Deputy Curator submits that s 7(1)(d) of the
Wills Act 1973
(NI) had not
been complied with because two witnesses have not subscribed the will. She
accepts that that result seems to frustrate
the intention of the deceased
because it seems clear that the deceased intended the handwritten document to be
effective and to leave
his estate to his daughter.
witnesses have not subscribed the handwritten document as required by s 7(1)(d).
The law as to what is required for the execution
of a valid will is stated in
numerous texts. In Dal Pont GE and Mackie KF,
Law of Succession
LexisNexis Butterworths, 2013) the learned authors state (at [4.15]):
Whereas the testator must sign, or acknowledge, his or her signature in the
presence of both witnesses, the witnesses’ attestation
and subscription,
though it must be in the testator’s presence, need not necessarily be in
each other’s presence. ‘Attestation’
means the mental act of
witnessing the testator’s signing or acknowledgment;
‘subscription’ is the actual signing
of the will by the witness. To
be valid, therefore, the witnesses must attest and subscribe the will after the
testator has signed
(or acknowledged). Signature in this respect has the same
meaning as considered above in the context of the signature of the testator,
except that in this instance another person cannot sign on behalf of a witness.
(Citations omitted.)
(See to similar effect the following texts:
Mortimer on Probate
pp 110–117; Hasting R, Weir G and Gulliver HW,
Probate Law
and Practice
(2nd ed, LawBook, 1948) pp 55–63;
Laws of England
(4th ed, Butterworths, Vol 50) paras 261–268.)
legislation in various Commonwealth States and Territories, there was no
provision in the
Wills Act 1973
(NI) which gives at the time the Court
the power to admit to probate a document executed in circumstances in which
there has been
substantial, but not strict, compliance with the requirements of
was submitted on behalf of Peter and Tracy that this Court has inherent
declare that the handwritten document is a valid will in circumstances where
there is clear evidence that the handwritten
document contains the testamentary
intentions of the deceased. There is no doubt that the law leans against a
finding of intestacy
Law of Succession
at paras 9.3–9.5) and that
this Court as a superior court of record (s 5 of the
Supreme Court Act 1960
Supreme Court Act 1933
has inherent
that such jurisdiction can be exercised
to override or dispense with the
requirements of s 7 of the
Wills Act 1973
should be noted the
Wills Act 1973
(NI) was repealed in 2012 and the
Wills Act 2012
(NI) was enacted and the Court has the power under the
Wills Act 2012
(NI) to dispense with the formal requirements of the Act
in certain circumstances. However, the relevant section in that Act does
apply in the case of persons dying before the commencement of s 59 on 1 January
2013 and is not applicable in the circumstances
of this case.
deceased died without making a valid will and his estate must be administered on
the basis that he died intestate.
The Devolution of the Deceased’s Estate on
Relevant Statutory Provisions
deceased’s domicile at the date of his death and for a period of time
prior to that date was Norfolk Island. The location
of the real property which
formed part of his estate was Norfolk Island. The order for collection and
administration of the estate
was made under the Administration and Probate Act
of Norfolk Island. In those circumstances, there is no dispute but that the law
which governs the distribution of the deceased’s estate on intestacy is
the law of Norfolk Island (Davies M, Bell A, Brereton
P and Douglas M,
Nygh’s Conflict of Laws in Australia,
(10th ed, LexisNexis
Butterworths, Australia, 2020) at 910–911).
adoption orders in this case were made by the Magistrates Court in Napier, New
Zealand. The evidence, both documentary and that
of Mrs Scadden, supports a
finding that Peter and Tracy were born in New Zealand and that they and their
adoptive parents were domiciled
in New Zealand at the time the adoption orders
Adoption of Children Act 1932
refers to an adoption order,
but does not define the term. It is an order made by the Court of Petty
Sessions after compliance with
certain procedural or natural justice
requirements and on the Court being satisfied of certain matters specified in
the Act. An
“adopted child” is defined in s 2 of the Act as
“an infant authorised to be adopted under this Act”. An
order may not be made in the case of certain classes of relationships.
consents in writing are required before an adoption order is made. They are set
out in s 4(3) of the Act which provides as
(3) An adoption order shall not be made except with the consent in writing of
every person who —
(a) is a parent or guardian of the infant in respect of whom the application is
(b) has the actual custody of the infant; or
(c) is liable to contribute to the support of the infant:
Provided that the Court may dispense with any consent required under this
subsection in any case where the person whose consent is
to be dispensed
(d) has abandoned or deserted the infant;
(e) cannot be found;
(f) is incapable of giving consent;
(g) being a person liable to contribute to the support of the infant has
persistently neglected or refused so to do; or
(h) is a person whose consent should, in the opinion of the Court and in all the
circumstances of the case, be dispensed with.
The effect of this subsection is that an adoption order cannot be made under the
Act without the consent in writing of a parent of
an infant unless the Court is
of the opinion that it should dispense with the requirement.
effect of an adoption order made under the Act on rights of succession is set
out (relevantly) in s 9(3)(b) of the Act. That
paragraph is set out above (at
I have said, unlike the legislation of various States and Territories of the
Commonwealth and the legislation in New Zealand, the
Act does not contain a
provision for the recognition in Norfolk Island of adoption orders made in those
States, Territories and foreign
countries. The standard provision for
recognition of the adoption orders of other States and Territories (and New
Zealand) is set
Nygh’s Conflict of Laws
and it is followed
by a discussion of recognition of adoption orders made by countries which are
parties to the Hague Convention and
recognition of adoption orders made by
countries with which Australia has a bilateral agreement on inter-country
adoption and recognition
of adoption orders made in other countries (at
turn then to the position in New Zealand. The
Adoption Act 1955
contains provision requiring consents from the parents and guardians of the
child before an adoption order is made. The consents
from parents in a case
where there is no adoption order in force in respect of the child are dealt with
in s 7(3)(a) and (b) which
provides as follows:
(a) if the parents of the child were married to each other either at the time of
the child’s birth or at after the time of
his conception ... the surviving
parents or parent ...
(b) in any other case ... the mother or (if she is dead ...), the surviving
guardians or guardian appointed by her:
provided that the court may in any such case require the consent of the father
if in the opinion of the court it is expedient to
difference between the Norfolk Island Act and the New Zealand Act in this
respect is that in the case of the Norfolk Island Act,
the consent of the
biological father of the child was required unless the Court dispensed with it,
whereas in the case of the New
Zealand Act, as Mrs Scadden never married the
deceased, the latter’s consent was not required unless the Court
considered it
expedient to require it.
respect to rights of succession, the
Adoption Act 1955
(NZ) contains a
section which provides that an adoption order results in an adopted child
ceasing to be the child of his existing
parents. Section 16(2)(b) provides as
(2) Upon an adoption order being made, the following paragraphs of this
subsection shall have effect for all purposes, whether civil,
criminal, or
otherwise, but subject to the provisions of any enactment which distinguishes in
any way between adopted children and
children other than adopted children,
(b) The adopted child shall be deemed to cease to be the child of his existing
parents (whether his natural parents or his adoptive
parents under any previous
adoption), and the existing parents of the adopted child shall be deemed to
cease to be his parents, and
any existing adoption order in respect of the child
shall be deemed to be discharged under section twenty of this Act:
adoption orders in this case were not made under the
Adoption of Children Act
(NI). They were made under the
Adoption Act 1955
(NZ). Due to
the fact that the Norfolk Island Act does not contain a section providing for
recognition of foreign adoption orders,
it is necessary to consider whether this
Court should recognise the adoptions and, if so, for what purposes. It is
important to
bear in mind that recognition and for what purpose, or to what
effect, can be two separate issues.
Common Law Principles
leading case dealing with the common law principles for the recognition of
foreign adoption orders is the English case of
Re Valentine’s
[1965] 1 Ch 831
[1965] 2 All ER 226
Re Valentine’s
The issue in that case was whether an English Court
would recognise, for the purposes of a settlement under a trust deed, an
order made by the court of a foreign country as conferring on the
adopted infant the status of being a child of the adoptive parents
circumstances in which the adoptive parents were not domiciled in the foreign
country at the time the adoption order was made.
The answer given by Lord
Denning MR and Danckwerts LJ (Salmon LJ dissenting) was no. Lord Denning MR
said (at 230–231):
Now it has long been settled that questions affecting status are determined by
the law of the domicil. This new status of parent
and child, in order to be
recognised everywhere, must be validly created by the law of the domicil of the
adopting parent. You do
not look to the domicil of the child; for that has no
separate domicil of his or her own. The child takes his or her parents’
domicil. You look to the parents’ domicil only. If you find that a
legitimate relationship of parent and child has been validly
created by the law
of the parents’ domicil at the time the relationship is created, then the
status so created should be universally
recognised throughout the civilised
world, provided always that there is nothing contrary to public policy in so
recognising it.
In my opinion, when English law recognises a foreign adoption order as
conferring the status of a child, it does not give to the
child all the
self-same rights and benefits of succession as a natural-born child. It only
gives the child the self-same rights and
benefits as a child adopted in England
by an English adoption order. I know that BARNARD, J., would not have given the
foreign-adopted
child even those rights. In
would not allow the child (or in that case the parent) to succeed on an
intestacy. But I think that case was wrongly decided.
It may be suggested that
the foreign-adopted child should have all the self-same rights of succession as
that foreign country gives;
and there are some passages in
Re Marshall
decd.), Barclays Bank, Ltd. v. Marshall
, which give colour to that view.
But I am quite clear that we do not look to the law of succession of the foreign
country. It we
did, we might find that a foreign­adopted child had greater
rights of succession in England than an English-adopted child. Which
The correct solution is this: the child is to be treated in English law just as
if he or she had been adopted in England,
no better and no worse.
Lord Justice Danckwerts said (at 233):
I reluctantly, therefore, have come to the conclusion that I must agree with the
opinion of LORD DENNING, M.R., that the courts of
this country will only
recognise an adoption in another country if the adopting parents are regarded by
the law of this country as
domiciled there. It will be observed that I have
expressed the proposition in such a way as to get over the difficulty in regard
to countries which do not recognise our conception of domicil.
(Citations omitted.)
following is a summary of the matters which emerge from Lord Denning’s
(1) An adoption order will only be recognised by an English Court where made by
a court of a country in which the adopting parents
were domiciled at the time
the order was made;
(2) An adoption order will only be recognised by an English Court where there is
nothing contrary to public policy (as assessed by
the English Court) in
recognising the order;
(3) The recognition of an adoption order by an English Court does not mean that
the child has the same rights as a natural born child
under English law and nor
does it mean the child has the same rights in England as he would have in the
foreign country in which
the order was made; and
(4) The recognition of an adoption order by an English Court means that the
child who is the subject of the foreign adoption order
has the same rights as if
that child had been adopted in England under English law.
aspects of Lord Denning’s statement of the requirements for the
recognition of adoption orders made by the courts of foreign
countries have been
questioned, such as a requirement that the child be ordinarily resident in the
foreign country where the adoption
order was made (
Dicey, Morris &
The Conflict of Laws
(16th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, United
Kingdom, 2022) at 1293 [21–118] and following), but none of those matters
are of present
is important to note that there were two questions in
Re Valentine’s
and they were whether the foreign adoption orders were to be
recognised and, if so, what effect was to be given to the orders. For
the Court may recognise a foreign adoption order for the purposes of recognising
the adopted child as an adopted child under
English law, but that may not mean
that the adopted child falls within the term of “children or issue”
within the terms
of a property settlement.
public policy exception referred to by Lord Denning in
Re Valentine’s
is the subject of the following observation by the authors of
Dicey, Morris & Collins
The Conflict of Laws
Recognition contrary to public policy.
Lord Denning M.R. in
Valentine’s Settlement
entered one caveat against recognising a
foreign adoption, namely, that there must be nothing contrary to public policy
in so recognising
it. Rule 127 does not mention this qualification, because
public policy is a necessary reservation in any conflict of laws case.
it is more than usually important to keep this factor in mind when deciding
whether to recognise a foreign adoption, because
the laws of some foreign
countries differ so widely from English law as to the objects and effects of
adoption. If the foreign adoption
was designed to promote some immoral or
mercenary object, like prostitution or financial gain to the adopter, it is
improbable that
it would be recognised in England. But, apart from exceptional
cases like these, it is submitted that the court should be slow to
recognition to a foreign adoption on the ground of public policy merely because
the requirements for adoption in the foreign
law differ from those of English
law. Here again the distinction between recognising the status and giving effect
to its results
is of vital importance. Public policy may sometimes require that
a particular result of a foreign adoption should not be given effect
England; but public policy should only on the rarest occasions be involved in
order to deny recognition to the status itself.
(Footnote references omitted.)
Re N (Recognition of Foreign Adoption)
[2016] EWHC 3085 (Fam)
, Sir J Munby P considered
Re Valentine’s Settlement
and the subsequent cases which have considered it. The President concluded that
Re Valentine’s Settlement
remained good law and that it was binding
on judges at first instance until the Court of Appeal decided otherwise.
Bouton v Labiche
(1994) 33 NSWLR 225
Bouton v Labiche
), the Court
of Appeal in New South Wales considered a provision in the
Adoption of
Children Act 1965
(NSW) which specified the circumstances in which an
adoption order made outside the Commonwealth of Australia would be recognised
for the purposes of the law of New South Wales. The Court was given the power
to deny recognition if it considered that the procedure
followed, or the law
applied, in connection with the adoption involved a denial of natural justice or
did not comply with the requirements
of substantial justice. The case is of
assistance even though, as I have said, there is no equivalent provision in the
Adoption of Children Act
Kirby made reference to the common law principles. His Honour said (at
courts of the common law will recognise as valid the orders of a competent
foreign tribunal (formerly a “foreign Christian
determining the status of a person who, for the purposes of international law,
is domiciled in the jurisdiction
of the foreign tribunal: see
Attorney-General (Gillig cited)
Gillig v Gillig
[1906] UKLawRpPro 7
[1906] P 135
interests of comity are not served if the courts of the common law are too eager
to criticise the standards of the courts and
tribunals of another jurisdiction
or too reluctant to recognise their orders which are, and remain, valid by the
law of the domicile:
Igra v Igra
[1951] P 404
MacAlpine v
[1958] P 35
Nevertheless,
the courts of the common law, and notably the courts of England, have reserved
to themselves the right to refuse to
recognise decrees and orders of foreign
courts and tribunals — even those of the domicile of the person affected
which remain
valid by the law of the domicile—where:
(a) the order impugned offends against local ideas of substantial justice: see
Gray (orse Formosa) v Formosa
[1963] P 259
Lepre v Lepre
(b) the decree or order has been obtained in the foreign court or tribunal
contrary to the requirements of procedural fairness or
natural justice:
MacAlpine v MacAlpine
Middleton v Middleton
[1967] P 62
of the cases referred to by Kirby P was
MacAlpine v MacAlpine
That case involved a divorce decree obtained by a husband by fraudulent
conduct which had the effect that the wife was not notified
of the proceeding.
The English Court refused to recognise the decree. Sachs J said the following
In the light of the above-cited authorities I consider that the issue for
decision in the present case must nowadays be approached
on the following basis.
First, a decree of divorce pronounced by a foreign court of competent
by the courts of this country if obtained
as a result of proceedings which took a course contrary to natural justice. I
use the word
“treated” as a nullity because to my mind it is not
necessary to show either that the decree is in its particular circumstances
regarded by the law of the foreign court as void as opposed to voidable or that
the decree if obtained in parallel circumstances
in this country would here be
regarded as void as opposed to voidable. Secondly, where the respondent has had
no notice of the proceedings,
the decree is prima facie one obtained by a
procedure contrary to natural justice. Thirdly, that where it is proved to be
or where it can be assumed to be the case that upon information bona
fide given to it the foreign court has held that its own rules
as to service or
substituted service have been duly complied with, and that it is despite that
fact that no notice of the proceedings
has been received by the respondent, then
the courts of this country, by way of exception, will not generally regard that
of notice as resulting in the foreign court's proceedings being contrary
to natural justice. (I use the word “generally”
because in each of
the three cases cited above the rules of the foreign court as to substituted
service appear to have been of the
same type as our own, and there has not yet
fallen for consideration the — I hope unlikely — position of the
the foreign court themselves being repugnant to our views here of
natural justice.)
In the present case the absence of notice of proceedings was procured by the
fraud of the husband and does not fall within the above
exception created by the
three recent cases. Nor is there any reason whatsoever why there should not be
here applied the rule that
prima facie such absence of notice results in the
proceedings being contrary to natural justice. It is a case where the husband
deliberately
set out to procure that natural justice should not obtain,
succeeded in what he sought to do, and has created the conditions in which
right to hold, as I do, that the decree of the court of Wyoming must be treated
as a nullity here.
Bouton v Labiche
and the facts in that case. An infant had
been the subject of an adoption order made by the Supreme Court of Mauritius.
In the application
made by the adoptive parents, they falsely stated that the
child’s parentage was unknown, when, in fact, they both knew that
female was the child’s natural mother with another man. Some years later,
the adopted child applied for Letters of Administration
in respect of her
natural father’s estate and to take the benefits of that estate as the
sole surviving issue.
Court declined to recognise the adoption order made by the Supreme Court of
Mauritius. In refusing recognition of the adoption
order made by the Supreme
Court of Mauritius, Kirby P said that the acts of the adoptive parents
meant that the procedure followed
in connection with the adoption order did not
meet “the requirements of the substantial justice”. Kirby P
that to be a very broad phrase (at 242). Mahoney JA considered that
the procedure followed in connection with the adoption order
involved a denial
of natural justice. There was a knowing misstatement which meant that the
application for the adoption order was
not brought to the attention of the
natural father, the person in respect of whom links would be severed upon the
making of the adoption
order. The critical consideration is that the absence of
notice to the natural father was contrary to natural justice as understood
New South Wales, although his Honour did consider that the Supreme Court of
Mauritius, had it been aware of the true position,
would have ordered that the
natural father be given notice (at 244). Priestley JA considered that
there had been a denial of natural
justice because the dishonest acts of the
adopting parents meant that the natural father was not given notice.
these authorities in mind, I turn to consider the first question of whether this
Court should recognise the adoption orders made
in New Zealand.
Court will not recognise the orders in circumstances where the Court concludes
that to do so would be contrary to public policy.
The Court may reach that
conclusion if there has been a serious departure from the rules of procedural
fairness or a failure to
meet notions of substantial justice.
evidence of the circumstances surrounding the making of the adoption orders is
limited. The deceased and Mrs Scadden were the
biological parents of Peter and
Tracy. They never married. Peter was born on 25 June 1967 and Tracy was born
on 13 July 1968.
The deceased and Mrs Scadden separated on 1 October 1969 and
Mrs Scadden married Mr Edwards on 10 November 1969. The adoption orders
were made approximately two years later.
Scadden did not provide the application papers or the orders to the deceased (or
authorise any other person to do so) and, to
the best of her recollection, she
did not tell him beforehand. She did tell him about the adoptions a few days
later when the deceased
called at Mrs Scadden’s home. I make findings of
fact in these terms.
material before the Magistrates Court in Napier, New Zealand in October 1971 is
not before this Court. Nor are any written reasons
of the Magistrates Court
(assuming there were written reasons) before this Court. There is no direct
evidence relating to the Court’s
consideration or otherwise of whether it
was expedient to require the consent of the biological father, that is, the
deceased. There
is no evidence that Mrs Scadden misled the Court and, in any
event, that is not alleged by any party. The allegation is one of a
the rules of natural justice or procedural fairness in that the deceased was not
told of the proceedings beforehand. I
was not referred to any section in the
Adoption Act 1955
(NZ) which required Mrs Scadden or Mr Edwards, or
indeed anybody else, to have given notice to the deceased of the proceedings. I
assume that it was open to the Court to conclude that in terms of expediency, it
was not necessary to require the deceased’s
consent in writing. The
presumption of regularity may be called in aid to conclude that the Magistrates
Court did consider the issue
in s 7(3)(b) of the
Adoption Act 1955
and that the adoption orders were regularly and properly obtained under the
is not the end of the natural justice (or procedural fairness) and public policy
inquiry because that matter is judged by the
law of the forum having regard to
its notion of what is procedurally fair and not contrary to public policy. In
that respect, the
local Act (or common law) will provide a guide, but I do not
think it is decisive. It may be that under the local Act, notice to
a parent is
likely to be given in most cases, but there may well be cases where it is not.
As to the public policy exception, in
my view it cannot be said that the
different “presumption” about whether the biological father’s
consent is needed
in the case of a child born out of lawful wedlock under the
Adoption Act 1955
(NZ) is such that enforcement of the order made
thereunder would be contrary to public policy in this jurisdiction. The
reflect a different policy based on whether or not the children were
born in lawful wedlock.
conclusions are sufficient to answer the questions raised on this application
because the principal argument of Peter and Tracy
was that the adoption orders
were made in breach of the rules of natural justice and for that reason, should
be not be recognised.
I reject that argument. It seemed to be accepted that
once the adoption orders were recognised, it followed that Peter and Tracy
not be entitled to the deceased’s estate on intestacy. That concession is
correct for the reasons which follow.
should be said at the outset that there is no public policy reason not to give
effect to the adoption orders in a way which precludes
the adopted children from
sharing on intestacy in the estate of a biological parent who is not an adopter.
It was not disputed, but
even if it had been disputed, it is clear that had the
administration of the deceased’s estate been governed by the law of
Zealand, Peter and Tracy would not be entitled to share in the deceased’s
estate. Equally, subject to one small issue
addressed below, had the adoption
orders been made in Norfolk Island, Peter and Tracy would not be entitled to
share in the deceased’s
estate on intestacy. Furthermore, it is a common
feature of adoption legislation and succession legislation that adoption orders
can result “not only in the creation of a new legal status between
individuals, but also in the destruction of the status as
between others”
Re DG and The
Adoption Act 2000
[2007] NSWCA 241
(2007) 244 ALR
per Basten JA). For example, one need only consider the legislation
in New South Wales.
Adoption Act 2000
Succession Act 2006
(NSW) have the effect that for the purposes of
succession rights, family relationships that exist as a matter of biological
and are not consistent with the relationship created by adoption, are to
be ignored. The adoption order has the effect that the
adopted child is
regarded in law as the child of the adoptive parents and ceases to be regarded
in law as the child of the birth
reject one argument put by Ms Stevens. It was, as I understand it, that relying
on the common law rules of private international
law, I could declare that Peter
and Tracy were each an adopted child in that each of them became “an
infant authorised to be
adopted under [the] Act”. I had difficulty
following this argument and I reject it. If Peter and Tracy are precluded from
sharing in the deceased’s estate on intestacy it is because the common law
rules of private international law mean the “foreign”
orders are given the same effect as orders made in Norfolk Island, or they are
given the same effect as they have in the
place where they were made. The first
is said to be the English approach and the second is said to be the Australian
As it happens in this case, either way the result is the same.
English approach is set out in
Re Valentine’s Settlement.
recognition is accorded to the adoption order, the adopted child has the rights
he or she would have under the law of the local
consideration of how the
Adoption of Children Act 1932
(NI) interacts
with the Administration and Probate Act, the effect of s 9(3)(b) of the former
Act is that an adopted child has no
right of succession to any real or personal
property of his or her natural parent or parents.
Australian approach, so far as it is clear, tends to favour applying the law of
the foreign jurisdiction where the adoption order
was made as to the effects of
the order once recognised (
[1946] VicLawRp 21
[1946] VLR 356
Gavan Duffy J;
[1959] VicRp 36
[1959] VR 213
at 220 per Hudson J;
Estate of Searle, Deceased
[1963] SASR 303
at 309). If that approach be
followed, the result is the same and an adopted child ceases to be the child of
his or her natural
parents by reason of s 16 of the
Adoption Act 1955
Re Walker (deceased)
[1973] 1 NZLR 449
the circumstances, I do not need to pursue this issue any further.
final question involves a consideration of the interaction between s 9(3)(b) of
Adoption of Children Act 1932
(NI) which refers to “adopted
child” and the Administration and Probate Act which refers to
“issue” in the
context of providing for succession rights on
intestacy (see ss 58, 61 and Part 2.2 of Schedule 2). The word
is defined in s 3, but the definition goes no further than
making it clear that legitimate and illegitimate children are included.
word “issue” has a well-known meaning in the common law. In
Matthews v Williams
[1941] HCA 32
(1941) 65 CLR 639
, Acting Chief
Justice Rich, Justice Dixon (as his Honour then was) and Justice McTiernan said
(at 650–651):
But we have come to the conclusion that the gift to “issue” is not
limited to children of the testator’s children,
but includes remoter
descendants. “Issue” is a word with a clear prima-facie legal
meaning. It means descendants or progeny.
No doubt “issue” is a
flexible word and its prima-facie application may be restricted by any
sufficient indications appearing
in the documents: Cf.
In re Birks
“the essence of the word ‘issue,’ which primarily means all
descendants, is totality rather than succession”
(In re Cust;
Glasgow v Campbell
, per Cussen, J., distinguishing “issue”
from “heirs of the body”).
(Citation omitted; see
Buick v Equity Trustees Executors & Agency Co
[1957] HCA 65
(1957) 97 CLR 599.)
word “issue” includes children, but it is clear from s 61 of the
Administration and Probate Act that it extends to
children of children and would
have its primary meaning of descendants or progeny.
and Tracy only come within the common law meaning of issue because they are the
natural children of the deceased. If by statute
they are not to be considered
children of the deceased, then they are not issue. Although the facts were very
different, in the
In re H deceased
[1946] VicLawRp 71
[1947] VLR 170
, Herring CJ
said (at 173):
This being so, when one is considering the persons to take under the intestacy
of a natural parent, there seems good reason for saying
that for this purpose an
adopted child is not the child or issue of such parent within the meaning of the
provisions dealing with
this matter. And I think I should hold that when such
provisions are applied to the case of the present intestate as a natural parent
they should be applied on this basis, and that as a result his estate should be
distributed as if, in fact, he had no issue.
Conclusions
these reasons, I would answer the questions raised in the Deputy Curator’s
Originating application as follows:
(1) No. The document titled “LAST WILL OF W.K.GREEN” dated
25 January 2005 and signed by William Kenneth Green (the
Deceased) is not a
valid will and the Deceased’s estate be distributed on intestacy pursuant
to the provisions of the
Administration and Probate Act 2006
(2) Yes. The adoption orders made on 27 October 1971 in the Magistrates Court
at Napier, New Zealand, under the
Adoption Act 1955
(NZ) regarding Peter
Simon and Tracy Huia Simon (the Deceased’s Biological Children) are
effective adoption orders under the
Adoption of Children Act 1932
and pursuant to s 9 of that Act, the Deceased’s Biological Children are
not entitled to benefit on intestacy under the
Deceased’s estate and the
Deceased’s estate be distributed to Patricia Rosanne Stevens, the
Deceased’s sister,
as the only eligible next of kin.
(3) Does not arise.
I certify that the preceding seventy-two (72)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Chief
Dated: 25 January 2024
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (463 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter