URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stoffels v Piper [2024] NFSC 2 (30 January 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Stoffels v Piper
[2024] NFSC 2
File number(s):
SC 1 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
30 January 2024
Date of publication of reasons:
5 February 2024
Catchwords:
REAL PROPERTY
– application for
partition of property held by joint tenants
– whether “good
reason” not to order sale and partition
Partition Act 1900
(NSW) in its application to Norfolk Island under the
Partition Ordinance Act 1931
(NI) – no “good reason”
not to order sale and partition of property
– order for property to
Legislation:
Partition Act 1900
Partition Ordinance 1931-1964
Cases cited:
Foote v Foote
(2014) 11 ASTLR 504;
Sovova v Ojvan
(1987) 72 ACTR 10
Squire v Rogers
[1979] FCA 48
(1979) 27 ALR 330
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
30 November 2023
Date of hearing:
30 January 2024
Solicitor for the Plaintiff:
J Brown of McIntyres Lawyers
Counsel for the Defendant:
The Defendant appeared in person
SC 1 of 2023
ERIKA LEE STOFFELS
ANDREW HARRY PIPER
DATE OF ORDER:
30 JANUARY 2024
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
section 4(1)(b)
Partition Act 1900
(NSW), in its application to
Norfolk Island under the
Partition Ordinance 1931-1964
(NI), the property
described as Lot 9 of section 30, portion 75e being the land comprised in Title
number 1813 Edition 8, known as
65 Captain Quintal Drive, Norfolk Island (the
), with an area of 2.638 hectares more or less, be sold.
and 15(c) of the
Partition Act 1900
(NSW), the sale of the
Property be effected out of Court subject to the restrictions and directions set
out in the following orders.
sale be effected by a real estate agent carrying on business on Norfolk Island
as the parties may agree in writing within seven
(7) days from the date of these
orders, failing which the sale shall be effected by such real estate agent
carrying on business on
Norfolk Island as may be selected by the Registrar in
his or her absolute discretion. The agent shall be entitled to charge his
her usual commission in relation to the negotiation and effecting of the sale.
agent in the first instance shall seek to sell the Property by private treaty
for such price as may be agreed between the parties
in writing, and failing such
agreement, the agent shall offer the Property for sale by public auction, and
for that purpose the reserve
price shall be the amount referred to above as
having been agreed between the parties in writing, and failing such agreement
reserve price shall be the average of market appraisals obtained from each
of the estate agents who carry on business on Norfolk
no person purchases the Property at public auction at a figure equal to or in
excess of the said reserve price, then the agent
shall seek to sell the Property
by private treaty at the best price available.
of the parties be at liberty to purchase the Property in any sale pursuant to
these orders.
Registrar be authorised to execute all contracts, deeds, documents or paper
writings on behalf of the parties in his or her capacity
as the proprietors of
the Property that are necessary or desirable to effect and complete the sale of
the Property in accordance
with these orders, in the event that the parties or
either of them fail to do so within seven (7) days from the date on which the
documents or paper writings are submitted to them for execution.
terms and conditions of sale (including but not limited to the provisions of the
contract for sale) be as determined and agreed
by the parties in writing, and
failing such agreement within seven (7) days of a draft terms of sale being
submitted to the parties,
such terms and conditions shall be determined by the
Registrar in his absolute discretion.
defendant vacate the Property within twenty-one (21) days from the date of these
orders and deliver the keys to the agent.
completion of the sale, the proceeds of sale be used to pay any:
(a) repayment of the mortgage to Westpac Banking Corporation which is secured
against the Property;
(b) unpaid rates, levies or other charges issued by the Norfolk Island Regional
Council in respect of the Property;
(c) insurance charges levied on or in respect of the Property;
(d) vendor’s legal fees in relation to the sale; and
(e) agent’s commission and other expenses in relation to the sale.
balance of the proceeds of the sale of the Property be paid into Court pending
further order of the Court in relation to the distribution
of those proceeds.
costs of this proceeding be paid on a party and party basis by the defendant, as
agreed or taxed.
parties have liberty to apply on five (5) days’ notice for the purpose of
making any supplementary or consequential or procedural
orders or directions
that may become necessary in respect of the sale of the Property.
REASONS FOR
Revised from transcript
applicant, Ms Erika Lee
, and the respondent, Mr Andrew Harry
, are the registered proprietors as joint tenants of portion 75e
being the land comprised in Title number 1813, Edition 8, known as
Quintal Drive, Norfolk Island (the
). For reasons that will be
explained shortly, Ms Stoffels wants to sever her joint ownership of the
Property with Mr Piper and have
the Property sold. Mr Piper has made it clear
that he does not want to sell the Property. Ms Stoffels has accordingly applied
an order pursuant to
section 4(1)(b)
Partition Act
(NSW) as adopted and applied on Norfolk Island by the
(NI), that the Property be sold. She also seeks
ancillary or consequential orders concerning how the sale should be effected and
how the proceeds should be distributed. Mr Piper opposes Ms Stoffels’s
application.
relevant facts may be shortly stated. Ms Stoffels and Mr Piper jointly
purchased the Property in October 2016 for $285,000.
Ms Stoffels contributed
$50,362 towards the purchase price, and Mr Piper contributed $8250. The balance
was borrowed from the
Banking Corporation. That loan is secured
by a registered mortgage over the Property in favour of Westpac. Ms Stoffels
claims that
she has made repayments to Westpac totalling $45,843.94, and that Mr
Piper has contributed $10,808.06 towards the repayments.
Property comprises a large rural lot of some 2.638 hectares, together with some
improvements. Ms Stoffels and Mr Piper originally
intended to grow industrial
hemp on the Property, but that commercial venture did not proceed. There is
also no prospect of that
venture proceeding in the near future. That is
because, for reasons that it is unnecessary to detail, the business relationship
and any friendship between Ms Stoffels and Mr Piper have been fractured beyond
Piper currently resides on the Property. Ms Stoffels resided on the Property
for short periods in the past, but that is no longer
possible given the
breakdown of their relationship. As for the loan from Westpac, which is in the
joint names of Mr Piper and Ms
Stoffels, Mr Piper stopped making any repayments
to Westpac in February 2021. Ms Stoffels continued to make repayments, but for
financial reasons has been unable to continue to do so since December 2021. The
loan is accordingly now in default, and Westpac
has demanded repayment in full.
While there is no evidence that Westpac has commenced any enforcement action, or
that any action
is imminent, it may be inferred that enforcement proceedings at
some point in the future are likely, if not inevitable, if the current
between Mr Piper and Ms Stoffels is not resolved shortly. While it is common
ground that Mr Piper has been in contact with
Westpac concerning the loan in
recent times, there is no evidence concerning the outcome of those discussions.
Stoffels’s attempts, via her solicitor, to persuade Mr Piper to agree to a
voluntary sale of the Property and the equitable
distribution of the sale
proceeds have thus far been been unsuccessful. The available inference from the
evidence is that Mr Piper
has no intention of agreeing to sell the Property and
that, unless the Court orders a sale of the Property, he will continue to reside
on the Property and treat it as his own to the exclusion of Ms Stoffels.
of the Ordinance provides, in effect, that the
Partition Act
is adopted as a
law of Norfolk Island. While the
Partition Act
has since been repealed in New
South Wales, it continues to operate as a law of Norfolk Island by virtue of the
of the Ordinance provides, in effect, that the powers
vested in the “court” under the
Partition Act
shall, in relation to
Norfolk Island, be vested in, exercised, and performed by the Supreme Court of
Norfolk Island.
Partition Act
provides as follows:
In a suit for partition where but for this Act or the Act hereby repealed a
decree for partition might have been made, ... if parties
collectively to the extent of one moiety or upwards, or some persons as
hereinafter provided on their behalf, request
the Court to direct a sale of the
property and a distribution of the proceeds instead of a division of the
property between or among
the parties interested, the Court shall, unless it
sees good reason to the contrary, order a sale of the property accordingly.
section 4(1)(b)
Partition Act
is expressed in somewhat archaic and arcane
terms, the effect of it is to provide a statutory mechanism for a co-owner who
to terminate the co-ownership to apply to the Court for an order
directing the sale of the Property and the distribution of the proceeds
circumstances where previously only a decree of partition might have been made.
A decree of partition is an equitable remedy
which terminates co-ownership by
effecting a division of the Property and conferring separate estates in fee
simple to each co-owner.
partition legislation has been construed as being “facultative legislation
in that it confers a wide power to make an
order for sale in lieu of partition
in circumstances where previously sale in lieu of partition was only available,
with the assent
of the court, if all the parties agreed that a sale was the most
beneficial way of disposing of their interests”:
Squire v Rogers
[1979] FCA 48
(1979) 27 ALR 330
at 340. Where an application is made pursuant to
Partition Act
, the onus is cast on the defendant to show
“good reason” why a sale should not be directed:
(1987) 72 ACTR 10
is readily apparent that
section 4(1)(b)
Partition Act
as adopted as a
law of Norfolk Island applies to the circumstances of this case. Ms Stoffels is
a co-owner of the Property. She
wishes to terminate the co-ownership because
her business relationship with Mr Piper has broken down and the purpose for
acquired the Property with Mr Piper can no longer be fulfilled. In
those circumstances, but for the application of the
Partition Act
decree of partition might have been made”. It follows that the
Court’s power to make an order pursuant to
Partition Act
is enlivened.
Court’s power to make an order under
Partition Act
been enlivened, the Court
order the sale of the Property unless Mr
Piper discharges his onus of showing a “good reason” why such an
order should
not be made. Mr Piper has failed to discharge that onus. Indeed,
he has failed to show any reason, let alone a good reason, why
the Court should
not order the Property to be sold.
Piper’s defence to Ms Stoffels’s application filed raised a number
of collateral contentions and issues. Most of them
are not relevant to the
question whether there is a good reason not to order the sale of the Property
and were not, in any event,
pursued or pressed by Mr Piper in his final
submissions before the Court. When pressed at the hearing to identify any good
why the Court should not order the sale of the Property, Mr Piper
identified three such reasons.
Mr Piper contended that the Property should not be sold pursuant to a Court
order because he believes that the Property could
be sold at a better price if
he was permitted to sell it privately at some point in the future. Mr Piper
made a number of assertions
from the Bar table in support of that contention.
He did not, however, adduce any evidence which would permit the Court to
that some better outcome could or would be obtained by permitting Mr
Piper to voluntarily sell the Property at some stage in the
future. In any
event, it may readily be inferred that, unless ordered to do so, Mr Piper is
highly unlikely to agree to a sale of
the Property, now or at any time in the
Mr Piper pointed out that Westpac has not taken any enforcement action and that
he has had some discussions with Westpac in
recent times. As noted earlier,
however, while Mr Piper may have had discussions with Westpac in recent times,
there is no evidence
In any event, the mere fact that Westpac has not taken any enforcement
or that foreclosure and repossession may not be imminent, does not provide a
good reason not to order the sale of the Property.
Mr Piper has asserted, from the Bar table, that he has plans to improve the
Property, including by building some further dwellings
and removing some
contaminants that might impede the immediate sale of the Property. Mr Piper did
not, however, adduce any evidence
concerning the feasibility of his plans in
that regard, or what he has done to advance those plans, or how or when they
completed. Those plans might amount to little more than pipe dreams.
They hardly provide a good reason for not ordering the sale
of the Property.
of the reasons put forward by Mr Piper, considered individually or collectively,
establish or constitute a good reason not to
order a sale of the Property.
is no dispute that Ms Stoffels is a co-owner of the Property. She wishes for
good reason to terminate the co-ownership. Her
purpose for jointly purchasing
the Property can no longer be fulfilled and she is unable to reside at the
Property or otherwise enjoy
the fruits of her share or co-ownership of the
Property. Mr Piper has, however, made it tolerably clear that he does not and
not agree to sell the Property. In the past, before the
Partition Act
Stoffels’s only remedy in the circumstances would have been a decree for
partition. The effect of the
Partition Act
, however, was to permit the Court to
direct a sale of the Property in circumstances such as those faced by Ms
Stoffels. Indeed,
a directed sale effectively became the default or preferred
remedy in the circumstances. The onus was on the co-owner, in this case
Piper, to demonstrate to the Court that there was a good reason why the Court
should not direct the sale of the Property. For
the reasons that have been
given, Mr Piper has failed to discharge that onus.
follows that it is appropriate to make an order directing the sale of the
Property, along with ancillary orders to facilitate that
sale. Section 15 of
Partition Act
provides that:
Wherever the Court orders a sale under the Act it may order such sale to be
(a) by the Court; or
(b) out of Court subject to such restriction as the Court thinks fit; or
(c) altogether out of Court.
order sought by Ms Stoffels is that the sale be effected out of court, but
subject to various ancillary orders. That would appear
to be the most efficient
and effective way for the Court to proceed. Mr Piper did not submit otherwise.
Ms Stoffels’s originating application, and in some draft orders provided
to the Court today, Ms Stoffels clearly identified
the ancillary orders which
she sought to facilitate the Court ordered sale. Mr Piper did not make any
submissions concerning the
appropriateness or otherwise of those ancillary
orders. I also note that the ancillary orders proposed by Ms Stoffels are
to the orders made by former Jacobson CJ in relatively analogous
circumstances in
Foote v Foote
(2014) 11 ASTLR 504;
[2014] NFSC 2.
Subject to some minor variations, it is appropriate to make the ancillary orders
proposed by Ms Stoffels concerning the means by
which the sale of the Property
out of court should be effected.
is, however, an issue concerning the distribution of the proceeds of sale. The
orders initially sought by Ms Stoffels envisaged
that the mortgagee and any
unpaid rates, levies, or charges over the Property be first paid out of the
proceeds of sale. That would
appear to be an appropriate order. The more
contentious issue, however, is how the balance of the proceeds of sale should be
between Ms Stoffels and Mr Piper.
effect of the order initially sought by Ms Stoffels was, in summary, that the
proceeds be divided between her and Mr Piper broadly
in proportion to their
respective contributions towards the purchase price, mortgage repayments and
other outgoings connected with
the Property. While at first blush that would
appear to be an appropriate way to distribute the proceeds of sale, it seems
Mr Piper disagrees. Moreover, if an order to that effect is made, it is
likely to give rise to disputes in the future concerning
the contributions that
have been made. Some process or procedure may need to be put in place to
determine the respective contributions
that have been made.
light of that difficulty, the appropriate order at this stage, in my view, is
that the balance of the proceeds of the sale, after
the mortgagee has been paid
out, and any outstanding rates and levies have been discharged, be paid into
Court, pending further order
by the Court in respect of the distribution of the
proceeds between Mr Piper and Ms Stoffels. When the Property is sold and the
balance of the proceeds of sale has been paid into Court, the matter should be
relisted. Consideration can then be given to the
fair and equitable
distribution of sale proceeds as between Mr Piper and Ms Stoffels and the
process or procedure that should be
put in place in that regard. It may, for
example, be appropriate at that point to refer the matter to mediation
concerning the distribution
of the funds.
Mr Piper and Ms Stoffels did not disagree that the appropriate order concerning
the proceeds of sale at this stage was that,
once the mortgagee has been paid
and outstanding rates and levies discharged, the balance be paid into court
until further order.
I certify that the preceding twenty-four (24)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 5 February 2024
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (340 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter