URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nf/NFSC/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stoffels v Piper (No 3) [2024] NFSC 5 (15 July 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF NORFOLK ISLAND
Stoffels v Piper (No 3)
[2024] NFSC 5
File number(s):
SC 1 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
15 July 2024
Date of publication of reasons
31 July 2024
Catchwords:
CONTEMPT OF COURT
– where failure to
comply with court order – sentencing for contempt – defendant fined
– defendant to pay
plaintiff’s costs as a fixed sum
Legislation:
Court Procedures Rules 2006
Partition Act 1900
Cases cited:
Kazal v Thunder Studios Inc (California) and
[2017] FCAFC 111
(2017) 256 FCR 90
Polleycutt v Taylor
[2020] ACTSC 158
Stoffels v Piper (No 2)
[2024] NFSC 4
Stoffels v Piper
[2024] NFSC 2
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
15 July 2024
Solicitor for the Plaintiff:
J Brown of McIntyres Lawyers
Counsel for the Defendant:
The Defendant appeared in person
SC 1 of 2023
ERIKA LEE STOFFELS
ANDREW HARRY PIPER
DATE OF ORDER:
15 JULY 2024
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
defendant, Mr Andrew Harry Piper, be fined the sum of $5,000 in respect of his
conviction for contempt for failing to comply with
order 9 of the orders made by
Wigney J on 30 January 2024, as varied by order 1 of the orders made by Wigney J
on 13 May 2024.
payment of the fine referred to in order 1 be wholly suspended on the condition
that the defendant not engage in any conduct which
materially impedes or
obstructs the sale of the Property pursuant to the orders made by Wigney J on 30
January 2024.
defendant pay the plaintiff’s costs of the plaintiff’s application
in the proceeding filed 19 April 2024, as amended,
in relation to the
enforcement of the orders made by Wigney J on 30 January 2024.
costs payable pursuant to order 3 are fixed pursuant to
rule 1720(3)(c)
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), in the sum of $15,000.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
3 June 2024, I convicted the defendant, Mr Andrew Harry Piper, of contempt for
failing to comply with orders made by the Court
which required him to vacate a
property which he jointly owned with the plaintiff, Ms Erika Stoffels. Mr Piper
has now vacated the
property and thereby purged his contempt. It remains
however, to determine what, if any, penalty should be imposed on Mr Piper in
respect of his contempt.
reasons should be read together with my previous judgments, which set out the
relevant factual background in more detail: see
Stoffels v Piper
Stoffels v Piper (No 2)
[2024] NFSC 4.
relevant to Mr Piper’s contempt may be shortly summarised as follows.
30 January 2024, I ordered that the property at 65 Captain Quintal Drive,
Norfolk Island (the
) be sold pursuant to
section 4(1)(b)
Partition Act 1900
(NSW), as that Act applies to Norfolk Island. I
also made a number of ancillary orders to facilitate that sale. Significantly,
I made the following order (order 9):
The defendant vacate the Property within twenty-one (21) days from the date of
these orders and deliver the keys to the agent.
Piper did not vacate the Property in compliance with that order.
19 April 2024, Ms Stoffels filed an application by which she sought to enforce
the orders made on 30 January 2024. The orders
sought by Ms Stoffels in that
application included an order requiring Mr Piper to show cause why he should not
be found guilty of
contempt for failing to comply with the order requiring him
to vacate the Property.
matter returned to Court on 13 May 2024 to deal with Ms Stoffels’
enforcement action. At that hearing, Mr Piper did not
suggest that he had
vacated the Property. Instead, he sought to justify his non-compliance with
order 9 by claiming, among other
things, that he was not able to comply with
order 9 because no agent had been appointed. He was therefore not able to
keys to the agent as required by order 9.
Piper’s contention in that regard was, strictly speaking, correct. As was
Stoffels v Piper (No 2)
, order 3 of the orders made on 30
January 2024 provided for the appointment of an agent agreed by the parties or,
failing any such
agreement, an agent selected by the Registrar. As at 13 May
2024, the parties had not reached any agreement in relation to the
appointment
of an agent and no agent had been selected by the Registrar. It may be noted,
however, that Mr Piper had made no attempt
to vacate the Property at this time.
His claim that he was unable to comply with order 9 because he was unable to
return the keys
was therefore a rather technical and convenient way to excuse
his failure to otherwise comply with the order. It would always have
to him to return the keys to the Registrar, or raise the issue concerning the
return of the keys with Ms Stoffels’
solicitor, with whom he had been in
deal with this technicality, on 13 May 2024, on Ms Stoffels’ application,
I made an order varying order 9 so that it required
Mr Piper to return the keys
to the Registrar as opposed to an agent. I also made various procedural orders
to facilitate the future
hearing of Ms Stoffels’ enforcement application,
including her application in respect of contempt. The application was listed
for hearing on 3 June 2024. I made it abundantly clear to Mr Piper that if, at
the hearing of the application on 3 June 2024, it
was found that he had not by
that time vacated the Property, and had therefore failed to comply with order 9,
as amended, he might
be convicted of contempt and punished accordingly.
matter returned to Court on 3 June 2024. Mr Piper had again not vacated the
Property at that time. He did not contend otherwise.
Instead, he raised a
number of issues or arguments based on his dealings with the bank which holds a
mortgage over the Property.
He also again raised the issue concerning his
inability to return the keys to an agent as originally required by order 9.
arguments, and the manner in which they were dealt with by the Court, are
referred to in
Stoffels v Piper
. It is unnecessary to
repeat what I said in that judgment. It suffices to note that I rejected as
unmeritorious the various arguments
advanced by Mr Piper to excuse his
non-compliance. I accordingly convicted Mr Piper of contempt. I decided,
however, to defer
imposing any punishment in respect of the contempt so as to
enable Mr Piper to purge his contempt, should he wish to do so. The
listed for hearing on 24 June 2024 for the purpose of hearing submissions in
respect of the penalty to be imposed on Mr
Piper. Procedural orders were made
in respect of the filing of evidence and submissions by the parties.
matter returned to Court again on 24 June 2024. It was not, however, possible
to proceed with the penalty hearing on that day
for at least two reasons. The
first reason was that Mr Piper was apparently ill, though that was only
communicated to the Court
on the morning of the hearing. Mr Piper eventually
appeared at the hearing via video link from his bed. The second reason was that
there was an element of uncertainty as to whether Mr Piper had completely
vacated the Property. While the evidence indicated that
he had returned the
keys to the Registrar on 11 June 2024, there were clear indications that he had
not removed all items of his
personal property from the Property. The Court
accordingly adjourned the hearing to 15 July 2024 and made further procedural
Those orders included an order that the Sheriff provide a report to the
Court concerning the Property and orders for the filing
of any further evidence
and submissions, including evidence from Ms Stoffels concerning her costs of the
enforcement proceedings.
evidence currently before the Court clearly indicates that Mr Piper has still
not fully removed all items of personal property
from the Property. Indeed, the
evidence indicates that the Property has been left in an unsatisfactory, if not
squalid condition.
Items of personal property appear to have been left at the
Property along with assorted rubbish and detritus. It is nevertheless
appropriate to proceed with the penalty hearing on the basis that Mr Piper has
vacated the Property and thereby purged his contempt.
The question of who
should ultimately pay the costs of removing the rubbish and remaining chattels
from the Property may need to
be determined at a later date.
relation to his punishment for contempt, Mr Piper relies on an unsigned
affidavit dated 12 July 2024 and filed on 15 June 2024,
the contents of which he
affirmed and adopted under oath at the hearing. The general effect of Mr
Piper’s evidence was that
the Court should take into account the following
matters in considering the appropriate punishment for his contempt. First, Mr
claims that, while he was originally represented by a lawyer, he has not
had any legal assistance or guidance for over 12 months.
Second, he claims that
some of his actions were the product of naivety and his misunderstanding or
misconstruction of the Court’s
orders. That was said to be in part a
result of the fact that he has not had any legal representation in recent times.
again relies on the fact that he was, at least initially, unable to
comply with order 9 as he could not return the keys to an agent.
says that he has now complied with the Court’s orders. Fifth, and
finally, he says that he never intended to be
in contempt or to disrespect the
Court. He noted, in that context, that he has always conducted himself in a
courteous and respectful
manner in Court.
accept that Mr Piper was not legally represented at all times relevant to his
contempt. It is, however, difficult to accept that
that provides any real
justification or mitigating circumstance in relation to his contempt. It was
made quite plain to Mr Piper,
particularly when the matter first returned to
Court in relation to Ms Stoffels’ enforcement application, that he risked
found to be in contempt if he did not vacate the Property pursuant to the
Court’s order. It is difficult to accept that he
did not understand that
clear caution or warning. Moreover, the evidence that is before the Court in
relation to Mr Piper’s
dealings with Ms Stoffels’ solicitor, in
particular the email correspondence, indicates that Mr Piper’s actions
more the product of defiance and disobedience than naivety.
Piper’s apparent continued reliance on his initial inability to return the
keys to an agent also has little merit given the
amendment that was made to
order 9 on 13 May 2024. The effect of the amendment was clearly explained to Mr
Piper on 13 May 2024.
It follows that the terms of order 9 as originally made
provides no justification for Mr Piper’s conduct after 13 May 2024.
find, in all the circumstances, that Mr Piper’s failure to comply with the
Court’s order to vacate the Property was
deliberate and contumacious,
particularly following the amendment made to order 9 on 13 May 2024. From that
date, at the very least,
Mr Piper’s failure to vacate the Property was
entirely unjustified and constituted deliberate defiance of the Court’s
orders. Moreover, as noted earlier, I consider that Mr Piper made no real
attempt to vacate the Property prior to that time and
used his supposed
inability to return the keys to an agent as a convenient and technical
justification for his continued occupation
of the Property.
make matters worse, while Mr Piper has, strictly speaking, now complied with the
order that he himself vacate the Property, as
adverted to earlier, there could
be little doubt that he has left the Property in a disgusting and squalid state.
To make the Property
fit for sale, it will undoubtedly be necessary for the
remaining items of personal property and rubbish to be removed and disposed
The costs of so doing may well have to be taken into account in the course of
considering the distribution of the sale proceeds
once the Property is sold.
accept that Mr Piper has been courteous and respectful when he has appeared in
Court. I will take that into account in determining
the appropriate sentence,
though given the other findings that I have made, it is deserving of limited
weight. I also accept that
Mr Piper now accepts that he was wrong to defy the
Court’s orders. While that acknowledgment has come at a very late stage,
I will nevertheless proceed on the basis that Mr Piper is genuinely remorseful
and contrite.
then, is the appropriate punishment for Mr Piper’s contempt?
I consider Mr Piper’s actions to be contumacious and worthy of punishment,
I do not consider that a sentence or punishment
involving imprisonment is
warranted or justified. That is particularly so given that he has now purged
his contempt and has shown
that he is contrite and remorseful.
my view, however, Mr Piper’s deliberate defiance and disregard of the
Court’s orders warrants at least a pecuniary
punishment. The Court must
uphold its integrity and will not countenance any deliberate disregard or
non-compliance with its orders.
General deterrence is an important
consideration when it comes to punishing a contemnor who has deliberately
disobeyed the Court’s
orders. Litigants should be left in no doubt that
non-compliance with the Court’s orders will likely result in the
of a penalty.
Piper has not adduced any evidence which directly discloses his financial
position. I would, however, infer from the evidence
as a whole that he is a man
of fairly limited means and is unlikely to be able to meet any large fine.
Moreover, for reasons that
I will come to, I also propose to order that Mr Piper
pay Ms Stoffels’ costs in respect of her enforcement action assessed
indemnity basis. I will take that into account in fixing the appropriate fine,
noting, however, that a costs order is compensatory,
not punitive in
the circumstances, I propose to impose a fine of $5000 on Mr Piper. I will,
however, wholly suspend the enforcement of that fine
on the condition that Mr
Piper does not engage in any conduct that materially impedes or obstructs the
sale of the Property pursuant
to the Court’s orders made on 30 January
2024. If at any point Ms Stoffels alleges that Mr Piper has engaged in, or is
in, any such conduct, she may have the matter re-listed. If the
allegation is upheld, the suspension of the fine may be lifted,
in which case Mr
Piper will become liable to pay the fine. If, however, the Property is sold in
the absence of any such conduct,
Mr Piper will not be liable to pay that
for costs, in my view, there could be no doubt that the circumstances are such
that Mr Piper should be required to pay Ms Stoffels’
costs in respect of
the enforcement of the Court’s orders, including her costs of seeking an
order that he be punished for
contempt. Moreover, it would be appropriate in
all the circumstances to order Mr Piper to pay Ms Stoffel’s costs assessed
on an indemnity basis. Indemnity costs are commonly ordered against a party who
has been found to be in contempt as a result of
disobeying orders:
Thunder Studios Inc (California) and Another
[2017] FCAFC 111
and the cases there cited.
Court has the power to fix an amount of costs rather than leave the cost to be
rule 1720(3)(c)
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) which
apply in this Court;
[2020] ACTSC 158
. The Court’s purpose in fixing costs on a lump sum basis is
generally to avoid the expense and delay which is generally involved
assessment process. It may also be appropriate for the Court to fix costs where
the party liable to pay costs may not be
able to pay the costs, or where that
person has conducted themselves in the proceedings in such a way as to cause
trouble and expense
to the other party:
is a case where it is appropriate for the Court to fix the costs that Mr Piper
should pay Ms Stoffels in respect of her enforcement
action. Ms Stoffels’
solicitor has filed an affidavit which annexes a report prepared by a costs
assessor which calculates
the costs reasonably incurred by Ms Stoffels in
enforcing the Court’s orders. The costs assessor’s assessment
$19,977.96, including the cost of the assessment itself. While Mr
Piper did not challenge or dispute this assessment, I do not propose
him to pay the full amount arrived at by the assessor. Some of the assessed
costs appear to relate to the period before
Mr Piper was required to vacate the
Property. I also do not consider that it is appropriate to require Mr Piper to
pay the assessed
component of $2991 for “care, complexity, difficulty,
novelty, importance to client, specialised knowledge, responsibility,
by solicitor, including research of law.”
regard to the cost assessor’s report, I consider that a fixed costs order
in the sum of $15,000 is appropriate in all
circumstances. While it appears
that Mr Piper may not have the capacity to pay that amount in the immediate
future, it is an amount
that could be deducted from the sale proceeds which
would otherwise be payable to Mr Piper once the Property is sold if that is
to be appropriate at that stage.
I certify that the preceding twenty-seven (27)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 31 July 2024
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (336 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter