URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jane Chester as Executor of the Estate of the Late John Lapp v State of New South Wales [2025] NSWDDT 4 (22 October 2025)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Jane Chester as Executor of the Estate of the Late John Lapp v State of New
South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDDT 4
Hearing Date(s):
21 October 2025
Date of Orders:
22 October 2025
Decision Date:
22 October 2025
Judge Russell SC
(1) Add Professor Brims to Order 3(a) made on 7 October
(2) Decline to add Professor Fox to Order 3(a) made on
7 October 2025.
(3) Decline to add Associate Professor
Franklin to Order 3(d) made on 7 October 2025.
(4) Decline
to vary Order 4 made on 7 October 2025 and confirm that all conclave reports
should be confined to listing the points
of agreement and the points of
disagreement.
(5) Costs of this dispute concerning
conclaves and conclave reports to be costs in the cause.
Catchwords:
DUST DISEASES — Prescribed dust diseases — Asbestos related
DUST DISEASES — Evidence — Expert evidence
— Conference between expert witnesses – Dispute about respiratory
physician conclave – Dispute about occupational hygienist conclave –
Dispute about task of each conclave – court
discretion to prescribe
content of reports
Legislation Cited:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
Procedural rulings
Jane Chester as Executor of the Estate of the Late John Lapp
(Plaintiff)
State of New South Wales (Defendant)
Representation:
A Giurtalis / A Schonell (Plaintiff)
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
Maurice Blackburn Lawyers
(Plaintiff)
Thompson Cooper Lawyers (Defendant)
File Number(s):
2023/00007932
late Mr John Lapp brought proceedings in this Tribunal against the State of New
South Wales alleging that he contracted lung cancer
as a result of asbestos
exposure while working at the State Dockyard in Newcastle. Mr Lapp’s
evidence was taken at a bedside
hearing on 6 February 2023. Mr Lapp has passed
away and the proceedings have been continued by Ms Jane Chester as the executor
his estate.
is a known carcinogen. So is cigarette smoke. Mr Lapp was a smoker. Causation of
Mr Lapp’s lung cancer is likely to
be the key medical issue in the
proceedings, which have been set down for hearing before me commencing on 2
February 2026.
parties have engaged experts in the fields of: respiratory medicine,
epidemiology, pathology and occupational hygiene. The defendant
retained an oncologist as an expert.
7 October 2025 I made directions for conclaves to be held by 1 December 2025
(1) Dr Robert Edwards and Associate Professor McKenzie. Both are respiratory
physicians.
(2) Associate Professor Franklin, Professor Brims and Dr Moolgavkar. All are
epidemiologists.
(3) Professor Klebe and Professor Roggli. Both are pathologists.
(4) Mr Kottek and Mr Rogers. Both are occupation hygienists.
parties are now in dispute as to which experts should join two of the four
conclaves. The parties are also in dispute as to the
questions which should be
asked of the experts, and whether they should be asked to provide reasons.
7 October 2025 I made the following order:
“Joint reports produced as a result to the conclaves are to be served by
10 December 2025, such reports to list the points
of agreement and the points of
disagreement.”
Dispute about the respiratory physician conclave
recited above, the order made on 7 October 2025 was for Dr Edwards and Associate
Professor McKenzie to meet in conclave. The plaintiff
wishes to add Professor
Brims to that conclave, as he is a respiratory physician as well as an
epidemiological research author. This
is not opposed by the defendant. The
plaintiff also wishes to add Professor Richard Fox to the conclave. Professor
Fox is an oncologist
retained by the defendant. The plaintiff has not retained
an oncologist.
plaintiff submits that Professor Fox should be added to the respiratory
physician conclave, as it would be odd to leave him out
of the debate.
do not think that Professor Fox should be added to the respiratory physician
conclave. The three respiratory physicians will approach
their task from a
common background. Professor Fox, who is an expert in a different field of
medicine, will approach the issue from
his standpoint. While no doubt each
expert is highly qualified in medical matters, one would expect Professor Fox to
defer to the
other three experts in the field of respiratory medicine.
Conversely, one would also expect the three respiratory physicians to defer
the opinion of Professor Fox in relation to oncology. I will therefore make an
order adding Professor Brims to the respiratory
physician conclave but I will
not make an order adding Professor Fox to that conclave.
plaintiff wishes to add Associate Professor Franklin to the occupational
hygienist conclave. He is not an occupational hygienist,
epidemiologist. The two expert occupational hygienists retained by the parties,
Mr Kottek and Mr Rogers, have both referred
in their reports to the Australian
Asbestos Job Exposure Matrix. Associate Professor Franklin is one of the
co-authors of this Matrix.
No doubt he may have something to say about whether
either or both occupational hygienists have correctly understood and applied
Matrix. However, I see no point in adding him to the occupational hygienist
conclave as there is nothing to suggest that he can
offer a view about the
likely level of exposure of Mr Lapp at the State Dockyard. By contrast, Mr
Kottek and Mr Rogers are trained
in the measurement and estimation of dust and
are thus qualified to make an estimate of the dust exposure of Mr Lapp, given
factual assumptions.
therefore decline to add Associate Professor Franklin to the occupational
hygienist conclave.
Dispute about the task of each
I made orders for conclaves on 7 October 2025 I specifically ordered that a
report should be prepared by each conclave, listing
the points of agreement and
the points of disagreement. I did not ask for each conclave report to set out
any reasons for declining
to agree with the opposite side’s expert. In my
experience one of the great benefits of a conclave and a conclave report is
when the experts speak to each other they sometimes reach agreement on some
matters and thus narrow the issues to be decided
by the court. Further, having a
simple list of the matters agreed and the matters in dispute provides a focus
for the court to know
what issues have to be decided.
Note SC Gen 11 deals with joint conferences of expert witnesses. Paragraph 5 of
the Practice Note sets out the objectives
of joint conferences. These
(1) The just, quick and cost effective disposal of the proceedings.
(2) The identification and narrowing of issues in the proceedings.
(3) The consequential shortening of the trial and enhanced prospects of
settlement.
(4) Apprising the court of the issues for determination.
(5) Binding experts to their position on issues.
reports have been served by both parties. Presumably those reports contain not
only the opinions of the experts, but also,
in accordance with the rules of
evidence, reasons to support each opinion.
the experts simply list the points upon which they still disagree, then the
reasons for such disagreement will appear from a reading
of the existing expert
reports. I do not see the point of putting the experts to the trouble, and the
parties to the expense, of
having reasons for an opinion repeated in a conclave
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) (UCPR) provides as
31.24 Conference between expert witnesses
, rule 13CA; DCR
, rule 9D; LCR
(1) The court may direct expert witnesses--
(a) to confer, either generally or in relation to specified matters, and
(b) to endeavour to reach agreement on any matters in issue, and
(c) to prepare a joint report, specifying matters agreed and matters not agreed
and reasons for any disagreement, and
(d) to base any joint report on specified facts or assumptions of fact,
and may do so at any time, whether before or after the expert witnesses have
furnished their experts’ reports.
is clear that
Pt 31.24(1)
gives the court a discretion to direct how much, or
how little, should be covered by each conclave report.
plaintiff has proposed (MFI 3) that in relation to each of the four conclaves,
the conclave report should set out the matters
agreed and the matters not
agreed, but should also set out reasons for any disagreement in respect of
certain specified matters.
defendant has gone further and has sent to the solicitors for the plaintiff four
draft letters (MFI 4) to be sent to the experts.
These letters follow the same
form as the first part of the proposal of the plaintiff, in that they require
the conclave report to
list the matters on which agreement was reached, the
matters where there is disagreement, and set out the reasons of each expert
the disagreement. The letters, in part, ask the experts to refer back to the
reports which have already been served, and to certain
questions arising out of
those reports.
letters ask some of the experts for an opinion upon “the causation of Mr
Lapp’s Lung Cancer”. Medical causation
and legal causation are two
different tests. It will be of little utility to the court to have a
doctor’s opinion about causation
which is not based upon the legal
to have reports in which experts repeat or recycle the opinions they have
offered in existing reports really adds to the time
spent by those experts, and
the expense to the parties when experts charge for that time.
to ask experts to now provide reasons for their disagreement, which at this
stage must be obvious from putting the plaintiff’s
reports side by side
with the defendant’s reports, provides further opportunity for objections
to be taken, based on the rules
of evidence. This will require further rulings
by the Tribunal in relation to the admissibility, not only of the original
but of questions answered by the conclave reports as proposed by the
legal principles involved in cases where lung cancer may have arisen from a
combination of asbestos exposure and cigarette smoking
are well known. These
cases depend on the facts found, which in turn feed into the acceptance or
rejection of expert opinion.
do not propose to vary the orders made on 7 October 2025 in relation to the
content of the conclave reports. In my view the greatest
assistance which can be
provided to the court by those reports will be (hopefully) to cut down the
issues for determination.
orders of the Tribunal are:
(1) Add Professor Brims to Order 3(a) made on 7 October 2025.
(2) Decline to add Professor Fox to Order 3(a) made on 7 October 2025.
(3) Decline to add Associate Professor Franklin to Order 3(d) made on 7 October
(4) Decline to vary Order 4 made on 7 October 2025 and confirm that all conclave
reports should be confined to listing the points
of agreement and the points of
disagreement.
(5) Costs of this dispute concerning conclaves and conclave reports to be costs
in the cause.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (230 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter