URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ruta Tonumaipea v Samoan Advisory Council Sydney Inc [2006] NSWCIMC 67 (25 May 2006)
reproduction, except under authority from the Crown, of the contents of
transcript for any purpose other than the conduct of these proceedings is
prohibited.
Coram: G J T Hart
Chief Industrial Magistrates Court of New South
Ruta Tonumaipea
Respondent:
Samoan Advisory Council Sydney Inc
Case number:
Date of Hearing:
Date of Decision:
25 May 2006
Legislation:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
section 365
Magistrate:
Representation:
Applicant Self
Represented
Respondent’s Agent: Mr T S Asiata,
of the Samoan Advisory Council Sydney
Reasons For Decision
1. The applicant claims that prior to August 2005, she had been
employed by the respondent as a Grade 4 Social Worker and that her
was governed by the provisions of the Social and Community (State) Award. The
applicant claims that following many months
of acrimony between herself and the
board of directors of the respondent she had tendered her resignation. The
applicant claims that
between November 2004 and August 2005 the respondent had
unilaterally reduced her wages below the level prescribed in the Award and
agreed between the parties under the applicant’s contact of employment.
The applicant’s claim is for unpaid wages together
with superannuation
monies that were not paid in full during the period according to the
applicant’s claim. The total sum claimed
by the applicant is $10,837.63.
2. The court was informed by the applicant and by Mr Asiata, the
president of the respondent, that the Samoan community in Sydney
affected by factional divisions, which have impacted on the operations of the
respondent organisation. Prior to November
2004 the applicant had enjoyed a good
working relationship with the office bearers of the respondent organisation. The
applicant’s
husband had been elected to the office of Secretary of the
respondent and held that position until November 2004. According to the
applicant the organisation was subject to a “Hostile take over” in
November and that a new board of directors emerged
which was hostile to the
previous board including the applicant’s husband and, according to the
applicant, that hostility extended
3. The account of these
developments given by Mr Asiata on behalf of the respondent was described
somewhat differently. Mr Asiata
asserts that members of the Samoan community
were dissatisfied by the manner in which the previous board of directors had
the affairs of the organisation and in November 2004 there had been a
democratic vote which had led to the election of a new board
of directors and
the ousting of the former office bearers including the applicants husband. There
followed a period of great difficulty
with two separate groups each claiming to
be the legitimate office bearers of the organisation. The situation had not
until March 2005 when the main provider of funding, the Commonwealth
Department of Immigration, announced that it would recognise
the group elected
in November 2004 as the duly elected board of directors for the organisation.
4. During the period of uncertainty and turmoil the applicant states
that she had continued to perform her normal duties as a social
worker visiting
various locations where Sydney’s Samoan community is concentrated and
performing her normal duties as a social
worker assisting the Samoan community
through various programs. During this period the applicant claims that she took
accrued annual leave which had been approved well prior to November
2004 by her employer.
5. The applicant claims that the new board of
directors made it clear to her that she was regarded as being associated with
going office bearers because she was the wife of the out going Secretary
and that she was not trusted and that the new board of directors
would prefer it
if she ceased to be part of the organisation.
6. These allegations are
denied by the respondent which claims that there was no objection to the
applicant remaining an employee
but the new board of directors wished her to
work in accordance with their directions and to attend punctually in the various
where she was meant to be working and that there was dissatisfaction
with her work performance. It is asserted on behalf of the respondent
applicant’s failure to perform her work properly led to a reduction in the
funding that was made available by the
Department of Immigration and as a
consequence it had been necessary for the applicant’s salary to be reduced
by 20 percent
to meet the level of funding that was available.
respondent did not put in issue the terms of the contract of employment between
the applicant and the respondent and did not
put in issue the applicant’s
claim that her employment was governed by the Award and that she was properly
classified as a
Grade 4 Social Worker pursuant to that Award. Further, the
respondent did not put in issue the fact that the wages paid to the applicant
had been reduced by the respondent without the consent of the applicant.
8. It is clear that the respondent is an incorporated entity, which has
a continuous existence notwithstanding changes in the composition
of the board
of directors. The respondent acknowledges that it has a legal responsibility for
contractual arrangements which were
entered into prior to the change of office
bearers in November 2004. Mr Asiata, in response to a question from the court,
difficulty in acknowledging that if the respondent had entered into a
lease of premises during the period when the old board was
running the
organisation the organisation would remain bound by the terms and obligations of
the lease notwithstanding the election
of a new board of directors.
9. The case presented on behalf of the respondent was essentially an
argument that there were a number of extraneous factors at play
that would make
it unfair for the organisation to be required to pay further monies to
10. It was suggested on behalf of the respondent that persons
involved in the old board had misused the funds of the organisation
there were funds which had not been properly accounted for. It was suggested
that the applicant should not receive any additional
monies unless and until her
husband, the former secretary, took appropriate steps to account for the
finances of the organisation
during the period when the old board was in
control. I reject this submission. There was no evidence before the court which
establish any impropriety in relation to the conduct of the affairs of the
organisation and even if such evidence existed the Chief
Magistrate’s Court is not the appropriate forum for such matters to be
explored. The matter before the court relates
to a contract of employment
between the applicant and the respondent. This is not the forum for a debate
concerning allegations and
counter allegations between two competing factions
within the Samoan community.
11. A further submission that was made on
behalf of the respondent was to the effect that the new board had not had the
complete time and wages records because documents that belong to the
respondent had not been returned to the respondent by the members
board including it’s secretary, the husband of the applicant. This
submission is also rejected. The relevant award
governing the applicant’s
employment is available to the respondent. So is a copy of the written contact
of employment made
between the applicant and the respondent which was produced
as evidence in the proceedings. The respondent does not take issue with
terms and conditions of the contract of employment and concedes it took no steps
to terminate the applicant’s employment
and continued to pay her
throughout the relevant period although at a reduced rate.
12. The third
submission made on behalf of the respondent was to the effect that in
circumstances where the respondent organisation
was almost totally dependant on
funding from the Department of Immigration the organisation could only pay the
applicant such monies
as were made available by the Department. If the
Department cut the funding that meant that the organisation had no option other
than to reduce the applicant’s wages. In that sense, it was contended, the
applicant had in reality been employed by the Department
of Immigration rather
that by the respondent organisation.
13. I reject that submission.
Irrespective of the source of revenue for the organisation it is clear that the
respondent had entered
into a direct contract of employment with the applicant
and had engaged her for many years in a full time capacity working as a Social
Worker in a role for which she had appropriate tertiary qualifications. It is
clear that some charitable or welfare organisations
are heavily dependant on
government funding and employ their staff on contracts which make clear that the
continued employment of
the employee is dependant on an annual or quarterly or
monthly funding arrangement and that it is a term of the employment agreement
that in the event of a loss of funding the employer is free to terminate or vary
the contract.
14. In the circumstances of this case the evidence
suggests that the applicant continued to work the same five day week as she had
worked prior to the change of composition of the board in November 2004. There
is considerable dispute between the parties as to
the reason for the Department
of Immigration funding being cut by 20 percent. The applicant says that the cut
followed the mismanagement
of the organisation by the new board which was in
part related to an attempt by the new board to concoct difficulties for which
would then be attached to the applicant. The respondent, on the other
hand, asserts that the reduction in funding was caused by a
failure on the
applicant’s part to properly perform her duties as
15. The court notes that there is no evidence to support a
suggestion that the applicant was the subject of any disciplinary action
relation to any alleged failure to follow the directions of her
16. Further, there is no evidence to suggest the respondent
took steps to vary the contract from a five day a week contract to a four
week contract in response to the 20 percent reduction in funding by the relevant
Commonwealth Department. Instead the applicant
simply continued to work her
normal five day week whilst the respondent paid her 20 percent less than was
required asserting that
this was fair and reasonable as it was allegedly the
applicant’s conduct which had caused the reduction in funding in the first
17. I am satisfied that the respondent is not entitled under the
contract or under the award to unilaterally reduce the wages of the
whether that is done purportedly for disciplinary reasons or otherwise.
18. I am satisfied on the material before the court that the applicant
is owed the monies as claimed. There is no evidence of any
step taken by the
respondent to vary the hours worked by the applicant to take into account a
change in the funding arrangement.
Further, I am satisfied that the treatment of
the applicant by the respondent did not flow from a difficulty with the
of Immigration but rather a desire on the new board to encourage her
to resign from her position because of her marital relationship
secretary of the old board. Had this factor not been present I have no doubt
that any change in the funding would have led
to an immediate variation of the
employment agreement whereby the applicant would have had her hours reduced by
approximately 20
percent to match the reduction in funding which would appear to
be the procedure required by clause 1(a) of the original employment
19. It is most unfortunate that people who are all motivated to
diluted by internal factional conflict. However, this appears to be a reality
which besets not only minority communities
but the community as a whole.
20. It would be inappropriate for this court to express any view
concerning the events of November 2004 and following. I express no
the conduct of either competing group namely the outgoing board or the new
office bearers who took over the control of
the organisation from November 2004
onwards. The only role for this court is to determine the applicant’s
claim in accordance
with the provisions of the relevant award as well as the
provisions of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
. I am satisfied that the
applicant has performed the work in question and that she is entitled to be paid
in accordance with the
award and in accordance with the
Industrial Relations
21. I find that the applicant is owed the gross wages
claimed by her in the sum of $10,837.63. The respondent is ordered to pay the
sum of $10,837.63 to the applicant within 28 days of the date of this decision
being published. The respondent is ordered to pay
the sum in gross with the
applicant responsible for remitting the appropriate tax component to the
Australian Taxation Office.
22. I publish my
Chief Industrial
25 May 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (33.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter