URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
New South Wales Resources Regulator v Endeavour Coal Pty Limited [2025] NSWIC 16 (24 October 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
New South Wales Resources Regulator v Endeavour Coal Pty Limited
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 16
Hearing Date(s):
18 August 2025
Date of Orders:
24 October 2025
Decision Date:
24 October 2025
Paingakulam J
(1) I convict Endeavour Coal Pty Limited of the offence as charged.
I impose a fine of $640,000.
(3) Endeavour Coal Pty Limited is to pay the
prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings as agreed or assessed.
Pursuant to s 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be paid to the
prosecutor.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — work health and safety — offences —
category 2 — mining train operated in man and material
drift while workers
were working in drift portal — train narrowly missed workers but collided
with roof bolter held by worker,
injuring his leg — high risk work —
disputed facts concerning safety systems — safety systems were in place
were inadequate — offender did not implement most effective control
despite the fact that it was available — reliance
on actions of one
individual undermined effectiveness of control measures — objective
seriousness in the mid-range
SENTENCING — relevant factors on
sentence — objective seriousness — deterrence — specific
deterrence not of
significant weight — aggravating factors — prior
convictions not treated as aggravating factor — mitigating factors
cannot find that offender is unlikely to reoffend due to prior convictions
— 20% discount for guilty plea — assistance
to authorities not
treated as mitigating factor — appropriate penalty
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
Work Health and Safety
Work Health and Safety (Mines and Petroleum Sites) Regulation
Cases Cited:
Attorney General for NSW v McMahon Mining Services Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWCCA
Baumer v The Queen (1988) 166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South
Wales (2000) 49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
Markarian v The Queen (2005)
228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25
McColm v Endeavour Coal Pty Limited
[2022] NSWDC
Meis v The Queen
[2022] NSWCCA 118
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR
[2011] HCA 39
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd; Attorney
General for New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCCA
R v Borkowski
[2009] NSWCCA 102
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
R v Shankley
[2003] NSWCCA 253
R v Thomson; R v Houlton
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
R v Wilkinson (No 5)
[2009] NSWSC
R v Youkhana
[2004] NSWCCA 412
Regan v Endeavour Coal Pty Ltd
NSWIRComm 141
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
Queen (No 2) (1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
Warman International Limited v
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
(1998) 80 IR 326
Principal judgment
New South Wales Resources Regulator (Prosecutor)
Endeavour Coal Pty
Limited (Offender)
Representation:
N Read (Prosecutor)
Solicitors:
McCullough Robertson Lawyers
(Prosecutor)
Herbert Smith Freehills Kramer (Offender)
File Number(s):
2024/244208
Publication Restriction:
Coal Pty Ltd (Endeavour Coal) was the mine operator of the Appin Colliery, an
underground mine located in Appin, New South
Wales. On 18 July 2022, a group of
workers, including Mr Alan Rice, were performing roof bolting related work in
the man and material
drift connected to Appin East when a train entered it. The
workers jumped from the tracks as they saw the train approaching. Mr Rice
the roof bolting machine with him. As the train passed by the workgroup, the
roof bolting machine’s water and air hoses
became entangled with it,
causing Mr Rice serious injuries.
Coal appeared for sentence after pleading guilty to an offence that as a person
who had a work health and safety duty pursuant
Work Health
and Safety Act 2011
) it failed to comply with that
duty and thereby exposed workers to a risk of death or serious injury contrary
to s 32 of the
risk particularised at paragraph 16 of Annexure A to the Amended Summons is as
“There was a risk of workers, including Mr Rice, Mr Howarth and Mr
Maddinson, suffering death or serious injury as a result
[of] being struck by,
or otherwise involved in a physical interaction with, the Train while working in
the Drift.”
its plea of guilty, Endeavour Coal accepts that it could have taken the
following reasonably practicable steps to eliminate or
at least minimise the
reasonably foreseeable risk:
“(a) Implementing and enforcing the requirements in the ROVOA which
(i) The placement of reflective warning signs advising that men were working in
the Drift at the drift portal and the pit bottom;
(ii) The placement of portable flashing lights 100m each side of the work site.
(b) Developing and implementing a standard operating procedure for working in
the Drift, which specified:
(i) a requirement that the Train be isolated and locked out while workers were
working in the Drift;
(ii) where practical, a requirement that the Train be parked adjacent to the
work site of the workers working in the Drift; and
(iii) where it is not practical for the Train to be parked adjacent to the work
site, requiring compliance with the ROVOA set out
in paragraph 18(a)(i) and (ii)
(c) Providing training and instruction to workers on a standard operating
procedure for working in the Drift, such as the one identified
in paragraph
18(b) above; and
(d) Requiring the Train to be isolated and locked out while workers were working
in the Drift.”
maximum penalty for this offence is a fine of 17,315 penalty units
($1,860,843).
prosecutor tendered an agreed Statement of Facts. I have taken this document
into account in coming to an appropriate sentence.
What follows is a brief
summary of the facts relevant to the offence to permit an understanding of the
sentence imposed.
Coal is a wholly owned subsidiary of Illawarra Coal Holdings Pty Ltd (Illawarra
Coal) and the operator of the Appin Colliery
(the Mine). Endeavour Coal engaged
Nexus Mining Pty Ltd (Nexus) to provide supplementary labour to the Mine.
Appin East area of the Mine features a men and material drift (the Drift),
including a fixed railway line by which a train is
used to transport workers and
materials in and out of the underground workings. The train’s maximum
operating speed is 14.4km/hour.
The Train Operator sits in a Dolly Car
perpendicular to the direction of travel, facing a screen displaying CCTV
images. The Train
Operator’s visibility relies on this CCTV display screen
which rotates through footage from three cameras, with one camera
displaying at
least 100m in the direction of travel.
the time of the incident, the train was fitted with white lights which could be
set to be on, off or “auto” (i.e.,
on when motion is detected).
There were also green and red flashing strobe lights that remained on while the
train was in motion.
In addition, the Drift was fitted with orange flashing
warning lights that activated when the train was in motion.
to the Drift was via a portal gate. The winder controlling the train was fitted
with visual and audible prestart warning alarms,
and the train’s operation
could be isolated from power both from the driver’s panel in the Dolly Car
and via three other
remote isolation points.
train underwent routine maintenance every Monday and Wednesday. Some maintenance
tasks allowed the train to be isolated. However,
others, such as the weekly
static brake test which occurred on Mondays, had to be conducted with the train
powered. In the three
months prior to the incident, workers were regularly
tasked with undertaking work in the Drift on a Monday or Wednesday while the
train was either undergoing routine maintenance on the surface or isolated at
the job site.
5 July 2022, it was identified that roof support in the Drift around the 70
manhole was falling and needed to be re-meshed. That
involved using a roof
bolting machine, a tool similar to a large drill weighing approximately 50kg.
Preparation works occurred on
12 July 2022 during which the train stayed with
the workers, and again on 13 July 2022 between 8:00am and 12:00pm, the regular
four hour maintenance window for the train. The job itself was
scheduled to take place over 10 hours on 18 July 2022, which again
included the
regular maintenance window for the train.
were four workers involved in the incident. Mr Gary Osgood, Train Operator
employed by Endeavour Coal, had approximately 17
years’ experience at the
Mine, including at least 10 years as a Train Operator. He had extensive training
relevant to that
role, including in relation to Dolly Car operations and
isolation rules. Mr Rice was a supervisor employed by Nexus with more than
years’ experience at the Mine, including 18 months as a supervisor. He too
had participated in extensive training over that
time, including in relation to
isolation rules and Safe Work Method Statements (SWMS).
Brock Howarth and Mr Duncan Maddinson were operators employed by Nexus who had
only six and four weeks’ experience respectively
at the Mine at the time
of the incident. However, in addition to participating in site inductions, they
too had been trained in isolation
rules and SWMS. In addition, all four men had
undertaken training in relation to “Mobile Equipment (Transport
which made reference to the “Principal Hazard Management
Plan for Roads or Other Vehicle Operating Areas” (ROVOA) but
include any information about undertaking work in the Drift.
morning of the incident
the 6:00am shift briefing, attendees were informed that the train would be
undertaking maintenance and out of use for certain
periods, and that a team
would be working in the Drift. Mr Osgood did not attend the shift briefing.
However, after the shift briefing,
he had a brief discussion with Mr Rice
regarding the work to be done in the Drift and confirmed the radio channel so
that the workers
could make radio contact. Mr Rice understood from that
conversation that Mr Osgood would radio the work group when he was entering
Drift after the train had completed its maintenance.
and returned to the surface. He then communicated
via radio to Mr Rice that the
work group could commence the roof bolting work. At about 11:20am, the train
entered the Drift for
its weekly static brake test, during which it was driven
continued to work in the Drift while this occurred without any communication
from Mr Osgood. However, the orange flashing warning
lights activated to
indicate that the train was in motion. All of the workers noticed this, but they
assumed that the train was being
moved around near the surface and continued
working without contacting Mr Osgood. After completing the static brake test,
returned to the surface.
The incident
after midday, Mr Osgood was requested to transport a tyre to pit bottom. Mr
Osgood did not communicate to the work group that
the train was entering the
Drift. He incorrectly assumed that the work would be completed within the usual
train maintenance period
and was unaware that the work group had been scheduled
to perform their work until 4:00pm.
were no reflective warning signs at the Drift Portal and Pit Bottom advising
that men were working in the Drift, nor were there
any portable flashing lights
100m on each side of the work site. There had not been any no go zones or
control zones established.
The work group continued to work in the Drift unaware
that the train was approaching them. The flashing lights in the Drift operated
as designed, but the work group either did not notice them, or assumed that the
train was being used for maintenance purposes near
the surface.
the train approached the work group they were in the process of installing a
roof bolt. Mr Howarth saw the approaching train and
yelled “get off the
tracks”. Mr Maddinson and Mr Howarth jumped to one side of the track and
Mr Rice jumped to the other
while still holding the roof bolter. The train
narrowly missed the work group, but the roof bolter’s water and air hoses
entangled with a derail sensor, activating it and bringing the train to a
stop. In the process, the roof bolter hit Mr Rice’s
Osgood, Mr Maddinson and Mr Howarth rendered first aid to Mr Rice, who was
subsequently transported to the surface and then to
hospital. He suffered a
fractured left fibula, three blood clots and deep vein thrombosis in his
Legal obligations and guidance material
23 and 24 of the
Work Health and Safety (Mines and Petroleum Sites) Regulation
(NSW) (WHS (MPS) Regulation) required Endeavour Coal, as the operator of
the Mine, to identify and risk assess all principal hazards
associated with
mining operations at the Mine and prepare a principal hazard management plan
(PHMP) for the principal hazard. This
requirement included operations in
relation to “roads or other vehicle operating
Systems of work prior to the incident
the time of the incident, Endeavour Coal operated under its parent company South
32’s Safety Management System and had the
following systems of work in
(1) The ROVOA, dated 26 February 2021, as required by cll 23 and 24 of the WHS
(MPS) Regulation. This document addressed risks associated
with the operation of
the train. Clause 4.3.2 included a requirement that the work in the Drift be
coordinated between the work crew,
the control room operator and Train Operator.
This included a requirement for the work crew to advise both the control room
Train Operator once their work was completed. It also required the
posting of reflective warning signs advising that men are working
in the Drift
at the drift portal and the pit bottom, and portable flashing lights 100m on
each side of the work site.
(2) A “Risk Management Procedure” which applied to both employees
and contractors. It required a “Take 2”
to be prepared when
commencing or resuming a routine task, a “Task Analysis” to be
completed for less routine tasks and
a “Qualitative Risk Assessment”
to be completed for irregular tasks.
(3) A “Dolly Car Daily Operations Procedure” which identified
controls such as the use of no go and control zones, demarcation
of work spaces
using caution tape and information tags, good communication, adherence to the
ROVOA and conducting a Take 2 to address
the risk of collision with
pedestrians.
(4) An “Isolation Standard” dated 16 June 2022 which provided work
in the Drift as an example of a circumstance in which
manual remote isolation
procedures might apply to the drift winder conveyances and drift conveyors.
(5) An “AE M&M Winder Remote Isolation Procedure” (Winder
Procedure) dated 10 November 2021 that provided information
to use the remote isolation system on the winder which operated the train.
(6) A “Communications Arrangements Management Plan” which set out
communication requirements, including the content of
and process for information
to be communicated to workers. It required interacting and conflicting work to
be addressed at either
the weekly planning meeting or the daily review, and to
be confirmed at the start of shift meeting. The shift undermanager was
responsible
for addressing issues arising from the interaction of planned work.
21 November 2012, Endeavour Coal (or one of its associated entities) conducted a
risk assessment for operating the Appin East Dolly
Car that was in operation at
the time (and was replaced in 2021). Mr Osgood participated in the assessment,
which identified a collision
between a pedestrian and the Dolly Car as a risk,
and identified a series of preventative controls. These controls included the
development
of a standard operating procedure (SOP) both for working in the
Drift and operating the Dolly Car; the use of cameras, strobes and
other lights
on the Dolly Car, together with a pre-start alarm at both the surface and
underground stations as well as on the Dolly
Car itself; the installation of
warning lights in the drift; the use of speed zones at the top and bottom of the
Drift and radio
communication. At the date of the incident, Endeavour Coal had
not developed or implemented a SOP for working in the Drift which
required that
the train be isolated and locked out while workers were working in the Drift,
and either parked adjacent to the work
site in the Drift, or, if that was not
practical, requiring compliance with the ROVOA.
20 August 2021, Endeavour Coal conducted a ROVOA Risk Assessment. It identified
a risk event of “vehicle interaction with
people”, a cause as
“Pedestrians on roads” and a preventative control as
“Demarcation of working areas on
roads is included within the Roads or
Other Vehicle Operating Areas PHMP”.
Coal conducted extensive training for staff. Mr Osgood had successfully
completed numerous assessments required for Train
Operators. For example, the
“Dolly Car Operations (Appin) Training” document expressly addressed
requirements for when
personnel were working in the Drift. Those requirements
included the Train Operator contacting both the control room and the workgroup
to confirm that all work had ceased and that personnel were in a safe position
before recommencing operations. Mr Rice had also benefitted
from training in
numerous competencies, including the Isolation Standard. Even Mr Maddinson and
Mr Howarth had undergone training
in several competencies in the brief period
that they had been working at the Mine, including the Isolation
Systems of work after the incident
Safety Alert after the incident identified several post-incident actions to be
undertaken, including the publication of a procedure
for working in drifts. The
Incident Cause Analysis Method (ICAM) investigation undertaken by Endeavour Coal
identified 10 “absent
or failed defences” as contributing factors,
including the failure of the Train Operator to communicate with the work group
and the control room as required, and the failure of the work group to implement
the controls identified in their Take 2.
Coal undertook several measures to improve systems of work at the Mine in
response to the incident. These included the installation
of barricades between
the manholes and the Drift at both the 34 manhole and 70 manhole, and cut
throughs and a sign at each manhole
prohibiting access from the manhole to the
Drift without approval from the Train Operator. They also included updating
relevant sections
of the ROVOA to better define existing controls and implement
new ones, such as prohibiting access to the Drift while the train is
and requiring a restriction zone to be implemented, confirmation to be given
that the Drift winder has stopped and the
brake applied and positive permission
to be communicated before workers embark or disembark the train. Working in the
now requires the train to be on site and isolated by the relevant
workgroup and a formal risk assessment to be conducted for any
work undertaken
outside of arrangements set out in updated job instructions.
Furthermore,
Endeavour Coal has reviewed and amended the Isolation Standard to clarify when
isolation is required for works being
undertaken in the Drift. It has also
reinforced the work methodology that integrates the Management Operating System
with the mine
work planning process. The camera and lighting systems for the
Dolly Car have been updated so that they operate automatically when
Car is in operation and the Dolly Car CCTV screen has also been upgraded.
Additional lights have been installed at both
the 34 and 70 manhole cut
throughs. In addition, a new procedure requires the train to be isolated and
available to workers at the
Drift work site, and all work in the Drift must be
subject to a Job Instruction or Task Analysis. Finally, Endeavour Coal has
a number of risk assessments and policies including the ROVOA Risk
Assessment and the competency training and assessment module for
operations.
Disputed Facts
prosecutor tendered a bundle of documents which it obtained from Endeavour Coal,
said to establish disputed facts. That bundle
contained the following
(1) Section 155 Notice No. 220919JG01;
(2) Appin East M&M Winder Drift Hot Work Job Instruction;
(3) Appin East Drift Rail Installation Procedure – APNP0430;
(4) Illawarra Coal Drift Rail Repair – Using Pandrol Plates; and
(5) Appin East M&M Drift Roller Replacement.
disputed facts tender bundle also included extracts of transcripts of records of
interview with each of Mr Maddinson, Mr Rice,
Mr Howarth and Mr Osgood.
addition, the prosecutor tendered a work procedure titled “Management
System Job Instruction for Bolting in the Aspen East
Drift Off Floor”
(Bolting Procedure), dated 26 October 2012.
Coal’s knowledge of procedures
prosecutor relied upon the Bolting Procedure to prove that Endeavour Coal had
access to, and therefore knowledge of, a SOP that
could have been but was not
applied to the task undertaken by the workgroup at the time of the incident. It
relied on the other procedures
in the disputed facts tender bundle to
demonstrate that Endeavour Coal had access to procedures for other maintenance
tasks in the
Drift which required the isolation and lockout of the train. This
was said to add to Endeavour Coal’s culpability for failing
to have such
measures in place at the time of the incident.
Coal objected to the tender of the procedure documents on the basis that they
very significantly predated the incident and
were in place when the Mine was
being operated by BHP Billiton and Illawarra Coal. The Bolting Procedure is
dated 26 October 2012.
The other procedures, which related to work on the Drift
rails and rollers, date from 2013 to 2015. Endeavour Coal stated that the
documents were irrelevant because it was an agreed fact that it had not
developed and implemented a SOP for working in the Drift
which required the
train to be isolated and locked out or that, where practical, the train should
be parked adjacent to the worksite
in the Drift.
absence of a SOP for working in the Drift which required isolation of the train
is not in dispute. It is also not in dispute that
Endeavour Coal had access to
the procedure documents, because they produced them in response to a notice
issued by the Resources
Regulator. Accordingly, any dispute is limited to the
extent to which the procedure documents inform Endeavour Coal’s
culpability
because they were aware of but did not implement the use of
isolation as the ultimate control to prevent the risk which ultimately
materialised.
the various historical procedure documents were admitted over objection, they
add little to the gravity of the offending in
circumstances where the need for a
documented SOP for working in the Drift had been identified by Endeavour Coal
years before the
incident, and the accepted practice at the Mine at the time of
the incident included isolation of the train at the job site in the
it was not undergoing routine maintenance at the surface. The relevance of the
historical procedures to Endeavour Coal’s
culpability must also be viewed
in the context of a risk that materialised due to a lack of compliance with
basic safety measures
that were in place.
knowledge of procedures
Ultimately,
there was no objection to the tender of the extracts from the record of
interview of each of Mr Maddinson, Mr Rice, Mr
Howarth and Mr Osgood. Endeavour
Coal sought to cooperate with the prosecutor by not requiring any of them for
cross-examination.
However, Endeavour Coal submitted that I should not accept
that material as establishing that workers were not aware of any documented
procedures for working in the Drift, or a requirement to set up warning signs or
barriers, as the prosecutor urged me to do. In particular,
Endeavour Coal
submitted that I should not accept the evidence of Mr Osgood at face value in
circumstances where he was a duty holder
whose evidence may have been influenced
by a concern to avoid criminal liability for his role in the incident.
determining the knowledge of the work group about safety systems surrounding
work in the Drift, I have had regard both to the circumstances
in which the
evidence contained in the records of interview was obtained and other evidence
before the Court, such as the Statement
of Facts and the evidence of Mr Benjamin
James Patten, Mining Engineering Manager at the Mine, addressed
Offender’s case on sentence
Coal relied on the evidence of Mr Patten in an affidavit sworn on 1 August 2025.
The following is a summary of his evidence
in addition to matters contained in
the Statement of Facts.
Patten is employed by Illawarra Coal and is based at the Mine. He has a Bachelor
of Engineering (Mining Engineering), a Master
of Business Administration
(Business Administration and Management) and a Practising Certificate to act as
a mining engineering manager
of underground coal mines. He has been employed in
the mining industry since 2007 and has worked for Endeavour Coal under previous
holding companies since 2010.
his role as Mining Engineering Manager, Mr Patten’s responsibilities
include fulfilling the statutory function of Mining
Engineering Manager under
Schedule 10 of the WHS (MPS) Regulation. Mr Patten also oversees the safety
management system of both the
underground and surface operations at Appin
Expression of remorse and contrition
Patten, on behalf of Endeavour Coal and its holding company Gear M Illawarra Met
Coal Pty Ltd (GM3), expressed deep regret concerning
the incident. He apologised
to Mr Rice and his family for the injury that Mr Rice suffered and the impact
that it has had on his
life. Mr Patten also stated that the incident has deeply
affected himself, Endeavour Coal, GM3, the workforce and their operations.
Patten’s view was that the directors of Endeavour Coal and GM3 “work
to instil a genuine commitment to safety and
health across the business”.
Mr Patten testified to the fact that the incident had caused Endeavour Coal and
GM3 to evaluate
and improve their health and safety procedures across their
operations.
Coal owns and operates the Mine. Approximately 1250 workers work at the Mine,
including 1030 employees and 220 contractors.
Illawarra Coal and all its
subsidiaries, including Endeavour Coal, were acquired by GM3 on 29 August 2024.
At the time of the incident,
Illawarra Coal and, therefore, Endeavour Coal, were
subsidiaries of South32 Limited.
its holding company GM3 and through GM3’s community trusts, Endeavour Coal
supports many community activities and initiatives.
The total cost of these
contributions over the past three and a half years in the Illawarra region was
approximately $5.2 million.
Just a few examples of the initiatives GM3 has
supported include local school classroom upgrades, driver education programs and
health initiatives such as Lifeline in Macarthur and the South Coast
and the Illawarra Turf Club mental health event. GM3 has also
contributed to
numerous sporting organisations and events including the Illawarra rugby league
women’s and junior’s competition
and the Wollondilly Razorbacks
junior basketball club. It’s support of arts initiatives include the art
and light festival
“Illuminate Wollondilly” and the Southern Stars
First Nations Dance Troupe. In addition, GM3 has supported local community
initiatives and charities including the Illawarra Women’s Trauma Recovery
Centre, Dress for Success, the Wollongong Homeless
Hub, Foodbank Australia and
local council and Rotary events and programs, alongside local business programs
such as the Business
Illawarra Awards and the Wollondilly Women in Business
Empowerment Course.
Coal also provides support to the Resources Regulator in the examination process
for statutory personnel and has sponsored
and facilitated the development of
training programs. It is a member of the Minerals Council of Australia and
supports the annual
Resource Conference, the New South Wales Health, Safety,
Environment and Community Conference and the Australasian Institute of Mining
and Metallurgy Student Chapter. Finally, Endeavour Coal has a strong focus on
driving long term and mutually beneficial relationships
with Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander communities.
Systems of work at the time
of the incident
Coal had a Safety Management System (SMS) which provided a framework for the
management of health and safety risks at the
Mine. This included the ROVOA, the
Dolly Car Operations Procedure, the Isolation Standard, the Winder Procedure and
the Risk Management
Procedure to which I have already referred. Also in place
were the “Life Saving Rules”, a set of mandatory and expected
behaviours designed to reduce workers’ exposure to potentially fatal risks
at work. The SMS was constantly reviewed to facilitate
a safe workplace for all
Endeavour Coal workers.
Significantly,
the Isolation Standard provided that isolation should be planned before physical
work starts. It also stated that all
key personnel who may be affected by the
isolation need to be advised to ensure no safety or operational problems will be
and that if there is any concern that safe isolation has not been
verified, the work must stop and the situation must be made safe
to entering the Mine, all workers were required to complete induction training
and competency processes. Specific task-related
competency assessments were also
conducted on an “as needed” basis and workers were required to be
deemed competent in
all relevant units prior to receiving sign off. All
trainings and competencies completed by workers were tracked by Endeavour Coal
and any relevant information such as location and expiry date were
Steps taken following the incident
Immediately
following the incident, Endeavour Coal isolated the site, notified the
Regulator, facilitated an initial site inspection
and put in place temporary
controls. In accordance with the SMS, it also prepared an “Event Report
and Basic Investigation”
to capture information about the incident, and
“Preliminary Safety Alert HSE Event” to facilitate prompt and
transparent
information about the incident to the workforce. Two “Start of
Shift Briefs” clarified some of the initial action items
and corrective
actions in place.
Coal also commenced an ICAM investigation. The ICAM Team identified the root
cause of the incident as failure to apply the
controls set out in cl 4.3.2 of
the ROVOA. Three key learnings arising from the investigation related to the
importance of demarcation
of the work site, planning of simultaneous or
potentially interacting activities and the need to ensure that workers are aware
they must comply with the SMS.
accordance with its risk management process, Endeavour Coal reviewed and updated
the ROVOA Risk Assessment to include a risk event
which addressed the
interaction of the Drift train with pedestrians. As part of that process, 13
additional actions were identified,
many of which involved changes to the
existing SMS. Endeavour Coal also updated the “Operational and Maintenance
of Appin East
Drift Winder Risk Assessment” to include the risk of a
person in the Drift being unaware that the train is operating in the
identified actions to address this risk event. The reduction of recorded
injuries in the Mine since the incident demonstrates
the impact of Endeavour
Coal’s corrective actions and training.
Endeavour Coal assisted with finding suitable surface duties and further
employment for Mr Rice post-incident. As of July
2025, Mr Rice is no longer a
worker at the Mine, as Nexus no longer provides labour hire services to
Endeavour Coal.
Oral evidence
oral evidence, Mr Patten accepted that notwithstanding the change in ownership
of the Mine in August 2024, the management team
at Endeavour Coal was
fundamentally the same and that his role had not changed.
Patten stated that at the time of the incident, there were a number of different
job instructions that were documented work procedures.
He stated that the ROVOA
included a SOP for the operation of the Dolly Car in the Drift. He further
stated that workers trained in
the mobile operations transport rules had been
trained in the ROVOA notwithstanding the fact that the documents were different
the procedure to which he drew attention in the ROVOA did not form part of
the mobile transport rules. However, he accepted that
Mr Maddinson, Mr Rice and
Mr Howarth were not aware of the requirements set out in the ROVOA as they had
not seen it, or any procedure
which set out the relevant requirements contained
Patten was directed to documents which recorded the training given to Mr Osgood
regarding operation of the train in the Drift and
personnel transport. He stated
that he was unaware of whether the control officer had also been trained in that
procedure, or whether
workers in the Drift had been using reflective warning
signs or flashing lights in the months leading up to the incident. He accepted
that the electrical flashing light beacon to which Mr Osgood referred had not
been in use for a significant period. However, he maintained
that mechanical
flashing lights were available for use in the Drift.
Patten stated that one of the responsibilities of the Train Operator was to
of the static
brake test. The work crew would either stand in a cut through or withdraw from
the Drift at that point. Mr Patten described
and the work crew in the Drift as common practice.
Patten accepted that although isolation of the train was a control that the work
group had identified for the work that they were
undertaking in the Drift, it
was not possible to do that when the train was undergoing some of the
maintenance checks which were
required, such as the static brake test. He
accepted that it was therefore not an appropriate control on the day of the
Mr Patten was directed to the isolation procedures relevant to drift
rail installation in the Appin East Drift. He accepted that
isolation of the
train by locking the key in the lock box would eliminate the risk of the train
moving, including because of the
inadvertent actions of the Train
Consideration
have had regard to the objects of the
set out in s 3 and the
purposes of sentencing set out in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
have taken into account the maximum penalty for this offence:
Markarian v The
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25 at [31] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Callinan JJ (
Court arrives at the appropriate sentence through a process of
“instinctive synthesis” in which the sentencing judge
identifies all
the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discusses their significance and
then makes a value judgment as to
the appropriate sentence given those factors:
Objective seriousness
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
485–6, 490–1 and 496 (
). At common law, the term
“objective circumstances” was used to describe the circumstances of
a crime. The gravity of
the offence was assessed by reference to its objective
circumstances:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
task requires the Court to consider where the conduct of Endeavour Coal falls in
the range of conduct covered by the offence:
Baumer v The Queen
166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67 at 57. As Whealy JA said in
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
(Hulme and Harrison JJ agreeing at
[75]–[76]):
“This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate range of
sentences available which will reflect the objective seriousness
of the offence
committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to the
criminality of the offender will lie.”
objective seriousness of an offence is to be determined by reference to the
nature of the offending without reference to matters
personal to a particular
offender or class of offenders:
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death is a factor relevant
to the gravity of the offence:
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
. The question of foreseeability of the
risk is to be determined objectively.
Court of Criminal Appeal examined the sentencing process with regard to the
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
General for New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
NSWCCA 96. Under the heading “Assessment of Risk”, Basten J
“[34] The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the
proposition that ‘[g]reater culpability attaches to the
failure to guard
against an event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the
occurrence of which is extremely unlikely’.
However, the truth of that
proposition depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential
consequences of the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the
availability of steps to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether
such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative
culpability depends on assessment of all those factors.”
at [42] his Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step‑by‑step
assessment of the various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall
evaluation of various factors, which may pull in different
directions.
Culpability in this case is reasonably high because, even if the pressure event
of the force which occurred might not
be expected to occur often, the
seriousness of the foreseeable resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be
taken to avoid it, which
were not even assessed, were straightforward and
involved only minor inconvenience and little, if any, costs.”
[53] his Honour dealt with the proper approach to considering the objective
seriousness of offences under the
“ ...It is important to note that the risk to be assessed is not the risk
of the consequence, to the extent that a worker is
in fact injured, but is the
risk arising from the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the
injury occurring. To
discount the seriousness of the risk by reference to the
unlikelihood of injury resulting is apt to lead to error. The conduct in
question is the failure to respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more serious the potential injuries,
whether or not they are
likely to materialise. The objective seriousness of the conduct will also be
affected by the ease with which
mitigating steps could have been taken.”
Prosecutor’s submissions
prosecutor submitted that this offence falls within the mid-range of objective
seriousness. It pointed to the fact that the risk,
well known to Endeavour Coal,
was one of significant gravity due to its catastrophic potential consequences.
Further, Endeavour Coal
had identified the need to isolate the train when work
was being carried out in the Drift, having done so at times in the months
leading up to the incident. It was said that Endeavour Coal could therefore have
implemented such a requirement as a permanent control
measure with little
burden, and that doing so would have prevented the scheduling of train
maintenance simultaneously with work in
prosecutor contended that the controls that Endeavour Coal had developed to
manage the risk were not the most effective measures
available because they did
not involve isolation of the train and therefore did not guard against the
foreseeable risk of human carelessness
and fallibility. In addition, it was said
that Endeavour Coal’s pre-incident controls designed to manage the risk
effectively implemented. There was no SOP for working in the Drift
despite the fact that the need for one had been identified in
a 2012 risk
assessment. There was no demarcation of the work group through signage and
flashing lights as required by the ROVOA plan.
The Drift workers were unaware of
these requirements and it had been many years since Mr Osgood had seen flashing
beacon lights available
prosecutor noted that multiple workers were exposed to the risk by the incident.
It submitted that the likelihood of the risk
occurring was moderate because, in
the months leading up to the incident, workers were tasked with working in the
Drift when the
train was undergoing maintenance and was therefore not isolated.
The prosecutor accepted that Mr Osgood was inattentive to the control
in place, but contended that little turned on this in circumstances where the
duty under s 19(1)
requires persons conducting a business or
undertaking to have regard to such matters and implement the most effective
controls available.
oral submissions the prosecutor accepted that the context for the incident was
one in which there were safety systems in place,
but contended that they were
inadequate, both because they did not require the isolation of the train and
because they relied heavily
on the Train Operator to implement them. The
prosecutor submitted that the Court should not have regard to the contribution
Osgood to the creation of the risk as he was not charged in relation to
the incident, the potential for human fallibility was foreseeable
incident arose from the failure of Endeavour Coal to implement the higher and
better control of isolating the train.
support of its submission that it was available to the Court to find that the
offence was a mid-range offence notwithstanding the
failure of Mr Osgood to
comply with Endeavour Coal’s existing safety systems, the prosecutor
Attorney General for NSW v McMahon Mining Services Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWCCA 8
–[19]. In that decision, Beazley P (with whom
Fullerton J agreed at [27]) overturned the sentencing judge’s finding that
deferring the implementation of a simple safety measure designed to prevent what
was considered to be the low probability of an accident
due to a worker doing
something that would almost inevitably result in serious harm was low range
offending. The accident in that
matter occurred in circumstances where the
worker had been signed off multiple times on the applicable control measure
which would
have prevented the accident
Offender’s submissions
Coal submitted that the objective seriousness of the offence is in the low
range. First, it contended that although the
relevant risk in this matter was
identified by Endeavour Coal prior to the incident, in determining the extent of
its foreseeability
the Court is required to have regard to the existence of a
settled system of work, adherence to which would have eliminated or reduced
risk. Therefore, in assessing the objective seriousness of the offence,
Endeavour Coal urged the Court to have regard to the
relative culpability of
other duty holders. In particular, Endeavour Coal pointed to the role that Mr
Osgood played in the creation
of the risk as a person who was trained in the
required procedure for when personnel are working in the Drift and had duties
subss 28(b) and (d) of the
. Endeavor Coal submitted that
the Court should conclude that the likelihood of the risk occurring was low and
required a series of
failures to comply with the existing systems to
although Endeavour Coal, by its plea of guilty, accepted that it had failed to
take the stated reasonably practicable measures,
it submitted that the Court
must also have regard to the effectiveness of the measures that were in place in
preventing the risk
from materialising over a lengthy period of time. In
addition, Endeavour Coal acknowledged that the risk giving rise to the offence
was a serious one but submitted that the seriousness of the offence is
determined by the extent of its failure to prevent exposure
to the risk rather
than the consequence of the breach.
Coal’s contention was that, prior to the incident, it had taken extensive
measures to enforce a series of controls
applicable to the risks of working in
the Drift and operating the train in the Drift which, if complied with on the
day of the incident,
would have minimised the likelihood of the risk occurring
“to a high degree”. A mid-range offence was said to be one
steps had been taken, or where a single layer of control required a high level
of compliance to prevent exposure of workers
to the risk. The prosecutor’s
submission that this offence falls within the mid-range of seriousness was said
not to have proper
regard to the extensive steps Endeavour Coal took to minimise
oral submissions, Endeavour Coal pointed to the fact that Mr Osgood was aware
that the workers were conducting work in the Drift
and could only exit the Drift
with his assistance so that he must have known that they were still there. While
Endeavour Coal did
not seek to blame Mr Osgood for the incident, his conduct was
said to be consistent with the contention that had the existing systems
complied with, the risk would have been largely eliminated.
Coal further submitted that although Mr Osgood stated in his record of interview
that he couldn’t recall the existence
of demarcation lights or barriers,
the evidence of Mr Patten demonstrated that those measures were in place.
Further, part of Mr
Osgood’s role as the Train Operator was to adhere to
the ROVOA, which specified at cl 4.3.2 that reflective warning signs and
portable flashing lights were the control measures that he was meant to
implement when people were working in the Drift. Further,
Mr Osgood clearly knew
demarcation lights and signs were part of the ROVOA, as he said as much in his
record of interview.
Endeavour Coal also noted that the work group identified “isolate
train” as the relevant control in their Take
2 risk assessment but did not
Determination
find the objective seriousness of the offence to be at the mid-range. In so
doing, I accept Endeavour Coal’s submission that
the foreseeability of the
risk (and therefore the seriousness of the offence) has to be assessed in the
context of the measures that
were in place to control it:
International Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
(1998) 80 IR
at 342. Endeavour Coal had numerous safety measures in place to control the
risks associated with operating the train in the Drift,
including the risk of a
collision with personnel working in the Drift. These included the requirement
for the Train Operator to contact
both the control room and the work group
before entering the Drift in the train. Further, the Train Operator’s
ability to monitor
the screen in the Dolly Car of the train, which provided a
rotating live feed from three cameras, provided visibility of a work group
more than sufficient time for the train to be stopped.
accept that the implementation of any of those control measures would have
significantly reduced, if not eliminated, the risk. However,
as noted by the
prosecutor, the difficulty with those control measures was that they depended on
the reliability of a single individual
to be effective. Accepting Mr
Patten’s evidence concerning the availability of mechanical lights for use
does not alter that
basic problem. Mr Patten accepted that the work group had
not seen the ROVOA and therefore could not have been expected to comply
Accordingly, the implementation of the control measures contained in the ROVOA
was also dependent on the Train Operator.
I accept that Mr Osgood had been
trained in and was well aware of his obligation to comply with the required
control measures. However,
this reliance on the actions of one individual
significantly undermined the effectiveness of the control measures that
Coal had in place.
any event, Endeavour Coal accepted that the ROVOA was a high-level management
plan. As such, it was of limited utility unless there
was a procedure to
implement it. The need for such a procedure had been identified many years
earlier but had not been progressed.
The Mobile Equipment Operations Transport
Rules did not set out the control measures at cl 4.3.2 of the ROVOA.
flashing lights in the Drift which signalled the movement of the train were
operational and did not rely on Mr Osgood for their
effectiveness. However,
Endeavour Coal had effectively neutralised them as a control measure because of
their activation by the conduct
of maintenance activities at or near the
surface. This caused the workgroup, who were aware that train maintenance was
being conducted
simultaneously with the work in the Drift, to disregard them.
For the same reason, Endeavour Coal cannot rely on the failure of the
to ensure that the train had been isolated – a control measure which they
had identified – in mitigation of
the seriousness of the offence,
particularly as Mr Patten’s evidence was that isolation was an
inappropriate control measure
in all of the circumstances.
reasonably practicable measures which Endeavour Coal failed to take were capable
of implementation without significant burden
or inconvenience to Endeavour Coal.
Compliance with its own ROVOA was a rudimentary requirement that should have
been met. There
was no evidence from which I could be satisfied that workers had
reflective warning signs available to them (as distinct from the
flashing lights to which Mr Patten referred). The ease with which isolation of
the train could have been implemented as
a control measure is demonstrated by
the fact that the train had been isolated and stationed near the workgroup when
work was being
undertaken in the Drift on occasion, notwithstanding the absence
of any procedure for working in the Drift which stipulated this
requirement.
potential consequences of the risk to multiple workers were significantly
greater than those which manifested in the serious injuries
occasioned to Mr
Rice on 18 July 2022 and included death.
Aggravating
injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial: s
. In order for the aggravating factor to be established,
the Court must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the harm was greater
more deleterious than may ordinarily be expected for the subject offence:
[2004] NSWCCA 412
offence does not require an injury to be sustained, but merely the creation of a
risk of death or serious injury. The injuries
sustained by Mr Rice are
sufficient to establish the aggravating factor.
Coal has two prior convictions. In issue at the sentence proceedings was whether
those convictions should be treated as
an aggravating factor pursuant to s
. The first offence concerned a scaffold collapse onto a
conveyor belt in breach of
Occupational Health and Safety Act
(NSW), which concerned the exposure of non-employees to a risk to their
health or safety. Endeavour Coal pleaded guilty to this offence
and was fined
Regan v Endeavour Coal Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWIRComm 141.
recent offence on 8 June 2019 involved a contract worker suffering serious
injuries when his right foot fell into a moving
conveyor. Endeavour Coal pleaded
guilty to this offence and was fined $300,000:
McColm v Endeavour Coal Pty
[2022] NSWDC 307.
prosecutor’s position was that the instant offence arose because of a
failure by Endeavour Coal to comply with its own systems,
and that this had also
been the case in relation to the 2019 offence. Therefore, the instant offence
manifested a continuing attitude
of disobedience to the law and
“retribution, deterrence and the protection of society may indicate that a
more severe sentence
is warranted”:
R v Shankley
[2003] NSWCCA
per Howie J at [31] (Greg James J agreeing at [1] and Smart AJ agreeing at
[41]). By contrast, Endeavour Coal submitted that its
record of two prior
convictions since it was incorporated 23 years ago, when viewed in the context
of the scale of its operations,
its workforce of approximately 1250 workers and
its exposure to risk in an inherently dangerous industry does not warrant such a
finding. In particular, the proximity of the instant offence to the 2019 offence
was not a proper basis of aggravation, especially
in the absence of evidence
that the offences arose from a similar failure to comply with its duty.
Mason CJ and Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ set
out the relevant principles in relation to an offender’s prior convictions
“... The antecedent criminal history is relevant, however, to show whether
the instant offence is an uncharacteristic aberration
or whether the offender
has manifested in his commission of the instant offence a continuing attitude of
disobedience of the law.
In the latter case,
retribution, deterrence and protection of society may all indicate
that a more severe penalty is warranted. It
is legitimate to take account of the
antecedent criminal history when it illuminates the moral culpability of
the offender in the
instant case, or shows his dangerous propensity or
shows a need to impose condign punishment to deter the offender and other
from committing further offences of a like kind...”
application of
Veen (No 2)
to the sentencing process was addressed by the
Court of Criminal Appeal in
Meis v The Queen
[2022] NSWCCA 118
Simpson AJA, with whom Rothman and Button JJ agreed, held at [42] that before an
offender’s previous conviction could
properly be taken into
account as an aggravating factor, the sentencing judge must
“• whether the present offending was an
uncharacteristic aberration;
• whether the applicant manifested in the commission of
these offences a continuing attitude of disobedience of the law;
• whether the applicant’s previous offence
illuminates his moral culpability in relation to the current offending or
a dangerous propensity, or a need to impose ‘condign punishment’ by
way of specific and general deterrence.”
or not the instant offence could be described as an “uncharacteristic
aberration”, I am not satisfied that when
proper regard is had to the
scale of the mining enterprise operated by Endeavour Coal and the size of its
workforce, it’s occurrence
more than three years after the 2019 offence
could fairly be described as manifesting a “continuing attitude of
disobedience
to the law”. On the contrary, the extensive safety systems
which Endeavour Coal had in place at the time of the incident to
which I have
referred demonstrate that it had a genuine and significant regard for its safety
obligations towards employees. Those
systems included the fitting of the train
with multiple safety features, the use of visible and audible pre-start warning
and a documented system for isolating the train. They also included a
communications management plan which provided a resolution
process for
conflicting work tasks. The practice of undertaking maintenance of the train at
or near the surface simultaneously with
work being undertaken in the Drift does
not lead me to a different conclusion, particularly given the evidence of the
train being
isolated at the job site when no such maintenance was occurring.
Accordingly, this aggravating factor is not made out on the evidence
Mitigating factors
Coal is otherwise of good character: s 21A(3)(f)
demonstrated by its actions after the incident, including in the provision of
alternative work for Mr Rice. Endeavour Coal’s
good character is also
demonstrated by its significant community involvement, as outlined by Mr
Endeavour Coal’s criminal antecedents are such that I cannot find, even on
the balance of probabilities, that it is
unlikely to reoffend: s 21A(3)(g)
. I nonetheless accept that Endeavour Coal has good prospects of
rehabilitation pursuant to s 21A(3)(h)
, because of the
significant investment that it has made to its safety systems in the wake of the
offence and the practice that it
has now adopted of ensuring that train
maintenance does not occur simultaneously with work in the Drift.
Patten’s evidence is to the effect that Endeavour Coal has accepted
responsibility for its actions, acknowledged that its
failures led to the injury
of Mr Rice and is genuinely contrite. I accept that evidence as a demonstration
of Endeavour Coal’s
remorse for the offending: s 21A(3)(i)
Coal entered a plea of guilty on 19 May 2025 to the charge particularised in an
Amended Summons of that date. The plea of
guilty was entered at the fifth
mention of proceedings commenced more than 10 months earlier on 3 July 2024. The
agreed Statement
of Facts was finalised more than two months later. A small
number of facts which were not agreed resulted in the prosecutor being
to adduce evidence to establish the complete factual basis upon which it wishes
the Court to sentence Endeavour Coal. It
therefore contends that a discount of
15–20% would be appropriate.
arguing that it should receive the full 25% discount for its guilty plea,
Endeavour Coal pointed to the very large brief of evidence
and considerable
factual and technical complexities of the matter, together with its relatively
early indication of its intention
to plead guilty to an Amended Summons so that
negotiations with the prosecutor commenced in mid-November 2024. It contends
entry of a guilty plea in May 2025 was the earliest opportunity to
enter a plea of guilty to a charge that was appropriately pleaded.
Coal is entitled to a discount on penalty that reflects the utilitarian value of
that early plea. The quantum of the discount,
which will not be greater than
25%, is largely determined by the timing of the plea:
R v Thomson; R v
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
R v Borkowski
[2009] NSWCCA 102
allowance may be made in determining the discount where the trial would be
particularly complicated or lengthy:
at [32]. In addition,
at [32] sets out the
following well established principles:
“...8. Generally, the reason for the delay in the plea is irrelevant
because, if it is not forthcoming, the utilitarian value
is reduced:
[2006] NSWCCA 56
[2008] NSWCCA 280.
9. The utilitarian value of a delayed plea is less and consequently the discount
is reduced even where there has been a plea bargain:
[2003] NSWCCA
[2006] NSWCCA 177
; or where the offender is waiting to see
what charges are ultimately brought by the Crown:
Sullivan and Skillin
[2009] NSWCCA 296
; or the offender has delayed the plea to obtain some forensic
[2006] NSWCCA 56
[2007] NSWCCA 98
as having matters put on a Form 1:
Chiekh and Hoete
[2004] NSWCCA
Coal submitted that the duration of negotiations as to the content of Agreed
Facts is not a matter which erodes the utilitarian
benefit of a guilty plea.
While I accept that submission, it does not address when the guilty plea was
first entered or indicated,
which can of course occur in advance of any
agreement as to facts. There is no evidence before the Court that would enable
make a finding about when Endeavour Coal first indicated to the prosecutor
that it would enter a plea of guilty to a charge in the
form as ultimately
particularised, beyond the timing of the plea itself. The reasonably practicable
measures which Endeavour Coal
accepts that it failed to take, set out in the
Amended Summons, are significantly more confined than the terms of the Summons
filed in July 2024. The negotiation of those numerous changes was necessarily
to the benefit of Endeavour Coal. In all of the circumstances,
I cannot accept
that the plea was entered at the earliest opportunity. I accept, however, that
it was entered before the matter was
set down for hearing and brought with it a
significant utilitarian benefit. Accordingly, I accept that a discount of 20% is
appropriate
in the circumstances: ss 21A(3)(k) and 22
Coal submitted that its cooperation with the authorities is a matter which
should operate in mitigation of the sentence
to be imposed upon it, both because
it cooperated with the Resources Regulator’s investigation and statutory
disclosure requirements
and because it consented to the Statement of Facts
relied upon by the prosecutor. While the prosecutor did not oppose that
submission,
there is no evidence before the Court about the extent to which
Endeavour Coal cooperated with the Resources Regulator’s investigation
beyond the tender by consent of a Statement of Facts. Accordingly, I make no
finding about the ease or timeliness with which Endeavour
Coal was able to meet
the requirements of the regulator’s investigation. I do accept that
Endeavour Coal has taken significant
steps in response to the incident to
improve its safety systems. This has been recognised by way of findings both as
to its good
character and prospects of rehabilitation.
as set out above, Endeavour Coal resisted the tender of procedures which it had
provided to the Resource Regulator in response
to a notice or notices served
upon it. That circumstance, together with Endeavour Coal’s belated
agreement to the admission
of the involved workers’ records of interview
(in response to the relevant statutory notice) undermines the submission that
cooperation with the authorities was demonstrated by consent to the tender of
the prosecutor’s Statement of Facts. Accordingly,
I am not able to find
that assistance to the authorities operates as a mitigating factor on
s 21A(3)(m)
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide for general deterrence.
Endeavour Coal continues to operate a significant
mining business. Mining work
is inherently dangerous. There is nothing in the circumstances of either the
offence or Endeavour Coal
that would permit a finding that Endeavour Coal is not
a suitable vehicle for general deterrence or that the role of general deterrence
in the sentencing exercise should be minimal.
relation to specific deterrence, I accept that Endeavour Coal has demonstrated a
commitment to safety in what is an inherently
dangerous industry in the
proactive steps that it has taken and the significant investment that it has
made in safety programs and
initiatives since the incident occurred.
Accordingly, while specific deterrence continues to be relevant, it is not a
matter of significant
weight in determining the appropriate sentence to be
Capacity to pay a fine
Court is required to have regard to
Fines Act 1996
before imposing a fine. Endeavour Coal has not provided any evidence concerning
its capacity to pay a fine and makes no submission
in that regard.
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of
Criminal Appeal recognised that a fine which may be crippling to a small
business may have virtually no impact on the
financial operations of a large
corporation and that the maximum penalty for the offence was
“undoubtedly” set having
regard to that
circumstance.
appropriate fine is $800,000, which will be reduced by 20% to reflect the plea
make the following orders:
(1) I convict Endeavour Coal Pty Ltd of the offence as charged.
(2) I impose a fine of $640,000.
(3) Endeavour Coal Pty Limited is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the
proceedings as agreed or assessed.
(4) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be
paid to the prosecutor.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (341 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter