URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v Hibernian Contracting Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 4 (14 May 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v Hibernian Contracting Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 4
Hearing Date(s):
28 February 2025
Date of Orders:
14 May 2025
Decision Date:
14 May 2025
Paingakulam J
(1) I impose a fine of $180,000.
(2) Hibernian Contracting Pty Ltd is to
pay the prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings, as agreed or
(3) Pursuant to s 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is
to be paid to the prosecutor.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — work health and safety —
offences — category 2 — hot work — sparks from
grinder mixed
with oil to cause an explosion — no hot work permit system —
mid-range of objective seriousness
SENTENCING — relevant
factors on sentence — objective seriousness — deterrence —
aggravating factors —
mitigating factors — capacity to pay a fine
— appropriate penalty
SENTENCING — mitigating factors
— assistance to law enforcement authorities — principles
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety
Regulation 2017
Cases Cited:
Baumer v The Queen (1988) 166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South
Wales (2000) 49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
Mahdi Jahandideh v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA 178
Makarian v The Queen (2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA
MF v The King
[2024] NSWCCA 42
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd; Attorney General for
New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCCA
[2009] NSWCCA 102
R v Cartwright
(1989) 17 NSWLR 243
Fabrizio Calderoni
[2000] NSWCCA 511
R v Hunt; Ex parte Sean Investments Pty
(1979) 180 CLR 322
[1979] HCA 32
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
R v Thomson; R v Houlton (2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA
R v Wilkinson (No 5)
[2009] NSWSC 432
[2017] NSWCCA 90
[2004] NSWCCA 412
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA
Veen v The Queen (No 2) (1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
Mining Ltd v Bulga Milbrodale Progress Association Inc
(2014) 86 NSWLR 527
[2014] NSWCA 105
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Hibernian Contracting Pty Ltd
(Defendant)
Representation:
P Gow (Prosecutor)
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
(Defendant)
File Number(s):
2024/292969
Publication Restriction:
Contracting Pty Ltd (Hibernian) was engaged by Camden Council (the Council) to
redevelop the Council’s works depot
in Narellan, New South Wales. On 12
August 2022, Mr Dustin Clifford, a labourer working for Hibernian, was using a
grinder to cut
through a pipe attached to an old waste oil tank. He suffered
serious burns when the sparks from the grinder ignited oil in the waste
tank, causing an explosion.
appeared for sentence after pleading guilty to an offence that as a person who
had a work health and safety duty pursuant
Work Health and
Safety Act 2011
) it failed to comply with that duty
and thereby exposed Mr Clifford to a risk of death or serious injury contrary to
s 32 of the
risk particularised at paragraph 11 of Annexure A to the Amended Summons is as
“The risk was the risk to workers, particularly Mr Clifford, suffering
serious injury or death as a result of fire and/or explosion
due to ignition
sources, particularly, sparks produced from grinding work from an angle grinder
(or heat produced by grinding work
from the use of an angle grinder), being used
around hazardous or flammable or combustible chemicals, liquids, substances or
hazardous substances
) on or in the Waste Oil Tank and its
associated pipework (
maximum penalty for this offence is a fine of 17,315 penalty units
($1,860,843.05).
prosecutor tendered an agreed Statement of Facts. I have taken this document
into account in coming to an appropriate sentence.
What follows is a brief
summary of the facts relevant to the offence to permit an understanding of the
sentence imposed.
undertakes concrete paving services and a range of demolition and civil works.
The sole director of Hibernian is Mr Martin
was engaged by the Council to redevelop its works depot (the upgrade works), a
seven-hectare site at 5 Millwood Avenue,
Narellan, New South Wales (the site).
There were 24 buildings on the site either to be demolished or redeveloped, and
the Council
continued to operate the depot during the upgrade works.
subcontracted the supervision of the works to Bride View Civil Pty Ltd (Bride
View). Bride View’s sole director, Mr
Kevin O’Keeffe, assumed the
role of site supervisor from about June 2022. Other workers at the site included
leading hand carpenter
and supervisor Mr Jamie Beresford, form worker and
concreter Mr David Breen, and labourers Mr John (JJ) Flannigan and Mr Declan
Mr Beresford and Mr David Breen were employed by Kingdom Group Pty Ltd
(Kingdom). Mr Martin Breen was the sole director of
Injured worker
Clifford was a labourer who had worked for Hibernian since approximately
Works at site
commenced the upgrade works in or around June 2021. The original scope of the
upgrade works did not involve demolition,
decommissioning or dismantling of any
waste oil tanks.
work on site involved dismantling a workshop located on top of a concrete pit
which was just over two metres deep (the Pit). The
work also involved emptying
the contents of the Pit, which was to be filled in afterwards to make way for a
new concrete pavement
entrance to a weighbridge which was part of the upgrade
works at the site.
in the south-eastern corner, at the base of the Pit, was an unlabelled waste oil
tank which had previously been used to store
oil from vehicles that had been
serviced at the site (Waste Oil Tank). Alongside the Waste Oil Tank were various
other drums and
tanks both inside and outside of the Pit. Some were labelled
“oil” and “Valvoline”, and some contained cautionary
labelling such as “AutoSmart Caution Plus 10 Heavy Duty Degreaser
Flammable Liquid 3”.
the tender process, the Council had provided Hibernian with a Construction
Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) for the site
which had been prepared by
iEnvironmental Australia on 19 November 2019. The CEMP identified the presence
of various oil drums and
tanks in and around the Pit, together with their
John Smith, the workshop supervisor at the Council, emptied all of the products
out of the tanks other than the Waste Oil Tank
incident. At least one week prior to the incident, Mr Smith told
Mr O’Keeffe and Mr Breen that
all tanks in the Pit had been emptied
by the Council except the Waste Oil Tank.
a week before the incident, Hibernian fenced off the area where works were
occurring, including the Pit. In an email dated 11
August 2022, Hibernian
advised the Council that the workshop area would be deconstructed in the same
manner that it was constructed,
which excluded hot work.
or around 13 August 2022, workers began the process of dismantling the Pit. Mr
Smith asked Mr O’Keeffe if Hibernian’s
employees could assist in
removing tanks from the Pit. In the days before the incident, Hibernian’s
employees used grinders
in the Pit to remove hydraulic rams, other tanks and
metal covering the Pit.
The incident
17 August 2022, there were at least five workers on site, including
Mr Clifford, Mr David Breen, Mr Beresford, Mr Flanagan and
O’Keeffe. A pre-work meeting was held where the workers were given tasks
that were a continuation of what they had been
doing over the previous few days.
Such tasks related to cleaning up and sorting materials into various bins.
removal of the Waste Oil Tank was not an allocated task. However, on the morning
of the incident, Hibernian’s workers lifted
two other tanks from the
Clifford started work at around 7:00am on the day of the incident. At
approximately 8:00am, he entered the Pit and began clearing
and sorting
materials into various skip bins and conducting general clean up tasks from the
previous days’ work. After exiting
the Pit for a short break at around
10:00am, Mr Clifford obtained an angle grinder from the tool bin and
re-entered the Pit alone.
He did not communicate to any other worker that he was
going to do any work on the Waste Oil Tank.
approximately 11:15am, Mr Clifford used the angle grinder to cut through a thin
horizontal pipe connected to the Waste Oil Tank
so it could be lifted straight
out. As he was cutting the pipe, an explosion occurred and a flame approximately
10 metres high engulfed
the Pit and Mr Clifford. Mr Clifford extricated
himself from the Pit before being provided first aid by other workers, including
Mr Quinn and Mr O’Keeffe.
Inspectors who attended the site on the day of the incident observed that the
side of the Waste Oil Tank was ruptured and
that it contained a dark liquid
which also covered the ground surface of the Pit. Subsequent testing of samples
of the black liquid
confirmed that it contained Category 2 and 3 hazardous
chemicals using the Globally Harmonised System of Classification and Labelling
of Chemicals.
services were called to the site. Mr Clifford was assessed by attending
emergency services personnel, who placed him into
an induced coma at the site
before he was airlifted to Royal North Shore Hospital.
a result of the incident, Mr Clifford sustained 15% mixed dermal oil burns to
his face, abdomen, upper and lower back and both
upper limbs. Whilst in
hospital, Mr Clifford underwent two skin grafts. He was discharged from hospital
12 days later, on 29 August
Legal obligations and guidance
work carried out by Hibernian was “high risk construction work”
within the meaning of cl 291(l) of the
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2017
(NSW) (WHS Regulation). As such, Hibernian was required to prepare a Safe Work
Method Statement (SWMS) for the work. The SWMS had
to identify the work that was
high risk construction work, specify the hazard relating to the work and the
risks to health and safety
associated with those hazards, describe the measures
to be implemented to control the risks and describe how the control measures
were to be implemented, monitored and reviewed: WHS Regulation cl
299(2)(a)–(d).
was also a significant amount of relevant guidance material available to
Hibernian. The Safe Work NSW Code of Practice “Managing
the Risks of
Hazardous Chemicals in the Workplace” (August 2019) (Hazardous Chemicals
Code of Practice) applies to substances
defined as “hazardous
chemicals” by the WHS Regulation. The Hazardous Chemicals Code of Practice
was available to Hibernian.
The Hazardous Chemicals Code of Practice relevantly
(1) Where the contents of a container are not known, the container should be
isolated and clearly marked as an unknown substance
until such time as the
contents are identified (p 19).
(2) While the WHS Regulation does not require a risk assessment, it may be best
practice to conduct one, and a detailed risk assessment
might be needed where
there is a significant risk to health (p 21).
(3) Physical risks may arise where hazardous chemicals (that are flammable) come
into contact with ignition sources. Petroleum-based
oils are a common example of
a flammable or combustible liquid (p 27).
(4) A person conducting a business or undertaking (PCBU) must identify an
ignition source in the workplace that has the potential
to ignite flammable or
combustible material. Sparks from grinding is an example of an ignition source
(5) The effects of an explosion can be exacerbated when the fuel and air mixture
is contained, for example, in a tank or pipework.
Explosions can be more violent
than when unconfined and flying debris can cause serious injuries or death (p
(6) If there is a possibility of fire or explosion in a “hazardous
area” (defined in cl 5(1) of the WHS Regulation) due
to the introduction
of an ignition source, a PCBU must ensure that the ignition source is not
introduced to the area: (p 40, referring
to cl 355 of the WHS Regulation).
(7) Hot work, which includes grinding and undertaking such work in areas where
flammable or combustible chemicals are present, creates
a significant risk of
fire or explosion. Conducting hot work on containers such as drums or tanks that
have not been properly decontaminated
is a common ignition scenario resulting in
fatalities. A hot work permit system is a system designed to eliminate or
minimise risks
associated with hot work (p 41).
(8) Hazardous areas generally exist around flammable or combustible materials,
for example, those present in tanks or drums (p 42).
(9) Fuels and oils are identified as fire and explosion hazards in the
automotive industry, particularly with regard to motor mechanic
work (i.e., the
Pit) (p 86).
relevant was the SafeWork NSW Code of Practice:
Welding Processes
August 2019 (Welding Processes Code of Practice). The Welding Processes Code of
Practice relevantly provides at p 21 that grinding
can generate heat, flames and
sparks which are considered ignition sources in hazardous atmospheres and that
common sources of fuel
found in workplaces include flammable and combustible
materials, such as oils.
Australian Standard 1674.1 – 1997
Safety in Welding and Allied
(Welding Standard) specifies precautions to be taken prior to and
during hot work to prevent the possibility of fire or explosion
(1) Hot work should be carried out under the control of a person responsible for
the safe execution of all operations who should
ensure the hazards of the
location are identified and there is no inherent hazard due to the nature of the
item on which the hot
work is to be performed.
(2) Prior to performing any hot work, precautions should be taken to prevent any
fire, explosion or injury, including testing for
the presence of any flammable
gas or flammable vapour within 15 metres of the hot work or drum, tank or vessel
involved in the hot
work, and ensure the concentration of any flammable gas or
flammable vapour is less than 5% of its lower explosion limit.
(3) Gas and vapour detectors used should comply with the relevant Australian
(4) Once satisfied that the hot work can safely proceed, the responsible person
is to issue a hot work permit that complies with
the Welding Standard.
(5) Piping and tanks on which hot work is to be undertaken should be thoroughly
cleaned and treated before hot work begins.
(6) Sight and smell are not reliable indicators of whether it is safe to carry
out hot work on a closed container because a very
small amount of residual
vapour can cause an explosion.
Systems of work prior to the incident
the time of the incident, Hibernian had in place the following systems of
(1) A Daily Pre-Start Hazard Assessment Checklist, which was signed by workers
including Mr Clifford on the date of the incident.
This checklist failed to
identify hazards from ignition sources, hazardous areas, hazardous atmospheres
or the implementation of
controls for hot work, such as the use of angle
(2) A Work Health & Safety Management Plan (WHS Plan) which noted that
workers carrying out hot work would have a fire extinguisher
close by, and
evidence of workers being fully trained in the use of fire extinguishers would
be available. The WHS Plan prohibited
workers from carrying out hot work unless
they had the appropriate training and certifications, but failed to identify the
a fire or explosion due to ignition sources being used near hazardous
chemicals that were present at the site.
(3) A site induction attendance record. However, induction records failed to
identify the site-specific hazardous chemicals, hazardous
areas, hazardous
atmospheres or ignition sources for hazardous chemicals. Mr Clifford had not
been trained in regard to the specific
hazards associated with the site.
(4) A site-specific SWMS for Demolition at Camden Council Depot dated
11 May 2021, which was signed by workers including Mr Clifford,
1 June 2021. The SWMS failed to identify high-risk construction work such
as work carried out in a contaminated or flammable atmosphere,
site-specific hazard of hot work carried out in that context. The SWMS therefore
did not address risks to health and safety
associated with those hazards, or
measures that could be implemented to control such risks.
(5) A refresher SWMS for Demolition Work (Refresher SWMS), which was signed by
workers, including Mr Clifford, on 12 August 2022.
This refresher SWMS was not
site-specific but did address works conducted in areas that may have a
“contaminated or flammable
atmosphere” and suggested that all areas
of the workplace should be examined to determine whether there were any items
could be a fire or explosion risk, or if there was any toxic or other
hazardous material present. It also required that all hazardous
materials be
clearly identified. The Pit was not examined for flammable or other hazardous
substances prior to the incident as required
by the Refresher SWMS. The
Refresher SWMS identified 15 different types of high-risk construction work, but
the applicable types
of works identified did not relate to the work in the Pit
or the Waste Oil Tank. Further relevant hazards identified in the SWMS
marked as being present.
(6) Toolbox Talks. However, at the time of the incident, a Toolbox Talk had not
occurred at the site for several months. One worker
had not participated in a
Toolbox Talk since starting work at the site.
Hibernian had no hot work permit system in place at the time of the incident,
and workers were able to freely access hot
tools to conduct work at the site. In
addition, although Hibernian was provided with a copy of the CEMP by the
Council, Mr O’Keeffe
had not reviewed it prior to the incident occurring,
despite being aware of its existence. The CEMP identified the existence of
waste oils, chemicals and fuels in the Pit prior to the works
commencing, and Hibernian failed to determine whether this created
a hazardous
Systems of work after the incident
the incident, SafeWork NSW issued several statutory notices to Hibernian. In
complying with these notices, Hibernian:
(1) updated its WHS Plan to include provisions for hot work, monthly WHS
inspections and the implementation of site-specific risk
assessment measures;
(2) engaged an external contractor to remove the remaining tanks and barrels and
clean up the floor of the Pit;
(3) introduced a hot work permit system for workers at the site;
(4) updated the SWMS for Project Camden Council Depot to address high-risk
demolition work, ignition sources in hazardous areas and
hazardous atmospheres,
spills and leaks of hazardous or flammable chemicals, falls from heights,
housekeeping, unauthorised access
to areas at the site, the provision of
designated entry and exit point signage, an emergency plan and temporary
handrails; and
(5) introduced a Waste Oil Tank Policy, which identified that hot work such as
grinding or welding presented a risk as flammable
vapours and gases that come
into contact with ignition sources can cause fire or explosions.
Offender’s case on sentence
read and relied on the affidavit of Mr Martin Breen sworn 17 February 2025. The
following is a summary of his evidence,
in addition to matters already set out
in the agreed Statement of Facts.
Breen is a permanent resident of Australia, having migrated from the Republic of
Ireland in 2008. He is 40 years of age and lives
with his wife, who works
part-time in the skin care industry, and their three children. He has worked in
the building industry for
Expression of remorse and
Breen apologised that the failures of the defendant led to the injuries suffered
by Mr Clifford. He stated that he has always taken
work health and safety
seriously, which was demonstrated by the fact that neither he nor Hibernian had
previously been involved in
a workplace injury.
soon as he was informed of the incident, Mr Breen rushed to the scene and
ensured that Mr Clifford was receiving medical assistance.
He ensured emergency
protocols were followed, including the calling of the ambulance, police and fire
brigade. He also called SafeWork
NSW and ensured he and his staff assisted these
bodies as requested.
Breen visited Mr Clifford in hospital and offered him ongoing support regarding
returning to work and lodging a Workers Compensation
claim. He also lent Mr
Clifford a truck to assist him in renovating his wife’s wellness studio.
Mr Clifford has been cleared
to return to full-time work.
Additionally,
the workers who witnessed the incident were offered counselling and support
services, including post-incident debriefing
and additional toolbox meetings and
was incorporated on 28 May 2013, and almost exclusively services New South Wales
Local Government Councils. As at 17 February
2025, Hibernian employed between
three and five staff including contractors engaged from time to time. At the
time of the incident,
Hibernian employed up to 10 people, including contractors.
Furthermore, at the time of the incident, Hibernian had done only 30–40
hours of demolition work after 14 months at the site. Demolition was therefore
only “a fraction” of the work undertaken
by Hibernian.
had been taking active steps to manage safety as part of the demolition process,
including placing red and white “danger”
tape around the perimeter
of the Pit to address the risk of workers falling into it. It did not occur to
Mr Breen that the area may
have a flammable atmosphere, because the Council had
been using it as a workshop with the tanks in place for many years.
of the work ordinarily performed by Hibernian involved formwork, steel
reinforcement and concreting of pavements. That work required
grinders and, in Mr Breen’s experience, did not typically require a hot
work permit.
has made modest donations to various sporting clubs and community events,
including the St Pats Football Club, Sydney Shamrock
Hurling Club and the St
Patrick’s Day Parade.
The circumstances surrounding the
Breen was not aware that Hibernian was involved in removing tanks from the Pit.
Had he known, he said he would have required a
risk assessment to be completed,
and he would have prohibited the use of the grinder on the Waste Oil Tank.
Further, he would not
have agreed to do that work without a significant and
formal variation to the contract with the Council.
O’Keeffe was selected by Hibernian as site supervisor based on his
representation that Bride View had nine years of supervisory
experience and he
personally had more than 15 years of supervisory experience, including for
multiple crews on multimillion-dollar
projects. He held a number of certified
qualifications and had workplace health and safety experience.
the incident, Mr Breen became aware that Council employee Mr John Smith had been
tasked with removing the tanks from the Pit
and had approached
Mr O’Keeffe to seek assistance from Hibernian’s workers. In
that context, two tanks had been lifted
out of the Pit by using an excavator. Mr
O’Keeffe had a suite of specialist lifting equipment available for use at
of Hibernian’s workers had been tasked to enter the Pit on the day of the
incident. No one was aware that Mr Clifford was
working on the Waste Oil Tank
until the explosion occurred.
on site were required to attend both a site-specific induction conducted by the
Council and one conducted by Hibernian. The
site-specific induction conducted by
Hibernian did not cover hazards arising from undertaking hot work because it was
the scope of the project. While it had been some time since a Toolbox
Talk had been conducted, Mr Breen had spoken to workers individually
safety matter that had arisen only the week before the
After the incident
incident has had a “profound personal and professional impact” on
Mr Breen. He has upgraded Hibernian’s safety
systems, which are now
digitalised and streamlined. Hibernian engages the Master Builders’
Association NSW’s (MBA NSW)
Safety Department to conduct independent
safety inspections alongside its own. It now has a Project Management Plan
format which
integrates work health and safety, environmental and quality
management plans. Hibernian also routinely engages independent environmental
specialists to conduct hazard and waste classification assessments, in addition
to any client-provided reports, before mobilising
on site. Staff training has
been enhanced to address site-specific high-risk activities.
Hibernian derives most of its construction work from local councils, does not
advertise and relies entirely on references obtained
from completed projects,
the incident has seen business decrease. Competition is high for tenders, the
cost of labour and materials
has significantly increased, and interest rates and
inflation have caused a downturn in the market.
the incident, Mr Breen and his brother Damien commenced an MBA NSW course
“WHS for Supervisors”, which they were
part-way through as of
17 February 2025.
Breen has limited the amount of people who work for Hibernian so as to ensure
greater oversight and is “much more hands-on”
with work since the
incident, ensuring that either himself or his brother is on site providing
direct supervision at all times. As
a result, Hibernian can undertake only one
project at a time. This has led to gaps between projects which has had financial
repercussions
for both his and his brother’s
Consideration
have had regard to the objects of the
set out in s 3 and the
purposes of sentencing set out in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
have taken into account the maximum penalty for this offence:
Makarian v The
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25 at [31] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Callinan JJ (
seriousness
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
485–6, 490–1 and 496. At common law, the term “objective
circumstances” was used to describe the
circumstances of a crime. The
gravity of the offence was assessed by reference to its objective circumstances:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
task requires the Court to consider where the conduct of Hibernian falls in the
range of conduct covered by the offence:
Baumer v the Queen
CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67 at 57. As Whealy JA said in
BW v The Queen
(Hulme and Harrison JJ agreeing at
[75]–[76]):
“This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate range of
sentences available which will reflect the objective seriousness
of the offence
committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to the
criminality of the offender will lie.”
objective seriousness of an offence is to be determined by reference to the
nature of the offending without reference to matters
personal to a particular
offender or class of offenders:
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death is a factor relative
to the gravity of the offence:
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
. The question of foreseeability of the
risk is to be determined objectively.
Court arrives at the appropriate sentence through a process of
“instinctive synthesis” in which the sentencing judge
identifies all
the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discusses their significance and
then makes a value judgment as to
the appropriate sentence given those factors:
Court of Criminal Appeal examined the sentencing process with regard to the
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
General for New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
NSWCCA 96. Under the heading “Assessment of Risk”, Basten J
“[34] The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the
proposition that ‘[g]reater culpability attaches to the
failure to guard
against an event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the
occurrence of which is extremely unlikely’.
However, the truth of that
proposition depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential
consequences of the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the
availability of steps to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether
such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative
culpability depends on assessment of all those factors.”
at [42] his Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step‑by‑step
assessment of the various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall
evaluation of various factors, which may pull in different
directions.
Culpability in this case is reasonably high because, even if the pressure event
of the force which occurred might not
be expected to occur often, the
seriousness of the foreseeable resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be
taken to avoid it, which
were not even assessed, were straightforward and
involved only minor inconvenience and little, if any, costs.”
[53] his Honour dealt with the proper approach to considering the objective
seriousness of offences under the
“ ... It is important to note that the risk to be assessed is not the risk
of the consequence, to the extent that a worker
is in fact injured, but is the
risk arising from the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the
injury occurring.
To discount the seriousness of the risk by reference to the
unlikelihood of injury resulting is apt to lead to error. The conduct
question is the failure to respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more serious the potential injuries,
whether or not they are
likely to materialise. The objective seriousness of the conduct will also be
affected by the ease with which
mitigating steps could have been taken.”
NSW submitted that this offence falls within the mid-range of objective
seriousness having regard to the following factors
which it asked the Court to
take into account in making its assessment:
(1) Hibernian’s experience in the demolition business.
(2) Hibernian’s awareness of the presence of flammable liquid in the Pit,
both because it had been provided with a copy of
the CEMP and because the
presence of the tanks and drums was obvious and some of them displayed oil
labels and flammable liquid warnings.
(3) The express warning which Mr Smith gave Mr O’Keeffe and Mr Breen
had not been emptied
(in the context of the Welding Standard, which provides that a very small amount
of residual vapour can cause
an explosion even where a tank is empty).
(4) The requirement in cl 291(I) of the WHS Regulation for Hibernian to develop
a site-specific SWMS for work undertaken in an area
which may have a flammable
atmosphere, which it failed to do, and the absence of the relevant risk in
either of the SWMS prepared
by Hibernian.
(5) While the removal of the Waste Oil Tank and other tanks was not originally
part of the works, Hibernian agreed to assist to remove
them, and a cursory
inspection by anyone in authority for Hibernian would have established that the
horizontal steel pipe needed
to be removed in order to lift the Waste Oil Tank
out of the Pit.
(6) In using an angle grinder to sever that pipe, Mr Clifford was continuing the
duties he had been performing in previous days clearing
the Pit, including use
of an angle grinder as required, and Hibernian would have been aware of his
intention to use a grinder on
the Waste Oil Tank if it had had a hot work permit
system in operation.
(7) Fires and explosions are well known to be unforgiving and there was
extensive guidance material available to put Hibernian on
notice of the risks
and manner in which they may be controlled, including the Hazardous Chemicals
Code of Practice, the Welding Processes
Code of Practice and the Welding
(8) Hibernian failed to consider what was a reasonably foreseeable risk in
circumstances where it was on notice of the presence and
contents of the various
drums, including the Waste Oil Tank.
(9) The risk of serious injury or death was not remote.
(10) Undertaking an adequate risk assessment (or requiring the Council to do so)
was a reasonably practicable measure that Hibernian
could and should have
(11) Additional reasonably practicable measures that Hibernian could and should
have taken included a prohibition against hot work
being carried out, the
implementation of a hot work permit system, prohibiting work without adequate
information, and the provision
of instruction and training, adequate supervision
and appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) to workers.
(12) The above steps which, if taken, would have eliminated or at least
minimised the risk, were feasible, straightforward and inexpensive.
submitted that the objective seriousness of the offence was low because the
scope of the agreement between itself and the
Council was for Hibernian to
assist the Council to remove (i.e., lift out) the Waste Oil Tank from the Pit.
That agreement, made
between the Council and Mr O’Keeffe, occurred in
circumstances where Mr O’Keeffe brought specialist lifting equipment
was therefore available for use on site. Hibernian contended that the agreement
to assist the Council to remove the Waste Oil
Tank from the Pit did not extend
to demolition work to facilitate that process and there was no agreement as to
when or how the Waste
Oil Tank was to be removed. Accordingly, Hibernian’s
position was that the risk which ultimately materialised was not foreseeable
circumstances where it was beyond Hibernian’s scope of work.
further submitted that the absence of any systems in place to manage the risk
associated with undertaking hot work in a
flammable atmosphere ought to be
viewed in the context of the work giving rise to that risk being outside
Hibernian’s scope
of work. In support of that submission, Hibernian
pointed to the absence of any direction from Hibernian to Mr Clifford to sever
the pipe, Hibernian’s lack of awareness that Mr Clifford was undertaking
that task, and the absence of risk to any of Hibernian’s
accept Mr Breen’s evidence that he was unaware that Hibernian had agreed
to assist in removing the tanks, including the Waste
Oil Tank, from the Pit. I
also accept that, had he been aware of that agreement, he would have required a
further risk assessment
to be done and that the introduction of hot work as part
of the demolition process would have required a significant variation in
contract between Hibernian and the Council.
I do not accept that the hot work undertaken by Mr Clifford was beyond
Hibernian’s scope of work as varied by Mr O’Keeffe
in the days
before the incident. The agreed Statement of Facts provides that Mr Smith asked
Mr O’Keeffe “whether his
employees could assist to remove the
tanks”. It must have been obvious to Mr O’Keeffe, when he agreed to
assist the Council
to remove the tanks from the Pit, that the Waste Oil Tank was
unable to be lifted out unless the pipe to which it was connected was
the agreed Statement of Facts also provides that in the days leading up to the
incident, workers had been using grinders
in the Pit to remove hydraulic rams,
other tanks and metal covering the Pit. While there is no allegation that the
earlier use of
grinders in the Pit was unsafe, its occurrence demonstrates that
Hibernian’s workers were accustomed to engaging in hot work
as required to
perform the task at hand. In addition, the need to sever the pipe in order to
remove the Waste Oil Tank was obvious.
do not place any weight on the fact that removal of the Waste Oil Tank was not a
task that was specifically allocated during the
pre-work meeting on the day of
the incident. The agreed Statement of Facts provides that “[t]he jobs
allocated related to cleaning
up and sorting material into various bins.”
Yet two other tanks had been removed on the morning in question, prior to the
occurring. I accept that the removal of those tanks was confined to
lifting them out of the Pit with an excavator. No one was required
to enter the
Pit. However, it is clear that Hibernian’s workers had turned their
attention to removing tanks from the Pit on
the morning of 17 August 2022,
notwithstanding what occurred at the pre-work meeting.
the person supervising the work undertaken by Hibernian on that day,
Mr O’Keeffe would or should have known that Hibernian’s
had been lifting tanks out of the Pit that morning. He would or should have
known that the Waste Oil Tank was not empty,
because he had been informed of
this when Hibernian commenced demolition of the workshop above the Pit. In
addition, Mr O’Keeffe
would or should have known that
Hibernian’s workers had been using grinders in the Pit as required in
previous days. Further,
the risk posed to a worker such as Mr Clifford whilst
using an angle grinder in the presence of flammable materials was obvious and
well-known to Hibernian and the industry. The likelihood of the risk
materialising was high given the residual hazardous chemicals
in the Waste Oil
its plea of guilty, Hibernian accepts that it could have taken the following
reasonably practicable steps to eliminate or at least
minimise the reasonably
foreseeable risk:
(1) On agreeing to remove the Waste Oil Tank, undertaken a risk assessment of
the site that considered the site-specific hazards,
including a consideration of
work on or near the Waste Oil Tank.
(2) Required the Council to undertake a risk assessment in relation to the
demolition, decommissioning and dismantling works involving
the Waste Oil Tank,
which included testing for hazardous substances or the scientific analysis of
its contents to determine whether
any hazardous substances were present, and
providing this information to Hibernian in writing, prior to seeking
Hibernian’s
assistance to remove the Waste Oil Tank.
(3) Developed, implemented and enforced a SWMS (or required the Council to do
so) that identified the hazards of fire and explosion
due to ignition sources
associated with the demolition, decommissioning and dismantling works involving
the Waste Oil Tank and described
the measures to control it, such as vapour
testing for hazardous substances and scientific analysis of its content, and to
the risks associated with grinding work on or near the Waste Oil
(4) Prohibited hot work from being carried out in areas that may contain or be
affected by hazardous substances, and in particular,
the use of an angle grinder
to cut the pipe connected to the Waste Oil Tank.
(5) Developed, implemented and enforced a hot work permit system at the site
where only appropriately authorised workers were permitted
to use tools such as
angle grinders, in particular, in circumstances such as cutting (by grinding)
the pipe connected to the Waste
(6) Prohibited workers from performing any work in the vicinity of hazardous
substances without such workers receiving prior adequate
information,
instruction and training specific to working in that environment or, if that was
not reasonably practicable, without
direct supervision by a competent and
experienced supervisor with training in the safe use and handling of hazardous
substances.
(7) On agreeing to remove the Waste Oil Tank, required Mr Clifford to wear
adequate nonflammable PPE.
(8) On agreeing to remove the Waste Oil Tank, provided workers, and in
particular Mr Clifford, with appropriate instruction, information
and training
before commencing any hot work.
(9) Provided adequate supervision to workers to prevent both access to
unauthorised areas and unauthorised hot work from being performed
at the site,
particularly in areas such as the Pit.
above measures both individually and in combination could have been implemented
without great burden or inconvenience to Hibernian.
Hibernian submitted that,
even with the benefit of hindsight, many (but not all) of the measures could
not, of themselves, eliminate
or minimise the risk so far as is reasonably
practicable. Rather, they formed a suite of measures required to achieve that
While I accept that submission, little turns on it in circumstances
where measures such as the conduct of a risk assessment, the
development and
implementation of a SWMS which identifies measures to attempt to manage the
risks identified and the adequate supervision
of workers deployed in a high-risk
environment are measures routinely employed on construction and demolition
potential consequences of the risk materialising included death. The serious
injuries suffered by Mr Clifford were a manifestation
of the risk.
the above matters into account in the manner indicated, I find that the
objective seriousness of the offence falls within the
Moral culpability of Hibernian
absence of appropriate systems was due, in large part, to a breakdown in
communication within Hibernian so that Mr Breen was unaware
of the nature of the
work being undertaken by Hibernian’s workers at the site. While I accept
that Hibernian’s agreement
to remove the tanks from the Pit occurred in
the context of the specialist lifting equipment that Mr O’Keeffe had at
his disposal,
the fact remains that hot work had been undertaken to remove fixed
items from the Pit in the days preceding the incident. Given that
Hibernian should have ensured that appropriate systems were in place when it
came to the removal of the Waste Oil Tank,
because Mr Smith had told Mr Breen
and Mr O’Keeffe that the Waste Oil Tank had not been emptied. The
removal of two tanks from
the Pit by Hibernian’s workers on the morning of
the incident should have alerted Mr O’Keeffe to the fact that the removal
of the Waste Oil Tank was imminent.
O’Keeffe was an experienced site supervisor. He had 20 years’
experience in the utilities and civil industry. He had
experience supervising
multiple crews on multimillion-dollar projects. He was also the holder of
several construction related qualifications,
licences and tickets. Accordingly,
I accept that Hibernian had exercised a degree of diligence to put appropriate
supervision in
place when it engaged Mr O’Keeffe and relied upon him as
the supervisor for the daily activities of its workers at the site.
is not a matter which has a direct bearing upon the objective seriousness of the
offence, it is a matter which reduces
Hibernian’s moral culpability in
relation to the offence:
MF v The King
[2024] NSWCCA 42
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide for general
deterrence.
accept that, at the time of the incident, Hibernian, through the efforts of
Mr Breen, was a company which paid high regard to its
responsibilities. This is reflected in both Hibernian’s absence of prior
convictions over several years and the measures taken
by Hibernian to secure the
workshop demolition site and the Pit. Accordingly, I find that there is a
reduced need for the sentence
imposed upon Hibernian to provide specific
deterrence. I am fortified in that view by the measures taken by Mr Breen since
the incident
to update and integrate Hibernian’s site management plans,
engage additional expert assessments and ensure that either he or
his brother
performs site supervision on Hibernian’s projects with the benefit of the
additional MBA NSW training that they
undertaking.
Aggravating factors
injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial: s
. In order for the aggravating factor to be established,
the Court must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the harm was greater
more deleterious than may ordinarily be expected for the subject offence:
[2004] NSWCCA 412
have considered the Victim Impact Statement of Mr Dustin Clifford, dated
9 February 2025. The photographs annexed to that statement
show permanent
scarring to Mr Clifford’s forearms, face, leg and back. Mr Clifford states
that he covers the scars with clothing
to the extent possible and that the skin
grafts have left him unable to regulate his body temperature. The injuries which
he suffered
during the incident have resulted in significant “functional
restriction”, in addition to ongoing anxiety and emotional
distress. The
offence does not require an injury to be sustained, but merely the creation of a
risk of death or serious injury. The
injuries sustained by Mr Clifford are
sufficient to establish the aggravating factor.
has no prior convictions: s 21A(3)(e)
is otherwise of good character: s 21A(3)(f)
. The steps which it
took after the incident demonstrate this. Further, Hibernian has been operating
since 28 May 2013, a period of
more than nine years without any prior
convictions at the time of the incident.
Breen gave unchallenged evidence about the “profound” effect of the
incident upon his mental health. Because of this,
alongside his increased
personal oversight of Hibernian’s projects together with Mr Damien Breen,
and with the benefit of their
additional training and the enhanced site-specific
safety training provided to workers, the updating and integration of
Hibernian’s
site management plans and the routine engagement of external
expertise to manage site safety, I find that the offender is unlikely
reoffend (s 21A(3)(g)
) and has good prospects of rehabilitation
(s 21A(3)(h)
has shown remorse for the offence: s 21A(3)(i)
. It has provided
evidence that it has accepted responsibility for its actions and has
acknowledged that its failures led to the injury
of Mr Clifford.
entered a plea of guilty on 16 December 2024 to the charge particularised in an
amended summons of that date. The plea of
guilty was entered at the second
mention of proceedings commenced on 9 August 2024. Hibernian is entitled to a
discount on penalty
that reflects the utilitarian value of that early plea:
v Thomson; R v Houlton
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
v Borkowski
[2009] NSWCCA 102
. The prosecutor did not take issue
with the defendant’s submission that it should be afforded a discount on
sentence of 25%
in recognition of its early guilty plea. I accept that a
discount of 25% is appropriate in the circumstances: ss 21A(3)(k) and 22
submits that its cooperation with the authorities is a matter which should
operate in mitigation of the sentence to be imposed
s 21A(3)(m)
. The prosecutor does not dispute that
Hibernian cooperated with the SafeWork NSW investigation, but submits that
complying with improvement
notices, prohibition notices and providing
information under s 155(2) of the
are matters required by
law which ought not to attract a sentencing discount. The prosecutor notes the
absence of evidence as to
what Hibernian relies upon by way of assistance to the
authorities.
provides as follows:
21A Aggravating, mitigating and other factors in sentencing
Mitigating factors
The mitigating factors to be taken into account in
determining the appropriate sentence for an offence are as follows—
(m) assistance by the offender to law enforcement authorities (as provided by
section 23),
provides as follows:
23 Power to reduce penalties for assistance provided to law enforcement
authorities
(1) A court may impose a lesser penalty than it would otherwise impose on an
offender, having regard to the degree to which the offender
has assisted, or
undertaken to assist, law enforcement authorities in the prevention, detection
or investigation of, or in proceedings
relating to, the offence concerned or any
other offence.
(2) In deciding whether to impose a lesser penalty for an offence and the nature
and extent of the penalty it imposes, the court
must consider the following
(a) (Repealed)
(b) the significance and usefulness of the offender’s assistance to the
authority or authorities concerned, taking into consideration
any evaluation by
the authority or authorities of the assistance rendered or undertaken to be
(c) the truthfulness, completeness and reliability of any information or
evidence provided by the offender,
(d) the nature and extent of the offender’s assistance or promised
assistance,
(e) the timeliness of the assistance or undertaking to assist,
(f) any benefits that the offender has gained or may gain by reason of the
assistance or undertaking to assist,
(g) whether the offender will suffer harsher custodial conditions as a
consequence of the assistance or undertaking to assist,
(h) any injury suffered by the offender or the offender’s family, or any
danger or risk of injury to the offender or the offender’s
resulting from the assistance or undertaking to assist,
(i) whether the assistance or promised assistance concerns the offence for which
the offender is being sentenced or an unrelated
(j) (Repealed)
(3) A lesser penalty that is imposed under this section in relation to an
offence must not be unreasonably disproportionate to the
circumstances of the offence.
(4) A court that imposes a lesser penalty under this section on an offender
because the offender has assisted, or undertaken to assist,
law enforcement
authorities must—
(a) indicate to the offender, and make a record of the fact, that the lesser
penalty is being imposed for either or both of those
reasons, and
(b) state the penalty that it would otherwise have imposed, and
(c) where the lesser penalty is being imposed for both reasons—state the
amount by which the penalty has been reduced for each
(5) Subsection (4) does not limit any requirement that a court has, apart from
that subsection, to record the reasons for its decisions.
(6) The failure of a court to comply with the requirements of subsection (4)
with respect to any sentence does not invalidate the
operation of s 23
was considered in detail by Beech-Jones J in
[2017] NSWCCA 90.
His Honour made the following relevant
observations in his assessment of the terms of that provision at
(1) Section 23(1) confers a discretion and not an obligation on a sentencing
judge to proffer a discount when assistance has been
(2) The assistance referred to in s 23(1) is not defined and there is nothing in
the section that limits the type of assistance which
falls within the provision
beyond requiring that it be assistance to “law enforcement
authorities” in the “prevention,
detection or investigation, or in
proceedings relating to” an offence; and
(3) Section 23(2) is not an exhaustive list of the factors that can be
considered but the considerations listed there ought to be
forefront of the decision-maker’s
consideration”.
Beech-Jones then undertook an analysis of the historical context of the
provision and relevant extrinsic materials. That exercise
led his Honour to the
conclude, at [53], that a relatively expansive view of the meaning of assistance
should be adopted. His Honour
also noted, at [54], that the rationale for the
enactment of s 23(1) was that stated in
, namely “the ‘public interest’ in encouraging
offenders to supply information to the authorities which will assist
bring other offenders to justice and to provide evidence” and that this
was subject to the constraint provided by s
23(3) that the resulting
sentence not be “unreasonably disproportionate to the nature and
circumstances of the offence”.
applying these principles to the investigation of offences pursuant to the
, I note the following matters:
(1) The provision of assistance, even when provided in response to a regulatory
notice, may be variable in its completeness and reliability
(noting that the
provision of untruthful information is a matter that would attract a criminal
(2) Assistance provided by an offender which is limited to bare compliance with
a regulatory notice, the absence of which would render
the offender liable to
prosecution, is not a matter that would ordinarily attract a discount on
(3) Assistance provided by an offender who takes proactive steps in response to
a regulatory notice, and embraces the opportunity
which it presents, should not
be viewed as favourably as assistance which is entirely voluntary (but can be
contrasted with unwitting
assistance which has been construed to fall outside s
(4) The time and financial commitment required by an offender to comply with
regulatory demands (for example, where multiple notices
are served on a
corporate offender and its officers) is a relevant consideration.
(5) The ease with which an offender is able to implement remedial measures in
response to an improvement notice served upon it assists
the prosecution to
prove the reasonably practicable nature of such measures in any subsequent
prosecution.
(6) The timeliness of compliance with regulatory requirements benefits the
prosecution in the context of a statutory limitation period
for the bringing of
proceedings for an offence pursuant to the
agreed Statement of Facts records that Hibernian complied with several statutory
notices, and in so doing, updated its WHS Plan,
engaged the services of an
external contractor to empty and clean up the floor of the Pit, introduced a hot
work permit system at
the site, updated its SWMS for the site to address a
number of stated risks not confined to matters relevant to the incident and
introduced a Waste Oil Tank policy. Mr Breen gave evidence that he answered all
questions posed by police and SafeWork NSW at the
time of the incident and
ensured that his staff also assisted as requested. He further stated that he and
his staff had cooperated
with SafeWork NSW wherever possible and will do so in
the future.
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Hibernian cooperated with law
enforcement authorities sufficiently to attract
the benefit of this mitigating
Capacity to pay a fine
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) requires the Court to have regard to the
means of Hibernian before imposing a fine. An offender that seeks to have a fine
on the basis of limited capacity to pay bears the evidentiary onus of
convincing the Court that it should limit the amount of the
Hibernian’s capacity to pay is relevant but not decisive:
Jahandideh v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA 178
. A substantial fine may
still be warranted due to the seriousness of the offence and the need for
general deterrence.
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of
Criminal Appeal recognised that a fine which may be crippling to a small
business may have virtually no impact on the
financial operations of a large
corporation and that the maximum penalty for the offence was
“undoubtedly” set having
regard to that circumstance.
Breen gave evidence that the weekly salary which he draws from Hibernian
approximately equates with his weekly expenses. However,
there was no evidence
before the Court concerning the financial position of Hibernian and no
submission was made that Hibernian had
a reduced capacity to pay a fine. I
nonetheless take into account the size and scope of
Contracting Pty Ltd was convicted pursuant to an order that I made on 28
February 2025.
appropriate fine is $240,000, which will be reduced by 25% to reflect the plea
make the following orders:
(1) I impose a fine of $180,000.
(2) Hibernian Contracting Pty Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the
proceedings, as agreed or assessed.
(3) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be
paid to the prosecutor.
Citing Warkworth Mining Ltd v
Bulga Milbrodale Progress Association Inc
(2014) 86 NSWLR 527
[2014] NSWCA 105
–[216]; see R v Hunt; Ex parte Sean Investments Pty Ltd
[1979] HCA 32
R v Fabrizio Calderoni
[2000] NSWCCA 511
per Sully J with whom Bell and
Whealy JJ agreed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (340 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter