URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/526.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CNN v State of New South Wales (Northern Sydney Local Health District) [2025] NSWPIC 526; (4 November 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION OF MEMBER
CNN v State of New South Wales (Northern Sydney Local Health District)
[2025] NSWPIC 526
RESPONDENT:
State of New South Wales (Northern Sydney Local Health District)
SENIOR MEMBER:
Elizabeth Beilby
DATE OF DECISION:
4 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workers Compensation Act 1987
; claim for
psychological injury within
section 4(b)
– award for the
respondent as applicant did not establish that employment was the “main
contributing factor” to
any aggravation; discussion regarding treating
notes and how they should be interpreted; applicant and family members names to
de-identified due to sensitive nature of the medical evidence.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
The Personal Injury Commission (Commission) determines:
for the respondent.
was not the main contributing factor to the aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation or deterioration of a disease.
name of the applicant and his family members is to be redacted before
publication of this decision.
A brief statement is attached setting out the Commission’s reasons
for the determination.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
(the applicant) commenced proceedings in the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) seeking weekly benefits, lump sum compensation
and medical
expenses. The respondent is the State of NSW (Northern Sydney Local Health
District) with whom the applicant was employed
as a pharmacy assistant at Mona
Vale hospital commencing on
15 September 2014. The claim is for
psychological injury which was initiated and /or aggravated when [CNN] was
allegedly exposed to
a toxic work environment in which he was bullied, harassed
and threatened.
applicant last worked on 20 November 2014, and his employment was terminated on
5 December 2014. It is therefore a short period of employment with the
respondent.
way of correspondence dated 24 June 2024, a claim for lump sum compensation in
accordance with s 66 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act)
was made on the respondent. Reliance was placed upon on the report of Dr Ben
Teoh dated 30 May 2024 who assessed 20%
s78 notice was issued on 7 January 2025 denying any entitlement to permanent
impairment compensation.
respondent relied on ss 4, 11A(1), 33, 59, 60, 65A(3), 66(1) of the 1987 Act
together with ss 254 and 261 of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act).
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
parties agree that the following issues remain in dispute:
(a) did the applicant suffered an injury pursuant to s 4 of the 1987 Act, and if
(b) is there a valid defence pursuant to s 11A of the 1987 Act, if not;
(c) is there an entitlement to compensation because of a failure to make a claim
for compensation within the time prescribed as required
by ss 254 and 261 of the
1998 Act, if so;
(d) is there total or partial incapacity for work resulting from an injury as
required by s 33 of the 1987 Act, and
(e) was medical or related treatment reasonably necessary as a result of an
injury as required by ss 59 and 60 of the 1987 Act?
PROCEDURE BEFORE THE PERSONAL INJURY COMMISSION
am satisfied that the parties to the dispute understand the nature of the
application and the legal implications of any assertion
made in the information
supplied. I have used my best endeavours in attempting to bring the parties to
the dispute to a settlement
acceptable to all of them. I am satisfied that the
parties have had sufficient opportunity to explore settlement and that they have
been unable to reach an agreed resolution of the dispute.
parties agreed that there should be a primary determination in respect of
primary liability and if the applicant was successful
in relation to that claim
there should be a referral to a Medical Assessor for whole person impairment
assessment and the residual
matters relating to weekly benefits should be
determined after the issuing of a Medical Assessment
Certificate.
Documentary evidence
following documents were in evidence before the Commission and considered in
making this determination:
(a) Application to Resolve a Dispute and attached documents (Application);
(b) Reply to the Application, and
(c) late documents dated 10 July 2025 and 15 July 2025.
Relevant legislation
4 of the 1987 Act provides;
(a) means personal
out of or in the course of employment,
(b) includes a
‘disease injury’
(i) a disease that is contracted by a worker in the course of employment but
only if the employment was the main contributing factor
to contracting the
disease, and
(ii) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration in the course
of employment of any disease, but only if the employment
was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of the disease
applicant’s case is that [CNN] suffered a psychiatric injury in the nature
of an aggravation, exacerbation or deterioration
of his pre-existing
Applicant’s
has provided a statement which is annexed to his Application dated
[CNN] provided evidence that
he was born in India into a strict and often violent household. There was an
episode of self-harm when
the applicant was 15, from which he recovered.
applicant migrated to Sydney Australia in 2000 and started working as a process
worker in an electronics factory. He then returned
to India to complete his
university studies and successfully completed a degree in pharmacy.
applicant met his first wife ‘[BOZ]’ at University. This culminated
in a marriage in 2004, and a son born in March
2005. There is no doubt that the
applicant is a dedicated father.
his return to Australia the applicant worked as a process worker for some period
2010 the applicant’s wife [BOZ] was diagnosed with schizophrenia. The
applicant continued to work as a process worker as
he was the sole income earner
for the family. The applicant is candid in his statement that the diagnosis and
subsequent associated
behaviours caused difficulty in the relationship and
household. The applicant found it difficult to manage work and support his
whilst working through the relationship issues.
2012 the applicant took medication for his situational depression as prescribed
Dr Nicola, his then general practitioner.
March 2013 the applicant’s wife was charged with assault occasioning
actual bodily harm and the charges were heard in Kogarah
Local Court. Shortly
thereafter, the applicant’s father passed away and he travelled to India
so he could attend his father’s
returning to work the applicant found it difficult to cope and his employment
was subsequently terminated.
May 2013 the applicant was admitted to the St George Hospital Mental Health Unit
because of depression symptomatology. He was experiencing
difficulties with
managing his wife’s mental illness and his father passing away. He
remained in hospital for a week because
of his depression.
2013 the applicant and his wife separated but continued living under the same
roof. He felt he had no other choice. His wife still
suffered symptoms from her
schizophrenia, and he wanted his son to have a continuing relationship with his
applicant obtained employment in September 2013 for Baxter Health Care Pty
Limited as a full-time pharmacy technician. The applicant
observed that there
were still difficulties in managing the relationship between himself and his
November 2013 the applicant was given three months leave from his employment at
Baxter Health Care and he travelled to India alone
and was introduced to
‘[CIZ]’ by family members. A relationship then commenced which
culminated in a marriage in December
applicant then returned to Sydney in January 2014 whilst his wife remained in
India and the relationship continued by long distance.
A divorce from [BOZ] was
ultimately granted though her schizophrenia was relatively florid.
applicant ended up resigning from his job at Baxter in March 2014 and he
returned to India until May 2014.
his return to Sydney the applicant applied for three or four jobs before he
obtained an interview with the respondent. He felt
at that stage he was doing
pretty well psychologically and felt positive. He was keen to get to work and
wanted a good future for
[CIZ], himself and his son. At that stage he
wasn’t taking any antidepressant medication, and he was very focused on a
13 September 2014 the applicant received a written offer of employment from the
respondent for the position of a pharmacy assistant.
He says he was so moved by
this offer that he cried tears of joy and felt that his dream had come true.
applicant commenced employment with the respondent as a full-time pharmacy
assistant at Mona Vale Hospital on 15 September 2014.
He took pride in his job
and intended to progress in the role to have a successful career with the New
South Wales Health Service.
The applicant moved his family to Dee Why to be
closer to his work.
applicant observed there was quite a lot of walking in his job including walking
up and down stairs as pharmacy workers were not
allowed to use the elevators
when attending wards. There was also repetitive crouching and kneeling as he
picked medication off pharmacy
applicant says that from 7 to 10 October 2014 he did not work because of pain to
his legs, and he was on paid leave for those
four days. He recalled speaking to
Noman Masood (director of pharmacy) explaining to him that he needed to take
time off because
of pain in his legs. At that time, the applicant was having
problems with his ex-wife and had feelings of depression though did not
this to Mr Masood over the telephone.
applicant returned to work on 14 October and spoke to Mr Masood in his office.
The applicant said that Mr Masood said to him words
to the effect
“You’ve just started working here and you’re already taking
time off”. The applicant replied
that he had pain in his legs and was also
having problems with his ex-wife at home and that he had been a victim of
domestic violence
and was experiencing depression.
applicant says that Mr Masood replied, “I know what happens with wives in
India”, following up with a comment “I
don’t want to know
your interview”. The
applicant felt upset and was crying at this stage and
begged Mr Masood to please give him some more time and he would try to change
his personal circumstances. The applicant said that Mr Masood replied,
“you say you will not let me down, but you have buried
applicant felt that he had been spoken to like a ‘street dog’ and
there was no sympathy extended.
applicant said that the following days he felt affected by the way he had been
treated by Mr Masood and felt that Mr Masood had
taken some sort of pleasure in
torturing him and wanted to break him.
applicant says that the situation at home continued to be very difficult with
his ex-wife. He says that he continued to be depressed
and focused on what Mr
Masood had said to him and was not sleeping and not functioning well at
applicant was able to work up until 2 November but had negative thoughts and was
hardly sleeping. At that time [BOZ]’s psychotic
episodes were severe.
3 November 2014 the applicant says he was not up to going to work. He telephoned
Janet (surname not disclosed), pharmacy supervisor,
and said to her that he felt
depressed and needed to see a doctor.
applicant then attended upon Dr Tattersall at Dee Why Medical Centre on 3
November 2014 and was given a script for Avanza. The
applicant was certified
unfit for work from
3 November 2014 to 17 November 2014. The certificate of
capacity was then forwarded to Mr Masood by email on the same day.
applicant explains that he did not hear from the respondent until 4 November
2014 when Mr Masood telephoned him. He stated Mr
Masood indicated that he
received the doctor’s certificate and asked him to come and see him at
Manly Hospital. The applicant
Mr Masood’s manner of speaking
was rude with a raised voice. The applicant felt scared and was shaking.
applicant attended Manly Hospital at 4.00pm later that afternoon where Mr Masood
asked him why he was not attending work. The
applicant explained that he was
depressed and that he had been given a certificate to the effect that he was
unfit for work.
applicant said that Mr Masood then asked him what happened with ‘fair
work’, that pharmacies are small communities
in Australia and that they
all know each other. It became clear to the applicant at that stage that Mr
Masood had contacted his previous
employer, Baxter Health Care.
applicant said that Mr Masood then told him he should resign if he is not able
to work to which the applicant said that he needed
to work as he needed to
provide for his family.
Mr Masood replied that if you don’t resign
that they will blacklist him. Mr Masood then said that he would give the
a time to think and to take another four days leave and come back on
Monday or resign. Mr Masood then directed the applicant to “apply
religious principles”. The applicant felt in shock and had no idea what
religion had to do with his work.
applicant says that he felt very poorly and felt he had been treated like a
street dog. He said tears were rolling down his face
because of the way he had
been treated.
this event the applicant says that he could not sleep or eat and was barely
functioning. He would stay in his room for hours
applicant returned to see Dr Tattersall on 15 November 2014 but did not want to
complain about the treatment he had received from
Mr Masood because he did not
want to lose his job. Dr Tattersall increased the applicant’s dosage of
Avanza from 30mg to 45mg.
applicant’s home life continued to be difficult with his ex-wife
assaulting him on
16 November 2014 and involving the police.
17 November 2014 the applicant returned to Dr Tattersall and received a
certificate certifying him unfit for work from 18 November
2014 until 23
February 2015.
receiving the certificate of capacity, the applicant attended Manly Hospital to
present his medical certificate to Mr Masood.
Dr Tattersall had mentioned that
it would have been good for the applicant to return to India for his mental
health. Mr Masood said
that they had received a letter from the general
practitioner regarding returning to India and indicated that the applicant had
work or resign and if the applicant didn’t resign, he would be
blacklisted and unable to apply for a future position.
applicant asked about unpaid leave which was rejected. Mr Masood offered a
casual position two days a week so he could manage
his personal affairs and
attend work. The applicant said that this would not work as the medicine he is
on makes him sleepy until
late so he can’t come in. Mr Masood then
indicated he would discuss the matter with human resources, and a meeting would
applicant says he ruminated on his experience with Mr Masood and became worried
to Manly Hospital in a
depressed mood.
26 November 2014 the applicant self-referred to St George Community Mental
Health Unit because he was struggling and experiencing
frequent suicidal
thoughts. The applicant was then admitted to St George Hospital Mental Health
Acute Care from 28 November 2014
to 5 December 2015. He could not stop thinking
and interactions with Mr Masood replayed over and over in his mind.
the applicant was in St George Hospital, he received a phone call from Mr
Masood. It was indicated that a meeting had been
arranged to which the applicant
replied he was on sick leave. The applicant said Mr Masood then said that his
sick leave had not
been approved and that if he didn’t attend the
appointment his employment would be terminated. The applicant did not disclose
in the conversation that he was in hospital.
applicant attended the disciplinary meeting with the respondent on 2 December
2014 at Manly Hospital. Present at the meeting was
Mr Masood and Mr Adam from
Human Resources. A discussion took place in relation to the applicant working on
a casual basis however
the applicant was of the view that his doctor had
provided him with a medical certificate which certified him as being unable to
work. The applicant was told that there would be another meeting on 4 December.
The applicant said that he felt sick because of the
pressure that had been
placed on him after the meeting and he felt like he wanted to vomit, his head
felt like it had been smashed,
and he was having suicidal thoughts.
returning to St George Hospital, the applicant said he spoke to a nurse about
the meeting, and she expressed shock at what had
occurred. She said she would
engage a social worker to speak to the applicant.
applicant said he was unable to attend the meeting on 4 December as he was
struggling psychologically. In addition, he did not
have the money to pay for
the fares to and from the meeting. The applicant told the respondent he would
not attend the meeting.
applicant also forwarded a letter from a social worker in respect of attendance
at the meeting.
applicant says on 5 December 2014 the respondent terminated his employment. He
then lodged an application to the Industrial Relations
Commission. He had also
sent emails to the respondent because he felt he had been unfairly
terminated.
applicant consulted with Dr Mahadev at Kogarah Railway Medical Centre about how
he was treated at work. He was prescribed antidepressant
medication by Dr
January 2015 the applicant had a child with [CIZ].
a result of the Industrial Relations Commission filing, the applicant entered
into a Deed of Release on 5 March 2015. He said he
had not received legal advice
in respect of any agreement because he did not have the money, and he was also
unwell psychologically.
6 March 2015 and 23 April 2015, the applicant returned to India. He says while
he was there his mind remained preoccupied
with the treatment he had received
from the respondent. He ruminated over the words Mr Masood had spoken to him.
the applicant returned to Sydney, he felt he was not coping well with his
depression being severe.
applicant managed to find a job as a pharmacy technician for Custom Pharmacy in
Taren Point. After completing his first shift,
the applicant felt that he was
unable to continue because of his severe depression.
applicant continued to be treated by Dr Mahadev who then referred him to Dr
Younan, psychiatrist.
applicant consulted with Dr Younan on 16 February 2016. The applicant says that
Mr Younan did not ask him any questions about his work however told the
doctor that his employment was terminated because of his mental
health. The
applicant also saw Mr Saad, psychologist.
the months passed, Dr Younan adjusted the applicant’s medication however
he continued to have suicidal thoughts and self-harm.
March 2018 and February 2020, the applicant lived with his wife and child in
Kogarah at which time they decided to return
to India where they remained during
the COVID-19 pandemic.
February 2020, the applicant’s second child with [CIZ] was born.
applicant returned to Sydney in February 2022 and returned to regular treatment
Dr Mahadev, Dr Younan and Mr Saad.
late 2023 the applicant was speaking to some close friends about his work injury
who suggested that he make a workers compensation
claim. He had no experience
with that before this time. He spoke to Dr Mahadev about making a claim. The
applicant then consulted
with Colin Daley Quinn Solicitors in February 2024 for
the first time. He said he was unaware of any time limits in respect of making
claim before that date.
applicant has provided a further statement dated 15 July
In that statement the
applicant referred to his job with the respondent stating that he did his best
to attend and did his best to
notify the respondent when he was not able to
attend work. The applicant takes issue with Mr Masood’s statement in many
particularly where he worked, whether it be at Manly Hospital or not
and where he attended meetings.
applicant wrote a letter or email to Adam Quested, the manager of Human
Resources and Culture on 5 December 2014. At that time,
the applicant formally
resigned from his position as a pharmacy assistant at Mona Vale Hospital due to
his carer’s responsibilities
of his son. The correspondence states that
the respondent was aware that the applicant had been on unpaid leave since 3
to accommodate his personal carer’s needs with the intention to
recommence his duties within the Northern Sydney Local Health
Unfortunately, the applicant could not find any alternative option other than
resigning from his position at that time.
applicant went on to state that he had enjoyed working with Northern Sydney
Local Health District for whatever time he was able
to work. He also said that
if his circumstances improved in the future then he would like to request an
opportunity to enter into
the workforce on either a part-time or casual pool to
gain further experience.
applicant completed his correspondence with thanking the respondent for their
support and also for the support from his colleagues
in his difficult time and
he heartfully apologised for any inconvenience caused by his absence or due to
this resignation.
Medical evidence
Dr Ben Teoh
Teoh has prepared a report dated 30 May 2024 at the request of the
applicant’s solicitors.
Dr Teoh took a history consistent with the applicant’s statement which
includes his admission at hospital, experience of domestic
violence and stress
at home and feelings of being unsupported by his employer. In addition, Dr Teoh
took a history that the applicant
had been experiencing psychotic symptoms,
delusions and auditory hallucinations and had been paranoid. The applicant had
also attempted
suicide by cutting his wrists and had thoughts of jumping off a
a mental state examination, Dr Teoh reported observing a depressed mood with
preoccupation with negative thoughts, including fleeting
suicidal ideation. The
applicant was agitated and anxious and had become socially withdrawn. Dr Teoh
diagnosed the applicant as having
a major depressive disorder to which
employment with the respondent had aggravated his pre-existing psychiatric
condition. The applicant
felt that he was under pressure to return to work,
despite being mentally unwell and had experienced significant depressive
before and at the time of employment with Northern Sydney Local Health
Teoh also stated that the applicant’s condition was not caused by
reasonable conduct or action taken or proposed to be taken
by the respondent as
the applicant had meetings to discuss his capacity to work and felt unsupported
and was under pressure to return
Teoh assessed the applicant as having a 20% whole person impairment.
Teoh has prepared a supplementary report dated 14 March
At that stage Dr Teoh
indicated that he had received the records from Ashton Medical Practice which
recorded the applicant had been
treated for various medical conditions in 2012
where he had been prescribed antidepressant medications including Lexapro 10mg
Pristiq 50mg. In addition, the applicant had been treated for depression
over several years and had admissions at a psychiatric ward
at St George
Hospital in 2012.
Teoh said that the medical records confirmed that the applicant had a
pre-existing psychiatric condition which was well documented
in his report.
Honey, psychiatrist has prepared two reports at the request of the
respondent’s solicitors. The first report is dated 4 November
Dr Honey took a history which
was consistent with that which has been provided by the applicant in terms of
the applicant’s
recollection that his employer wanted to terminate him.
The applicant said he had been suffering from depression for three to five
before that date and was treated with medication.
applicant also outlined his return to India, his relationship with his second
wife who had experienced cancer and his living arrangements.
The applicant says
that he was now depressed and sometimes felt suicidal, he is scared to go
outside and is often suspicious and
feels he cannot trust anyone.
examination, Dr Honey observed the applicant appeared to be rather wooden in his
presentation and took some time to understand
the nature of the question being
put to him. He did however appear to give truthful responses to the questioning,
Dr Honey also observed
that the applicant’s mood was flat and depressed
without evidence of any formal disorder of thought except for some slowing
thinking. The applicant denied any hallucinations at that stage.
Honey diagnosed the applicant as suffering from a chronic schizophrenic illness
with a major depressive disorder.
Honey opined that the psychological injury did not arise out of employment,
rather the applicant was suffering from significant
psychological symptoms prior
to and including the time of his brief employment with the respondent. He had a
prior history of depression
leading up to that time and was under great stress
due to significant disturbance in his marriage due to his wife’s
schizophrenia
and her violent behaviour.
Honey did explain that it is now many years since the applicant’s
employment with the respondent which allegedly led to his
injury. Dr Honey
stated that any psychological symptoms arising from or being aggravated by the
event of his dismissal would have
long since abated.
Honey further explained that schizophrenia is best described as a disease of
gradual process, this is how the illness evolves,
and it may well be that in
retrospect the diagnosis of schizophrenia may have been made well before the
event in question in the
workplace in 2014.
Honey has provided a second report dated 21 January
Dr Honey continued to hold
the view that any psychological illness or injury from which the applicant was
suffering at the time of
his employment did not arise from the employment, was
pre-existing to his employment and was not due to employment-related causes.
Honey explained that there had been considerably distressing events over a long
period of time in the applicant’s life including
the violent behaviour of
his first wife who had suffered from schizophrenia and his subsequent
estrangement from his second wife
and two children.
Honey observed that the applicant’s last treating psychiatrist diagnosed
him as suffering from schizophrenia and it is his
view that this was a likely
long-term illness, preceding his last employment in its onset, an illness of
paranoid schizophrenic type
which might render him likely to see ill treatment
where there is none. This would lead to his interpretation of behaviour of his
employers when they acted in response to his frequent absences from work from
the outset of his employment.
Younan is the applicant’s treating psychiatrist. He first consulted with
the applicant on 11 February 2016 and produced a
report of the same
At that time the applicant
reported that his behaviour had changed over the last two or three months
gradually and this included
being suspicious about his wife’s infidelity
and becoming suspicious and somewhat hyper-sexualised. The applicant also
that he slashed his wrists which was essentially in response to
frustration. In addition, the applicant felt that he was under surveillance
felt that people were talking to him. Dr Younan described these symptoms as
“psychotic and schizophrenic in nature”.
Younan diagnosed the applicant as having paranoid schizophrenia, a diagnosis
which the applicant accepted.
applicant saw Dr Younan again on 3 March
applicant’s sexual thoughts were no longer preoccupying him, he still had
persecutory delusions and hallucinations.
the examination on 14 April
the applicant continued to
suffer from paranoid delusions and was clinically depressed. Such symptomatology
continued on review on
review on 14 June 2016,
applicant was feeling much better and did not feel depressed. He had stopped
hallucinating and had had no further delusions.
applicant’s condition relapsed on review on 26 July 2016, in response Dr
Younan increased the dose of Zoloft to 200mg per
25 August 2016, Dr Younan reviewed the applicant
Unfortunately, at that
stage the applicant had begun to hear auditory hallucinations and was paranoid.
review on 11 August 2016,
applicant’s condition had improved so that he had no more hallucinations
or paranoid symptoms.
Unfortunately,
on review on 10 February 2017,
the applicant’s condition had deteriorated, and he was described by Dr
Younan as being’ psychotic and severely depressed’.
hallucinations and paranoid delusions continued.
2 March 2017 there was further
the applicant’s
condition was better in the sense that the period he spends without feeling
paranoid and without hearing voices
was less frequent than previously.
Nevertheless, they still did occur and when that happened it pushed him into a
severe depression
and despair.
review on 31 March 2017,
again the applicant was markedly depressed after getting a sudden delusion that
people wanted to put poison in his food. He
also felt depressed in relation to
both of his legs with the possibility that he may need surgery.
review on 7 June 2017,
applicant’s condition had relapsed once again into a psychotic state.
21 September 2017,
described the applicant as appearing severely depressed reaching a melancholic
state. The applicant continued to be deluded
despite the multi antipsychotics
that he had been taking.
review of 16 November 2017,
Younan observed that the applicant was stable and free from any psychotic
symptoms. He had been well for some several months.
6 December 2017 the applicant once again saw Dr Younan however was suffering at
that stage from paranoid thoughts and hallucinations.
This appeared to be after
the change in medication.
review of 4 April 2018,
Younan was pleased to find that the applicant was stable with no relapse for the
last few months. The applicant did suffer from
dizziness and falling episodes
however Dr Younan thought these were unlikely to be the side-effects of his
current medications.
applicant was reviewed again by Dr Younan on 18 April
At that time the applicant
had just returned from a period overseas and had been on no medications during
the last two months. As
a result, Dr Younan described the applicant as starting
to hear voices and get paranoid.
consultation on 7 May 2019,
applicant described being a cocaine addict for some six months which he had been
using to improve his mood. The applicant told
Dr Younan that he wanted to return
to India and stay there for two months as he would not be able to use cocaine
there. Dr Younan
encouraged the applicant to do so.
examination on 27 September 2019
with Dr Younan, the applicant provided a history that he was starting to hear
voices and paranoia again.
Younan had a lengthy consultation with the applicant on 6 May
Dr Younan said that the
applicant gave him a detailed history of what had happened to him socially and
psychologically since their
last consultation in September 2019. Dr Younan
observed that the applicant was clear and well organised in his thinking. He
noted low mood and anxiety in relation to his unenviable situation. The
applicant said that from time to time he did indulge in grandiose
thoughts or
depressive thoughts. He also commented that “I feel I have multiple
personalities”. Dr Younan thought that
these could be described as
dissociative symptoms, more likely secondary to past and current traumas.
applicant saw Dr Younan on 13 September
At that time the applicant
had relapsed into a depression with psychotic features. Dr Younan observed that
the applicant had been
on no psychotropic medications for a long period, this
combined with a number of stressors had contributed to his relapse.
applicant saw Dr Younan again on 28 February
in a state of severe
distress. He also remained silent throughout the consultation and was
accompanied by a woman who cares for him
who reported that the applicant says at
times unreasonable things such as “I have no arms and no legs” or at
other times
“I am spiderman”. The friend reported that he was not
complying with his medication. Dr Younan thought the applicant
in-hospital treatment. Dr Younan also stated that he was retiring soon, and the
applicant should follow up for treatment
with another psychiatrist.
Dr Tattersall
Tattersall was the applicant’s general practitioner. She wrote a report
15 November 2014
which she described the applicant’s situation as ‘horrible’.
It was indicated that his ex-wife was schizophrenic,
and she was currently
dependent upon the applicant. Dr Tattersall felt that the applicant had been
emotionally blackmailed by his
ex-wife and been a victim of domestic violence at
Tattersall explained that the applicant was very depressed regarding his
situation and felt that he had to remove himself temporarily
from the toxic
environment or the situation would not improve. The applicant would therefore
like to go back to India in the short
term as his new wife was expecting their
first child in January. Dr Tattersall indicated that she asked him to discuss
his situation
with the employer as he was concerned about his employment
applicant consulted with Mr Saad (psychologist) on 8 July 2015. There is a
treating report to the applicant’s treating general
practitioner dated 9
At that stage
Saad understood that the applicant was unemployed owing to complications
relating to his family situation as well as suffering
from a major
depression.
Saad recounted a difficult history since the applicant had arrived in Australia
in 2007. The applicant had struggled to find appropriate
work and was forced to
reside with his brother-in-law who was verbally and physically abusive towards
the applicant’s wife.
The applicant’s wife was diagnosed with
schizophrenia, and she continued to be on medication at that stage and shared
of the 10-year old son.
Saad said that the applicant had presented with a range of distressing symptoms,
his mood was chronically low, and he felt a profound
sense of hopelessness
regarding his future. He had entertained suicidal thoughts but didn’t have
any active intent or plans
to act on these thoughts. Mr Saad said that the
applicant’s depression had commenced in 2008 and understood that there had
been a difficult upbringing with a physically abusive father.
Saad opined that the applicant presented with a major depressive disorder, with
recurrent and severe intensity with melancholic
features. Mr Saad thought the
applicant would require intensive intervention focused initially on symptom
management together with
cognitive behavioural treatment.
Saad wrote a further report dated 28 September
where Mr Saad thought the
applicant continued to suffer from a major depressive disorder of severe
intensity with melancholic features.
He suggested that the applicant needed
ongoing psychological treatment.
15 January 2016 Mr Saad wrote again to the applicant’s treating general
practitioner.
At this stage Mr
Saad thought that the applicant’s mental state had stabilised at the end
of last year. In the session of that
day, the applicant had reported feeling
suicidal since December and had attempted to take his life by cutting his wrists
with a razor
blade. The applicant was experiencing severe depression with strong
feelings of worthlessness and failure. Mr Saad expressed concern
applicant was developing a bipolar or psychotic illness and had reported
increased periods of hypersexuality and disinhibited
behaviour, for example
telling his wife he “wants to have sex with her sister”. He has also
had suspicious thoughts regarding
his wife’s infidelity who lived in
Saad wrote a further report dated 30 April 2019 to St George Hospital Kogarah.
In that report he said that the applicant had been
previously diagnosed with
schizophrenia and continued to be under the care of Dr Younan. He had been under
an enormous level of stress
following the recent arrival of his wife and his
4-year old son from India. There was also increasing financial pressure. When he
reviewed the applicant that day, he took a history of the applicant consuming
cocaine almost daily for the past three weeks averaging
$1,400 a week in
expense. He had been financing his cocaine use by getting loans from family
members in India, who had been sending
him sums of money.
Saad expressed extreme concern about the applicant’s immediate welfare and
persuaded him to attend the emergency department
so that he could be medically
reviewed and stabilised. The applicant reported that the main reason he had not
been able to cease
his cocaine use was that he experiences suicidal ideation and
starts to get persecutory thoughts regarding his wife’s infidelity.
denied experiencing homicidal ideation between his wife or child but
nevertheless Mr Saad was concerned about his mental health
given the volume of
frequency of cocaine use. Mr Saad requested review to assist the applicant in
the “state of crisis”.
Mahadev is the applicant’s treating general practitioner from the Kogarah
Railway Medical Centre. Dr Mahadev has written
a report dated 14 December 2023
to the State Insurance Regulatory
Dr Mahadev said that
the applicant suffered from mental illness and depression and schizophrenia
which was related to his work. He
described that the employer failed to consider
his leave request and unfairly terminated his employment during his illness thus
his permanent mental illness.
relation to the late submission of his workers compensation claim, Dr Mahadev
explained that the applicant was mentally ill due
to schizophrenia and was
cognitively unable to understand the claim lodgement process. Other matters
which complicated his situation
was that his wife had breast cancer, he was
unable to leave India due to a COVID-19 lockdown for two years, in 2022 he had
a mechanical mitral valve replacement and his wife had cut her left
thumb requiring microsurgery at Sydney Hand Hospital in circumstances
applicant was required to look after his two children.
Beaches Mental Health Team
emergency department assessment took place on 25 November
where the applicant
presented with depressive symptoms, he felt overwhelmed about his current
circumstances and responsibilities.
He explained at that time that he felt he
couldn’t go on, so he presented to Manly Hospital. The history explains
applicant needs to take leave without pay when his wife is not well
which put him under financial stress.
should be observed that there is little reference to any work related problems
in the treating notes for the attendance at Manly
Hospital. There is an entry
in the discharge referral where there is an indication that the applicant had
taken extended leave with
a medical certificate however has been pressured by
his employer to return or
A further entry (found
at page 123 of the Application) whilst the applicant was currently on leave from
work to care for his ex-wife
and received a three-month medical certificate,
work was putting pressure on the client to resign if unable to work. At that
it was observed the applicant was receiving Newstart allowance and his
ex-wife was receiving a disability pension.
a further undated entry
applicant reported to a social worker that he went back to his workplace a
couple of days ago for a disciplinary meeting after
he had been given a medical
certificate for three months off work. The applicant said the employer would not
accept this and asked
him to resign and they would offer him some casual work.
The applicant explained that he had contacted his union, and they had said
employer was within their rights to terminate him as he had only been there for
a month or so. The applicant then went on to
explain that his main worry at the
moment was his son and follow-up plans for him.
a mental health progress note, appearing to be dated 5 December 2014 with social
worker Victor Syquia in a telephone
the applicant attributed
his feelings of depression to ongoing issues at home, care of burnout with his
son and wife and his own
deteriorating physical and mental health. The applicant
also requested a support letter from the Acute Care team to support with
regarding his employment and the applicant reported that his current employers
were looking to terminate him due to poor attendance
at his current
Treating notes Dee Why Medical Centre
treating notes from Dee Why Medical Centre have been provided. These notes
appear to commence when the applicant moved to Dee
Why in preparation for his
employment with the respondent.
3 November 2014 the applicant presented to Dr
reporting that he was
still living with his ex-wife and stayed with her because she has schizophrenia
and gets acute psychotic episodes.
The applicant had just moved from South
Sydney to work at Mona Vale Hospital and had a new wife in India who was
pregnant. He was
feeling very depressed and had suicidal thoughts. The applicant
reported that he had seen a psychologist but not since
15 November 2014
the applicant
presented as still depressed but had no change in his current situation. He was
thinking about going to India to see
his wife and removing himself from the
17 November 2014 the applicant reported that he had been assaulted by his
ex-wife the preceding day. He was feeling depressed and
had a constant headache.
He had thoughts of ending it all but would not act on it. The applicant said
that he had spoken to work
briefly but not at length about it.
20 November 2014
the applicant
reported that work was going to give him some leave, and he requested a medical
certificate. At that stage the applicant
was still living with his ex-wife,
there was no abuse, but she had stolen his passport.
Dr Mahadev treating notes
treating notes form Dr Mahadev’s clinic, Kogarah Railway Medical Centre,
have helpfully been annexed to the Application
commencing at page 151. I was not
taken through these treating notes in the hearing however have taken the time to
read them. There
do not appear to be any relevant histories that assist in the
determination of this case save for an entry on 10 December
where the applicant
reported that he had lost a job with New South Wales Health as a result of
having to care for his wife. He felt
more depressed as a result of the job loss
and recently felt suicidal.
the entries disclose symptomatology regarding depression, it is not until
January 2016
that the applicant
reports feelings of delusion and strange thoughts.
treating notes on 16 February 2016 report that the applicant has been diagnosed
with schizophrenia after seeing Dr Younan on 11
January 2016. The treating notes
thereafter refer to his difficulties experienced arising from the symptoms he
suffers relating to
his diagnosis.
Noman Masood
Masood has provided a statement.
Mr Masood’s statement says that the applicant had been treated fairly and
in accordance with the respondent’s policies
and procedures.
Masood puts in issue much of the evidence raised by the applicant and denies
comments such as saying that “you just started
working here and
you’re already taking time off” and further that “I know what
happens with wives in India”.
addition to denying what is asserted by the applicant in that interaction, Mr
Masood states that the applicant never cried in his
presence or showed any signs
of distress in any meeting with him. The statement denies all allegations that
the applicant makes including
speaking with a raised voice or being rude to the
applicant. In addition, he denies putting pressure on the applicant to make a
whether to work part-time or resign, however he probably said that he
could take a week to do that. Mr Masood clearly denies saying
religious principles” and further that there is a blacklist in relation to
working in a pharmacy.
observation, it appears that nearly every part of the applicant’s evidence
is put in dispute by Mr Masood.
SUBMISSIONS CONSIDERED
Applicant’s submissions
applicant’s case is that [CNN] suffered a psychiatric injury in the nature
of an aggravation, exacerbation or deterioration
of his pre-existing
applicant submitted that the treating medical notes, when one looks at the
medication prescribed for the applicant, clearly support
his claim of injury
with the respondent in 2014. Dr Nicola, from the Ashton Medical
prescribed Avanza
during the period she treated him in 2012 and 2013.
applicant submitted that the reduction in dose in August 2014 is a significant
matter because it is consistent with an improvement
in the applicant’s
mental health condition at that time to which he has given account. To make this
clear, I was referred to
the November 2013 prescription which was 45mg which was
then reduced to 30mg.
must say for this submission to have any significant force, in the context of
long term psychological distress, medical opinion
to this effect would be
applicant’s submissions also refer to an improvement in his mental health
following his time when he returned from India.
The applicant says in his
statement that it was beneficial being away from his ex-wife and being able to
spend time with [CIZ].
The applicant says that this is good evidence that whatever legacy there was of
a pre-existing condition has been removed. The applicant
then received the
written offer of employment and felt thrilled that his dream had come true with
such an offer of employment. He
then commenced employment on 15 September 2014.
again, it seems to me that this submission must be weighed against the reduction
in stress the applicant must have felt being
away from his ex-wife and not
witnessing her psychological difficulties. I do not agree that this is
persuasive evidence that any
legacy of a pre-existing condition has been
applicant says that it is quite clear that he did take some time off work and on
7 October 2014 reported to his direct supervisor
Mr Masood that he was having
difficulties. There is some dispute about what occurred between the applicant
and Mr Masood but what
is clear is that the applicant did work for only a short
period before taking time off.
there are differing recollections as to what actually occurred between the
applicant and Mr Masood, it was suggested that the
applicant had a genuine
perception that he was being strongly criticised by Mr Masood and he reacted
negatively to this. It was accepted
that this perception may not have been
‘a genuine perception of what was happening at
Nevertheless, the
applicant’s state of mind then deteriorated to the extent that on
November 2014 he was unable to work when he saw Dr Tattersall.
is also accepted that that Dr Tattersall’s contemporaneous report does not
record an accurate account of any troubles at
work. The applicant says in his
statement that he did not want to tell Dr Tattersall about those issues. What is
clear however is
that the dose of Avanza was increased from 30mg to 45mg at that
time. Following that, on 26 November 2014 the applicant was self-referred
George Community Mental Health Clinic because he was struggling.
is then some dispute between the parties as to what occurred in relation to
asking the applicant to attend a meeting, but there
is no issue that the
applicant was indeed called to a meeting, and the meeting was attended by Mr
Adam from Human Resources and
Mr Masood. There is some dispute as to what
was discussed at that meeting however what is clear is that there was some
attend work.
was then referred to the Mental Health Unit notes of Manly
where there was an
assessment of the applicant on 2 December 2024. At that stage, the applicant was
given details for contacting
Fair Work Australia and there is an entry
regarding’ the employer pressuring the applicant to return to work or
is suggested that this is consistent with the applicant’s evidence that
there was pressure put on him to return to work or
entries after the meeting also record a deterioration in mood and mental state
“secondary to situational
There is also
an entry in relation to what is causing this elevation and it refers to plural
stressors being ex-wife who he lives
with is not coping and not able to cope
with a 9-year old son and then a reference is made in the following terms
“client has
taken extended leave with a medical certificate; however,
being pressured by employer to resign or return. Client reports at times
stresses becoming overwhelming and he has had suicidal ideation.”
applicant submitted that the work meeting was transformative and gave rise to an
aggravation that lifted the worker to a more
serious state of mental anguish
such that his pre-existing condition had been significantly exacerbated and/or
aggravated by the
actions of the employer.
respect of the medical reports of Dr Honey, the applicant submitted that Dr
Honey has a dual diagnosis of a chronic schizophrenic
illness and a major
depressive disorder. Dr Honey in his report does suggest that there could have
been an aggravation of the psychological
symptoms by the event of his dismissal,
but they would have long since abated.
applicant submitted that Dr Honey supported the proposition that employment was
the main contributing factor to the aggravation.
That is, his condition was
materially aggravated by the interaction between the applicant and Mr Masood
from his perception of events.
applicant then submitted that Dr Teoh supports the history of work issues and
describes how the applicant felt unsupported by
his employer and was required to
attend a disciplinary meeting with his employer. Dr Teoh quite clearly concludes
that the applicant’s
presentation was consistent with a diagnosis of a
major depression and his employment with Northern Sydney Local Health District
aggravated his pre-existing psychiatric condition.
applicant also referred to the opinion of Dr Mahadev of 4 December
Dr Mahadev writes
to State Insurance Regulatory Authority (SIRA) suggesting that the
applicant’s mental illness of depression
and schizophrenia were related to
the applicant’s work.
applicant submitted that it is the work situation that has put the applicant in
hospital. I was also referred to some of the entries
in the applicant’s
statement which I have already gone through.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent pointed out that on 13 September 2014 the applicant was offered a job
as a full-time pharmacy assistant working 38
hours per week. He then commenced
work with the respondent on 15 September 2014. The applicant was then off work
from 7 October 2014
to 10 October 2014. The applicant explained to Mr Masood he
was having difficulties with his legs but in reality, the applicant acknowledged
that he was having greater difficulties with his ex-wife at home. Then by 2
November 2014 the applicant was having a hard time, he
was hardly sleeping, had
a poor appetite and was having difficulties with his domestic situation. The
applicant then says on 3 November
he couldn’t go to work, he wasn’t
up to it because of depression, he contacted work and explained to them that he
applicant then consulted with Dr Tattersall on 3 November 2014 and was
prescribed Avanza and was certified as unfit for work until
17 November. There
is a clinical entry that corresponds with the attendance on Dr Tattersall on 3
November 2014.
The clinical note
refers to the applicant having a new wife in India who is pregnant, and an
8-year old son with his first wife.
At that stage the applicant was depressed,
having suicidal thoughts, negative thoughts and his sleep was disturbed. Of some
significance,
there was no mention of any workplace interactions or difficulties
or any suggestions of bullying or harassment etc. What clearly
is observed at
that stage is that the applicant was feeling disturbed and was having suicidal
next relevant entry is 15 November
where there is another
clinical note of
Dr Tattersall who says that the applicant’s condition
hasn’t changed and there is a suggestion of him removing himself
domestic situation and going to India. Following that consultation, Dr
Tattersall actually wrote a report dated 15 November
which goes into a greater
examination of the applicant’s difficulties at that stage including his
ex-wife’s schizophrenia,
domestic violence and having a wife with a new
child in India.
respondent points out that once again there was no reference to anything
regarding a toxic workplace or bullying and harassment
as alleged and whilst
there was an increase in the Avanza prescription, there is nothing to suggest it
arises from any workplace
interaction. The respondent points out that the
difficult circumstances with the ex-wife are escalating such that on 17 November
2014 there was a clinical note
where the applicant was assaulted by his ex-wife. At that stage the applicant
was having suicidal thoughts but would not act on it.
Dr Tattersall then noted
on 20 November 2024 that the applicant would be unfit for work from 18 November
2014 to 23 February 2015
due to an illness.
respondent submitted in mid-November 2014 onwards there was an escalation of
events that are occurring in the applicant’s
respondent then referred to the Manly Hospital emergency department entries on
25 November 2014
where there
is an entry regarding the applicant’s wife being violent, the applicant
feeling worried about his son and him also
having a pregnant wife in India. The
applicant felt a lot of stress about her and his mother in India regarding
financial reliance.
Once again, the respondent points out that there was no
entry in relation to any bullying and harassment in the workplace, indeed
applicant hasn’t worked for the respondent since 3 November because
of these other stressful factors.
respondent pointed out that any submission that the applicant hadn’t been
suicidal prior to the meeting of 2 December is
not made out when one looks at
the discharge referral dated 25 November 2024 where the applicant’s
history was taken that the
applicant felt overwhelmed and suicidal that morning.
respondent then took me to the St George Hospital Mental Health records and in
particular to the entry on 28 November 2014. At
that stage there had been a
telephone call from the applicant requesting an appointment due to increased
stress over the weekend.
The stress appeared to be regarding his ex-wife and
police had been called around 2.00am. The applicant expressed difficulty. He
been trying to get special benefits and was worried about his wife in India who
is depressed with a difficult pregnancy and there
was constant harassment from
his ex-wife via text messages and things. He was also concerned about his
son’s mental health.
respondent points out that significantly there is once again nothing in this
entry about workplace issues.
respect of the entry regarding Fair Work Australia on 2 December 2014, the
respondent concedes that it is clearly there however
submitted that there is
nothing in that entry that suggests that work was in any way causative of his
condition or symptoms or that
it has resulted in the deterioration or
exacerbation of his symptoms.
respondent also referred to the documentary evidence in relation to the
applicant’s employment circumstances including 3
wherein it is foreshadowed
there is the potential termination of his employment because the applicant is
unable to fulfill his contractual
requirements of the role. There is also some
discussion about the potential for the applicant to return to a part-time role
temporary casual role however this was declined.
is also correspondence from the applicant to the respondent dated 3 December
wherein the applicant sets
out various issues which he says are preventing him from returning to work which
includes focusing on
his carer responsibilities to his son and his ex-wife and
that he would find it difficult to find an alternative carer at short notice.
that correspondence there is once again nothing from the applicant suggesting
any difficulties with how he has been treated by
the respondent. Indeed, the
letter refers to the applicant suffering from major depression in relation to
what appears to be those
personal factors which he outlines.
relation to the entries in the St George Hospital Mental Health Unit regarding
the applicant’s attendance at the meeting
of 4 December
the respondent submits
that all this entry refers to is that the applicant indeed attended his
workplace for a disciplinary meeting
and gave them a medical certificate that
the employer would not accept and asked him to resign. The applicant also
provides history
that he contacted the union who indicated to him that it was
within the employer’s rights to terminate him.
the respondent says in relation to this entry is that there is nothing there
that reports anything in the nature of a toxic workplace
of bullying and
harassment, at best it simply recounts another issue the applicant has been
dealing with in the context of something
that arises out of all these unrelated
respondent also pointed out on 5 December 2014 (coincidentally the same date as
the termination letter),
George Hospital notes indicate that the applicant is once again suffering from
issues at home, carer burnout and the son and
the wife and his own deteriorating
physical and mental health. At that stage the applicant requested a support
letter relating to
his issues revolving around his employment. The notes
indicate that work is aware of the applicant’s depression and was happy
for the writer to write correspondence to the employer to indicate that he is
unable to work and happy for it to disclose those other
factors including carer
burnout, issues at home, and own deteriorating health.
fact, a letter was prepared by a social worker consistent with that request and
that is dated 5 December 2014.
The correspondence really, on the face of it, indicates that the
applicant’s difficulties are in the context of “ongoing
significant family issues, carer stress and poor physical, social and mental
health”. Once again, there was no blame put
on the employer or an
allegation of a toxic workplace.
6 December 2014 the applicant was discharged from the mental health
The discharge report
clearly indicates that the applicant had reported that at time stresses became
overwhelming and he had had suicidal
ideation, however the balance of the
sentence which was drawn to my attention by the respondent says there has been
Manly assessment on 25
I infer from that entry is that the applicant had suicidal ideation when he
presented to Manly Hospital but hasn’t had
any suicidal ideation since
that time. I observe that this is not consistent with any submission that the
meeting with Mr Masood
specifically aggravated the applicant’s condition.
respondent also pointed to an email from the applicant to the employer dated
20 February 2015
the applicant suggests he wishes to accept a temporary part-time offer for a
maternity position and be considered for any
further permanent part-time roles
that may become available. The respondent asks, why a person would want to enter
into such a toxic
workplace where he is bullied and harassed if the
applicant’s suggestion is correct.
respondent also referred to the resignation letter of 5 March 2015 (which is
5 December 2014) where the applicant offers his resignation
immediately. Once again, the respondent points out that this is not consistent
with a person who feels that they are bullied and harassed by their former
respondent referred to the medical evidence which includes the treating notes of
psychologist, Mr Saad. When looking at those
reports, it appears that the
discussion outlined there focuses on the difficulties the applicant was having
in relation to his ex-wife,
her medical condition and consequences this has on
the care for his son.
the applicant is under the care of Mr Saad and had six sessions with him and by
28 September 2015 Mr Saad focuses on the major source of distress which was
coming from his family in India, there was constant communication
applicant felt guilty he was not able to provide for them or look after his
frail mother.
again, the respondent points out that there was no reference to any issues
occurring with the respondent’s employment.
It is focused on family
issues. I agree with this submission after considering the treating notes.
the reports from the treating psychiatrist Dr Younan, also focus on the
applicant’s difficulties regarding fidelity,
feeling he is under
surveillance and thinking people are trying to cheat him. Quite clearly, these
symptoms are becoming schizophrenic
and psychotic in nature which leads to a
diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia. Significantly, Dr Younan has nothing in his
these difficulties.
Saad sees the applicant again in 2019, this is some five years after ceasing
work with the respondent and Dr Younan takes a
which once again has
nothing to do with workplace factors or bullying and harassment.
there was a readmission to St George Hospital on 30 April 2019 where the
admitting history has also nothing to do with the
applicant’s employment
with the respondent.
respect of Dr Teoh’s report, the respondent complains that Dr Teoh
doesn’t deal with the question of main contributing
factor, which is
critical where there are other various factors which are causing the
applicant’s psychological symptoms. He
simply says that “employment
with the respondent has aggravated the pre-existing condition”.
respondent says what is missing is any analysis of whether it is the main
contributing factor, pointing out that it is an aggravating
factor is not enough
to satisfy the statutory requirements. Whilst this is not fatal to the
applicant’s case
have been of assistance.
is required is for the decision maker to having regard to
the whole of
the evidence
, the issue of injury, and whether employment is the main
contributing factor to the injury. That involves an evaluative process.
submissions, the applicant’s case seemed effectively to be that there is
an aggravation of his condition that puts him in
hospital and then there is a
further aggravation following the work meeting at Manly Hospital. The applicant
suggested the difference
in the hospital notes following the attendance at the
meeting was that it correctly records that he was suicidal following the meeting
and was not suicidal at the time of his admission. For reasons I have already
outlined- I do not agree that this is an accurate reflection
of the evidence as
there is a note of suicidal ideation on admission.
I have some difficulty in accepting that the aggravation is what put the
applicant in hospital because when I look at the self-referral
there is no mention at
all in relation to work. It seems implausible to me that given the disclosure of
other personal information
that the work factors are not discussed with the
treating professionals in this case. The failure for the reporting of
psychological
distress arising his treatment as pleaded by the respondent.
must feel an actual persuasion or comfortable satisfaction of the existence of a
fact. The Court of Appeal in
Nguyen v Cosmopolitan Homes
[2008] NSWCA 246
) summarised the approach as follows:
finding that a fact exists (or existed) requires that the evidence induce, in
the mind of the fact-finder, an actual
persuasion that the fact does (or at the
relevant time did) exist;
(2) Where on the whole of the evidence such a feeling of actual persuasion
is induced, so that the fact-finder finds that the probabilities
fact’s Determinations 133 existence are greater than the possibilities of
its non-existence, the burden of proof on
the balance of probabilities may be
(3) Where circumstantial evidence is relied upon, it is not in general
necessary that all reasonable hypotheses consistent with the
nonexistence of a
fact, or inconsistent with its existence, be excluded before the fact can be
(4) A rational choice between competing hypotheses, informed by a sense of
actual persuasion in favour of the choice made, will support
a finding, on the
balance of probabilities, as to the existence of the fact in issue.” (at
do not feel a persuasion as required in this case to make the findings as sought
by the applicant. I am very aware that one is
always careful about treating
notes and their content and that busy doctors sometime misunderstand or
misrecord histories given in
circumstances where the focus is on the
patient’s treatment.
Applying the caution warned about, I am nevertheless left with the observation
that the overwhelming contemporaneous reporting contained
therein is of family
difficulties, including a very sick ex-wife, a newly pregnant wife overseas and
understandable parental concerns
for a loved son. The failure for there to be
recorded contemporaneous histories supporting the applicants case includes
no history being given to Dr Tattersall, St George Health Acute Care,
Dr Younan, Mr Saad, Northern Beaches Mental Health Team and
a Social worker.
This is a wide chasm for which I cannot find any reasonable explanation.
agree that there are some references to work issues, however I am not satisfied
that this leads to a finding regarding work being
the main contributing factor
to the aggravation on the balance of probabilities. The test is not for the
work factors ( as pleaded)
just to be a contributing factor; the test is
narrower for the applicant.
respondent submits that I should accept the opinion of Dr Honey who acknowledges
a chronic and severe ongoing psychological condition
that has been present for
many years. Dr Honey opines that employment was not the main contributing factor
to any aggravation that
has been suffered as there have been all these other
ongoing factors in the applicant’s life. In Dr Honey’s second
the first of these factors including the applicant’s wife being
diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia and subsequent estrangement
applicant’s second wife and children.
respondent points out that in Dr Teoh’s second
he confirms he has now
been provided with the medical records of the Ashton Medical Practice. He
confirms that the applicant had
been treated for various medical conditions,
however, doesn’t alter his opinion.
read that report it seems apparent to me that Dr Teoh has not dealt with the
question of main contributing factor. This is
a significant factor against the
applicant’s submissions.
I am reminded of the guidance of Deputy President Roche gave in AV v
at paragraph
“The test of main contributing factor is one of causation.
It involves consideration of the evidence overall. It is not purely
question. It involves an evaluative process considering the causal factors to
the aggravation both work and non-work-related.
Medical evidence to address the
ultimate question is both relevant and desirable.”
considering this matter, it appears to me, and it is not in dispute, that the
applicant has a clear pre-existing psychological
condition. The condition now
has been diagnosed by his treating psychiatrist as schizophrenia, a condition
which Dr Honey says likely
predated his employment.
contemporaneous and treating notes of various doctors and hospitals ( as
outlined in this decision) illustrate an increase in
the applicant’s
symptoms in late November and early December 2014, however when one looks at
these entries in the contemporaneous
documents contained therein, the histories
provided by the applicant really do not focus on any work-related causative
factors. The
applicant has had significant difficulties in relation to both his
wives’ mental illness, caring for his son and his own diagnosis
the history taken by Dr Teoh, it seems that he doesn’t appear to have a
complete understanding of the history in terms
of the entries relating to and
the significance of other factors causing the plaintiff’s condition. In
the alternative, he
does not engage with the necessary terms in the legislation
of “main contributing factor” to the aggravation. His opinion
not assist me greatly in this determination.
therefore am not persuaded that there is injury by way of aggravation arising
out of employment or in the course of employment to
make the findings as sought
by the applicant. That is, I am not satisfied that employment has not been the
main contributing factor
to any aggravation of a pre-existing psychological
condition the applicant may have experienced in late November, early December
2014 or otherwise.
those circumstances, I cannot find in favour of the applicant on the threshold
issue of injury. In those circumstances it is not
necessary nor appropriate to
determine the other issues in dispute.
De-identification of the applicant and his family
58(1)(a) of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(PIC Act) requires
the Commission to publish details of its decisions in accordance with the
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
Rule 131(1)
provides that subject to r
132 details of a decision are to be published.
provides for the
de-identification or redaction of publishable decisions.
to r 132(4) regard is to be given to the following matters when considering
de-identification:
(a) the objects of the PIC Act and enabling legislation and, in particular, the
object that the Commission be open and transparent
(b) the prevention of prejudice to the proper administration of justice;
(c) the safety, health and wellbeing of a person affected or named by the
publishable decision;
(d) the views of any other party to the proceedings, and
(e) whether it is necessary in the public interest for the direction to be
given and whether the public interest in giving the direction
significantly
outweighs the public interest in open justice
way of submissions dated 5 October 2025, the applicant has requested redaction
of the names of himself, and his family is for the
safety, health and wellbeing
of those persons. The applicant identified that highly sensitive medical
information is contained in
the material relied on by each of the parties in the
proceedings. It was submitted that given the applicant’s vulnerable
health, the safety, health and wellbeing of the applicant and his family
outweighs any prejudice to the proper administration of
justice occasioned by
the names of the applicant and his family being redacted from all of the
publishable decision before it is
published. It was submitted that the names of
the applicant and his family being redacted does not prevent the Commission from
the objects of the PIC Act.
agree with the submissions made by the applicant in relation to the sensitive
medical information that was ventilated in both the
hearing and in this
decision. I therefore direct that the name of the applicant and his family
members is to be redacted before publication
of this decision.
Application page
Notice of Claim,
application page 34.
Application p 1.
Late documents
dated 15 July 2025.
Application
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
This is not
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Late documents dated 10
July 2025 p 4.
Claim, application page 34.
Application p 191.
Attorney General v
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Application p
Late documents p
Application p
[2009] NSWCA
Application p
Mason v Demasi
[2009] NSWCA 227
Application
[2020]NSWCCPD 9
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter