URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BFD [2013] NSWGT 35 (25 September 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 35
(25 SEPTEMBER 2013)
APPLICATIONS FOR REVIEW OF ENDURING POWERS OF ATTORNEY, APPLICATION TO
REVIEW A REVOCATION OF AN ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY AND APPLICATION
AN ENDURING GUARDIANSHIP APPOINTMENT.
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
25 September 2013 at Newcastle
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Ms Jan Redfern (Deputy President)
Professional Member:
Dr Melanie Wroth
Community Member:
Ms Jane Fraser
Review of enduring power of attorney –
review of making and of operation and effect of two enduring powers of attorney
capacity to execute - capability to manage affairs – attorneys
appointed jointly – conflict between attorneys –
declaration of
capacity to make enduring power of attorney.
Review of revocation
of enduring power of attorney – declaration of capacity to revoke enduring
power of attorney.
Review of enduring guardianship – request
by enduring guardian for revocation – informal arrangements suitable
appointment revoked.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Guardianship Act 1987
of Attorney Act 2003
Date of order
: 25 September 2013
Reasons for Decision are for the orders of the Tribunal made on 25 September
2013 concerning Mrs BFD.
WHAT THE TRIBUNAL DECIDED
Tribunal determined:
BFD had mental capacity on 27 May 2013 to revoke the enduring power of attorney
that she made on 18 July 2008 appointing Mr ZKC
and Ms HYU as her
BFD had mental capacity to make a valid power of attorney when she made the
enduring power of attorney on 27 May 2013 which appointed
Ms HYU as her
carry out a review of the operation and effect of the enduring power of attorney
made by Mrs BFD on 27 May 2013 but made no order;
to carry out a review of the operation and effect of the enduring power of
attorney made by Mrs BFD on 18 July 2008 appointing
Mr ZKC and Ms HYU as
Tribunal revoked the appointment of enduring guardian made by Mrs BFD on 23 July
2008 appointing Mr ZKC and Ms HYU as her enduring
Tribunal dismissed Mr ZKC’s application for review of the operation and
effect of the enduring power of attorney made by
Mrs BFD on 27 May 2013.
Tribunal dismissed the application made by Mr ZKC for a review of the operation
and effect of the enduring power of attorney dated
BFD is a 90 year old woman who presently resides in her own home in a suburb on
the North Coast of NSW. Mrs BFD's daughter, Ms
HYU, has recently relocated from
Sydney to the North Coast to care for her. Mrs BFD has another daughter, Mrs
RKC, who resides on
the North Coast, and a son, Mr TSE, who resides on the North
BFD reportedly spent a period of time earlier in the year staying with Mrs RKC
and her husband, Mr SKC. Ms HYU assumed the care
of Mrs BFD after Mrs BFD had an
admission to Hospital and a period of respite during March and April
18 July 2008 Mrs BFD executed an enduring power of, appointing Mr ZKC and Ms HYU
as her attorneys (the 2008 power of attorney).
She executed an enduring guardian
appointment on 23 July 2008, appointing Mr ZKC and Ms HYU as her guardians. Both
were joint appointments.
BFD revoked the enduring power of attorney on 27 May 2013 and made a new
enduring power of attorney appointing Ms HYU as her attorney
(the 2013 power of
3 June 2013 the Tribunal received applications from Mrs BFD's grandson, Mr ZKC,
to review the enduring power of attorney and guardian
appointment made by Mrs
BFD on 18 and 23 July 2008 respectively.
Tribunal received an application from Mr ZKC on 19 September 2013 to review the
revocation of the 2008 power of attorney. In an
email to the Tribunal dated 24
September 2013, Mr ZKC confirmed that his application for review was intended to
cover a review the
2013 power of attorney appointing Ms HYU. This was the
hearing of all applications for review.
THE HEARING
Tribunal was of the opinion that it was not possible to attempt to bring the
parties to a settlement. There was significant dispute,
although all parties and
witnesses agreed there had been a break down in the relationship between Ms HYU
and Mr ZKC to such an extent
that they could not continue to work harmoniously
or effectively in the management of Mrs BFD’s finances or in making
THE LEGISLATIVE
Tribunal’s jurisdiction in relation to the review of the making,
revocation and operation and effect of powers of is set
out in Division 4,
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
Tribunal may, on the application of an interested person, decide to review the
making, revocation or operation and effect of a
reviewable power of attorney
reviewing the making of a power of attorney, the Tribunal may make an order
declaring that the principal either did or did not
have the mental capacity to
make a valid power of attorney at the relevant time. If the Tribunal is
satisfied the principal did
not have the capacity necessary to make the power of
attorney, the Tribunal may declare the power of attorney to be invalid. The
Tribunal may also make an order that the power of attorney is invalid for some
other reason, such as where the principal was induced
to make the power of
attorney by dishonesty or undue influence. Similarly, the Tribunal may make an
order declaring that the principal
either did or did not have the mental
capacity to revoke a power of attorney. The Tribunal may also declare that the
power of attorney
is valid, either in whole or in part, if the principal did not
have capacity to revoke it or if the revocation is invalid for any
other reason
(ie undue influence or dishonesty).
reviewing the operation and effect of a power of attorney, the Tribunal has a
broad discretion to make orders in the terms of
those set out in ss 36(3) to (9)
of the POA Act if it is satisfied that it would be in the best interests of the
principal to do
so or that it would better reflect the wishes of the principal.
For instance, the Tribunal may remove a person from office, vary
power, revoke all or part of the power of attorney and direct an attorney to
lodge accounts.
the alternative, the Tribunal may decide not to make any orders in respect of
the review and, if so, may treat the application
as an application for a
financial management order under
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship Act
“if it considers it appropriate in all the
circumstances to do so”
(refer s 37(1) of the POA Act). The Tribunal
may consider this would be appropriate if there are concerns about the making
operation and effect of a power of attorney but to revoke the instrument
would leave the principal without a financial manager.
Tribunal’s jurisdiction in relation to the review of an enduring guardian
appointment is set out in
Guardianship Act
provides that the Tribunal may (on its own motion) and must (at the request of
any person who, in the opinion of the Tribunal, has
a genuine concern for the
welfare of the appointor) review the appointment of and enduring guardian.
reviewing the appointment of an enduring guardian, the Tribunal may revoke the
appointment or confirm the appointment, with or
without varying the functions of
the guardian
(ss 6K(1)).
The Tribunal must not revoke the appointment unless the
enduring guardian requested the appointment or it is satisfied that it is
best interests of the appointor that the appointment be revoked
(ss 6K(2)).
the Tribunal revokes the appointment, it may proceed as if an application for
guardianship, financial management or both has been
ISSUES IN DISPUTE AND QUESTIONS FOR DETERMINATION
ZKC has made applications for review of the revocation and the operation and
effect of the 2008 power of attorney and for review
of the making and the
operation and effect of the 2013 power of attorney. He has also made application
for review of the enduring
guardian appointment dated 23 July 2008.
is dispute about Mrs BFD’s capacity to manage her finances, her capacity
to revoke the 2008 power of attorney and her
capacity to make the 2013 power of
attorney. There is also dispute about the operation of the appointment of
enduring guardian.
ZKC contended that the appointment of enduring guardian is not working because
Ms HYU does not consult with him about matters relating
to Mrs BFD’s care
and health. He also contends that the 2008 power of attorney has not operated
effectively because Ms HYU
has made decisions without reference to him. He was
concerned he could not fulfil his role properly as attorney and that Mrs
financial affairs were being mismanaged. He was not consulted about
the revocation and was concerned Mrs BFD did not have capacity
to understand
these documents or may have been unduly influenced. Mr ZKC requested that a
financial management order be made so an
independent party be appointed to
manage Mrs BFD’s finances.
HYU contended that she has provided assistance and care to her mother for a
number of years. She disputed Mr ZKC’s contentions
that she obstructed
appropriate care for Mrs BFD and contended that Mr ZKC was advancing the
interests of his parents in preference
to Mrs BFD. Mrs BFD wanted to revoke the
previous power of attorney because of dissatisfaction with Mr ZKC. She had
capacity to
do so and could still manage her own finances. Ms HYU contended the
arrangements should remain as they were.
questions for determination by the Tribunal in respect of the review of the
powers of attorney are:
(a) Is Mr ZKC
an “interested person” and, if so, should the Tribunal conduct a
review of the 2008 and/or 2013 powers of
(b) Should the
Tribunal make any orders in respect of the reviews and if so, what orders should
be made? In this regard it is relevant
to note that if the Tribunal determined
Mrs BFD had capacity to revoke the 2008 power of attorney, there would be no
utility in reviewing
the operation and effect of this instrument.
Tribunal determines that it is not appropriate to make orders in respect of any
or all of the reviews, should it treat
the application for review as an
application for a financial management order?
the Tribunal treats any of the application as an application for a financial
management order, the following further questions
(a) Is Mrs BFD
capable of managing her affairs?
(b) Is there is
a need for another person to manage the affairs of Mr Mrs BFD on her
(c) Is it in
the best interests of Mrs BFD that a financial management order be
questions for determination by the Tribunal in respect of the review of the
appointment of enduring guardian are:
(a) Does Mr ZKC
have a genuine concern for the welfare of Mrs BFD?
(b) Should the
Tribunal make any orders in respect of the reviews and if so, what orders should
Tribunal decides to revoke the appointment, should it treat the application for
review as an application for a guardianship
ZKC and Ms HYU provided detailed written submissions to the Tribunal and
supplemented these submissions by oral evidence at the
hearing. Mrs RKC provided
written submissions and gave evidence to the hearing, as did her husband, Mr
SKC. Mr TSE attended part
of the hearing but did not give evidence and left
before the end of the hearing. Mrs BFD gave evidence.
Tribunal was also provided with medical reports and financial documents,
together with copies of the instruments which were the
subject of the review. Mr
MDD, the solicitor who prepared and witnessed the 2013 instruments, gave
evidence by telephone.
BFD appointed Mr ZKC and Ms HYU as her attorneys by instrument dated 18 July
2008. As already noted, Mr ZKC and Ms HYU were appointed
jointly. The provisions
in the power of attorney authorising the attorneys to give gifts and to confer
benefits on third parties
and themselves were struck out. The power of attorney
was expressed to continue to be effective if Mrs BFD lacked capacity and the
appointment was expressed to take immediate effect. Mr ZKC and Ms HYU each
accepted their appointments on 18 July 2012.
appointment of enduring guardian was executed on 23 July 2008. Mr ZKC and Ms HYU
were appointed as joint guardians and they were
authorised to make decisions
jointly about where Mrs BFD should live, her health care, services and medical
and dental treatments.
They were required to exercise any decisions subject to
an advanced directive signed by Mrs BFD on the same day as she executed the
appointment. Mr ZKC and Ms HYU accepted their appointments on 31 October
BFD was still driving at this stage and continued to live in her home at Toronto
with regular assistance from time to time from
to Mr ZKC, his first concerns about the joint role of attorney and guardian was
in June 2012. Ms HYU had surgery that required
rest for six weeks so it was
agreed that Mrs BFD should move in to live with his parents in Stockton for a
period. His mother expressed
concern about whether Mrs BFD could continue to
live at home by herself and Mr ZKC arranged for an aged care assessment to be
undertaken.
According to Mr ZKC the assessment identified parts of Mrs
BFD’s home that were unsafe. Modifications were recommended, such
renovations to the bathroom and a handrail at the entrance of the home. It was
also recommended that Mrs BFD be provided with
services in her home. On Mr
ZKC’s account, he attempted to discuss and agree these matters with Ms HYU
but they could not agree
and Ms HYU reacted angrily to his intervention. Mrs BFD
was provided with an aged care package in November 2012 but Mr ZKC criticised
HYU for the delay. Ms HYU refused to spend money on renovating Mrs BFD's
bathroom and Mr ZKC asserted that this was because Ms
HYU was a beneficiary
under Mrs BFD's will. She did not want to spend the money and had a conflict of
HYU denied these allegations. She said that the reason the renovations had not
been undertaken was because her mother did not want
to spend the money. Ms HYU
conceded these renovations would assist her mother and committed to making the
renovations and persuading
her mother about their need. Ms HYU said that
relations between her and Mr ZKC had broken down in March 2013. She produced
of emails between them, which revealed increasingly tense communications
between Mr ZKC and Ms HYU about Mrs BFD's care and her financial
arrangements.
ZKC requested that Mrs RKC be added as a guardian. Ms HYU responded to the
effect that this would not be practical. She also noted
that the 2008 power of
attorney had not been signed by Mr ZKC. It appears this assertion was incorrect
as the copy provided to the
Tribunal was signed by Mr ZKC on 18 July 2008. Mr
ZKC raised an issue about the need for automatic direct debits into his
bank account to cover Mrs BFD's expenses. Mrs BFD was still
living with his mother and he noted in one of his emails that Mrs RKC
was primary carer”
of Mrs BFD at this time. It is apparent
from Ms HYU’s response that she took issue with this email, noting she had
“been caring for mum four years (through my 2 surgeries) without any
. Thereafter the contents of the email
exchange became more heated.
to Ms HYU, Mr ZKC gave her an ultimatum that Mrs BFD either live with his
parents and they should become Mrs BFD's guardians
and attorneys or Ms HYU
should give up work and take over this role. Mr ZKC denies the ultimatum but
says that the conflict between
Ms HYU on the one hand and him and his parents on
the other led him to the conclusion that the arrangements would not work without
one or the other taking care of Mrs BFD and being appointed as guardian and
BFD continued to live with Mrs RKC and Mr SKC until she was admitted to hospital
with an infected toe. After her discharge from
hospital and two weeks in respite
aged care accommodation, Ms HYU moved to the North Coast to care for Mrs BFD.
She has been living
and caring for Mrs BFD since early April 2013.
to Ms HYU, Mrs BFD was able to manage her own finances until about mid 2012. Ms
HYU has assisted her mother with her finances
from this time, although she said
Mrs BFD is still very alert and knows about her bills. She said she raised with
her mother Mr ZKC’s
suggestion that automatic debits be set up to pay
money to his parents. Mrs BFD said she did not want to do this and after this
told Ms HYU she wanted to change her power of attorney.
RKC stated that she previously had a very good relationship with her mother but
did not have a good relationship with her sister.
Mrs RKC further stated she did
not have any issues with the way Ms HYU cares for Mrs BFD but it was clear from
her statement and
her evidence, and the evidence of Mr SKC at the hearing, that
the conflict with Ms HYU has caused difficulties in her relationship
BFD executed a revocation of the 2008 power of attorney on 27 May 2013. The
document was prepared and witnessed by Mr MDD. She
also executed an enduring
power of attorney on the same date, which was expressed to operate immediately.
Mr MDD witnessed her signature
and certified he had explained the effect of the
power of attorney to Mrs BFD before was signed and that she appeared to
the effect of the power of attorney.
MDD said that he was originally instructed in March 2013 to prepare a joint and
several power of attorney appointing Ms HYU and
Mr ZKC as attorneys. He spoke to
Mr ZKC about this and Mr ZKC told him he was not prepared to be an attorney
under a joint and several
appointment because he did not believe this was in the
best interests of Mrs BFD. On 20 May 2013, Mr MDD met with Ms HYU in his
She told him there was a dispute with Mr ZKC and requested that he
prepare and a power of attorney with her as sole attorney. Mr
MDD suggested she
refer the dispute to this Tribunal but Ms HYU said her mother had capacity to
execute another power of attorney.
MDD said that he met with Mrs BFD on 27 May 2013. He had already prepared the
2013 power of attorney and revocation. He spoke with
Mrs BFD alone. She said
that she could not work with Mr ZKC and wanted to revoke the 2008 power of
attorney and make a new power
of attorney appointing Ms HYU. Mr MDD said he
explained the documents to Mrs BFD. It was his usual practice to say words to
“this authorises the person to execute documents as if it
was you yourself”
. He believes he would have said these words to Mrs
BFD. He did not ask Mrs BFD to read the documents but he explained the contents
to her by paraphrasing all the clauses. He was not aware that Mrs BFD had
Alzheimer's disease at the time he prepared and explained
the documents to her
and said that if he had been aware, he would have undertaken more rigorous
questioning. Notwithstanding this,
Mr MDD said this did not change his opinion
that Mrs BFD understood the revocation and the power of attorney.
BFD participated in the hearing. She was alert and able to give an account,
albeit not entirely accurate, of her finances. She
said that she did not want to
renovate the bathroom but if she had to, she would spend the money. Despite
this, Mrs BFD repeated
on a number of occasions during the course of the hearing
she did not believe this was necessary. Mrs BFD said she realised her children
were in conflict. She was angry with Mr ZKC because she believed he had acted
improperly. Mrs BFD was not able to particularise what
Mr ZKC had done other
than that he was not doing things
and did things
without discussing them with her. She also that she was not happy with the
application he had made. Mrs BFD was questioned
power of attorney signed by her on 27 May 2013. She recognised her signature on
the documents and said
she understood what a power of attorney was. Mrs BFD told
the Tribunal that an attorney is someone whom takes care of your money.
acknowledged that an attorney could do the same things as she could do,
including selling her home, although she said this was
not necessary. Mrs BFD
was able to explain the effect of the power of attorney and revocation in
general terms. Mrs BFD said that
she was the one who asked to go to the
solicitor to “
cancel the joint appointment”.
She said she
wanted the present arrangement with Ms HYU to continue.
Tribunal was provided with reports dated 29 May 2012 and 20 September 2013 from
Dr IEL, Mrs BFD’s treating doctor. In his
report dated 29 May 2013, Dr IEL
reported as follows:
Mrs BFD has had an alzheimers disease diagnosis
for the past six years. She has been a member of my practice during this
I do not believe that she now possesses testamentary capacity.
the Health Professional Report completed by Dr IEL he noted that Mrs BFD had
moderate dementia, progressing slowly. He opined that
Mrs BFD's disability
affected her capacity to make informed decisions about her health and medical
care and her financial affairs
but not decisions about her accommodation, care
and services. He noted that Mrs BFD would be capable of making a limited
contribution
to the hearing. He also noted as follows:
There appears
to be considerable distrust between relatives regarding this lady’s
financial affairs. It dates back many years.
I do not understand the nature of
this distrust.
IEL declined to participate in the hearing and advised Tribunal officers (as
recorded in a file note) that he was not prepared
to be contacted by telephone
to give evidence because he did not wish to be involved in what he saw as a
“family dispute”.
Tribunal was also provided with reports from Dr AWR, Nuclear Medicine Physician,
dated 29 June 2004 and reports from Dr DEE, Geriatrician,
dated 15 March and 3
August 2007 and 6 February and 3 October 2008.
AWR reported on a nuclear medicine brain scan undertaken on 29 June 2004.
According to Dr AWR,
The pattern of uptake seen on brain scan,
although not diagnostic is suggestive of mild Alzheimer's disease.
further noted,
However, there is no other scan evidence to suggest
recent vascular disease. Interpretation of this finding therefore is uncertain.
The reduced uptake seen in the basal ganglia most likely represents a
non-specific neurodegenerative process.
DEE reviewed Mrs BFD in March and August 2007 and finally in October 2008. He
administered the Rowland Universal Dementia Assessment
Score test (RUDAS) on
each occasion. Dr DEE noted that Mrs BFD scored 24/30 in August 2007, which was
two points better than her
previous score. He recommended further review in six
months. Dr DEE assessed Mrs BFD on 5 February 2008 and noted that she reported
RUDAS score of 21/30. He recommended further review in nine months. In his
report of 3 October 2008, Dr DEE recorded the following:
Mrs BFD has
recently passed a driving test and remains very well particularly with regard to
activities of daily living including
cooking and managing her own finances. She
has had no problems driving to the Polish house in Broadmeadow having no
accidents or
getting lost.
Today she scored 29 out of 30 on the RUDAS test which is the equivalent to
the MMSE for people whose first language is not English.
This is nine points
better than she performed eight months ago and I must say I'm a little bit at a
loss to explain this improvement
which would be certainly unusual with one of
the cholinesterase inhibitors.
I can only assume therefore that Mrs BFD does not have a dementing process
and that her initial problems were largely related to anxiety
from which she
Tribunal was also provided with an Aged Care Client Record report (ACCR) dated 9
April 2013 which recorded that Mrs BFD lacked
initiative to shower and required
planning and sequencing of tasks. It was also noted that Mrs BFD regularly had
short-term memory
problems and occasionally had long-term memory problems and
of the financial records provided by Ms HYU revealed no unusual transactions. Ms
HYU also provided copies of invoices for
expenses paid on behalf of Mrs
THE TRIBUNAL'S REASONING: REVIEW OF THE 2008 AND 2013 POWERS
OF ATTORNEY
an interested person and, if so, should the Tribunal
conduct a review of the enduring powers of attorney?
35(1) of the POA
Act identifies when a person will be an
“interested person” for the purposes of making an application for
review under
s36(1) and includes an attorney, including attorney whose
appointment has been purportedly provoked. Given Mr ZKC was an attorney
the revoked 2008 power of attorney, there is no dispute he has standing to make
these applications.
question of whether the Tribunal should conduct a review in respect of all
applications is, however, a more complicated issue.
has been dispute and conflict in relation to the management of Mrs BFD’s
financial affairs in respect of both powers of
attorney. Mr ZKC has challenged
the validity of the 2013 instruments. Having regard to this conflict and the
potential impact on
Mrs BFD and her family, the Tribunal was satisfied it was in
Mrs BFD’s best interests to consider and determine the legal status
these instruments and to make a determination about this dispute. The Tribunal
therefore determined that it was appropriate to
conduct a review of the
revocation of the 2008 power of attorney and a review of the making and
operation and effect of the 2013
power of attorney.
the reasons that follow, the Tribunal found Mrs BFD had capacity to revoke the
2008 power of attorney and to make the 2013 power
of attorney but was not
satisfied it should make any orders about the operation and effect of the 2013
power of attorney. Given the
Tribunal’s finding on the revocation of the
2008 power of attorney, this power of attorney had no effect as at 27 May 2013.
The Tribunal was therefore not satisfied there was any utility in reviewing the
operation and effect of the 2008 power of attorney
and therefore determined not
to conduct a review.
Should the Tribunal make any orders in
respect of the review and if so what orders should be made?
is evidence Mrs BFD has dementia and needs assistance to manage her finances.
There was no formal assessment undertaken of Mrs
BFD’s capacity at that
time she executed the revocation and 2013 power of attorney and the only
available evidence is a brief
report from Dr IEL stating that Mrs BFD did not
testamentary capacity
”. Unfortunately, the Tribunal was
unable to test this opinion and, in particular, question Dr IEL about what he
by testamentary capacity. There is evidence Mrs BFD did not have a
dementing process in October 2008 yet there is also evidence that
by the time
she was assessed in April 2013 by an ACAT team she was reported to regularly
have short-term memory problems and occasionally
confusion and long-term memory
medical evidence does not directly address the issue as to whether Mrs BFD had
capacity or alternatively lacked capacity to execute
the 2013 instruments and is
therefore of limited assistance. Confusion and short-term memory do not, of
themselves, mean that a person
is not able to understand the nature and effect
of certain legal documents.
Szozda v Szozda
[2010] NSWSC 804
Barrett J considered whether a principal
had capacity to execute a power of attorney and, in particular, what degree of
understanding
was involved. Barrett J outlined the understanding required [at
34] as follows,
That concept of empowering another person to act
generally in relation to one’s affairs raises two basic questions. First
it to my benefit and in my interests to allow another person to have control
over the whole of my affairs so that they can act in
those affairs in any way I
could myself act...Second, is it to my benefit and in my interests that all of
these things – indeed,
everything I can myself lawfully do – can be
done by the particular person who is to be my attorney? Is that person someone
who is trustworthy and sufficiently responsible and wise to deal prudently with
my affairs and to judge when to seek assistance and
to Barrett J it was relevant that there was no evidence the principal was
informed of the full meaning and significance
of the power of attorney, there
was no evidence based on her statements on the day to establish her
understanding or comprehension
of the instruments and there was evidence that
her cognitive capacity was such that she could not have understood the power of
this case, there is evidence from Mr MDD that he explained the meaning and
significance of the 2013 power of attorney and the revocation
and that Mrs BFD
appeared to understand the effect of those documents. He certified to this on
the day Mrs BFD executed the 2013
power of attorney and revocation. Indeed, on
his account Mrs BFD initiated the discussions about revocation and a new power
of attorney
when he first saw her.
Importantly,
Mr MDD’s evidence was corroborated by evidence from Mrs BFD to the effect
that she understood the significance
of these documents. Mrs BFD was able to
demonstrate this understanding in her explanations to the Tribunal. Having
regard to this
evidence, it is likely Mrs BFD also understood their effect in
May 2013. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied Mrs BFD had capacity
to revoke the
2008 power of attorney and to make the 2013 power of attorney.
further issue to be considered was whether the 2013 power of attorney and
revocation are invalid for some other reason, such as
undue influence.
is no evidence to suggest Mrs BFD was misled or tricked into executing the
revocation or 2013 power of attorney. She may have
been influenced by the
conflict between Mr ZKC and Ms HYU and, because of her close relationship with
Ms HYU, taken her side. There
is evidence in the emails about Ms HYU’s
attitude to what she perceived as a challenge to her role as her mother’s
carer and decision-maker. It is not unreasonable to infer from this that Ms
HYU was unlikely to have been as impartial as she has
contended in discussing
these matters with Mrs BFD. This is supported by Mrs BFD’s hostile
attitude to Mr ZKC, the strength
of which could not be explained by the matters
she related or the information made available to the Tribunal by Ms HYU. There
no evidence of wrongdoing by Mr ZKC. While Mrs BFD may have unfairly drawn
the conclusion that Mr ZKC was acting improperly and not
consulting her, she
nonetheless formed a view she wanted to
“cancel the joint
appointment”
. She took the side of Ms HYU and even though this may
not have been an entirely balanced position to take in the circumstances,
conflict. This does not evidence undue influence
or dishonesty.
special relationships of trust and confidence give rise to a presumption of
undue influence, such as parent and child, guardian
and ward and solicitor and
client. These categories are not closed and it is possible to prove that a
special relationship of dependency
exists as a matter of fact (
[1936] HCA 41
(1936) 56 CLR 113).
If there is no such relationship, the party
challenging the transaction bears the burden of establishing it was made under
influence. The law on undue influence, as it applied to a deed entered
into between a man (E) and his second wife (A) where there
were potential issues
[2012] NSWSC 354.
Her Honour, Justice Ward found that there was a
special relationship of dependency but the presumption of undue influence was
by the fact E had independent legal advice about the deed before it was
this case, it is clear that at the time Mrs BFD executed the revocation and the
2013 power of attorney she had, and continues to
have, a close relationship with
Ms HYU. Mrs BFD has relied on Ms HYU to assist with the management of her
finances and to care for
her so she can remain in her own home. There is a high
level of dependency, at least because of Mrs BFD’s physical needs.
Notwithstanding
this, there was evidence Mrs BFD has remained independent of
thought and strong willed. She has opposed the renovations to her bathroom
was clear in her evidence to the Tribunal about her wishes. Having regard to
this evidence, the Tribunal was not satisfied this
physical dependency created
sufficient vulnerability so as to give rise to a presumption of undue influence.
The Tribunal did not
form the impression that the relationship between Mrs BFD
and Ms HYU was one where Ms HYU had an ascendancy over Mrs BFD. Furthermore,
Tribunal found no evidence of undue influence in the circumstances leading to
the execution of the revocation and the 2013 power
of attorney.
such, the Tribunal was not satisfied that the revocation or the 2013 power of
attorney was invalidated by undue influence of by
any misconduct by Ms HYU.
regard to our findings about Mrs BFD’s capacity and the absence of
evidence about other factors that would make the 2013
power of attorney invalid,
the Tribunal determined to make a declaration that Mrs BFD had capacity to
revoke the 2008 power of attorney
and to make a valid power of attorney on 27
May 2013. As noted, the Tribunal was satisfied it was in Mrs BFD’s best
to have these matters authoritatively determined.
Tribunal reviewed the operation and effect of the 2013 power attorney but found
no evidence to warrant intervention. There was
no evidence of wrongdoing or
misconduct by Ms HYU. Mrs BFD wishes Ms HYU to continue assisting her with her
finances. Relevantly,
there was evidence from Ms HYU that she would give effect
to the recommendations of the ACAT team to renovate Mrs BFD's bathroom.
Ms HYU is the beneficiary under her mother's will does not, of itself, create a
conflict. While there is always a potential
for conflict in such a case, there
was no evidence Ms HYU was unreasonably refusing to spend money for Mrs
BFD’s benefit or
that she had preferred her interests to those of her
mother. The Tribunal accepted Ms HYU's assurance that she would commence the
renovations as soon as possible. The Tribunal also accepted that one of the
reasons why the renovations had not been undertaken was
the inconvenience and
expense in undertaking these renovations, which Mrs BFD, rather than Ms HYU,
seemed reluctant to incur.
on these matters and the absence of any evidence of mismanagement by Ms HYU, the
Tribunal determined not to make any order under
s 36 of the POA Act in respect
of the operation and effect of the 2013 power of attorney.
the Tribunal treat the application for review as an application for a financial
management order?
Tribunal has made orders under s 36 of the POA Act in respect of the 2013 power
of attorney and as such the discretion under s
THE TRIBUNAL'S REASONING: REVIEW OF THE APPOINTMENT OF
ENDURING GUARDIAN
Does Mr ZKC have a genuine concern for the welfare of Mrs BFD?
ZKC has requested that the Tribunal review the appointment of enduring guardian
made 23 July 2008. A threshold issue for consideration
is whether Mr ZKC is a
person who has a genuine concern for the welfare of Mrs BFD. If so, the Tribunal
must review the appointment.
Tribunal is satisfied that Mr ZKC has a genuine concern for the welfare of Mrs
BFD. He was appointed, and accepted, to be her
guardian in July 2008 and there
is evidence he has been involved in her care, albeit not as actively as Ms HYU,
since this time.
The email correspondence between Mr ZKC and Ms HYU demonstrates
that Mr ZKC has been concerned about his grandmother's welfare and
attempts to ensure she had appropriate care and services prior to Ms HYU moving
in as career earlier in the year. Ms HYU
does not suggest
Should the Tribunal make any orders in respect of the
reviews and if so, what orders should be made?
Tribunal can revoke or confirm an appointment of enduring guardian but cannot
revoke the appointment of an enduring guardian unless
the enduring guardian has
requested the revocation or the Tribunal is satisfied it is in the best
interests of the appointor that
the appointment be revoked.
ZKC has requested the revocation of the appointment. There is clear evidence
that the joint appointment is not working because
of the conflict between Mr ZKC
and Ms HYU. Mr ZKC said that he feels pressured by an obligation he cannot
perform because Ms HYU
does not include him in decision-making. He accepted
that, with the exception of his concerns about the bathroom, Mrs BFD’s
care and accommodation is being managed appropriately. In these circumstances,
the parties agreed that there was no need for any
formal guardianship
arrangement to be in place. Ms HYU said that Mrs BFD could make most of her own
decisions about her person. This
was consistent with the report of Dr IEL, who
opined that Mrs BFD could make decisions about her care and accommodation.
on all of the evidence, the Tribunal decided to revoke the appointment of
enduring guardian. It has not been operating effectively,
or at all, given it
was a joint appointment. There was evidence the joint appointment has created
conflict over the past year. Mrs
BFD was aware of the conflict. Having regard
to these matters, the Tribunal was satisfied that it was in Mrs BFD's best
for the appointment to be revoked.
If the Tribunal
decides to revoke the appointment, should it treat the application for review as
an application for a guardianship
there was evidence from Dr IEL that Mrs BFD's dementia affected her capacity
make decisions about her health care and medical
treatments, there is no
evidence that any decisions need to be made in this regard in the foreseeable
future. Furthermore, if any
decision needed to be made about medical treatment
for Mrs BFD that she could not decide, consent for the treatment could be
from Ms HYU, who would be considered to be her “person
responsible” in accordance with the provisions of
Guardianship Act
. As such, the Tribunal determined not to proceed with the
matter is an application for guardianship orders.
Tribunal was satisfied that on 27 May 2013 Mrs BFD did have the mental capacity
to make a valid enduring power of attorney and
to revoke the power of attorney
dated 18 July 2008.
Presiding Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (194 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter