URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/36.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
YYN [2013] NSWGT 36 (29 October 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 36
(29 OCTOBER 2013)
APPLICATION FOR GUARDIANSHIP AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ORDERS
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
29 October 2013 at Balmain
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Ms Jan Redfern (Deputy President)
Professional Member:
Dr Gail Jamieson
Community Member:
Ms Catherine Gerloff
Guardianship – lack of insight into medical
condition – need for accommodation decision – friend and neighbour
as guardian –
Financial management – family
court proceedings – legal practitioner believes client no longer has
capacity to instruct
– power of attorney executed – question as to
whether power of attorney was general or enduring – operation and
of power of attorney – need for financial management order - suitability
of manager – conflict of interest between
proposed financial manager and
protected person – loan and sale of property - estate committed to
management by the NSW Trustee
and Guardian.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 29 October 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal appointed Mr FNV as Mr YYN's guardian for a period of 12 months to make
decisions on his behalf about his accommodation,
health care, medical and dental
treatment and services as set out in the Tribunal's Order.
Tribunal committed the estate of Mr YYN to the NSW Trustee and
YYN is an 88 year old man who lives alone in his home at Northern NSW. He has
three children: Ms ERD, Mr AQW and a young child
from a second marriage. Mr YYN
reportedly has cognitive impairment from a recent stroke.
YYN appointed Mr FNV as his attorney under a power of attorney dated 21 November
2008. Mr FNV’s authority was limited to
execute a contract for the sale of
Mr YYN’s property in regional New South Wales. Mr YYN appointed Mr FNV
and Mr JJS as joint
attorneys under a power of attorney on 26 June
12 September 2013, the Tribunal received applications for guardianship and
financial management orders made by Ms PLK, Registered
Nurse, at an Aged Care
Service. According to Ms PLK, Mr YYN needed assistance following his stroke and,
in particular, needed assistance
in relation to Family Court proceedings
commenced by his estranged wife.
was the hearing of both applications.
The Hearing
YYN, Ms PLK, Mr FNV, Mr YYN’s lawyer, Mr SPG, and Mr YYN’s general
practitioner, Dr H, participated in the hearing
by videoconference. Ms ERD and
her husband attended in person.
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate. Mr YYN
did not appear to understand the
nature of the proceedings and the Tribunal was of the view he would be unable to
give informed consent.
The Tribunal was of the opinion that it was not possible
or appropriate to attempt to bring the parties to a settlement.
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
GUARDIANSHIP
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal in relation to guardianship
someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because he has a disability
which prevents him from being able to make
important life decisions?
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Who should be
the guardian?
How long should
the order last?
Is Mr YYN someone for whom the
Tribunal could make an order because he has a disability which prevents him from
being able to make
important life decisions
to an Aged Care Client Record report dated 29 August 2013 provided to the
Tribunal by Ms PLK, Mr YYN enjoyed good health
until he had a stroke in 2009 and
another in June 2013. The report noted that Mr YYN had poor recall, was confused
and disorientated
at times and had little insight that he may not be coping. It
was further noted that Mr YYN’s mobility was affected by weakness
left side, he had some peripheral vision loss and was at risk of falls. It was
recommended Mr YYN be provided with a home
care package to assist him to remain
living in the community, with approval for high-level residential care and
Tribunal was also provided with a report dated 23 July 2013 from Dr K,
Specialist in Psychiatry of Old Age, from a Northern NSW
Area Health Service. Dr
K reported that Mr YYN's recent stroke was “just one acute event
superimposed on a period of declining
function”. He noted that Mr YYN's
“cognition had obvious impairment” and reported that Mr YYN’s
pre-interview
cognitive testing through the Rowland Universal Dementia
Assessment Score (RUDAS) was 16/30. According to Dr K, Mr YYN had poor short
term recall and his cognitive disorder was consistent with a diagnosis of
Alzheimer's disease. Dr K raised concerns about whether
Mr YYN could continue to
live safely at home and opined that Mr YYN should have assistance to look after
his finances.
PLK told the Tribunal Mr YYN requires a high level of services to remain living
at home but these services would not continue to
be available at this level. She
expressed concern about whether Mr YYN could continue to live at home and said
she had raised with
Mr YYN the possibility of him moving into an aged care
facility. Mr YYN was adamant he would not go but had no plan for how he would
manage. Like Dr K, she was of the view Mr YYN did not have insight into his care
H said Mr YYN was not able to give consent to his medication or treatment. He
had been deteriorating over the last six months.
Mr YYN’s daughter, Ms
ERD, and his friend and neighbour, Mr FNV, agreed.
YYN expressed frustration at the hearing, said he wanted to know what was going
on but made a limited contribution.
on the medical evidence, the evidence of Ms PLK, Ms ERD and Mr FNV and Mr YYN's
presentation at the hearing, the Tribunal was
satisfied that Mr YYN has a
disability which prevents him making important life decisions. He is a person
for whom the Tribunal could
make a guardianship order.
Tribunal make a guardianship order and what order should be made?
PLK told the Tribunal that the transitional care services being provided by her
service could not continue. She was attempting
to source other services but was
concerned Mr YYN would be unable to manage at home if services could not be
provided. He was barely
managing at home with the additional services. As a
ready noted, she had discussed with him the prospect of moving into an aged care
facility and he was opposed. She said Mr YYN needed prompting with his
medications and was not stable on his feet. It was apparent
during the hearing
that Mr YYN had mobility problems. Ms ERD was of the view her father could not
look after himself and probably
needed to be in an aged care facility.
Guardianship Act 1987
(the Act) provides that in considering
whether or not to make a guardianship order the Tribunal must have regard to a
number of factors,
including the views, if any, of the person, the importance of
preserving the persons existing family relationships, the importance
preserving the person's particular cultural and linguistic environments and the
practicality of services being provided to the
person without the need for the
making of such an order. The Tribunal must also observe the principles set out
of the Act in exercising its functions. Relevantly,
provides that
the welfare and interests of persons with disabilities should be given paramount
consideration.
YYN did not express a view about whether a guardianship order should be made.
Given his negative response to what he seemed to
consider was unnecessary
interference during the hearing, the Tribunal formed the view that Mr YYN was
unlikely be in favour of the
order. There was no evidence an order would affect
Mr YYN's existing family relationships or that there would be any impact upon
his cultural and linguistic background. There was evidence services could be
provided to Mr YYN without the need making in order.
However, the critical
problem is that it is unlikely adequate services will be available to meet Mr
YYN's high care needs.
Notwithstanding
Mr YYN’s negative reaction to the application, the Tribunal decided on the
basis of all of the evidence that
a guardianship order should be made.
YYN is struggling to live in the community after his stroke in June 2013. There
is evidence he does not have insight into his health
care needs. It is likely a
decision will need to be made about Mr YYN's accommodation if adequate services
cannot be provided, as
foreshadowed by Ms PLK. As noted by Dr H, Mr YYN is
unable to give consent to his medication and treatment. He has healthcare
The Tribunal was satisfied it was in Mr YYN's best interests for a
substitution decision maker to be appointed with decision-making
functions for
accommodation, health care, services and medical and dental treatments. There is
evidence that decisions will need
to be made in respect of these matters and
that Mr YYN is either unable or unwilling to make such decisions. This
consideration outweighed
Mr YYN’s implicit preference for no order to be
Who should be the guardian?
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person’s guardian
if there is a private person who can be appointed.
is a proposal that Mr FNV be appointed guardian for Mr YYN. The Tribunal has to
be satisfied that any person appointed as a
private guardian meets the following
requirements in accordance with
of the Act. He/she must:
personality generally compatible with the personality of the person under
guardianship,
have no undue
conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of the person and
be able and
willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accordance with the principles
of the Act (per Windeyer J in
C S and M Y v the Guardianship
Tribunal and the Public Guardian
(unreported)
NSW Supreme Court 29
November 1999).
Tribunal is satisfied that Mr FNV
meets the requirements to be a guardian
for Mr YYN and should be appointed. He has lived near Mr YYN for many years and
has provided
support, particularly in recent months. Mr FNV said he was willing
and able to take on the role of guardian for Mr YYN. When Mr
YYN was questioned
as to who would like to be his guardian, he said he would like Mr FNV.
was clear from the evidence and apparent close relationship between Mr YYN and
Mr FNV that Mr FNV would be compatible with Mr YYN
and would be able to assess
his needs. Ms PLK expressed concern about whether Mr FNV would be able to make
appropriate decisions
Mr YYN's wishes. This was particularly relevant given the concerns raised
PLK about whether Mr YYN could continue to live in his home and his opposition
to any contrary plan. Mr FNV was questioned
that he would seek to gain Mr YYN's consent to this course if it was necessary
and accepted it
may be difficult to make such a decision. He nonetheless
believed he would be able to take a difficult decision as long as it was
YYN’s best interests. Ms ERD said she did not object to the appointment of
Mr FNV as guardian. She was not in a position
to take on the role.
of the issues considered by the Tribunal was whether there would be
‘undue’ conflict between the interests of Mr FNV
with those Mr YYN
in Mr FNV performing the role. For the reasons outlined later in this decision
in respect of the financial management
application, we formed the view Mr FNV
was not suitable to be appointed as financial manager. There was evidence of a
conflict (or
at least potential conflict) between the interests of Mr FNV and Mr
YYN in respect of previous dealings between them. The Tribunal
formed the view
that it would be preferable for Mr YYN’s estate to be committed to the NSW
Trustee and Guardian for management
so that any issues arising from those
dealings could be resolved by an independent party. While it is unclear on the
available evidence
whether the transactions between Mr FNV and Mr YYN should be
challenged, it is clear they should be independently scrutinised. This
of itself, creating ‘undue conflict of interest’ as between Mr YYN
and Mr FNV for the purposes of Mr FNV making
lifestyle decisions for Mr YYN. For
instance, there is no suggestion Mr FNV would be influenced in his
decision-making about Mr YYN's
accommodation or his health care by reason of
their previous financial dealings. Relevantly, he does not have any interest in
YYN’s home.
Tribunal was not satisfied any independent inquiry into the dealings between Mr
YYN and Mr FNV would impact on their relationship
or the appropriate discharge
by Mr FNV of his duties. Furthermore, the Tribunal took into account Mr YYN's
strong preference for
Mr FNV to be his guardian if one was to be appointed. The
Tribunal therefore appointed Mr FNV as Mr YYN’s
How long should the order last?
Tribunal decided to make an order for 12 months because it is likely any
decision in respect of Mr YYN’s accommodation will
be made and implemented
in this period and this will give sufficient opportunity for the relevant
parties to assess the viability
of any such
arrangements.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal in relation to financial
management were:
incapable of managing his affairs?
Is there a need
for another person to manage Mr YYN’s affairs and is it in his best
interests for a financial management order
to be made?
should be appointed financial manager?
incapable of managing his affairs?
SPG told the Tribunal that he was acting for Mr YYN in family court proceedings.
Mr YYN's estranged wife had commenced proceedings
earlier in the year and Mr SPG
had attempted to obtain instructions from Mr YYN about the action to be taken to
resolve the claim.
Mr SPG said that he had formed the view based on his dealings
with Mr YYN that Mr YYN no longer had sufficient capacity to give him
instructions after his stroke. The proceedings were about the division of
property. Mr SPG had retained a barrister to act for Mr
YYN and the matter was
listed before was to be listed before the court on 26 November 2013.
PLK said that Mr FNV had been managing Mr YYN's financial affairs since his
stroke. Mr FNV confirmed this. He said that he checks
Mr YYN's mailbox from time
to time to see if there are bills to pay. If so, he pays them. Ms ERD agreed her
father needed someone
to manage his financial affairs and, in particular, the
court proceedings.
regard to this evidence and the evidence about Mr YYN’s capacity referred
to in respect of the guardianship application,
the Tribunal was satisfied Mr YYN
is incapable of managing his financial affairs.
Is there a need
for another person to manage Mr YYN’s affairs, is it in his best interests
for a financial management order
to be made and, if so, who should be
was evidence Mr YYN appointed Mr FNV as his power of attorney on 21 November
2008 for the specific purpose of executing a contract
for sale of his property
and to execute any documentation regarding the sale and the discharge of the
mortgage. There was also evidence
Mr YYN appointed Mr FNV and Mr JJS as his
attorneys by instrument dated 26 June 2009. The power of attorney was to take
effect immediately
and was not limited in its operation. The copy provided to
the Tribunal did not contain a certificate pursuant to
Attorney Act 2003
(the POA Act)
certification by a
prescribed witness that the witness explained the instrument to the principal
before it was signed and the principal
appeared to understand the effect of the
power of attorney. It was therefore unclear whether the instrument was an
power of attorney for the purposes of the POA Act. An
enduring power of attorney will have effect notwithstanding that the principal
no longer has mental capacity (s 21 of the POA Act).
SPG believed the certificate had been signed and said he may have provided an
incomplete copy. As far as Mr SPG was aware, Mr JJS
had not been involved in the
management of Mr YYN's financial affairs. Mr JJS was a friend of Mr YYN but was
not in the country at
this point of time.
there was a power of attorney in existence which may have been enduring, the key
question for the Tribunal was whether there
was a need to make a financial
management order in the circumstances . In exploring these matters and raising
the issue with the
parties, Ms ERD said that she would object to Mr FNV managing
her father’s financial affairs because she believed he had a
conflict. There were “a number of complicated issues” and it would
be in her father best interest for an independent
person to be appointed. She
referred to a transaction between her father and Mr FNV whereby Mr FNV purchased
part of her father's
property in the last year.
this was not a matter raised by either Mr SPG or Mr FNV when giving evidence
questioned the parties to further
investigate this issue.
SPG, who was apparently instructed by both Mr FNV and Mr YYN in relation to the
transaction, explained these transactions and the
impending action in the Family
Court. He said that Mr YYN’s land had been subdivided and part of the land
had been sold to
Mr FNV for consideration of $250,000. The remaining portion of
Mr YYN’s land, which included his house, was worth approximately
It was expected that Mr YYN's estranged wife would receive between 15 and 30% of
the property. It was proposed that Mr
YYN would pay out the settlement sum by
obtaining a reverse mortgage on the property. Mr SPG said he currently had
$70,000 in his
trust account, being the proceeds of the sale of Mr YYN's
property to Mr FNV.
FNV said that Mr YYN had attempted to sell his property in 2006 and when this
fell through; Mr YYN suggested that Mr FNV should
purchase part of his property
for $250,000. There was no sale agreement entered into at that time but Mr FNV
advanced money to Mr
YYN on the understanding the sale would proceed and these
monies would be offset from the sale price. He loaned money to Mr YYN from
to time and in the end advanced approximately $125,000. There was no loan
agreement. In addition to these monies, Mr FNV paid
fees for the subdivision of
the property in the sum of about $38,000. These monies were also offset from the
purchase price. On Mr
FNV’s account, he paid a “good price”
for the property. The valuation for the purposes of stamp duty was only $90,000.
Mr FNV said he decided to proceed with the transaction because of the earlier
oral agreement between him and Mr YYN. He felt obliged
to proceed but he later
regretted it because Mr YYN had continually asked him to give him money. At that
time Mr YYN was a frequent
traveller to the Philippines, where he met his now
estranged wife, and he needed money for his travels.
FNV explained that the 2008 power of attorney was given to him as
‘security’ for the monies owed by Mr YYN. When asked
how Mr FNV had
intended to use the power of attorney, he said that if something happened to Mr
YYN he believed he could use the instrument
to sell the property and recover his
SPG said he did not believe there was any conflict in acting for both parties on
the contract between Mr FNV and Mr YYN. In his
view the sale was a reasonable
bargain and the sale price was favourable. Mr SPG said that the market price for
the property at the
time of sale was approximately $600,000. He said that the
transaction had been completed and the title transferred.
was not clear to the Tribunal whether this transaction was in fact favourable.
We were not provided with any documents recording
the transactions. While it is
possible the transaction was entered into before Mr YYN’s cognitive
decline commenced, Ms ERD
said she was concerned about whether all dealings had
been in her father’s best interests. She proposed a third-party be
to independently review the transaction.
Tribunal had concerns about the transaction for a number of reasons. Neither Mr
SPG nor Mr FNV volunteered this information at
the outset. This may be because
they did not realise it was relevant, given the transaction had already been
completed. Nonetheless,
the Tribunal was not provided with any documents
detailing the transactions or their timing. Even though it seems the oral
to purchase the property was entered into some time ago, there was
evidence from Mr FNV that the sale was only completed in the last
12 months. In
the absence of evidence about the transaction, the Tribunal remained concerned
also concerned about Mr YYN's capacity at
the time it was completed and had regard to the fact that there was little
detail about
the consideration said to have been paid.
further issue of concern was Mr FNV’s evidence he had requested the 2008
power of attorney as security for his debt. This
demonstrates a lack of
appreciation about the purpose of a power of attorney, which is not be used as
an instrument to give effect
to repayment of a loan. The Tribunal questioned
both Mr FNV and Mr SPG about why the loan arrangement was not documented and a
or caveat lodged to formalise and secure the debt. Mr FNV said that he
did not think about this at the time. It was unclear whether
Mr SPG was involved
in the early stages of the transaction.
Guardianship Act1987
(‘the Act’) provides that the
Tribunal may make a financial management order if it is satisfied the person
cannot manage
their financial affairs, there is a need for another to manage
those affairs and it is in the best interests of the person for an
order to be
have found Mr YYN cannot manage his finances. This is not in dispute. There is
clear evidence there is a need for someone to manage
Mr YYN's financial affairs.
The most pressing issue is that Mr YYN is unable to make decisions in relation
to his litigation. Decisions
will need to be made about agreeing and
implementing a property settlement with Mr YYN’s estranged wife. There was
a suggestion
Mr YYN may need to enter into a reverse mortgage to retain his home
and pay any settlement. It is not clear whether this would be
the best solution
for Mr YYN given his only income is the pension.
to being satisfied the power of attorney was enduring, the Tribunal could have
decided to make no order and thereby leave
the power of attorney arrangements in
place. Alternatively, the Tribunal could have made an order appointing Mr FNV as
regard to the previous dealings between Mr FNV and Mr YYN, the Tribunal was
concerned about taking either course.
no order is made and Mr FNV is allowed to continue management unsupervised under
the current power of attorney, there would be
an undesirable lack of
transparency and rigour in the management of Mr YYN’s finances. Mr YYN has
significant cognitive impairment
at this time and it is important his interests
are protected. The Tribunal was therefore satisfied it would be in Mr YYN's best
for a formal financial management order to be made, thereby suspending
the power of attorney.
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under the Act
the Tribunal must act with the interests of the person concerned as the
paramount consideration and in accordance with the other principles
set out in s
4 of the Act.
25M of the Act
provides that, if the Tribunal makes a financial
management order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage the person’s
or may commit the management of the estate to the NSW Trustee and
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, the Court
said that the dominant consideration in making orders about financial managers
was the welfare of the person.
Mr FNV were to be appointed as financial manager, he would be supervised by the
NSW Trustee and Guardian. Despite this, the Tribunal
was not satisfied he was
suitable to be appointed in the circumstances of the case. It is clear Mr FNV
cannot review the transaction
between him and Mr YYN to verify its fairness and
validity because he would have an interest in the outcome and therefore a
To appoint Mr FNV would place him in an unacceptable position, as
there may be direct conflict between his interests and those of
He cannot properly determine those interests as to do so he may prefer, either
consciously or unconsciously, his
these matters into account, the Tribunal determined it was in Mr YYN’s
best interests for a financial management order
to be made so an independent
financial manager can assess the dealings between Mr YYN and Mr FNV. There may
be no difficulty with
those dealings. Nonetheless, the issue has been properly
raised by Ms ERD and it is therefore incumbent on the Tribunal to ensure
controversy is appropriately resolved.
YYN said he wanted Mr FNV to continue to manage his finances. He was adamant he
did not want a government official. While the Tribunal
accepts and has taken
account of Mr YYN’s views, we have concluded this would not be in his best
interests or in Mr FNV’s
interests because of the untenable position in
which he would inevitably be placed. In the circumstances of this case, nothing
than the appointment of an independent financial manager, such as the NSW
Trustee and Guardian, would serve the interests of Mr YYN.
The NSW Trustee and
Guardian may form the view the transaction should not be disturbed because it
was freely negotiated by Mr YYN
at a time when he had capacity. It may also be
assessed Mr YYN has been paid all appropriate consideration for the sale. Mr FNV
Mr SPG said there are records detailing the amounts paid to Mr YYN. Given
the importance of these transactions, this accounting should
be verified. If
there are any discrepancies or concerns, the NSW Trustee and Guardian may
negotiate a resolution.
the circumstances, the Tribunal was satisfied that the estate of for Mr YYN
should be committed to the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
If these matters are
resolved, a later application may be made by the parties to revoke the order or
replace the NSW Trustee and
Deputy President
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (573 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter