URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2020/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vigo [2020] NSWMHRT 1; (20 December 2019)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO VIGO AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON 6
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2020] NSWMHRT 1
s 37 Mental Health Inquiry
Ms Maria Bisogni
Deputy President
Dr Kristin Kerr
Psychiatrist
Mr Peter Bazzana
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
PRESENT AT THE HEARINGS
1. Mr Vigo attended the hearing and was represented by his lawyer, Ms Kim
Wellard of MHAS. Also in attendance were:
Psychiatrist;
Dr B, Psychiatry
Rodrigues, Lay Advocate, Legal Aid;
Medical Student;
REASONS FOR DECISION
2. Mr Vigo is 46 years of age.
3. On [date], Mr Vigo was scheduled under the
Mental Health Act
(‘the Act’). On [date], Mr Vigo was brought before the Tribunal
of the Act for a determination as to whether he was a mentally
ill person.
4. According to the material before the Tribunal, Mr Vigo was a forensic
patient, [information on index offence and sentence].
5. On [date], whilst a forensic patient, Mr Vigo was reviewed by the Tribunal
pursuant to
section 47(4)
and (5) of the
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
The Tribunal made no change to his order for
detention at the X Hospital and made a recommendation to the Court that he had
fit to be tried in relation to the aforementioned charges.
6. On [date], the Supreme Court of NSW extended Mr Vigo’s limiting term
pursuant to
section 54A
and cl. 6(5) of Sch.1 to the
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act
for a period of three months from the expiration of the
limiting term.
7. On [date], the Supreme Court of NSW revoked the interim extension order
made on [date].
8. On [date], the District Court found that Mr Vigo was fit to be tried. He
was sentenced to [time]. The sentence was backdated to
commence on [date] until
9. At the Mental Health Inquiry, the Tribunal took into account the written
material and the oral evidence at the hearing. On the
day of the hearing, Ms
Wellard provided the Tribunal with a written submission. Ms Wellard also made
oral submissions. In light of
the submissions, the Tribunal reserved its
decision in order to further consider all the evidence and her submissions.
APPLICATION OF THE TREATING TEAM
10. The treating team requested a 12 week involuntary patient order.
ISSUES UNDER CONSIDERATION
11. The Tribunal’s functions at a Mental Health Inquiry are set out
of the Act. Under
section 35(1)
the Tribunal is to determine
whether or not, on the balance of probabilities, the assessable person is a
mentally ill person.
Subsection 35(2)
provides that the Tribunal is to consider
the reports and recommendations of the authorised medical officer and other
medical practitioners
who examine the person under
person’s detention, and consider any other information put before the
12. A mentally ill person is defined under
of the Act.
set out the orders available to the Tribunal if satisfied that the person
is mentally ill, including an order that
“the person be detained in or admitted to and detained in a
specified mental health facility for further observation or treatment,
as an involuntary patient for a specified period of up to three months, if the
Tribunal is of the opinion that no other
care of a less restrictive kind, that
is consistent with safe and effective care, is appropriate and reasonably
available or that
for any other reason it is not appropriate to make any other
order under this subsection.”
APPLYING EACH OF THE CRITERIA
Is Mr Vigo mentally ill?
13. There was a written report by Dr B, Psychiatric Registrar, under the
supervision of Dr A. Dr B stated that Mr Vigo has a mental
illness, namely
schizophrenia and a substance use disorder, the latter in remission in a
controlled environment.
14. Dr B outlined Mr Vigo’s history of mental illness, noting that he
was diagnosed with a chronic psychotic illness in custody
around [year] and that
he had had multiple admissions to Y Hospital for acute psychosis during his
incarceration (for [offence])
between [dates]. After his release on parole in
[date], he was treated by the Z Community Mental Health Team. At the time of his
arrest relating to the index events, he was on parole and on a CTO.
15. In summary, Dr B reported that Mr Vigo was “behaviourally
settled” with no episodes of verbal or physical aggression.
He continued
“to present with positive symptoms in the form of delusional thought
content related to conspiracy theories, negative
symptoms and cognitive
impairment.” She also reported that his “insight into the interplay
between the mental illness,
substance use and offending behaviour remains
16. There were a number of handwritten progress notes from [dates]. Most of
the entries were compiled by nursing staff. In the main,
Mr Vigo’s mental
state was reported to be “settled” and “stable” with
“appropriate behaviour”
and compliance with medication and having no
overt psychotic symptoms or denying same. There was an entry on 21 November 2019
Drs B and A and also a nursing note. The former referred to Mr Vigo denying
“current persecutory ideation though some evidence
of underlying
delusional beliefs with conspiratorial themes.” The nursing note included
the following exchange with Mr Vigo:
“Repeatedly stated “I’m not mentally ill” “I
was but not anymore”. Seeking explanation of his
rights to be “let
out” of the X Hospital. Writer advised he speak to the psych registrar as
writer was not comfortable
advising about legal matters. [Patient] accepting of
same. Disclosed that he believed it “is a conspiracy theory that I’m
back here” (referring to the X Hospital). Stated that he believes they can
“digitally and electronically trace documents
that have been sent to keep
me in”. Referred to Dr A not releasing (sic) he is not mentally ill, it
had been “proven
by six psychologists”. Expressed paranoia that he
is being “railroaded by the system” “but I’m not
paranoid.... I’m just frustrated”.
17. Dr B’s report concluded that Mr Vigo is a mentally ill person and
that he has “a continuing condition that is likely
to worsen without
appropriate supervision and treatment.” Dr B stated that Mr Vigo:
“will benefit from continued inpatient rehabilitation to enhance his
psychosocial functioning in preparation for integration
into the community.
Specifically, he will benefit from further work aimed at improving insight into
his mental illness and harmful
substance use, and the nexus between these
factors and his offending behaviour.”
18. Dr B also gave oral evidence that Mr Vigo has ongoing symptoms
“mainly” by way of negative symptoms and cognitive
impairment. The
main concern were that if Mr Vigo was not to remain as an involuntary patient at
this point in time, given his continuing
symptoms and the fact that the majority
of the last [X] years he has either been in custody or in the X Hospital, then
into the community is likely to be quite a stressful experience.
Owing to his issues with substance use in the past, without a gradual
with appropriate support in place, he would be at risk of relapsing into
substance use, which could increase his risk
of violence. The plan is to refer
Mr Vigo to a medium secure unit so he can make that gradual and supported
transition to the community.
19. Dr A also gave evidence that Mr Vigo continues to have significant
positive symptoms and negative symptoms of cognitive impairment.
He has improved
over the last 11-12 months in the [X Hospital ward] but he was coming from a
place of significant impairments where
he has been in maximum security for [X]
years and has spent his whole adult life in custody with assertive psychiatric
care. If he
were to be considered appropriate for lesser security a medium
secure unit would be the “first downward step” as he is
need structured and slow transition back to the community. Dr A said that Mr
Vigo will require the structure of a CTO in
the community but unfortunately that
order “had failed spectacularly” on the last occasion. The system
will have to think
very carefully as to how to “structure things to be
effective”. The next step is consideration of a medium secure unit,
especially in light of his changed legal circumstances. Whilst Mr Vigo’s
legal circumstances have changed his clinical picture
or psychopathology have
20. There was a report by Dr C, Psychiatrist, dated [date], in relation to
the State’s application to extend Mr Vigo’s
forensic patient status.
Dr C interviewed Mr Vigo on [date]. He noted that Mr Vigo had been on a
Community Treatment Order (CTO)
at the time of the index event and that he had
been non-compliant with his medications for some weeks prior. Mr Vigo was also a
user and he had used heroin on the day of the index event.
21. Dr C also assessed Mr Vigo’s mental state and noted that Mr Vigo
“has and had delusional ideas”; has had “hallucinations;
showed “mild thought disorder; and negative symptoms to serious mental
illness - blunting of affect, difficulty with concentration”.
noted that Mr Vigo “has a mental illness” which is partially
treated with anti-psychotic medication and that
“he is in a therapeutic,
supported environment” and that:
“outside this environment the manifestation of his illness could be
triggered by stress, non-compliance or illicit drug use
22. In terms of risk of harm, Dr C noted that:
“Mr Vigo has had numerous historical instances of behaviour which
has caused psychological and physical harm to other people.
He also has had over
a period a pattern of such behaviour ending in homicide. He committed his index
offence when on parole”.
23. Dr C added that antipsychotic medication had allowed Mr Vigo to
“gain some mental stability...and insight” and that
“absence of illicit substances” had played a part in his
improvement”.
24. Dr C supported the extension of Mr Vigo’s forensic order and
expressed the view that Mr Vigo’s management as an involuntary
under the Act did not “provide sufficient safeguards”. Dr C further
stated that Mr Vigo should go to a medium
secure unit from the X Hospital where
he would require “on average [x] years in such a unit, for graded
community reintroduction
and rehabilitation” with “many years of
careful community follow-up and risk management”. Dr C recommended an
of the limiting term to [x] years.
25. Mr Vigo also addressed the Tribunal. He said that he did not set
unrealistic goals. He felt that he had gone as far as he could
Hospital ward]. He has been there for a year. He said that he recognises the
signs and symptoms of his illness. He has
not been tempted by anything small,
not even cigarettes or other drugs.
26. Asked about the role and effect of the medication, Mr Vigo said that it
was “alright” as it “balanced me out”.
“so paranoid”. He agreed that his thinking was clearer. His mood was
8 out of 10. He was getting on with everyone
and he doesn’t hold grudges
and “let’s things go”.
27. Asked about his rehabilitation needs at a medium secure unit, Mr Vigo
stated that he needed to address his social skills, how
to use an Opal Card and
how to do his banking.
28. Mr Vigo also said that there have been no fights and he has had no
aggression. He said that he was not a threat to himself or
the public. His
violent crime was in the past. He asked the Tribunal to take into consideration
that he was now wiser, more understanding,
and more empathic to people and that
he could continue in the community. Mr Vigo stressed that his recent history has
not been violent.
29. On the evidence provided, including from Dr B, Dr A and Dr C, the
Tribunal was satisfied that Mr Vigo is a mentally ill person.
The medical
evidence was clear that Mr Vigo continues to have positive symptoms of his
illness that have only partially responded
to treatment. He is more settled and
his condition appears to be stable. However, his stability has been achieved
through intensive
psychiatric support in conditions of maximum security and a
lack of access to illicit substances.
Owing to his mental illness were there reasonable grounds for
believing that care, treatment or
control were necessary for his
protection or the protection of others from serious harm?
30. Mr Vigo has a concerning history of violence to others when mentally
unstable. The index event involved serious violence. This
was in the context of
him being on a CTO in the community and prior to that having served [x] years
imprisonment for [offence]. He
was also on parole at the time of the index
31. The Tribunal was persuaded that this criterion was met. The Tribunal
considered that it is necessary to address Mr Vigo’s
substance abuse
disorder and improve his understanding of his illness and the connection between
his substance abuse and his offending
behaviour, as well as the need for ongoing
medication, in an inpatient setting to enhance his prospects of a successful
to the community and to protect others from his risk of further
serious harm.
32. Whilst Mr Vigo’s mental state has been relatively stable in a high
secure setting, he remains symptomatic, and he appears
to only have a partial
understanding of his rehabilitation needs. In this regard, his judgement is
incomplete. Without ongoing intensive
care and treatment, he is likely to
deteriorate further and pose a risk of serious harm to others. There is
considerable work to
do on addressing his issues and risks.
Is there less restrictive care, consistent with safe and effective
care that is appropriate and
reasonably available?
33. In her report, Dr B related that the treating team intend to refer Mr
Vigo to a medium secure unit to facilitate and continue
therapeutic work in an
environment of lesser restriction. Until this can be facilitated, according to
Dr B, the X Hospital was the
less restrictive placement option currently
available to Mr Vigo that is consistent with safe and effective care.
34. In her oral evidence, Dr B confirmed the plans to refer Mr Vigo to a
medium secure unit “this week” with an expectation
that he would be
assessed in the New Year.
35. Asked as to whether Mr Vigo should be transferred to a medium secure unit
immediately, Dr B said that it depended on bed availability.
36. Dr A said that it “wasn’t clear” to him that Mr Vigo
could be managed at a medium secure unit from a risk management
perspective.
However, it was reasonable to refer Mr Vigo to such units so that they can make
an assessment. Dr A said that he didn’t
think it was an appropriate
placement because of the less structured environment at such units. If Mr Vigo
was appropriate for lesser
security, a medium secure unit would be the first
37. Dr A added that Mr Vigo has significant positive and negative symptoms,
namely a cognitive impairment, although he has improved
over the last 12 months.
If Mr Vigo were to be transferred to a medium secure unit, there would need to
be a slow and structured
transfer back to the community. Any transfer to the
community would also have to be planned very carefully. Dr A also said that
Mr Vigo’s legal circumstances have changed his clinical
circumstances have not.
38. Asked why Mr Vigo was not appropriate, Dr A said that he understood that
a medium secure unit is appropriate in cases where persons
can be stepped back
into the community within 2 years. It was not clear to him that this would be
the case with Mr Vigo. Dr A added
that the units may have different views and it
was reasonable to refer Mr Vigo so they have an opportunity to assess his
suitability.
If he is assessed as appropriate then Dr A would be happy to
support this.
Ms Wellard’s submissions
39. Ms Wellard handed the Tribunal a written report by Dr C in relation to
the High Risk Supreme Court proceedings in which Dr C had
said that Mr Vigo
should go to a medium secure unit for graded rehabilitation.
40. Ms Wellard stated that Mr Vigo’s treating team had given evidence
that the Unit 1 or the Unit 2 would be appropriate. These
Units have the
facilities to provide gradual integration to the community.
41. Ms Wellard submitted that Mr Vigo has been ready for transfer to a medium
secure unit since July 2019. She then referred to the
determination by [Tribunal member] dated [date]. The reasons of that
determination referred to a mental state examination
of Mr Vigo in [date] and
the treating team’s decision to refer him to the medium secure units. Ms
Wellard submitted that Dr
C’s report and the treating team’s
decision to refer Mr Vigo were evidence that he was not being detained in the
restrictive environment.
42. Ms Wellard submitted that the objectives of the Act in section 3 and the
principles of care and treatment in section 68 required
that Mr Vigo be moved to
a least restrictive environment to promote his recovery and to allow him to
access appropriate care.
43. Ms Wellard noted that Mr Vigo had been in custody since 2012; first in Y
Prison Hospital and then, after a limiting term was imposed,
he was transferred
to the X Hospital on [date]. Prior to that, Mr Vigo was in custody for 18 years.
Ms Wellard submitted that Mr
Vigo now needs a gentle step down, graduated
transition towards living in the community, and this cannot be done from the X
44. Ms Wellard further submitted that if the Tribunal found that Mr Vigo was
a mentally ill person, he should be transferred to a
medium secure unit or a
civil mental health facility other than the X Hospital, as the least restrictive
option available for safe
and effective care. She said that Mr Vigo had spent
considerable time at the X Hospital, was on clozapine and was stable. Any
adjustments in relation to medication could be achieved at the medium
secure unit.
45. Ms Wellard also submitted that the use of the word
“specified” when referring to a mental health unit in section 35
meant that the Tribunal could specify a medium secure unit as the place of
CONSIDERATION
46. The only substantive point of contention at the hearing related to the
second limb of the criterion in section 35 (5) (c), that
is, whether Mr
Vigo’s ongoing detention at the X Hospital provided less restrictive care,
that was safe and effective, and
“appropriate and reasonably
available”. Ms Wellard contended that there was evidence that a medium
secure unit and not
the X Hospital was that option. Mr Vigo’s treating
team disagreed.
47. Plainly, medium secure units provide a less restrictive setting for the
ongoing care and treatment of persons who are mentally
ill, such that in
appropriate cases community transition can be planned. However, the second limb
also requires that the care is
consistent with safe and effective care and
“is appropriate” and “reasonably available”.
48. Ms Wellard’s submission that the treating team had indicated in
their evidence that it was “appropriate” was,
on consideration,
incorrect. At its highest level of support, the treating team only considered
that a referral to a medium secure
unit should be pursued to obtain a view from
other clinicians at medium secure units, to assist to determine if the care
would be appropriate. In fact, Dr A considered that a medium secure unit
may not be appropriate to manage Mr Vigo’s risks and
that for the present
time, until assessed as such, his care should continue at the X Hospital.
49. Dr C’s report appeared to support Dr A’s view. Read in its
entirety, Dr C’s report indicated that Mr Vigo was
being cared for in the
most suitable and therapeutic environment. Dr C had interviewed Mr Vigo at X
Hospital. The reference to care
and treatment in a medium secure unit, that Ms
Wellard relied upon as evidence of an appropriate alternative, appeared to be in
context of Dr C’s conception of an overall future care plan for Mr
Vigo to move from the X Hospital to the community.
50. In any event, Dr C was not purporting to conduct an assessment on behalf
of a medium secure unit. His report was prepared for
an entirely different
purpose, being an independent assessment in relation to whether Mr Vigo’s
high risk offender status should
be continued. Dr C’s report corroborated
the need for a structured and slow progression to the community, via a medium
unit and his report also identified the serious harm issues that Mr Vigo
posed owing to his partially treated illness.
51. The Tribunal accepted that Mr Vigo has ongoing positive and negative
symptoms of mental illness that are partially treated in
a highly restricted
environment with considerable supports. He also has a significant drug and
alcohol history and has only achieved
abstinence in the Hospital. He has a long
history of violence to others. His clinical picture is complicated by his
cognitive impairment.
He had recently disclosed to nursing staff that he was not
mentally ill and his understanding of his illness and rehabilitation needs
rudimentary. The Tribunal was persuaded that Mr Vigo’s hospital
containment in the X Hospital was necessary to address
Mr Vigo’s illness
and vulnerability to substance misuse and relapse, which historically have led
to episodes of serious physical
violence to others.
52. At the time of this hearing, there was no evidence that a medium secure
unit would be appropriate, in the sense of, providing
a level of care, treatment
and control that would contain Mr Vigo’s illness and protect others from
serious harm. Had Mr Vigo
been assessed as suitable by a medium secure unit,
then Ms Wellard’s submission would have been more persuasive. However,
was no such evidence at this hearing.
53. As the Tribunal was satisfied that Mr Vigo’s care at the X Hospital
was the appropriate place for him at this point in time,
it could be argued that
the Tribunal had no need to consider if any other care was “reasonably
available”. However, it
is important to comment on Ms Wellard’s
submission that the term “reasonably available” should be given a
interpretation”. Ms Wellard’s submissions appeared to
suggest that a “theoretical” availability would suffice.
Tribunal disagrees.
54. As far at the Tribunal is aware the term as used in section 35 of the Act
has not been judicially defined or considered. Nor is
the term likely to be
defined satisfactorily with any great specificity. The meaning of the word
“reasonably” is not
axiomatic and is value laden and its meaning and
breadth will often depend on its context and purpose. However, in attempting to
give effect to its plain and ordinary meaning it would include care that was
“likely” or “probably” available.
While not attempting
to provide an exhaustive definition of the term, the Tribunal does not consider
that a “mere possibility”
of availability will suffice. In addition,
in this case before the Tribunal, it must be borne in mind that a very
significant factor
in determining “reasonably available” is that
medium secure units have their own powers and discretions in determining
availability of placements depending on factors such as their assessments of the
suitability and needs of individual patients,
the unit’s resources and
their priority of placement. In the circumstances of this case, where no medium
secure unit has considered
Mr Vigo’s case or expressed any view on his
suitability or the availability of a place for him, it is not possible to
that such placement is reasonably available. At best it was a
possibility, a potential outcome, but no more than that.
55. In short, the Tribunal could not be satisfied on the available evidence
that a medium secure unit was a less restrictive option
consistent with safe and
effective care, or that it was appropriate and reasonably available.
56. As the Tribunal determined that there was no other appropriate or less
restrictive alternative to the X Hospital, then it was
unnecessary to determine
whether the Tribunal had the power to “specify” the place of
detention. However, a plain reading
of the provision suggests that the Tribunal
may make such an order.
Is a financial management order under the NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
57. Ms D, Social Worker, in a report dated 29 November 2019, noted that Mr
Vigo manages his own finances and that there have been
no reported difficulties
in this area.
DETERMINATION
58. The Tribunal accepted that for the present time, the care and treatment
offered Mr Vigo at the X Hospital, was necessary for the
ongoing treatment of
his illness and the safety of others. The Tribunal was satisfied that the
treating team is making enquiries
of medium secure units. The Tribunal was also
satisfied that there was no less restrictive option consistent with safe and
care that was appropriate and reasonably available when the following
matters were taken into account: the events that led to the
imposition of Mr
Vigo’s limiting term; his lengthy history of prior offending, mental
health treatment and incarceration; the
failure of a CTO to keep the community
safe; the treating team’s evidence and views; and the fact that Mr Vigo
had not been
assessed and accepted by any medium secure units as yet. Therefore,
Mr Vigo remains in the least restrictive environment consistent
with safe and
effective care and it is necessary for him to remain there to prevent a
significant risk of serious harm to others.
59. The Tribunal recommends that Mr Vigo’s referral to medium secure
units should be made at the earliest opportunity. To his
credit, Mr Vigo has
remained compliant with treatment and is behaviourally settled. It would appear
that he has not engaged in any
acts of physical violence since the index event.
In light of his changed legal status the Tribunal considers that it is
appropriate
that he be assessed for medium security. Mr Vigo had an expectation
that this would have occurred after his August hearing and he
is understandably
perplexed. Of course, should he be favourably assessed, then the treating team
would be obliged to transfer him
in accordance with their obligations under
section 12 of the Act. He has now spent one year in the [X Hospital ward], which
is generally
considered to be the least restrictive ward at the X Hospital and
usually the last step before transfer to a medium secure unit.
60. On [date], the Tribunal determined that Mr Vigo was a mentally ill person
for which there is no other less restrictive care that
was appropriate and
reasonably available. The Tribunal ordered that he remain detained at the X
Hospital up until [date].
61. There was no evidence that Mr Vigo was incapable of managing his
financial affairs. Accordingly, the Tribunal did not make an
order for his
financial affairs to be managed by the NSW Trustee.
Deputy President
Dated 20 December 2019
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (337 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter