URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2008/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Scott [2008] NSWPB 4 (9 April 2008)
[2008] NSWPB 4
Kym Ayscough v Andrew Walter Scott
9 April 2008
The complaint of professional misconduct concerned the management of
methadone dosing and buprenorphine dosing by the pharmacist,
who was the sole
proprietor of many years at his pharmacy. The pharmacist has supplied methadone
syrup to a customer on an expired
prescription. The pharmacist also supplied
three customers with a quantity of a prescribed restricted substance in
circumstances
where the customers were already being dosed by the pharmacist
with methadone and the supply of the prescribed restricted substance
without consulting the customer’s treating medical practitioner and
without a valid prescription. The pharmacist also
supplied a customer with a
take away dose of buprenorphine, which was not authorised by the prescriber.
The pharmacist also supplied
a number of customers with take away doses of
methadone where the additional take away doses were not ordered on the
prescription
from the authorised methadone prescriber contrary to Department of
Health guidelines. The pharmacist admitted the particulars of
the complaint and
admitted professional misconduct.
pharmacist is guilty of professional misconduct in that he has demonstrated a
lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment or care
in the practice of
pharmacist shows a willingness not to comply with the legislation or guidelines
for methadone and buprenorphine dosing.
complaints relate to a large number of customers and the professional conduct is
not an isolated occurrence and it is objectively
serious in nature.
pharmacist is severely cautioned. Ordered to maintain Quality Care Pharmacy
Program accreditation for the pharmacy and any other
pharmacy in which he
acquires a pecuniary interest for a period of 3 years with evidence of
continuing accreditation to be furnished
to the Board. Ordered to submit to
quarterly inspections and audits of policies and procedures for the receipt
storage, recording
and management of methadone and buprenorphine dosing at his
pharmacy. Written inspection reports by a Board approved pharmacist are
submitted to the Board. Educative orders imposed with an annual self reporting
requirement. The costs of complying with these
orders are to be borne by the
pharmacist.
Findings of a Professional Standards Committee
(“the Committee”) held on the 17
October 2007 into a Complaint of professional misconduct under the provisions of
the Pharmacy Act (“the Act”) by Kym
Ayscough (‘the
Complainant”) against Andrew Walter Scott (the “Respondent”)
of St George Pharmacy (the “Pharmacy”).
THE COMPLAINT
That Andrew Walter Scott has been guilty of professional
misconduct within the meaning of Section 19A (a) of the Act in that the
has demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment or
care in the practice of pharmacy pursuant to Section 19A (a) of
Particulars of Complaint
Respondent was at all relevant times the pharmacist in charge and the sole
proprietor of the Pharmacy.
April 2001 the Respondent successfully applied to the Pharmaceutical Services
Branch of NSW Health for the Pharmacy to be an approved
Methadone dosing point.
The application included an undertaking by the Respondent that Methadone will be
dispensed at the Pharmacy
in accordance with NSW Health guidelines TG 201
“Supply of Methadone Syrup under the New South Wales Methadone Program
Notes for Community Pharmacists.”
May 2002 the Respondent successfully applied to the Pharmaceutical Services
Branch of NSW Health for the Pharmacy to be an approved
Buprenorphine dosing
a period of 16 days from 20 December 2003 to 4 January 2004, the Respondent
supplied methadone syrup doses to Carlos Ishac without
a valid prescription from
a medical practitioner contrary to:
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
Health Department Guidelines TG 201 for the supply of Methadone syrup, paragraph
2.3.3 which provides that Methadone must only
be supplied in accordance with a
valid prescription.
or about between 2 and 9 January 2004, the Respondent supplied the clients in
Column 1 of Annexure “A” to this complaint
with the quantity of
prescribed restricted substances, as listed in Column 2 of Annexure
“A” without a prescription from
a medical practitioner contrary to
Section 10(3)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
, in circumstances,
clients were being dosed by the Respondent with a drug of addiction, namely,
Methadone, at the Pharmacy; and
Respondent made the supply without the consultation with the client’s
treating medical practitioner.
22 December 2003 to 2 January 2004, the Respondent supplied Mrs Angie Rifkin
with three Buprenorphine 2mg tablets as a take away
dose, in circumstances
take away dose for Buprenorphine, a drug of addiction was not authorised by the
prescriber; and
take away dose of Buprenorphine was contrary to the pharmacist’s written
undertaking to NSW Health dated 28 May 2002 to observe
that the appropriate
quantity of tablets are directly administered into the client’s mouth,
placed under the tongue until dissolution
is complete, and checked, before the
client leaves the Pharmacy.
the period from 17 November 2003 to 4 January 2004, the Respondent supplied the
patients listed in Column 1 in Annexure “B”
to this complaint with
take away doses of Methadone syrup listed in Column 3, a drug of addiction in
the weeks listed adjacent in
Column 2 of Annexure “B”, in
circumstances where such additional take away doses were not ordered on the
prescription
from the authorised Methadone prescriber, contrary to paragraph
3.4.1 of the Department of Health Guidelines (TG 201).
The Committee received the Complainant’s Bundle of Documents
without objection by counsel for the respondent. Counsel for
the Respondent
indicated to the Committee that the respondent plea guilty, admitted to
professional misconduct and accepted each
of the particulars of the
Counsel for the Complainant made the following opening submissions:
1. Respondent was first registered on 12 June 1962 and has been practicing
from Bexley North for 39 years.
2. On 17 April 2001, the Respondent applied to become an Approved Methadone
Dosing Point.
3. On 28 May 2002, the Respondent applied to become an Approved Buprenorphine
Dosing Point.
4. A letter from Dr Beena Chagule to the Pharmaceutical Services Branch,
dated 25 November 2003, initiated the complaint. This letter
indicated that
patients were being dosed at the Pharmacy other than in conformity with a
“I have information from a reliable source that the Pharmacy is well
known for the dispensing of take away doses of Methadone
prior to the day on
which they are due.”
5. This was followed by an inspection by the Pharmaceutical Services Branch
on 5 January 2004. At that routine inspection it was
found that there were
several details of the Respondent’s way of practice that needed further
investigation.
6. On 9 January 2004, the Pharmaceutical Adviser made a second inspection of
the Pharmacy. The Pharmaceutical Adviser made copies
of the various
prescriptions and the Subsidiary Drug Register for Methadone and Buprenorphine.
Two boxes of unlabelled Valium 5mg
tablets, relating to David Andrews and Elia
Kfoury and one box of Murelax 30mg tablets, relating to Kellie Bonnici were
Copies of the prescription history of these three patients were
7. On 2 March 2004, the Principal Pharmaceutical Adviser, Bruce Battye,
interviewed the Respondent at the NSW Health Department at
Gladesville. This
interview was tape-recorded and the transcript was used as evidence. There were
three persons present at that
meeting: Bruce Battye (Principal Pharmaceutical
Adviser), Kim Dolan (Pharmaceutical Adviser) and the Respondent, Andrew Walter
The Pharmaceutical Services Branch made the Respondent aware of the
alleged breaches of the Guidelines for supplying Methadone,
Buprenorphine or
Schedule 4D Medications as issued by the Pharmaceutical Services Branch of the
NSW Health Department.
Counsel for the Complainant summarised the issues as follows:
being dosed despite the prescription for Methadone having been expired.
of Methadone take away doses contrary to what was specified on the
prescription.
out of 48 Methadone patients did not have a photograph attached to the
prescription.
out of 48 Methadone patients were receiving take away doses of Methadone in
excess of that specified on the prescription or contrary
prescription.
Drug Register was not tallied at the end of the day, nor was the total added to
the Main Drug Register.
Alterations,
obliterations or cancellations were made to the Drug Register and Subsidiary
Drug Register using white out or stickers.
doses were measured out in advance, prior to dosing and not labelled.
away bottles and plastic dosing cups were being washed and recycled.
prescription numbers were assigned to the prescriptions.
8 prescriptions were not being cancelled.
relevant prescription was not being referred to, when dosing the client with
take away bottles did not have a date of supply or a date of use.
take away doses were being supplied to agents of the some clients.
Buprenorphine
was supplied as a take away dose.
(Schedule 4D) was supplied to two Methadone clients without a prescription or
consultation with the doctor.
(schedule 4D) was supplied to a Methadone client without a prescription or
consultation with the doctor.
was not attached to the premises of the Pharmacy.
Mr Francis William Payne OAM FPS FACPP was retained by the
Complainant as peer reviewer and was requested to undertake a review of
documents relating to the Complaint against the Respondent under the Pharmacy
On page 3 at last paragraph in his Peer Review, Mr Payne said:
“In general the conduct of the pharmacist as set out in the Complaint
attracts my strong disapproval.”
This report was admitted without objection by the Respondent.
The Respondent gave evidence, was cross-examined and answered questions from
the Committee members.
Counsel for the Respondent indicated the Respondent’s plea of guilty
and that his client was accepting of the Complaint and
its particulars.
Counsel for the Respondent sought to tender four references from the
following referees:
Richard Pinker, the Respondent’s accountant;
T H (Thomas) Low, a local practitioner;
Sheila Knowlden, a local practitioner;
Beena Chagule (original complaining Doctor) to the Pharmaceutical Services
Branch, setting out her view that she was no longer
concerned with the way that
the Respondent conducted his practice.
The first three references were admitted into evidence. It was
noted by the Committee that there was insufficient detail in each reference
show that the referees had been provided with the details of the complaint.
The fourth document was not admitted into evidence by the Committee as the
document was unsigned, a facsimile copy only, post dated
and was addressed to
the Pharmaceutical Services Branch.
The Committee was provided with a copy of the prescription for Carlos Ishac,
for three take away doses of Methadone from the 19
November 2003 to the 19
December 2003.
The Respondent could identify the copy of the script as well as the expiry
date of that script. The Respondent admitted that he had
made an error in
judgement by dispensing Methadone to Carlos Ishac without a relevant script from
20 December 2003 to 4 January 2004.
The Respondent believed that since Carlos
Ishac was a regular patient and got regular scripts, he was a model methadone
and because it was:
“over Christmas and everything, I thought well, I’ll continue
dosing him and get the script at the first available time
when the doctor
returns from holiday.”
The Respondent stated that he:
“made several attempts and the patient made several attempts to contact
the Doctor, by telephone.”
but, did not remember the details. The Respondent thought that the doctor
had gone away.
In cross examination, the Respondent admitted that:
“The doctor wasn't happy with that and rang me up and told me, and I
then I think I did the same thing a second time, which
prompted her to make a
complaint, but that was only one patient on probably two occasions and I'm very
strict with all the patients
now, but particularly her.”
The Committee finds that this action is contrary to
Section 25(1)
Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
and to the guidelines for the supply of
Methadone. The Committee notes that there is no provision for emergency supply
of Schedule
8 medication.
The Committee was referred to paragraph 2.3.3 of the Guidelines from the NSW
Health Department Pharmaceutical Services Branch (TG201),
which states that:
“Methadone must only be supplied in accordance with a valid
prescription.”
as well as paragraph 2.3.11, which states that:
“To supply Methadone without a valid prescription is an extremely
serious matter which may result in overdose, death and/or
diversion of the
doses. Pharmacists are encouraged to liaise with prescribers.”
and similarly, paragraph 2.3.12:
“Where the authorised prescriber changes or extends a patient's current
dosage regime or authorises a take away dose, the Pharmacist
must ensure that he
or she has full written authorisation to that effect.”
The Committee agrees with Mr Payne that the conduct of the Respondent
attracts its strong disapproval and the disapproval of the general
body of the
Respondent’s reputable and competent peers. Mr Payne stated in the Peer
Review on page 2 paragraph 3 that:
“The Pharmacist’s conduct was not only illegal but at variance
with established professional standards. This conduct
attracts my strong
disapproval and, I believe, of the general body of my reputable and competent
According to the interview with the Pharmaceutical Services Branch, on or
David Andrews
with twenty-five (25) Valium 5mg tablets
Elia Kfoury with
three (3) Valium 5mg tablets
Kellie Bonnici
with twenty-five (25) Murelax 30mg tablets
Each patient’s
prescription history was examined from the Pharmacy’s computer, which
indicated that there was no relevant
Valium and Murelax are Schedule 4D medications, that were supplied without a
prescription from a medical practitioner contrary to
Section 10(3)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
, in circumstances, where:
clients were being dosed by the Respondent with a drug of addiction, namely,
Methadone, at the Pharmacy; and
Respondent made the supply without consultation with the client’s treating
medical practitioner.
The Committee was provided with a copy of a prescription for
Buprenorphine for Angie Rifkin, with no reference to any take away doses.
According to the interview with the Pharmaceutical Services Branch, the
Respondent was requested by the client, Angie Rifkin to supply
take away doses
for Buprenorphine. The Respondent agreed and admitted to supplying
Buprenorphine as a take away dose to the client
between 22 December 2003 and 2
January 2004. The Respondent said that he was aware that the recommendation for
Buprenorphine is
not to supply take away doses. The Respondent later informed
the doctor, who, according to the Respondent, was not pleased that
Respondent was supplying take away doses.
The Respondent was made aware that the application form (TG 205) signed on 28
May 2002 to become an Approved Buprenorphine Dosing
Point, stated that:
“The appropriate quantity of tablet(s) must be observed to be directly
administered into the client’s mouth, placed under
the tongue (for up to
eight minutes) until dissolution is complete, and checked, before the client
leaves the premises.”
and that therefore, Buprenorphine take away doses are not authorised.
The Committee was shown the relevant prescriptions and Subsidiary Drug
Register for Methadone clients listed in Annexure “B”,
relating to
the period between November 2003 and January 2004. Most doctors permit extra
take away doses of Methadone for public
holidays, although this information must
be explicitly written on the relevant prescription, as stated in TG 201,
“Take away doses may only be supplied to a patient if such take away
doses have been authorised in writing” and “Under
no circumstances
should take away doses be provided at patient request or at the request of
nurses, receptionists or other staff
associated with a prescriber.”
There were thirteen Methadone clients who received a total of forty-seven
extra take away doses of Methadone that were in excess of
the prescribed allowed
number of take away doses:
four occasions, the Respondent’s client, David Andrews received one or two
extra take away doses than the prescribed one
take away dose for Sundays. David
Andrews received six extra take away doses.
five occasions, the Respondent’s client, Kellie Bonnici received one or
two extra take away doses than the prescribed three
take away doses for Mondays,
Tuesdays and Sundays. Kellie Bonnici received six extra take away doses.
one occasion, the Respondent’s client, Linda Campbell received one extra
take away dose than the prescribed four take away
doses. Linda Campbell received
one extra take away dose.
six occasions, the Respondent’s client, Kathy Chapman received one extra
take away dose than the prescribed four take away
doses for Mondays, Thursdays,
Fridays and Sundays. Kathy Chapman received six extra take away doses.
four occasions, the Respondent’s client, Jennifer Henwood received one
extra take away dose than the prescribed four take
away doses. Jennifer Henwood
received four extra take away doses.
four occasions, the Respondent’s client, Elia Kfoury received one extra
take away dose than the prescribed four take away
doses for Tuesdays, Thursdays,
Saturdays and Sundays. Elia Kfoury received four extra take away doses.
one occasion, the Respondent’s client, James Kofoed received one extra
take away dose than the prescribed four take away
doses. James Kofoed received
one extra take away dose.
two occasions, the Respondent’s client, Bede Lawrence received two extra
take away doses than the prescribed three take away
doses for Tuesdays, Fridays
and Saturdays. Bede Lawrence received four extra take away doses.
one occasion, the Respondent’s client, Glen McQuillan received one extra
take away dose than the prescribed four take away
doses. Glen McQuillan received
one extra take away dose.
three occasions, the Respondent’s client, Leon Mierendorff received one
extra take away dose than the prescribed two take
away doses for Saturdays and
Sundays. Leon Mierendorff received three extra take away doses.
five occasions, the Respondent’s client, K. O’Rourke received one
extra take away dose than the prescribed four take
away doses for Wednesdays,
Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays. K. O’Rourke received five extra take
away doses.
five occasions, the Respondent’s client, Deborah Storer received one extra
take away dose than the prescribed four take away
doses for Mondays, Wednesdays,
Thursdays and Sundays. Deborah Storer received five extra take away doses.
one occasion, the Respondent’s client, Steven Warr received one extra take
away dose than the prescribed four take away doses.
Steven Warr received one
extra take away dose.
Mr Payne stated in the Peer Review on page 2 paragraph 5 that:
“this conduct was repeated on many occasions and as such merits my
strong disapproval and, I am sure, of the general body of
my reputable and
competent peers.”
The Committee noted that the Respondent is currently dosing forty-six (46)
Methadone patients and three (3) Buprenorphine patients.
Each of these patients
pays a weekly fee to receive their medication for that week. The Government
supplies the Pharmacy with Methadone
at no cost to the Pharmacy. The Government
also funds the supply of Methadone by the Pharmacy for some of these patients
biannually.
The Respondent was aware that the application form (TG 203) was personally
signed on 17 April 2001, in order to become an approved
Methadone Dosing Point.
The Respondent was aware that TG 203 stated:
“I and all registered pharmacists under my employ have read the NSW
Department of Health Guidelines TG 201 ‘Supply of
Methadone Syrup under
the NSW Methadone Program – Notes for Community Pharmacists’, and
hereby give an undertaking that
Methadone will be dispensed at my pharmacy in
accordance with these guidelines.”
The Committee considers that the Respondent has a limited understanding of
the guidelines and the Notes for Community Pharmacists
(TG 201) in relation to
the Supply of Methadone under the NSW Methadone Program.
It was found that, after a Pharmaceutical Services Branch inspection, the
Respondent did not comply with the requirements of the appropriate
conditions for Methadone. One of the Respondent’s safes was not securely
affixed to the premises of the Pharmacy (paragraph
2.2.4 of TG 201). The
Respondent gave evidence that this has since been rectified.
The Committee finds that the Respondent still does not follow the guidelines
for entries into the Schedule 8 Drug Register or for
the Subsidiary Drug
Register for Methadone. The Committee notes that the Respondent does not
believe that there are any consequences
for not making daily entries into the
Drug Register and that sometimes he has difficulty in completing the Drug
Register every day.
Further, the Respondent gave evidence that the Subsidiary Drug Register is
written up in advance. This is before the Methadone is
dispensed. The
Respondent continues to make amendments or corrections to the Drug Register
using a white sticky label, even though
the Respondent admits to talking to the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch Officer about the guidelines on the correct
procedures for
making amendments to the Drug Register.
The Respondent believes that the guidelines are not law and can be
“one is a hanging offence and the other is not a hanging
The Respondent gave further evidence that he thinks that the Pharmacist
should be more involved in the decision making in relation
to dosing of patients
with Methadone even without the access to test results or medical
examinations.
“because the Pharmacist sees the patient every day.” and
“sometimes the Doctor doesn’t see the patient for
two months”
and “I'm just saying it would be good if the pharmacist had that
The Respondent gave evidence that he is regularly requested by the patients
to supply an extra take away dose of Methadone. He said
that from time to time,
he has acceded to those requests and continued to alter, supply and increase the
allowed number of take away
doses without follow up by the prescribing doctor.
The Committee finds the Respondent’s conduct in this regard unacceptable.
The Respondent said in evidence that he is very tired, has not had a holiday in
five years and that his “personal life is
in a bit of a tangle at the
moment.” He notes that the workload is “heavy and a bit stressful,
especially on Mondays
and Fridays and before and after any public
holidays.” He said that he has no intention to reduce the number of
Methadone patients
and has found it difficult to find a reliever who would be
able to handle the Methadone workload. The Committee views this evidence
grave concern. It is important that the Respondent takes proper steps to ensure
that he is able, from his personal fitness
perspective mentally and emotionally,
to discharge the onerous responsibilities for and on behalf of the pharmacy
profession to all
members of the public. In the opinion of the Committee the
Respondent needs to review his approach to the management of his pharmacy
seeking advice from the Pharmaceutical Society, the Pharmacy Guild and the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch of the Pharmacy Board.
The Respondent agreed that continuing education is important and that it is
important to keep up to date, but the Committee notes
the he has not attended
any courses in the last four years. The Respondent said that he scans through
some of the official publications
that he receives and reads the relevant topics
that might apply to his pharmacy. He said that he generally reads the
column” by Dennis Leahy in the Pharmacy Guild Bulletin
and has read the initial information supplied to the pharmacy in relation
Methadone and Buprenorphine but has never thought it necessary to seek help from
either the Pharmaceutical Society or the Pharmacy
Guild in relation to the
management or procedures to dispense either Methadone or Buprenorphine or any
Schedule 8 Medication.
“I'm quite happy with the standard of service I provide.”
The Respondent purchased a measuring pump and has found that to be a big help
The Respondent stated that he would attempt to make contact with the
prescribing doctor if there were any uncertainties when dispensing
medication including Methadone, although minor uncertainties would be fixed up
without consultation with the doctor. Again, this
is not acceptable. The
Respondent and indeed any Pharmacist in this role must consult with the
prescribing doctor.
The Respondent stated that he would not be committing the sins that he
committed before and he cited examples of giving extra take
away doses, giving
Valium and Murelax and dosing a patient without a valid prescription.
He also stated that he was not sure how much longer he would be practising
The Complainant’s Submissions
The Respondent admitted professional
misconduct and the particulars of the complaint. A finding of professional
misconduct can be
made by the Committee. The evidence proves the particulars of
the complaint.
The conduct complained of and admitted is objectively serious. It involves
the breach of two separate pieces of legislation with
respect to supplying a
restricted or prohibited substance other than in accordance with the relevant
Act, primarily without a valid
prescription and in addition to that, the
particulars indicate a willingness on behalf of the Respondent to disregard
which have been promulgated in order to ensure that Methadone and
Buprenorphine are supplied only in very restricted circumstances.
willingness not to comply with legislation or with guidelines.
The initial complaint was made by a member of the medical profession. The
complaining doctor was dissatisfied with the way in which
the Respondent
supplied Methadone to their patients.
The Respondents professional misconduct could not be described as isolated.
A clear pattern could be seen, indicating that the Respondent
was prepared to
disregard his professional obligations.
The complaints are in relation to a large number of patients. There were
thirteen Methadone clients and one Buprenorphine client
who received doses in
addition to the take away doses prescribed and, three of those clients also
received Schedule 4D substances
without a valid script. There was one client
who received Methadone without a valid script.
A list of suggested orders was submitted to the Committee.
The Respondent’s Submissions
The Respondent has been in practice for
forty five years and this is the first complaint that has ever been made against
The Respondent has not followed the recommended guidelines for the supply of
Methadone, Buprenorphine or Schedule 4 medications.
The Respondent finds it very difficult in dealing with the Methadone and
Buprenorphine clientele.
The Respondent stated that he understood the need to follow the guidelines
and believes that he has changed his way of practicing
The Respondent is willing to comply with the suggested orders submitted by
the Complainant.
The Committee’s Findings
Having regard to all of the evidence, the
Committee finds that Professional Misconduct and the particulars of the
Complaint are all
proved to the comfortable satisfaction of the Committee.
This is not a punitive jurisdiction, but a protective one. The Pharmacy
Board is concerned to protect the interests of the public
and minimise the risk
of future breaches.
Accordingly the Pharmacy Board of NSW makes the following
1. That Andrew Walter Scott is severely cautioned against practising without
professional rigour in relation to dosing of Methadone
and Buprenorphine
2. That Andrew Walter Scott is severely cautioned against acting upon
compassionate grounds without regard to his legal and professional
obligations.
3. That Andrew Walter Scott is to do all things necessary to obtain and/or
maintain memberships with the Pharmaceutical Society and
the Pharmacy Guild or
such other professional organisations as approved by the Pharmacy Board, for a
period of three years following
the date of these orders. Documents evidencing
those continuing memberships are to be provided to the Pharmacy Board on an
4. That Andrew Walter Scott is to do all things necessary to maintain Quality
Care Pharmacy Program accreditation for each pharmacy
in which he holds or
acquires a pecuniary interest for a period of three years following the date of
these orders. Documents evidencing
continuing accreditation are to be provided
to the Pharmacy Board on an annual basis.
5. That Andrew Walter Scott is to submit to four inspections or audits at
three monthly intervals of the policies and procedures relating
to the receipt,
storage, handling, dose, administration and records for Methadone and
Buprenorphine dosing at his Pharmacy or at
any Pharmacy in which he acquires a
pecuniary interest or works. The inspections are to be undertaken by a
pharmacist approved by
the Board and that pharmacist is to provide a report to
the Board within one month of each inspection audit.
6. That Andrew Walter Scott is to complete at least 30 hours of continuing
professional education per year for a period of three years
following the date
of the orders, of which 15 hours per year is to be in lecture, seminar or other
completion of this continuing
professional education are to be provided to the Pharmacy Board no later than 31
January in each of
2009, 2010 and 2011.
7. That Andrew Walter Scott is to bear the costs of complying with these
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (376 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter