URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/188.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Habkouk v R [2025] NSWCCA 188 (14 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Habkouk v R
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 188
Hearing Date(s):
24 September 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Ball JA, Ierace J, Coleman J
(1) Leave to file the Notice of Appeal out of time is
(2) Leave is granted to appeal against the
conviction and sentence;
(3) The appeal is dismissed.
Catchwords:
CRIME – appeals – appeal against conviction –
unreasonable verdict – attempt to possess commercial quantity
– whether prosecution required to exclude possibility that an associate of
the applicant had attempted to possess
the heroin alone – unnecessary for
prosecution to exclude that possibility – verdict not
unreasonable
CRIME – appeals – appeal against sentence
– principles in R v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383
sentencing judge sentenced applicant based on his “role in
importation” – error established –
no lesser sentence
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Criminal Code (Cth), ss 11.1(1), 307.5(1)
Cases Cited:
Balloey v R
[2014] NSWCCA 165
El Jamal v R
[2021] NSWCCA
El-Ghourani v R
[2009] NSWCCA 140
Hili v The Queen; Jones v The Queen
(2010) 242 CLR 520
[2010] HCA 45
Kentwell v The Queen (2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
(1981) 147 CLR 383
[1981] HCA 31
R v Laurentiu & Becheru
63 A Crim R 402
R v Lawless (Court of Criminal Appeal, 24 June 1994,
unreported)
R v Nguyen; R v Pham
[2010] NSWCCA 238
[2025] HCA 9
(2025) 99 ALJR 676
The Queen v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
The Queen v Pham
(2015) 256 CLR 550
[2015] HCA 39
[2011] NSWCCA
Wong v The Queen
(2001) 207 CLR 584
[2001] HCA 64
Principal judgment
Wade Habkouk (Applicant)
Rex (Respondent)
Representation:
P Lange (Applicant)
G Wright SC with A Payten
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Criminal Defence Group Pty Ltd
(Applicant)
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2021/252404
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court
Not applicable
Date of Decision:
19 April 2024
Fitzsimmons SC DCJ
File Number(s):
2021/252404
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The applicant, Mr Wade Habkouk, sought leave to appeal out of time against
his conviction on 31 January 2024 following a trial in
the District Court before
Fitzsimmons SC DCJ and a jury of an offence of attempting to possess a
commercial quantity of unlawfully
imported heroin contrary to ss 307.5(1) and
11.1(1) of the
Criminal Code
(Cth). The applicant also sought leave to
appeal out of time against the sentence imposed on him by Fitzsimmons SC DCJ of
of imprisonment of 15 years with a non-parole period of 11 years.
The heroin was imported from Malaysia by the applicant’s brother, Mr
Guy Habkouk, and was concealed inside panels within a large
bakery mixing
machine. The heroin was discovered by Australian Border Force officers on
arrival in Australia. The Australian Federal
) removed the
heroin and reconstructed the mixer to correspond to its original appearance. Mr
Guy Habkouk had arranged for the mixer
to be delivered to a storage unit leased
by Mr Benham Yekta through a company he (Mr Yekta) controlled. Mr Yekta was
a friend and
associate of both Mr Guy Habkouk and the applicant. Prior to the
delivery of the mixer, the AFP installed a listening device in the
storage unit
and video recording equipment outside the storage unit facing the entrance.
The video surveillance depicted the applicant and Mr Yekta unloading the
mixer on 10 February 2021 and leaving the storage unit 13
minutes later.
Around that time, Mr Yekta sent a photograph of the mixer to someone (who
it could be inferred was likely Mr Guy Habkouk)
via WhatsApp, showing the mixer
inside the storage unit still wrapped in plastic. The next day the applicant
attended the storage
unit alone on four occasions. Between the second and third,
and third and fourth visits the applicant attended hardware stores in
area. The applicant attended the storage unit alone again on 12 February 2021.
No one else attended the storage unit until
16 February 2021, when Mr Yekta and
an associate of his collected the mixer for disposal.
The applicant advanced three grounds of appeal: (1) the verdict was
unreasonable; (2) a miscarriage of justice was occasioned in circumstances
the Crown Prosecutor suggested to the jury during her closing address that any
questions about Mr Yekta should be put out of
their minds; and (3) his Honour
erred in sentencing the applicant, contrary to the principles set out in
(1981) 147 CLR 383
for his “role in the importation” in
circumstances where the applicant had been convicted of an offence of attempting
to possess a border-controlled drug.
(Ball JA, Ierace and Coleman JJ)
held there was no error
in respect to grounds 1 and 2, that error was established in respect of ground 3
but that no lesser sentence
was warranted at law and therefore dismissing the
(1) Had Mr Yekta attempted to possess the heroin alone, he would have needed
to attempt to access the heroin within the 13 minute
period he attended the
storage unit on 10 February 2021. Taking into account the various steps
necessary to access the heroin concealed
within the mixer, it would not have
been possible for one person alone to carry out of those steps in 13 minutes.
Accordingly, it
was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that Mr Yekta could not have attempted to possess the heroin alone:
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
(2025) 99 ALJR 676
(2) The statements of the Crown Prosecutor must be understood in context. The
applicant’s case at trial was not that the prosecution
had failed to
exclude beyond reasonable doubt the possibility that Mr Yekta alone had
attempted to obtain possession of the heroin
on 10 February 2021. Rather, the
applicant’s case at trial proceeded on the basis that, although the Crown
did not rule out
the possibility that the attempt to obtain possession of the
heroin was made on 10 February 2021, its primary case was that the attempt
made on 11 February 2021. It was entirely orthodox for the prosecution and the
trial judge to explain to the jury that the question
for them was whether the
case against the applicant had been proved beyond reasonable doubt and that in
answering that question they
should put out of their minds what had happened to
Mr Yekta and Mr Guy Habkouk and their own guilt or innocence: [34]-[35].
(3) The sentencing judge’s repeated references to the applicant’s
role in the importation of the drugs in the context
of assessing the objective
gravity of the offending and the applicant’s culpability, establish error
of the kind identified
R v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383.
despite his Honour’s findings that the applicant was not involved in the
planning or organisation of the importation.
However, in the circumstances, no
lesser sentence is warranted at law: [81]-[85].
The Queen v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
[1999] HCA 54
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
El Jamal v R
: The applicant seeks leave to appeal out of time against his
conviction on 31 January 2024 following a trial in the District Court
Fitzsimmons SC DCJ and a jury of an offence of attempting to possess a
commercial quantity of unlawfully imported heroin contrary
to ss 307.5(1) and
11.1(1) of the
Criminal Code
(Cth). The applicant also seeks leave to
appeal (again out of time) against the sentence imposed on him by Fitzsimmons SC
19 April 2024 of a term of imprisonment of 15 years with a non-parole
period of 11 years, which was backdated to commence on 20 April
applicant concedes that leave to appeal against the conviction is required
because the proposed ground of appeal raises
a question of fact.
applicant advances three grounds of appeal:
“i) The verdict was unreasonable, within the meaning of
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
ii) A miscarriage of justice was occasioned in circumstances,
where the learned Crown Prosecutor suggested to the jury during her
address that any questions about Mr. Yetka [sic] should be put out of their
minds, and this statement was not corrected by
the learned trial judge, nor was
it the subject of comment by defence counsel;
iii) His Honour erred in sentencing the applicant, contrary to
the principles set out in
R v. De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383
‘role in the importation’, in circumstances where the applicant had
been convicted of an offence of attempting
to possess a border-controlled
applicant had filed a notice of intention to appeal on 26 April 2024. However,
the notice of appeal itself was not filed until
11 June 2025. No point was taken
by the Crown in relation to the delay in filing the notice of appeal. It appears
that the reason
for the delay was the applicant’s family was not in a
position to fund the appeal any earlier. In the circumstances, it is
appropriate
to extend the time for the filing of the notice of appeal until 11 June 2025.
However, for the reasons that follow, the
appeal should be dismissed.
Background facts
was common ground at trial that the heroin was imported from Malaysia by the
applicant’s brother, Mr Guy Habkouk, using the
name “Michael
Stevenson” and was concealed in four lead containers that had been
secreted behind removable panels of
a large bakery mixing machine. Three of the
panels (referred to as Panel F, Panel G and Panel H) were at the back of the
A fourth panel (Panel E) was on the top of the machine when it was
standing on its feet. In all, the lead boxes contained 566 wrapped
heroin weighing 143.39 kilograms. The machine itself weighed approximately one
tonne and was approximately 180 to 190 centimetres
high when standing on its
feet. The machine, which was referred to at trial as vertical mixer 2
), was one of two vertical mixers containing heroin that were
imported by the applicant’s brother.
the arrival of the two mixers in Australia, they were examined by Australian
Border Force officers, who discovered the heroin.
On 28 December 2020, the
Australian Federal Police (
) removed the heroin and
reconstructed the mixers to correspond to their original appearance. The
evidence in relation to VM2 was
that the lead of the boxes was very soft; and
that it would be possible to cut into the boxes without the use of power tools.
boxes were sealed at the seams with a white substance and it was possible to
lever them open using a screwdriver. When the boxes
were replaced in VM2, they
were not resealed. Although the evidence refers to three panels at the back of
VM2 corresponding with
the three lead boxes located there, without seeing the
photographs that were in evidence, that description is somewhat misleading.
the back of VM2 were two large white rectangular panels with horizontal (when
the machine was standing on its feet) strips cut
into them. Like Panel E, those
panels were held in place by screws. Unlike Panel E, behind those two panels
were silver metal panels
held in place by tack welds. In order to gain access to
what lay behind the silver metal panels, the AFP cut the tack welds using
angle grinder. Behind the silver metal panels were areas which, as has been
said, were described as Panels F, G and H, which contained
the lead boxes. When
the machine was re-assembled, the silver metal panels were not re-welded.
However, the white panels at the back
and Panel E (which was also white with
horizontal cuts) at the top were re-attached using the original screws. It is
apparent from
the photographs in evidence that Panel E was held in place by 14
screws. The machine was then re-wrapped in layers of plastic. After
machines were reassembled and placed on their original palettes, the AFP
monitored their movement.
8 February 2021 and 10 February 2021, Mr Guy Habkouk arranged for VM2 to be
delivered to a storage unit at 113 Hunter Street,
the Storage
), which on 8 January 2021 had been leased by Mr Benham Yekta
under the name “Can Do Projects Pty Ltd”. Mr Yekta was a
and an associate of both Guy Habkouk and the applicant.
dimensions of the Storage Unit were not in evidence. However, photographs and
video images show that it was a substantial space
in which a forklift truck
could manoeuvre and which contained other items, including an excavator
(belonging to Mr Yekta), some tool
boxes, ramps, some ladders, some scaffolding
equipment, air compression equipment, work benches and power tools. At one end
to be space for a small office.
to the delivery of VM2 to the Storage Unit, Mr Guy Habkouk purchased a “RF
Tracer Bug Detector and Wireless Camera Detector”
from OzSpy Security
Solutions Brunswick, located in Victoria, which was delivered to Mr Montaze
Baroudi, a close associate of Guy
applicant was interviewed by the police, and the record of interview was
tendered and played at the trial. The applicant said
that he was a good friend
of Mr Yekta, that he did an apprenticeship with him and that they shared a
warehouse together. The applicant
said that he had a poor relationship with his
brother and they had not spoken for some time. He said he knew nothing about VM2
that Mr Yekta had asked him to assist with its delivery, which he did.
The applicant said that he understood that the delivery was
being made on behalf
of someone who subleased the Storage Unit from Mr Yekta, although the applicant
did not know the person.
order to trace the movements of VM2, the AFP conducted physical surveillance of
the Storage Unit. It also installed a listening
device in the Storage Unit and
video recording equipment outside the Storage Unit facing the entrance. Relying
on those three sources
of information, the AFP prepared a detailed timeline of
events which became Exhibit 22 at the trial.
surveillance indicates that at 6.45 pm on 10 February 2021 the applicant entered
the Storage Unit through the pedestrian door
and opened the garage door at the
front of the Storage Unit. At about the same time, Mr Yekta, using a forklift
vehicle took VM2,
which was sitting on a palette, from the back of a truck and
placed it on the floor of the Storage Unit. At 6.48 pm the applicant
garage door from the inside and Mr Yekta, after parking the forklift
outside the Storage Unit, entered the Storage Unit
using the pedestrian door.
Shortly before that time, the applicant left the Storage Unit briefly to collect
a black hard case. It
was the prosecution’s case at trial that the jury
should infer that the case contained the equipment that Mr Guy Habkouk had
bought from OzSpy Security Solutions. However, there was no evidence that that
equipment was contained in the black case or that
the applicant ever had
possession of the equipment.
the applicant and Mr Yekta left the Storage Unit at 7.00 pm. At that time, the
applicant was carrying the black hard case. The
timeline records that no sound
was detected by the listening device during the period from 6.47.39 pm and
7.00 pm. However, part
of the recording during that time was played to the Court
(and the jury) and it was apparent that there were some banging sounds
period of about one minute during that time.
transcript of messages taken from Mr Yekta’s telephone, which formed
Exhibit 31 at the trial, show that between 6.28.21 pm
and 6.57.49 pm on
10 February 2021 Mr Yekta had a WhatsApp conversation with a person
identified as “Phumi”, who was
in Thailand at the time. There was no
evidence of who Phumi was, but it is relevant to note that the evidence was that
Mr Guy Habkouk
was in Thailand at that time. The conversation was in the
Sydney Time
Application
Content / Event
Benham YEKTA
Benham YEKTA
Benham YEKTA
OK thank you my friend
Benham YEKTA
Sorry about this again
Benham YEKTA
If you could take a few pictures of it would be great
Benham YEKTA
Gotta try and take it off first
Benham YEKTA
Do they not have a pallet jack??
Benham YEKTA
It’s too far in the truck
Benham YEKTA
Not sure if my fork lift can reach
Benham YEKTA
Benham YEKTA
Items 96, 97 and 98 show photographs of VM2 sitting on the floor of the
Storage Unit on a palette and wrapped in multiple layers of
timeline indicated that at approximately 9.33 am on 11 February 2021, the
applicant arrived at the Storage Unit carrying a black
hard case. He entered the
Storage Unit and left approximately 13 minutes later. He returned on three
occasions that day: at 11.58
am for approximately 70 minutes; at 1.29 pm for
approximately 61 minutes and at 2.46 pm for approximately 34 minutes. The
records that at approximately 12.39 pm the listening device detected
sounds within the Storage Unit over the following two minutes.
That recording
was played to the Court (as it was to the jury). The sounds include sounds
consistent with plastic being unwrapped.
Between the second and third visits to
the Storage Unit, the applicant attended “Tradelink Hornsby Trade”
for approximately
five minutes. Between the third and fourth visits, he attended
“Hardware & General Hornsby” for 8 minutes. The timeline
records that at other times (between approximately 1.48 pm and 2.16 pm and
between 2.56 pm and 3.06 pm) the sound recording
device picked up the sound
of power tools in operation.
his statement to police, the applicant said that he did not know why he visited
the Storage Unit on 11 February 2021, that he did
not do much work there and he
was not aware of having ever used power tools or an angle grinder while there.
He said that he never
touched VM2, that when he went to the Storage Unit on 11
February 2021, it was unwrapped and had been pulled apart, but he did not
who had done that. At trial, one of the Crown’s witnesses accepted in
cross-examination that situated directly behind
the Storage Unit was a motor
mechanic business which used power tools. The suggestion, although not
specifically put to the witness,
was that the sound of power tools that had been
recorded by the listening device could have come from there.
tendered at trial was a transcript of WhatsApp messages taken from
Mr Yekta’s telephone which included the following messages
11 February
Sydney Time
Application
Content / Event
Wade HABKOUK
Benham YEKTA
Hey bro what’s going on the place is a mess? Can you get Michael to
clean up his shit
Benham YEKTA
Wade HABKOUK
Benham YEKTA
Wade HABKOUK
I’ll text him now
Benham YEKTA
Mate I have had employees at the warehouse and they have had major
complaint about the mess there
What’s going on ? I need this mess cleaned up straight away
timeline shows that the applicant went to the Storage Unit on 12 February 2021
for a period of approximately six minutes. He was
observed leaving the unit
carrying a vacuum cleaner.
one irrelevant exception, no one else visited the Storage Unit until
16 February 2021.
15 February 2021 at 2.07 pm, Mr Yekta arranged with Mr Madih Ahmad El Kordy
to attend the Storage Unit the following day to collect
and to dispose of VM2.
The next day, Mr Yekta met Mr El Kordy at the Storage Unit at approximately
9.36 am. Mr El Kordy backed his
truck up to the entrance of the Storage
Unit. Mr Yekta used the forklift to lift VM2 onto the truck. Those events
were recorded by
the video surveillance camera. The relevant video was played to
the Court (and again to the jury). It is apparent that Mr Yekta and
Mr El Kordy
had some difficulty in loading VM2 onto the truck. Eventually, it was toppled
into the truck. By that stage, some parts
had been separated from the mixer,
although it is not entirely clear whether all the parts were separated
beforehand or whether some
parts came off while VM2 was being placed on the
El Kordy left the Storage Unit at 9.55 am with VM2 on the back of his truck. The
police followed him to his residential address
at Villawood, Sydney where they
seized VM2. At that time, they observed that Panel E
had been removed
from VM2 as had the lead box that was behind Panel E. It is apparent from
photographs taken at the time that a roughly
rectangular hole had been cut into
the lead box behind Panel E. The lead boxes behind the other panels remained in
place, although
the panels themselves had been removed from the
question for this Court in determining whether the verdict of a jury is
unreasonable within the meaning of
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW) is “whether it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was
open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that the accused was
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
(Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ), cited most recently with
approval by the High Court in
[2025] HCA 9
(2025) 99 ALJR 676
(Gageler CJ, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ).
the present case, the applicant submits that the jury could not have been
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Yekta alone
had not sought to possess
the heroin that had been placed in VM2. In his submission, there were three
possibilities. One was that
the applicant had attempted to possess the heroin.
The second was that there was a joint attempt to possess the heroin by the
and Mr Yekta. A third possibility was that Mr Yekta had attempted to
possess the heroin alone. In the applicant’s submission,
the prosecution
had not negatived the third possibility beyond reasonable doubt.
submission cannot be accepted. In our opinion, it was open to the jury to
conclude beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Yekta could
not have attempted to
possess the heroin alone. The steps that were taken in an attempt to possess the
heroin relevantly included
the unwrapping of VM2, the removal of Panel E, the
extraction of the lead box behind Panel E and the cutting of a roughly
rectangular
hole in that lead box. If Mr Yekta had attempted to possess the
heroin alone, he must have taken all those steps in the 13 minutes
approximately 6.47 pm and 7.00 pm on 10 February 2021. VM2 was not delivered to
the Storage Unit until about 6.30 pm on that
day. Prior to 6.47 pm Mr Yekta
was using the forklift vehicle to place VM2 in the Storage Unit. At the time,
the mixer was on a pallet
and wrapped in plastic. Both Mr Yekta and the
applicant left the Storage Unit at 7.00 pm. Mr Yekta did not return to the
Unit until after VM2 had been dismantled. The jury was entitled to
conclude that it would not have been possible for Mr Yekta alone
to have taken
all of the steps in the time available. VM2 was a large machine wrapped in
layers of plastic. It would have taken some
time to remove that plastic.
Assuming that Mr Yekta knew in advance exactly where Panel E was and to look
behind it, it would still
be necessary for him to unscrew 14 screws and remove
the panel. It would then have been necessary for him to retrieve the lead box.
The evidence at trial was that to do that, it was necessary to lever it out with
a screwdriver. It would then have been necessary
to cut the hole in the lead
box. It is unclear how that occurred. The evidence at trial was that using some
force it would have been
possible to do that with a screwdriver, although the
images of the hole suggest that it was more likely done with a machine, since
the cuts that form the rough rectangle go beyond the actual hole. However, it
does not matter how it was done. What matters is that
it is obvious that it
would have taken some time to do. Taking all the steps together the only
reasonable conclusion is that it would
not have been possible for one person
alone to carry out all those steps in 13 minutes. The conclusion that Mr Yekta
alone did not
dismantle VM2 on 10 February 2021 is supported by several other
considerations.
just before 7.00 pm, Mr Yekta sent photographs of VM2 still wrapped. The
likelihood is that he took those photographs shortly
before he left. The request
for photographs was made at approximately 6.30 pm. Mr Yekta could not have taken
them immediately, since
he was taking delivery of VM2 at the time and the
photographs he took show VM2 still wrapped on a pallet sitting on the floor of
the Storage Unit. It follows that they must have be taken some time after
6.45 pm. The photographs follow the message “All
done”, which
suggests that the photographs record the completion of whatever tasks were
undertaken at that time. It is unclear
why Phumi wanted photographs of VM2. It
is reasonable to infer that Phumi was a pseudonym for Mr Guy Habkouk. But even
assuming that
it was someone else with an interest in the safe arrival of the
machine, if the true position is that Mr Yekta had unwrapped VM2
before leaving
the Storage Unit at 7.00 pm, it is reasonable to infer that he would have taken
photographs of the unwrapped machine.
the sound recording device clearly records the sound of plastic being unwrapped
on 11 February 2021. No such sound is recorded
on 10 February 2021.
the length of time that the applicant spent at the Storage Unit on
11 February 2021 is more consistent with the types of activities
undertaken in an attempt to obtain possession of the heroin. Both at trial and
on appeal considerable attention was devoted
to whether the listening device
installed in the Storage Unit recorded the sound of power tools and whether the
use of power tools
was necessary to dismantle VM2 in the way that it had been.
There was also an issue about how the applicant could have removed Panels
and H, given the weight of the machine and the fact that it was lying on its
back. But none of that is significant in relation
to the question whether Mr
Yekta alone could have attempted to obtain possession of the heroin. What is
significant is that however
it was done, it would take some time because of the
tasks involved.
on the evening of 11 February 2021, the applicant sent Mr Yekta a WhatsApp
message which said “Hey bro what’s
going on the place is a mess? Can
you get Michael to clean up his shit.” That message and the subsequent
ones are cryptic.
However, it is reasonable to infer that the applicant was
telling Mr Yekta that there was no heroin and that he should arrange for
be disposed of. If the true position was that Mr Yekta had obtained access to
the lead box behind Panel E on 10 February 2021,
that exchange of messages would
have been unnecessary and it is to be expected that Mr Yekta would have taken
steps immediately on
10 February 2021 to have VM2 removed.
it is unclear why the applicant went to the Storage Unit on 10 February if not
to assist Mr Yekta to do whatever he was doing.
The applicant said in his
statement to the police that he went there to assist Mr Yekta to take delivery
of VM2. However, the only
thing the applicant did in that regard was open the
garage door to the Storage Unit. It is not plausible that having gone there
specifically
to assist Mr Yekta in taking delivery of the machine he did not
assist Mr Yekta with whatever else Mr Yekta did with the machine
those matters together it was plainly open to the jury to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the attempt to possess
the heroin had not been undertaken
by Mr Yekta alone.
support of ground 2, the applicant relies on the following statements made by
the Crown Prosecutor during the course of her closing
“Now, the obligation on the Crown is to prove the elements beyond a
reasonable doubt as has been indicated to you several times
during the course of
this trial. Now, that does not mean that the Crown has to chase every rabbit
down every burrow in this case.
There will be some questions of fact that have
arisen in the trial that you may think do not have an answer. For example, you
be thinking, ‘Where is Mr Yekter [sic.] and why wasn’t he
charged?’ You might also be thinking, ‘Where is
Mr Guy Habkouk, the
accused’s brother? What has happened to him?’ You might also be
wondering about the young man we
saw on the footage going into the storage unit
on 15 February 2021. You might recall that was a young male apprentice and the
was that he worked for Mr Yekter [sic.]. You might be asking yourself,
‘Well, where does he fit in all of this and why hasn’t
said much about him?’
These would all be very reasonable questions to be asking yourselves, I accept
that. These questions do arise, I suspect, in your
mind, on the evidence. But
what I want to emphasise to you is that the Crown only has to prove the elements
of the charge as against
the accused, Wade Habkouk. The Crown does not need to
prove every single question of fact that arises in this case.
You are not
here to decide what Mr Yekter
may have done or not done; that is
not the purpose of this trial. Any question you have about
or Mr Guy Habkouk, I am going to ask you to put
those questions out of your mind when you come to assess whether the Crown has
its case against this accused person being Mr Wade Habkouk
[emphasis added by applicant]
later towards the end of the Crown Prosecutor’s closing:
“Some of you may be feeling sympathetic to the accused because he’s
here on his own. That is, Mr Yetka [sic] is not here
and his brother Guy Habkouk
is not here. Some of you might be thinking, this is a stitch-up. Poor old Wade
is sitting here in the
dock and he’s taking the flak. While those thoughts
might be entirely natural, I ask you to put any thoughts or emotions you
have about that to one side when you come to assess the evidence as you must do
objectively and without emotion. That is your
role as members of the jury
deciding the facts of this case. It’s not a comparative exercise whereby
you reason, well, his
brother Guy seems to be more involved than Wade so
let’s find Wade not guilty for that reason or well, Mr Yekta wasn’t
charged and I don’t think that’s particularly fair so let’s
find Wade not guilty for that reason.
It’s not your role as members of the jury to start engaging in that sort
of reasoning.
What you are required to do is objectively assess the evidence
as it has been presented against this accused and you need to put any
or thoughts you may have about Mr Yetka
or Guy Habkouk to one
...” [emphasis added by applicant]
comments are said to be consistent with a summary of the closing address
prepared by the Crown prosecutor at the trial judge’s
request and are
reflected in the following comments made by the trial judge during the course of
summing up:
“However, the Crown reminded you that whilst it needed to prove each of
the elements beyond reasonable doubt, it did not have
to effectively, as the
Crown said, chase every rabbit down every burrow.
Questions such as Mr
Yekta’s involvement
, whether he was charged, for example, or for that
matter, Guy Habkouk and what happened to him are
not matters which should
trouble you as part of your determination as to whether the Crown had proven its
case against the accused,
Wade Habkouk.
[emphasis added by
submissions to the jury and the trial judge’s summing up are said to
result in a miscarriage of justice because they had
the effect of excluding from
the jury’s consideration the possibility that it was Mr Yekta and not the
applicant who attempted
to obtain possession of the heroin.
do not accept the applicant’s submission. The statements must be
understood in context. The applicant’s case at trial
was not that the
prosecution had failed to exclude beyond reasonable doubt the possibility that
Mr Yekta alone had attempted to obtain
possession of the heroin on 10 February
2021. For the reasons we have given, that was not a realistic possibility.
Rather, the applicant’s
case at trial proceeded on the basis that,
although the Crown did not rule out the possibility that the attempt to obtain
of the heroin was made on 10 February 2021, its primary case was that
the attempt was made on 11 February 2021. According to the
applicant, there were
too many gaps and uncertainties relating to that case for the jury to be
satisfied that it had been proved
beyond reasonable doubt. So, for example, it
was said that the jury could not be satisfied that the sounds recorded by the
device on 11 February 2021 were the sounds of power tools because
the evidence established that the use of power tools was not necessary
access to the contents of the lead boxes and the applicant, who was a builder,
would have appreciated that fact if he had
been the one who dismantled VM2. Even
if the jury thought that the sounds were those of power tools, they could not
exclude the possibility
that the applicant was using the power tools for his
business but had forgotten about it at the time he was interviewed by the
or that the sounds had come from next door. Similarly, the evidence was
that Panels F, G and H had been removed (although the lead
boxes behind them had
not been). However, given the weight and position of the mixer (lying with its
back on the floor), it was difficult
to see how the applicant could have removed
those panels.
was entirely orthodox for the prosecution and the trial judge to explain to the
jury that the question for them was whether the
case against the applicant had
been proved beyond reasonable doubt and that in answering that question they
should put out of their
minds what had happened to Mr Yekta and Mr Guy Habkouk
and their own guilt or innocence. Evidence was led of what both did and that
evidence was referred to by the prosecution and the trial judge. In that
context, the submissions of the prosecution and summing
up of the trial judge
could not have been understood as saying that the jury should not take that
evidence into account in determining
whether the applicant’s guilt had
been proved beyond reasonable doubt. Although perhaps poorly expressed, the
statement by
the prosecutor that “
You are not here to decide what Mr
may have done or not done”
and other statements
to that effect,
would not have been understood by the jury as saying that
they should ignore what Mr Yekta and Mr Guy Habkouk had done, but simply
repetition of the proposition that the jury was not concerned with their guilt
or innocence.
as we have said, it was never suggested to the jury that they should conclude
that the case against the applicant had not
been proven beyond reasonable doubt
because the prosecution had failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt that Mr
Yekta alone had dismantled
VM2. Consequently, to the extent that the statements
made by the prosecution invited the jury to exclude consideration of that
hypothesis,
they involved no miscarriage of justice because they involved a
statement to the jury to exclude consideration of an hypothesis that
suggested to them.
any event, for the reasons already given in relation to Ground 1, we think that
this a clear case where the proviso to
should be applied. A substantial
miscarriage of justice could not have occurred as a result of what was said by
the prosecutor or
trial judge about Mr Yekta in circumstances where, on the most
favourable interpretation to the applicant, the jury was told to put
hypothesis – that is, that it was possible that Mr Yekta alone dismantled
VM2 – which the jury acting reasonably
could not have accepted.
applicant submits that his Honour erred in sentencing him, contrary to the
principles set out in
R v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383
[1981] HCA 31
for ‘his role in the importation’,
in circumstances where the applicant had been convicted of an offence of
or attempting to possess a border-controlled drug.
the reasons which follow, we have formed the view that his Honour did fall into
error by his findings as to the applicant’s
role in the importation of the
drugs when he was convicted of attempting to possess the drugs that were
imported. We have reached
the conclusion, however, that no lesser sentence than
that imposed by his Honour is warranted at law with the result being that the
appeal should be dismissed. Before dealing with the ground of appeal, it is
appropriate to set out relevant parts of the remarks
on sentence (
including the submissions of the parties which set the context for the
sentencing judge’s findings.
his conviction by the jury, the applicant was sentenced on 19 April 2024. In the
ROS the sentencing judge set out the details
of the offending based on agreed
facts tendered by the parties. The relevant facts are addressed at [4]-[20]
above and it is not
necessary to repeat them here.
Honour set out the subjective circumstances of the applicant from the evidence
before him. For present purposes, it is only necessary
to summarise those
to the applicant’s criminal history, the sentencing judge referred to the
applicant’s convictions for aggravated break
and enter, commit serious
indictable offence, robbery in company and robbery while armed with a dangerous
weapon. The applicant had
served a period of imprisonment.
Honour referred to the psychological report of Dr Olav Nielssen. The
applicant’s mental examination was “largely unremarkable”
Dr Nielssen considering the applicant did not meet any accepted criteria for
diagnosis of any psychiatric disorder, and no treatment
was recommended. He did
note, however, that the applicant’s reported symptoms and behaviour in the
years after his mother’s
death were consistent with severe grief reaction.
The applicant had a “relatively unremarkable history of substance
which included periods of excessive drinking and the occasional
use of recreational drugs, mainly cocaine.
asked by Dr Nielssen about his mental health, the applicant recounted a
difficult upbringing in which his family faced poverty,
and he suffered
financial exploitation at the hands of his father and brother. Additionally, the
applicant’s adolescence was
also severely affected by witnessing his
mother’s fatal drug overdose.
were five letters of support before the Court, from the applicant’s wife,
her mother and father, a colleague of the applicant
and his bishop. These
letters went to the applicant’s good character, his devotion to his family
and his faith. In particular
the letter of Ms Rebecca Habkouk, the
applicant’s wife, outlined the financial and parenting support which the
applicant provided
to their family and in raising their young son.
Submissions on sentence
Crown submitted the objective seriousness of the offence and the
applicant’s moral culpability were high. In respect to
the role of the
applicant, the Crown submitted that he had a “trusted role and
responsibility for [a] crucial aspect of the
importation”. In oral
submissions, the Crown reiterated that the applicant had “a significant
role in the access of the
drugs the subject of the importation” which
included being central to the securing of the storage unit.
applicant submitted that the offence fell within the mid-range of objective
seriousness on the basis that the Court could not
be satisfied that the storage
unit was leased for the sole purpose of accessing the drugs. It was submitted
that the applicant had
limited, if any, real contact with his brother who was
central to the import operation. Counsel for the applicant on sentence conceded
that it was open to his Honour to find that the applicant had “a trusted
role and responsibility for an important aspect of
the importation”.
Findings of fact
sentencing judge accepted, as reflected in the agreed facts, that it was the
applicant’s brother who imported the heroin
from Malaysia to Australia.
His Honour found that it was the applicant’s brother who oversaw the
customs clearance, transport
and storage of the consignment on arrival in
Sydney. He found that there was no evidence that the applicant was involved in
activity. His Honour did, however, find that the applicant was involved in
the securing of the storage unit in which he ultimately
attempted to possess the
drugs. He was not satisfied the unit was secured for the sole purpose of
accessing the importation.
sentencing judge accepted the applicant’s submissions that there was an
absence of evidence that he was involved in the
importation, other than
accessing the consignment in the storage unit. His Honour found there was no
evidence the applicant was an
investor, provided any finance or was to be
involved in the later sale and/or distribution of the heroin.
respect to accessing the consignment in the storage unit, his Honour found that
it was the applicant who dismantled VM2 on 11
February 2021 in order to retrieve
the heroin.
to the applicant’s role, the sentencing judge made the following findings:
“The evidence is insufficient to establish beyond reasonable doubt that
the offender was involved in the planning, organisation
of the importation. To
the contrary, the evidence establishes that it was the offender’s brother
who arranged for the importation
and was also responsible for its clearance,
transport and storage following its arrival in Australia.
I am satisfied, despite the offender’s limited role in the importation,
he did have a trusted role, and indeed was responsible
for a crucial and
important aspect of the importation.
I am satisfied that the offender was
involved in the importation for
financial gain.
(emphasis added)
a section of the ROS under the heading “Relevant considerations” the
sentencing judge referred to passages from the
High Court’s decision in
Wong v The Queen
207 CLR 584
[2001] HCA 64
per Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ. His Honour then set out general propositions
which emerge from the authorities when sentencing
for drug importation offences
R v Nguyen; R v Pham
[2010] NSWCCA 238
Macfarlan JA and RA Hulme J agreeing). His Honour stated:
“The presence of drugs in the community remains a significant problem. It
has a profound impact on society generally, and more
specifically for those who
use prohibited drugs. It is the importation of prohibited drugs, which
fundamentally enables their use
in society. It is in this context that the High
Court observed in
that the difficulty of detecting importation
offences suggests that deterrence is to be given significant weight in the
task and the social consequences that follow from the commission of
importation offences demands stern punishment in almost every
Further, as was observed in
, the sentence must send a clear
message to drug traffickers that the potential financial rewards to be gained
from the importation
of illicit substances will be neutralised by the risk of
severe punishment.”
a Commonwealth offence, his Honour appropriately then turned to consider the
relevant and known matters stipulated under
The nature and circumstances of
the offence:
s 16A(2)(a)
Honour began by stating that:
“Reference has already been made to the
circumstances of the
importation, more particularly, the offender’s role
.” (emphasis
the sentencing judge was not satisfied that the applicant knew the type or
quantity of the drugs in question, his Honour was
satisfied that the applicant
knew “the consignment he was accessing contained a large and valuable
quantity of illegal drugs”.
Contrition:
s 16A(2)(f)
respect to the applicant’s lack of contrition, the sentencing judge said
the following:
“There is a total absence of any acknowledgement by the offender of the
significant impact of illicit drugs such as heroin
circulating in the community,
let alone the likely impact of such a large quantity of drugs being successfully
imported. Such an
acknowledgement does not require an admission of guilt. It
would reflect no more than the offender
acknowledging the consequences of
being involved in the importation and potential circulation
substantial quantity of heroin in the community.” (emphasis added)
Honour found the complete absence of any expressions of remorse or contrition by
the applicant was relevant in the overall formulation
of an appropriate
Specific deterrence and prospects of rehabilitation:
applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation were found to be guarded. His
Honour accepted that there were several prosocial
factors but said that the
applicant’s lack of contrition did not bode well for his prospects of
rehabilitation.
General deterrence and the need for adequate
punishment:
s 16A(2)(ja)
Honour noted he had already made reference to the role of general deterrence and
denunciation in sentencing for drug related offences,
extracted above at [
Offenders character, age, antecedents and background:
applicant was aged 31 and was 28 at the time of the offending. Prior to his
arrest he was actively engaged in the building industry
and providing
financially for his family. His Honour found that although the applicant’s
criminal history was not an aggravating
factor, it disentitled him to leniency.
The probable effect that any sentence would have on any
person’s family or dependants:
s 16A(2)(p)
Honour accepted that the applicant provided financial and non-financial support
to his family. He said that it went without saying
that the applicant’s
incarceration would significantly impact his immediate family unit.
Presentence custody and quasi-custody
Honour held it was appropriate that the applicant’s 240 days in
pre-sentence custody be reflected in the appropriate backdating
of his sentence.
His Honour also took into account 120 days of quasi-custodial conditions as a
result of the strict bail conditions
the applicant was subject to prior to
sentencing the applicant, his Honour emphasised the fact that both specific and
general deterrence loom large given the supply
of drugs serves to perpetuate the
significant issue of illicit drugs in the community.
Honour imposed a term of 15 years’ imprisonment from 25 April 2023,
expiring on 24 April 2038. The non-parole period was
set for 11 years, with the
earliest date of release being 24 April 2034.
Applicant’s submissions
we have stated, the applicant submits that the sentencing judge erred in
sentencing the applicant, contrary to the principles set
for his ‘role in the importation’, in circumstances where the
applicant had been convicted of an offence of possessing
or attempting to
possess a border-controlled drug.
were taken to this Court’s decision in
El Jamal v R
[2021] NSWCCA
). The applicant referred to passages in that
decision which outlined the imperative of a sentencing judge not to rely on
of fact which constitute a different charge.
applicant submitted that some of the Crown’s submissions at the sentencing
hearing suggested a broader criminality than
an attempt to possess, going to the
applicant’s role and responsibility for a crucial aspect of the
importation. It was accepted
by the applicant that regrettably, these Crown
submissions were echoed without qualification by his counsel at the sentencing
applicant’s counsel referred to sections of the sentencing judgment where
his Honour made reference to the applicant’s
role in the importation of
the drugs. We have extracted these passages above.
oral submissions, counsel for the applicant accepted that if any of those
passages stood by themselves, the invariable inference
would be that they were
references to the “whole transaction” within which the
applicant’s attempt to possess the
drugs took place. He contended,
however, that when the ROS is read as a whole, the repeated references by the
sentencing judge to
the importation of the drugs and the applicant’s role
in that importation, makes good that the sentencing judge erred in sentencing
the applicant for an offence for which he was not convicted.
Respondent’s submissions
Crown submits that when the sentencing judge’s reasons are read as a
whole, it is plain his Honour was aware the applicant
was not involved in the
importation. In this sense, it is submitted that the applicant was sentenced on
the basis of his involvement
in attempting to possess the consignment.
Crown submits that having sat through a seven day trial (unlike
which was a sentence following a plea), it was clear to his Honour the applicant
was not involved in importation arrangements, a
fact expressly reflected in the
agreed facts tendered at trial. This, the Crown says, is expressed in the
sentencing judge’s
summing up when he stated:
“It is readily apparent that the accused had no role whatsoever in any
steps relating to the importation before his first appearance
at the storage
Crown submitted a key distinguishing feature between the applicant’s case
is that here the agreed facts on sentence did not in any way
assert the applicant was involved in the importation. In
Court found that the sentencing judge was responding to “the repeated
urgings of the Crown to make findings about the applicant’s
complicity in
an importation offence”:
respondent submits that the Crown did not at any stage suggest the applicant was
involved in the importation but rather, contended
his role was confined to the
acquisition of the storage unit and activities he undertook on 10 and 11
February 2021. Unlike in
, the respondent submits that in this
case the characterisation of the applicant’s conduct during the
proceedings could not
have been made the subject of a distinct charge:
at [37]. The respondent submits that this characterisation of the
applicant’s conduct was echoed by his counsel.
Crown submitted that it can be inferred that the trial judge had the matters
referred to at [
the forefront of his mind when he sentenced the applicant on the same day of the
sentence hearing. The respondent says this is
reflected in the fact his Honour
said expressly that he:
“accept[ed] the offender’s submission that there is an
evidence that the offender was involved in the importation other than accessing
the consignment in the storage unit
. There is no evidence that he was an
investor or provided any finance for the importation or would be involved in its
and/or distribution.”
(emphasis added)
Crown emphasised the sentencing judge’s reference to the applicant’s
role in an “
of the importation” or “
of the importation” (emphasis added). It submitted that the use of
this qualifying language was intended to reflect his Honour’s
that the applicant’s role was confined to the final stage of the
importation where the drugs were received and an
attempt was made by the
applicant to possess them.
Relevant legal principles
starting point for this ground of appeal is the decision of the High Court in
The Queen v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
[1999] HCA 54
Payne JA; Garling and
Wright JJ agreeing) in
at [24]). In
at [16] - a
case in which the applicant had pleaded guilty to the importation of narcotics -
the High Court explained that “the
sentencing judge is not obliged to
inquire about the course of events before or after an importation of
drugs”. With reference
the High Court said at
“...The offender may have conspired with others to import the drugs; the
offender may very well have intended to deal with
the drugs in Australia in ways
that amount to the commission of other offences in this country. But it would be
quite wrong to sentence
an offender for crimes with which that offender is not
(footnotes removed)
an offender is convicted of a charge of possess or attempt to possess a large
quantity of drugs, the particular circumstances
relevant to both an importation
offence and possession offence may be taken into account in the possession
offence notwithstanding
they could also be taken into account upon an
importation offence:
R v Lawless
(Court of Criminal Appeal, 24 June 1994,
unreported)
; El-Ghourani v R
[2009] NSWCCA 140
El‑Ghourani
at [29]. These circumstances have been referred to as consideration of the
“entire transaction”:
Laurentiu & Becheru
(1992) 63 A Crim R 402
at 415, “the entirety
of the appellant’s involvement in the enterprise”:
[2014] NSWCCA 165
) (Adams J, Hoeben CJ at CL and
Hall J agreeing) at [26], the “overall transaction”:
El-Ghourani
at [7], or the “overall context”:
[2011] NSWCCA 31
. The “entire transaction” and the
“enterprise” referred to by the Court in
El-Ghourani
was the “organised distribution chain” by which
the drugs, once possessed, were sought to be used:
at [29]. To
the extent that a consideration of the “entire transaction” brings
into consideration complicity in the importation
by way of aggravation, such
conduct could have been made the subject of a distinct charge and accordingly
ought not be taken into
distinction between permissible and impermissible uses of evidence regarding the
offender’s role in the importation when
dealing with a possession offence,
is not always an easy one to make:
[32]. Care must be taken in applying these authorities following the High Court
decision in
and sentencing judges should not shift their focus in
cases such as this from possession:
El-Ghourani
, Garling J at [64] set out three key principles arising from the
authorities:
“(1) No one is to be sentenced for an offence with which
they have not been charged:
The Queen v De Simoni
[1981] HCA 31
147 CLR 383
(2) The fact and circumstances in which an offender commits the
offence of possession (or attempted possession) of a border-controlled
be relevant to determining the level of culpability of the
offender. But the identification of the precise nature of an offender’s
involvement it is not an essential aspect of the sentencing process:
Queen v Olbrich
[1999] HCA 54
(1999) 199 CLR 270
(3) Care must be taken by prosecuting authorities in order to
avoid leading a court
error when dealing with an offence, such as
the one charged here, not to seek or rely on findings of fact which constitute
of a distinct and different charge, such as facts which constitute the
“entire importation transaction”, by way of aggravation
charged offence:
[2011] NSWCCA 31
Balloey v R
El-Ghourani v R
[2009] NSWCCA 140.
finding error had been established in
, Payne JA said at
“37 In fairness, as I have explained, the sentencing
judge was responding to the repeated urgings of the Crown to make findings
the applicant’s complicity in an importation offence. I have concluded
that the Crown’s focus upon the applicant’s
role in the importation,
with which he was not charged, under the guise of considering “the entire
transaction”, brought
into consideration the applicant’s complicity
in the importation by way of aggravation. Considering the sentencing judgment
a whole leads me to infer that the sentencing judge focused impermissibly on the
applicant’s role in the importation, rather
than the seriousness of his
attempt to possess the drug. The conduct asserted by the Crown and ultimately
relied upon by the sentencing
judge could plainly have been made the subject of
a distinct charge. Accordingly, it ought not to have been taken into account in
the way that it was.
38 Whilst the distinction required to be drawn by the
authorities is not always an easy one to make, I have concluded that the
sentencing judge fell into error on this ground. Whilst it is true, as the Crown
submits, that in some places in the judgment the
sentencing judge made explicit
reference to the offence for which the applicant had been convicted, the
frequency with which his
Honour referred to the “importation
offence” and the importance given to the findings about the
applicant’s role
in the importation in the judgment have persuaded me that
error has been established.”
Consideration
have come to the conclusion that the sentencing judge’s repeated
references to the applicant’s role in the importation
of the drugs in the
context of assessing the objective gravity of the offending and the
applicant’s culpability, establish
the error asserted. In reaching this
conclusion, we have not ignored the findings of his Honour set out at [
] above where he states
that the applicant was not involved in the planning or organisation of the
importation. Those findings, however,
are followed by the multiple references to
the applicant’s role in the importation.
role is said to have been a trusted one where the applicant was responsible for
a crucial and important aspect of the importation.
It was found the applicant
was involved in the importation for financial gain. These findings may reflect
the submissions made to
his Honour by the Crown (and repeated by counsel for the
applicant at the sentence hearing), but in the context of the ROS as a whole,
they ultimately demonstrate an erroneous emphasis by the sentencing judge on the
importation of the drugs and not the applicant’s
attempt to possess them.
His Honour’s references to the applicant’s role in the importation
were primarily made in the
course of his consideration of the circumstances of
the offending and its objective seriousness.
conclusion that his Honour erred is reinforced by a further reference to the
applicant’s involvement in the importation
when his Honour was considering
whether the applicant had shown contrition for his offending, being a relevant
factor under
s 16A(2)(f)
of the Act. We have extracted that passage at [
]. His Honour takes
into account the failure of the applicant to acknowledge “the consequences
of being involved in the importation
and potential circulation of the
substantial quantity of heroin in the community”. This finding was
despite, and contradictory
of, his Honour’s earlier finding that there was
no evidence the applicant would be involved in the sale of the drugs or their
distribution.
do not accept the Crown submissions that the references by his Honour to the
applicant being involved in “aspects”
or “parts” of the
importation show that on a reading of the ROS as a whole his Honour was
considering the entire transaction
and the applicant’s role in it. If his
Honour was doing so, he did it in a manner which impermissibly brought into
consideration
the applicant’s complicity in the importation so as to
aggravate the seriousness of the offending. The repeated references
applicant’s role in the importation of the drugs leads to the conclusion
that his Honour regarded that role as part
of the criminality of the offence for
which he was being sentenced.
concluded that error is established, the applicant must be resentenced unless,
in the exercise of the sentencing discretion
afresh, we are of the opinion that
no lesser sentence is warranted at law:
Criminal Appeal Act
v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
Applicant’s submissions
applicant submitted that a lesser sentence was warranted. No fresh evidence was
relied upon on appeal. It was submitted that a
lesser sentence was warranted
because of the very limited involvement of the applicant. In oral submissions,
counsel submitted that
this Court should sentence on the findings made by the
sentencing judge. It was submitted that as his Honour stated, it could not
found that the storage unit was hired solely for the purpose of the storage of
VM2. Further, counsel referred to his Honour saying
he could not conclude that
the applicant knew of the quantity of drugs involved, which diminishes his moral
culpability, although
he accepted the applicant must have appreciated there was
a substantial quantity of illicit drugs.
was submitted the applicant’s involvement in the attempt to possess was
limited to attempting to gain access to the drugs.
submissions
Crown submitted that if the Court were to find error in the sentencing
discretion, in the exercise of the sentencing discretion
afresh, this Court
would form an opinion that no lesser sentence is warranted at law. The Crown
submitted that a sentence that is
of a severity appropriate in all of the
circumstances in this case has to involve a substantial period of imprisonment
with a lengthy
non-parole period given the pure weight of the heroin involved
(143.39 kilograms). Although it is accepted that there is no evidence
applicant knew the exact weight or type of drug, the Crown submits, as was found
by the sentencing judge, it can be inferred
beyond reasonable doubt that he knew
the consignment he was accessing contained a large and valuable quantity of
illegal drugs.
Additionally,
the Crown pointed to the significant lengths the applicant went to access the
consignment and the fact his conduct was
not limited to his attempts to access
the drugs but included his involvement in the acquisition of the storage unit.
It was submitted
that this Court would find no lesser sentence is warranted at
law given the applicant was a willing and essential participant who
had detailed
knowledge of the key aspects of the enterprise, completed critical tasks, and
showed no contrition for his offending.
Consideration
sentencing for a Commonwealth offence, the Court must impose a sentence that is
of a severity appropriate in all of the circumstances:
s 16A(1) of the Act. The
Court is required to take into account the matters as relevant and known as set
out in s 16A(2) of the Act.
Those matters have been identified by his Honour and
summarised above; there is no challenge to those findings.
offending here involved an attempt to possess a significant amount of illicit
drugs. As the Crown submitted, and as the sentencing
judge found, whilst it
cannot be found beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant knew the precise
amount or type of drugs involved,
he knew that there was a significant amount of
illicit drugs which he was attempting to access.
do not accept the submissions of the applicant that his involvement in
attempting to access and possess the drugs was limited.
He did have a role in
securing the storage unit and having the drugs transported to the unit. He
undertook significant steps to attempt
to access the drugs in the manner found
by the sentencing judge summarised at [
] above, and not challenged on appeal.
offending is a serious example of its type. The applicant has shown no remorse
for his offending. Specific and general deterrence
are important principles in
the sentencing exercise for drug offences. The drugs involved would have caused
significant harm to the
community if they had not been intercepted.
the sentencing judge found, the applicant’s past record of offending
disentitles him to leniency. There is nothing in his
subjective case which would
lower his moral culpability. Whilst it can be accepted that there will be an
adverse impact on the applicant’s
family by reason of the sentence to be
imposed, a substantial period of imprisonment is necessary to adequately reflect
application of the purposes of sentencing and reach a sentence that
is of appropriate severity in all of the circumstances. No other
alternative
means of sentencing would be appropriate.
Commonwealth matters, to meet the need for consistency in sentencing, regard
must also be had to relevant sentencing practices
throughout the country:
Queen v Pham
(2015) 256 CLR 550
[2015] HCA 39
Hili v The Queen; Jones v
(2010) 242 CLR 520
[2010] HCA 45.
We have had regard to the table
at annexure B to the Crown submissions on sentence which refers to similar cases
of attempt to possess
a commercial quantity of unlawfully imported
border-controlled drugs. Recognising that each case has its differences in facts
circumstances, including those of the offenders, those cases provide some
guidance to the appropriate sentence in this case.
the exercise of the sentencing discretion afresh taking into account all of the
circumstances of this case, and in order to impose
a sentence that is of
appropriate severity in those circumstances, we do not consider that any lesser
sentence than that imposed
by his Honour is warranted at law. Indeed, the amount
of the drugs and the circumstances of the applicant’s offending should
have led to a slightly higher sentence. In such circumstances, there is no
requirement to resentence and the appeal against sentence
must also be dismissed
orders of the Court are:
(1) Leave to file the Notice of Appeal out of time is granted;
(2) Leave is granted to appeal against the conviction and sentence;
(3) The appeal is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (422 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter