URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/457.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v KF [2025] NSWDC 457 (7 November 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 457
Hearing Date(s):
3 June 2025, 12 June 2025, 17 October 2025
Date of Orders:
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Priestley SC DCJ
(1) The order will be made as sought by the Crown. The
parties are asked to prepare an appropriate short minute of order in line
these reasons
Catchwords:
MENTAL HEALTH — Criminal proceedings — Special hearing
Legislation Cited:
Child Protection (Offender’s Registration) Act 2000
(Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
Crimes Act (Commonwealth)
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment
Forensic Provisions Act 2020
Pre-Trial Diversion of Offenders Act 1985
Cases Cited:
Kelly v The Queen
[2004] HCA 12
[2004] 218 CLR 216
Taylor v Commissioner of Police NSW
[2024] NSWCA 285
Consequential orders
Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
KF (Accused)
Representation:
Mr M. Heffernan for the Crown
Mr B. Cochrane for the
Solicitors:
Director of Public Prosecutions for the
James Fuggle Rummery Solicitors for the Accused
File Number(s):
Introduction
5 December 2024 following a fitness hearing KF (“the defendant”) was
found to be unfit to be tried in respect of numerous
charges of sexual
offending. On 12 June 2025, following a special hearing special verdicts were
entered pursuant to
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment
Forensic Provisions Act 2020
(“the Mental Health Act”), that the
acts comprising counts 1-6 inclusive and 8 set out in indictment 22.2 are
“but the defendant is not criminally responsible”. Upon the
return of such a verdict the Court may make one or more of
the orders set out in
s33(1) of the Mental Health Act.
17 October 2025, pursuant to section 33(1)(c), orders were made that the
defendant be released on certain conditions. In addition
to those conditions,
the Crown sought an order under s3C(1)(a) of the
Child Protection
(Offender’s Registration) Act 2000
(“the CPOR Act”). The
defendant resists such an order being made on the basis that the orders made
under s33(1)(c) are
not a sentence, and that as s3C(1)(a) requires there to be a
“sentence” to be enlivened, there is no basis for the making
3C relevantly is in the following terms:
(1) A court (the "sentencing court" ) that sentences a person for a registrable
offence must make an order (a "registrable person
order" ) that the person is a
registrable person if--
(a) for a person who was an adult when the registrable offence was
committed--the sentencing court imposes a sentence for the registrable
other than a no conviction order, or
(b) for a person who was a child when the registrable offence was committed--
(i) the sentencing court imposes a sentence for the registrable offence, other
than a no conviction order, and
(ii) the prosecution requests the registrable person order be made, and
(iii) the sentencing court is satisfied the registrable person order is
necessary because the person poses a risk to the lives or
sexual safety of one
or more children or of children generally.........
"no conviction order" means an order under--
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
section 33(1)(a).
registrable offence is defined to mean a class 1 or class 2 offence. The parties
agree the offences in question are registrable
offences. The parties recognise
that the issue is whether the defendant comes within section 3C as a result of
the orders that have
been made. The parties express the issue slightly
differently. The Crown poses the question as whether “an order for a
release, conditionally or unconditionally under s33(1) of the
Mental Health Act constitutes a sentence for the purpose of s3C of
Act”. The defendant says the question for determination is whether or not
the orders made in this case constitute
a sentence for the purpose of the
definition of that term contained in s2B of the CPOR Act. The question posed by
the Crown is the
more accurate statement of the issue, though it is seemingly
posed based on all the words of s33(1)(c), whereas the question on the
this case is limited to a conditional release. The question posed by the
defendant may tend to shift the focus of the issue
because the definition in s2B
is inclusive, something that the defendant recognises. It is not a question of
satisfying the definition;
as with any inclusive provision, what may constitute
a sentence may be something other than what is set out in the inclusive
That is not to disregard the point that the definition will assist in
determining what other orders, actions or undertakings may
relevantly be a
Definitions and Taylor
approach to the definitions section of the CPOR Act is consistent with what was
said in a case referred to by the parties of
Taylor v Commissioner of Police
[2024] NSWCA 285.
That case was considering the definitions of the CPOR
Act, and in particular the meaning of “sentence”. The judgment
that there has been some amendment to the CPOR Act for the definition of
“sentence” was contained in section 3
as opposed to section 2B,
though the actual definition itself is in the same terms. Although considering
the meaning of “sentence”,
the case considers the question in light
of Commonwealth legislation and the effect of subsection (e) of the definition
of sentence
and so is not precisely on point. It does however provide
assistance. In particular at [14] and in reference to the decision of the
primary judge which was seemingly accepted it had been said of the definition of
“sentence” that subsections (a) to (d)
illustrations of orders and undertakings under New South Wales law that may not
be “sentences” in the ordinary
meaning of that word but are
equivalent in the sense of being other options available to a court when a
person had been found to
have committed an offence”
. I would note at
the outset that that would seem to be an apt description of a conditional
release under section 33(1).
[17] it was emphasised that sub sections (a)-(d)
“are only examples and
that the definition in section 3
is not exhaustive”
Again at [19], albeit with reference to the Commonwealth legislation, it was
said of the definition of sentence
“the definition is nonexhaustive and
may therefore extend to types of orders or undertakings not specifically
identified but
sufficiently similar to the examples identified”
reference was made to the High Court decision of
v The Queen
[2004] HCA 12
[2004] 218 CLR 216
and [103]. It was said that
definition clauses
“are no more than an aid to the construction of the
statute and do not operate in any other way”
. It was further noted
that the function of the definition is not to enact
substantive law but is to aid in construing the statute. McHugh J said
“nothing is more likely to defeat the intention of the legislature than
to give a definition a narrow literal meaning and then
use that meaning to
negate the evident policy or purpose of a substantial enactment”
proper approach was said to be to read the words of the definition into the
substantive enactment and then construe the substantive
enactment in its
extended or confined sentence in its context and bearing in mind its purpose and
the mischief that it was designed
to overcome.
of the issue in
concerned section 20(1)(a) of the Commonwealth
which provides for the conditional release of convicted
offenders and was held to be similar in operation to section 9 of the NSW
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(CSPA). It was held that a
outcome would render the defendant a registrable person, and thus that
provision and the Commonwealth provision were equivalent,
so that the
result was caught by subsection (e) of the definition of sentence and the
offender was registrable. More to the point however was
which set out a hierarchy of outcomes in respect of a person found guilty of
a registrable offence. It was noted that
section 10A
of the CSPA is expressly
included as a sentence by the definition section. The next part of the hierarchy
was described as follows:
(3) The court proceeds to conviction and imposes conditions on the
offender’s release (CSP Act, s 9(1)(a)). Although this outcome
explicitly provided for in the definition of “sentence”, it would be
incongruent with the above if a person who
is convicted but not subject to
additional conditions is treated more harshly than a person who is convicted
subject to conditions.
As such, the offender will be a “registrable
person” under s 3A(1) of the CPOR Act.
that same reasoning, it would be incongruent if a person found to have committed
the acts constituting the offence, and released
on conditions, was treated less
harshly than a person released without conditions.
last point made in
was to point out that on the appellant’s
argument the protective objects of the CPOR Act would be defeated. This was
offenders convicted with no penalty under section 10A of the CSPA would
be registrable persons but offenders convicted and placed
on a conditional
release order which is more serious than a section 10A order would not. This
point serves to emphasise the purpose
and protective nature of the legislation.
It should not be forgotten that the conduct of the defendant that has been found
occurred in this case included sexual intercourse with a child. That
there may be a need for protection is self-evident.
“sentence” for the purposes of s3C CPOR Act.
2B of the CPOR relevantly provides as follows in relation to
“sentence”:
"sentence" includes the following--
(a) any order under
section 65(2)
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment
Forensic Provisions Act 2020
that causes a person to be kept in custody or an
order of detention under
section 33(1)
(2) of that Act,
(b) any order under
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
(c) any action taken under
section 10A
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
(d) any undertaking under
Pre-Trial Diversion of Offenders Act
(e) any sentence or equivalent order or undertaking imposed under the laws of a
foreign jurisdiction.
definition of “sentence” is inclusive and not exhaustive. The
section makes clear that certain types of outcomes fall
within the definition of
at [13] the ordinary meaning of “sentence” in the
context of the criminal law was considered, at least as that word is
paragraph (e) of the definition. It was said, at [13] “
the ordinary
meaning of that word in the context of the criminal law... an order that
definitively disposes of the consequences of
conviction or a definitive decision
on the punishment or absence of it which is to be the consequence of
conviction”
, citations omitted.
would note a helpful definition of “sentence” in the CSPA. By
CSPA, sentence when used as a noun, means the penalty imposed for an
(a) of the definition in s2B CPOR Act makes plain that orders resulting in a
person being in custody or detention under
section 65(2), section 33(1) or
section 61(2) of the Mental Health Act fall within the definition of
“sentence”. Section
65(2) and section 61(2) of the Mental Health Act
are in division 3 of part 4 of that Act which deals with special hearings.
65(1) requires the court to refer the defendant to the Mental Health
Tribunal if the court nominates a limiting term. The expression
limiting term is
found in section 63 of the Mental Health Act. It is a term the court must
nominate where the court would have imposed
a sentence of imprisonment for the
offence if the special hearing had been an ordinary trial and is the best
estimate of the sentence
the court would have imposed. Plainly given the process
involved with section 65 and section 63 it may be arguable that as the limiting
term is nominated followed by a referral to the Mental Health Tribunal that it
may be something short of a sentence of imprisonment
or perhaps any penalty at
all. The definition of the CPOR Act makes clear that such an outcome falls
within the definition of sentence
so that the defendant is a registrable person.
Furthermore, the nomination of a limiting term may follow a verdict of on the
evidence available the defendant committed the offence charged. By s62
it expressly does not constitute a basis in law for a conviction.
In the present
case orders have been made following a special verdict, that is, a conclusion to
the hearing that is not a conviction,
and yet with the consequence of the making
of orders and the imposition of conditions. This strongly supports the view that
under s33(1) are, for the purposes of s3C of the CPOR Act, a
61(2) of the Mental Health Act provides that the court may make any order or
take any action in respect of the defendant after
a special verdict of act
proven but not criminally responsible is reached as it could on reaching the
same verdict under Part 3.
In other words if the special verdict is reached at a
special hearing then after the special verdict is reached the same actions
be taken as if it had been an “ordinary” trial. The last sentence of
subsection (a) of the definition includes any
order of detention under section
61(2). As with the provision concerning section 65 the purpose would most likely
seem to be to ensure
that although the proceeding was a special hearing, orders
made as a consequence which would ordinarily be considered to be a sentence
made in an ordinary hearing are to be treated as a sentence.
comments just made equally apply to the reference in the definitions to any
order for detention made under section 33(1) which
is of course the section
under which the orders in this case have been made. That section applies to both
special hearings and ordinary
hearings. It is a verdict finding that a person is
not criminally responsible. Again it may be seen that in those circumstances
doubt might arise as to whether the orders made following that are a
“sentence” given that it is a special verdict where
the defendant is
not held criminally responsible. The definition makes clear this is not so.
Section 33(1) sets out the types of
orders that can be made; the definition in
s2B of the CPOR Act refers to two of them which refer to custody or detention;
following subsection that refers to a release on condition. The
definition as set out at subsection (a) when viewed against the other
provisions which include as a sentence a s10A CSPA outcome, together with the
purpose of the Act, catches Orders made
under s33(1)(a), (b) and (c). Just
whether the orders made under (d) are caught would need to be decided when the
order to be made
(b) of the definition refers to
section 33(1)
Children (Criminal
Proceedings) Act
. By section 3C such an order is a no conviction order
so that section 3C does not apply to such orders. In other words such an order
is a sentence for the purpose of the definitions of the CPOR Act generally, but
it is expressly excluded as from the operation of
section 3C by section 3C
(c) of the definition includes as a sentence action taken under section 10A of
the CSPA. In other words where there is
a conviction recorded but no other
penalty imposed the person is registrable. That is plainly a reference to a
non-custodial outcome.
It supports the view expressed at [16] and [17]
(d) of the definition refers to an undertaking under
Pre-Trial Diversion of Offenders Act
of that Act the
purpose of that Act is to provide for the protection of children who have been
the victims of sexual assault by a
parent or a parent’s spouse or defacto
partner. The Act provides for the establishment of a program. Section 23 deals
people charged with a child sexual assault offence who have pleaded guilty.
The court requests the person to give an undertaking
to participate in the
program. Section 23 goes on to provide that whilst participating in the program
the defendant will comply with
all reasonable directions given by the director
including as to access to any other person premises or place. This again is a
non-custodial
outcome expressly said to fall within the definition of sentence
for the purpose of the CPOR Act.
(e) of the definition deals with equivalent laws of a foreign jurisdiction and
need not be considered further.
The defendant’s argument
defendant argues that the mandatory registration provisions do not apply where a
release order is made, but only where the defendant
is detained. This focuses
solely on the definition referring to provisions of the Mental Health Act with
their root in the provisions
relating to special hearings, as detailed above.
This interpretation seeks to make the definition effectively exhaustive, rather
than inclusive. What subsection (a) does is indicate that registrable person
orders can be made in those types of proceedings. It
is relevant to consider the
other subsections of the definition, which notably include non detention orders.
further argument was that to make the order was somehow to deprive the defendant
of his fundamental rights. The legislation is clear.
The provision is mandatory,
and it applies to the defendant because section 3C is satisfied. The defendant
has been sentenced for
a registrable offence.
defendant argues that whether a registrable person order is made under s3C is
determined by the seriousness of the penalty and
the safety of children.
registration provisions called in aid by the defendant for this argument apply
to offences that are not a class 1 or class 2 offences.
The offences relevant to
the defendant are class 1 or class 2 offenses and are more serious. It is fairly
obvious why there is the
emphasis on a consideration of risk where registration
is discretionary; it is a consideration relevant to how to exercise the
discretion.
The scheme is different for the making of a mandatory registrable
person order, which applies where the defendant has been sentenced
registrable offence. It is mandatory, and does not require the consideration of
risk factors. The nature of the offence is
enough in the view of Parliament to
require registration.
defendant makes the same argument concerning discretion by reference to the
provisions of section 3G which apply where a person
has been granted bail. In
those circumstances the matter is not yet proven so it is appropriate that in
such circumstances concerning
a class 1 or class 2 offence the position is
different than after the offence has been proven. Hence the need to consider the
of risk in connection with a class 1 or class 2 offence when bail is
being sought.
point of the defendant is that the sexual safety of children remains the
discretionary touchstone. From there a more general submission
is made seeking
to attach to the mandatory registration provisions some kind of assessment of
risk. The problem with this argument
is that the assessment of risk need only be
considered where there is a discretion to be exercised. The order being sought
Crown is a mandatory one. This takes the ground away from this argument
of the defendant, providing of course the necessary preconditions
are met (and
here it is accepted they are all met save for the question of whether the
defendant is relevantly subject to a sentence).
There is no doubt that the
object of the Act is the protection of children but in the case of a class 1 or
class 2 offence, the Act
dictates that protection in the form of registration is
required due to the nature of the offence, and without requiring an assessment
Conclusions
present argument reduces down to whether a release on conditions falls within
the definition of sentence. The short answer to
that is it is a penalty, and
thus a sentence, because it places restrictions on the defendant by reason of
the conditions made on
17 October 2025. The orders dispose of the matter
following the entry of the special verdict. That the orders made are not custody
or detention orders of the type referred to in subsection (a) of the definition
of “sentence” is not determinative. That
provision is inclusive, not
exhaustive, and is dealing with orders made either following special hearings,
or which are special verdicts.
In either case it is a circumstance where the
outcome differs from the “ordinary” finding of guilt, and possible
of a conviction. It logically follows that where as a result of that
same style of proceeding a release order is made on conditions,
those orders
also fall within the definition of “sentence”, a conclusion well
supported by the following subsections
of the definition making clear that in
respect of other legislation, non detention orders are a sentence, and thus
caught by the
mandatory scheme. The nature of the definition is not exhaustive,
so it is no answer to this to say that subsection (a) of the definition
include release orders on condition following a special verdict from a special
hearing. The principles of interpretation
relating to the use of definition
provisions spoken of in
support this approach.
interpretation argued by the defendant leads to incongruous results. It would
result in some orders for release into the community
being subject to the
registration orders, and not others, without any rationale as to why that would
be so. This was the point being
at [27], and referred to
at [10] above.
is true in order for a release order to be made the Court needs to be satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that the safety
of the defendant or any member
of the public will not be seriously endangered by the defendant’s release
(s33(3)), but that
does not render the orders imposed any less a sentence,
either generally or under the definition relevant to s3C. The mandatory
registration
provisions thus apply. Such registration provides further
protection for children, and is entirely consistent with the objects of
order will be made as sought by the Crown. The parties are asked to prepare an
appropriate short minute of order in line with
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (251 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter