URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/176.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Demir v R [2025] NSWCCA 176 (7 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 176
Hearing Date(s):
11 July 2025
Date of Orders:
07 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Stern JA at [1]
McHugh JA at [2]
Garling J at [3]
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
Catchwords:
CRIME – Appeal and review – Appeal from District Court to
Supreme Court – Appeal against sentence – Leave
to appeal granted
– Appeal dismissed
CRIME – Child sex offences –
Child abuse material – Bestiality material – Possession of –
Pleas of guilty
– Imposition of an aggregate sentence
– Grounds of appeal – Failure to take into account a relevant
consideration – Failure to consider objective
seriousness – Where an
ex-tempore judgment lacks the order and precision of a reserved judgment –
Principle established
in Rotner v R
[2011] NSWCCA 207
– Where sentencing
Judge refers to the factors relevant to objective seriousness without making an
explicit determination –
Where assessment of objective seriousness deemed
to have taken place when the sentencing judgment is read as a whole –
1 not upheld
CRIME – Grounds of appeal – Failure
to take into account a relevant consideration – Failure to give sufficient
to a reduction in moral culpability re Bugmy and the applicant’s
mental health conditions – Error in taking applicant’s
mental health
conditions into account – Application of Director of Public Prosecutions
(Cth) v De La Rosa
[2010] NSWCCA 194
– Where the applicant submitted that
he was an inappropriate vehicle for general deterrence – Where no
submissions were
made or evidence tendered to support a link between the
applicant’s mental health conditions and his offending conduct –
Where consideration of Bugmy factors deemed to have taken place when the
sentencing judgment is read as a whole – Ground 2
CRIME – Grounds of appeal – Manifest excess
– Where it was open to the sentencing Judge to conclude that each offence
needed significant individual recognition for the individual criminality
displayed – Where indicative sentences displayed no
error – Sentence
open to sentencing Judge – Ground 3 not upheld
Legislation Cited:
Child Protection (Offenders Registration) Act 2000
Cases Cited:
Baydoun v R
[2024] NSWCCA 65
[2013] HCA 37
; (2013) 249 CLR
Delaney v R; R v Delaney
[2013] NSWCCA 150
(2013) 230 A Crim R
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa
[2010] NSWCCA 194
(2010) 79 NSWLR 1
[2015] NSWCCA 242
[2025] NSWCCA
[2023] NSWCCA 26
[2011] NSWCCA 207
Texts Cited:
Not Applicable
Principal judgment
Erkan Demir (Applicant)
Rex (Respondent)
Representation:
S Talbert (Public Defender)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Brigitte Simeonides & Associates
(Applicant)
Solicitor for Public Prosecutions NSW (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Not Applicable
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court
Date of Decision:
2 and 3 May 2024
Bennett SC DCJ
File Number(s):
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
In the Local Court, the applicant, Erkan Demir, pleaded guilty to two
offences, namely, that on 22 December 2022, he possessed child
abuse material,
and bestiality material, contrary to
(NSW), respectively. An additional Form 1 offence was taken into
account on sentence, being a failure to comply with reporting obligations,
contrary to
Child Protection (Offenders Registration) Act
The proceedings on sentence were held on 2 May 2024 and concluded after two
days of submissions. The applicant was sentenced to an
aggregate sentence of 3
years and 6 months with a non-parole period of 2 years and 3 months.
The applicant sought leave to appeal against a sentence imposed upon him by
his Honour Judge Bennett SC on 3 May 2024, and relied
upon three grounds of
the sentencing Judge failed to consider
and make findings about the objective seriousness of each of the offences;
the sentencing Judge erred in not giving
any, or sufficient, weight to a reduction in moral culpability given the
applicant’s
background and
considerations; and/or taking into
account the applicant’s mental health conditions; and
the sentence was manifestly excessive.
The Court held
(Garling J, Stern and McHugh JJA agreeing)
unanimously dismissing the appeal:
As to Ground 1:
(1) As there was no standard non-parole period fixed in this
case, it was unnecessary for the sentencing Judge to formulate his
opinion about
the objective seriousness of the conduct by reference to a formula of words
describing the offending on a notional
scale. In reading the Sentencing Remarks
as a whole, by reference to the existence of two additional annexures to the
Agreed Facts,
it was evident that the sentencing Judge clearly took into account
the full range of facts and factors surrounding the offending,
including the
features of the offending (quantity of material, content of material, length of
material, date of download), the period
over which the offending conduct was
engaged in, and the relevant aggravating factors. The sentencing Judge clearly
engaged in an
assessment of the objective seriousness of the offences, no error
was made out, and Ground 1 was not upheld: per Garling J at [38]-[42]
McHugh JJA at [1] and [2] agreeing, respectively).
Baydoun v R
[2024] NSWCCA 65
[2011] NSWCCA 207
Delaney v R; R v Delaney
[2013] NSWCCA 150
(2013) 230 A Crim R 581
[2025] NSWCCA 83
[2015] NSWCCA 242
As to Ground 2:
(2) On the issue of the applicant’s mental health
conditions, the submissions of counsel for the applicant to the sentencing
did not encompass any proposition that the mental health of the applicant was
being relied upon to reduce his moral culpability,
nor did the report of the
forensic psychologist make any link between the applicant’s mental health
conditions and his offending
conduct. This element of Ground 2 was not made out:
per Garling J at [54] and [57] (Stern and McHugh JJA at [1] and [2] agreeing,
respectively).
(3) On the issue of the applicant’s deprived or
disadvantaged upbringing, the sentencing Judge clearly quoted, at length,
material relevant to the applicant’s disadvantaged upbringing, paying
specific attention to exposure to family violence and
sexual abuse, and
thereafter noted the Crown’s concession that moral culpability may be
reduced by reason of the applicant’s
deprived upbringing. This element of
Ground 2 was not made out: per Garling J at [58]-[59] (Stern and McHugh JJA at
[1] and [2] agreeing,
respectively).
[2013] HCA 37
; (2013) 249 CLR 571;
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa
[2010] NSWCCA 194
; (2010) 79 NSWLR 1, cited.
As to Ground 3:
(4) Although greater accumulation between the offences was
an available sentencing approach, given the disparate time periods at
videos were downloaded onto the applicant’s phone, it was open to the
sentencing Judge to conclude that each offence
had to have significant
recognition for the individual criminality which the offences displayed.
Further, neither of the indicative
sentences displayed any latent error which
could have influenced the aggregate sentence. The applicant failed to discharge
of demonstrating that the sentence was manifestly excessive, Ground 3
was not made out: per Garling J at [70]-[73] (Stern and McHugh
JJA at [1] and
[2] agreeing, respectively).
[2023] NSWCCA 26
[2025] NSWCCA 121
I agree with Garling J.
I agree with Garling J.
In this matter, Erkan Demir, to whom I will refer as the applicant, seeks
leave to appeal against a sentence imposed upon him by Bennett
on 3 May 2024.
granted leave, the applicant advances three grounds of appeal, namely:
(1) the sentencing Judge failed to consider and make findings about the
objective seriousness of each of the offences;
(2) the sentencing Judge erred in not giving any, or sufficient, weight to a
reduction in moral culpability given the applicant’s
background and
considerations; and/or taking into account the applicant’s
mental health conditions;
(3) the sentence is manifestly excessive.
applicant pleaded guilty in the Local Court to two offences, the first
(a) Sequence 1 – that on 22 December 2022, he possessed child abuse
material contrary to
”) (”the child abuse material
offence”); and
(b) Sequence 3 – that on 22 December 2022, he possessed bestiality
material contrary to
bestiality material offence”).
maximum penalty for the child abuse material offence is imprisonment for 10
years. The maximum penalty for the bestiality material
offence is imprisonment
for 3 years. The legislation does not provide for any standard non-parole period
for either offence.
being sentenced, the applicant asked that an additional offence of failure to
comply with reporting obligations, contrary to
Protection (Offenders Registration) Act
(NSW), be taken into account on
a Form 1 with respect to the child abuse material offence. The failure to comply
with the reporting
obligations consisted of the applicant’s failure to
disclose eight email addresses.
sentencing Judge imposed an aggregate sentence of 3 years and 6 months,
with a non-parole period of 2 years and 3 months. The
sentence was to commence
on 18 June 2023.
respect to the child abuse material offence, with the Form 1 offence attached,
the sentencing Judge indicated a sentence of 2
years and 9 months, and with
respect to the bestiality material offence, the sentencing Judge indicated a
sentence of 1 year and
Sentencing Judgment
Honour Bennett SC DCJ noted that the facts relevant to the offences were
contained in an Agreed Statement of Facts, to which there
were two annexures,
Annexure B referring to the first charge and Annexure A referring to the other
charge. Each of those annexures
set out, in considerable detail, the content of
the material which had been recovered by means of a Cellebrite download from the
applicant’s telephone.
the facts relating to the child abuse material offence, his Honour gave this
description:
“The Cellebrite also revealed 18 videos and 26 photos of child abuse
material. The images depicted naked prepubescent female
children in the form of
cutouts stuck on paper to create a photo montage. The images were characterised
as both category 1 and category
2 per the Interpol baseline definitions as they
focused on children’s genital areas and depicted children engaged in
poses. The children in the images are as young as ten to
twelve years of age. Annexure B outlines the details of examples of the
material ...”
respect to the bestiality material offence, the details of which were contained
in Annexure A to the Agreed Statement of Facts,
his Honour said this:
“The Samsung Note 10 and the Samsung Galaxy
phones were seized by the
police. A Cellebrite of the Samsung Note 10 revealed 261 videos of sexual acts
between people and animals.
158 videos contained material constituting the legal
definition of bestiality, namely, they depicted the anal [or] vaginal
penetration
of an animal or human by the penis of an animal or a human. The
remaining 103 videos depict other sexual acts between people and
animals, not
falling within the legal definition of bestiality.”
as the Form 1 offence was concerned, the applicant had completed a series of
forms relating to his status on the Child Protection
Register. His obligations
were explained to him. He was required to declare his email addresses at the
time of completing the forms
necessary for registration. Only one email address
was declared. About two weeks later, police attended at the applicant’s
Register. Police declared to the applicant an intention to
which time a second mobile telephone was retrieved by the applicant. When that
phone was reviewed, eight other
email addresses, which had not been declared on
the Child Protection Register by the applicant, were discovered.
dealing with the applicant’s subjective case, the sentencing Judge noted
the following features.
applicant was 41 years of age at the time of offending. Whilst a young child, he
had been the subject of significant family violence.
At about the age of 14, the
applicant had been groomed and sexually assaulted by a teacher. After that time,
following a period of
decreasing mental health, the applicant engaged with an
older antisocial peer group and commenced using alcohol and drugs to
self-medicate.
His substance abuse commenced at the age of 15, when the
applicant smoked marijuana. By the time he turned 16, he had progressed
consuming heroin and methamphetamine. He ran away from home at the age of 17.
to the offending, the applicant had been in a relationship, during the course of
which the applicant’s partner lost their
baby in a car accident and later,
as a consequence, his partner committed suicide. The applicant’s mother
died in 2021, and
thereafter, the applicant was the sole carer for his father,
who suffered from Alzheimer’s disease, until his father required
evidence before the sentencing Judge demonstrated that the applicant met the
criteria for Stimulant Use Disorder, Opioid Use
Disorder, Gambling Disorder,
Persistent Depressive Disorder, as well as Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.
sentencing Judge found that the applicant had a moderate risk of sexual
recidivism and displayed insight into his offending behaviour.
The sentencing
Judge found that there was a connection between the applicant’s viewing of
pornography and his hypersexuality
which occurred with methamphetamine use.
sentencing Judge noted that the applicant had previous convictions, including
for intentionally recording an intimate image without
consent, and six other
offences of possessing Category 1 and Category 2 child abuse material. He noted,
with respect to those matters,
that the applicant had ultimately been sentenced
to concurrent terms of imprisonment for 5 months commencing on 18 January 2023
expiring on 17 June 2023.
sentencing Judge also noted previous criminal offences essentially relating to
the driving of motor vehicles on a number of different
occasions which had
resulted in the applicant being ordered to submit to a Community Corrections
Order for a period of 2 years.
applicant had minor drug offences as well.
sentencing Judge noted that the applicant had given evidence before him. In his
evidence, the applicant said that, with one exception,
when dealing with whether
he had a sexual interest in children, he had otherwise told the truth to the
retained psychologist, Dr
Dorman, and to the author of the Sentencing Assessment
Report, Mr Chapman. The applicant also accepted that he needed professional
therapy and treatment for his condition, and that he proposed to undertake that
treatment when he was released. He extended that
willingness to undertaking
treatment for his drug addiction. He also averred the truth of the facts
contained in a statement with
respect to the abuse he suffered as a young man,
at the hands of a teacher.
Honour came to a number of conclusions about the applicant’s subjective
case, including these:
“I agree that in the written material that has been provided to me the
offender has sought to minimise his criminality but
ultimately it stands to his
credit that under oath he acknowledged that he did tell those lies and that he
clearly does have sexual
interests in the images found in his possession both of
children and of animals with which a female person was pictured engaging
various penetrative sexual acts.
I have difficulty in these circumstances accepting the extent for the sexual
assault, but I note that the Crown did not cross-examine
him, either as to the
event or the extent of the event. On balance, I have come to the view that I
should proceed upon the basis
that he has established on the balance of
probabilities, that is to say, more likely than not that he suffered some form
abuse at the hand of a teacher when he was in High School, but I am
not in a position to find that it was as severe as he described
There are no other relatives in this country and the brother fulfilling the wish
of his mother that he provides care and look after
the offender. He provided
background including the domestic violence and the dysfunctional family
environment. He speaks of the offender
being a caring and compassionate and
gentle soul prior to his embarkation upon drug use. He attributes him with shame
and remorse.
He provided a further report giving a chronology of events
including education, domestic violence abuse, the suicide of his girlfriend,
embarkation upon drug use, his attempt to achieve sobriety, his employment, his
prosecution for other offences and incarceration.”
addressing both the Crown’s and applicant’s submissions, the
sentencing Judge recorded the following Crown submission,
with respect to
objective seriousness:
“The objective seriousness of the offences is suggested to be, in the case
of child abuse, just below mid-range, for the bestiality
at the mid-range, and
the failure to comply with the reporting obligations at the lower end of
objective seriousness.”
respect to the objective seriousness, the sentencing Judge noted that counsel
for the applicant advanced oral submissions about
the objective seriousness
which were “
... comparable to what the Crown offered, perhaps favouring
the offender a little more
following findings with respect to the applicant were made, namely
(a) he had expressed remorse by way of his plea of guilty, his acknowledgement
of having lied to the author of the Sentencing Assessment
psychologist, and that he had provided evidence that he had accepted
responsibility for his actions and had acknowledged
the injury, loss and damage
which had been suffered, at least indirectly, by accessing the material found on
his telephone;
(b) the sentencing Judge agreed with the concession of the Crown that the
applicant’s moral culpability may be reduced by reason
of his deprived
upbringing;
(c) the sentencing Judge was not prepared to make a finding that his
circumstances of incarceration were so onerous that they should
be taken into
account in the reduction of his sentence; and
(d) the Judge agreed with the observation of Dr Dorman that the applicant had
some insight into his offending behaviour.
upon those conclusions, the sentencing Judge, after allowance of a 25% reduction
for the plea of guilty, indicated the sentences
recorded at [
], and imposed the
aggregate sentence.
1 of the appeal contends that the sentencing Judge erred by not making any
assessment of the objective seriousness of the applicant’s
criminality.
applicant submitted that, even where there is an agreement between the parties
as to objective seriousness, the Court is still
required to make a finding with
respect to that conclusion, noting reasons for it: see
Baydoun v R
Crown submitted that there was no error with respect to this ground. The Crown
articulated the context against which this ground
ought to be viewed as being
the fact that the Court was delivering its sentence judgment ex-tempore, and
that it is well accepted
that, in those circumstances, a judgment may lack the
order and precision of language that a reserved judgment permits: see
[2011] NSWCCA 207
per Simpson J (with whom McClellan CJ at
CL and Fullerton J agreed).
was submitted by the Crown that, having regard to the principles enunciated in
Delaney v R; R v Delaney
[2013] NSWCCA 150
(2013) 230 A Crim R 581
the sentencing Judge specifically referred to the factors which bore upon the
objective seriousness of the offence, such that it
can be inferred, when the
judgment is read fairly as a whole, that the relevant assessment was made.
Crown submitted that no criticism could be made of the
” way used by his Honour to summarise the critical
factors relevant to the seriousness of the offences. By adopting that summary
contained in Annexures A and B to the Facts, the effect was that the Judge
adverted to the most pertinent factors relevant to an
assessment of the
objective seriousness of the offence.
those circumstances, the Crown submits that no error is to be detected in the
[2025] NSWCCA 83
, the Court (Ball JA, Fagan and Yehia JJ)
noted, at [19], that it was not an error for the sentencing Judge, in that case,
refrained from ascribing the offending to a position on a notional scale
below mid-range
The Court said:
“The duty to assess objective seriousness does not require that a position
on such a scale be nominated:
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 129;
[2011] HCA 39
Court also noted, with approval, the judgment of Hoeben CJ at CL in
as being frequently cited to illustrate what is required
for the sentencing Judge “
... to undertake and to articulate
sufficiently an assessment of objective gravity
, Hoeben CJ at CL (with whom Harrison and Beech-Jones JJ agreed),
said at [56]:
“While it is true that his Honour did not in terms assess the objective
gravity of the offending, he did specifically refer
to the factors which bore
upon its objective seriousness. His Honour took account of the amount involved,
the role of the appellant,
the nature of the conduct and the period over which
it took place. While it may have been preferable for his Honour to have made
specific assessment of the objective seriousness of the offending, he did
implicitly do so. I am satisfied that the factors to
which his Honour referred
were relevant and important and were given proper weight in the sentencing
process. While his Honour may
not have expressly determined the objective
criminality of the offences, he clearly took that into account.”
decade earlier, in
[2015] NSWCCA 242
, Beech-Jones J (with whom
Bathurst CJ and Price J agreed) said, at [39]:
“Nothing in this judgment is meant to suggest that a sentencing judgment
must dwell upon either the facts of an offence or
their objective seriousness at
any length. Instead, at a minimum such reasons should state or refer to the
essential facts upon which
an offender is sentenced and provide at least some
assessment of, or reflection upon, the seriousness of the offending
is obvious that in this case, the sentencing Judge did not apply a formula of
words to describe the offending conduct on a notional
scale. As there was no
standard non-parole period fixed, it was not necessary for his Honour to
formulate his opinion about the objective
seriousness of the conduct by
reference to such a formula.
his Honour, in my view, when his Sentencing Remarks are read as a whole, by his
reference to the existence of Annexures A
and B to the Agreed Facts, and his
entirely understandable decision that it was unnecessary to set out the detail
in his Sentencing
Remarks, clearly referred to and considered the number of
videos and still images, a description of their content, the length of
videos and when the files were created on the applicant’s phone, i.e. when
the videos were downloaded by the applicant.
In other words, his Honour clearly
took into account the period over which the applicant had been participating in
the conduct which
gave rise to each of the offences. Further, his Honour noted
that, although there was no agreement between the parties with respect
assessment of the objective seriousness of the offending, the fact was that the
parties’ respective submissions could
not be said to be different in
substance, and the sentencing Judge did not express any disagreement with those
submissions.
sentencing Judge took into account the full range of facts and factors
surrounding the offending, including the aggravating factors
which existed
insofar as the applicant had a prior record of convictions, the offence was
committed whilst the subject of conditional
liberty, although the basis of this
conditional liberty was later set aside, and, further, that the applicant had
attempted to minimise
his involvement in the offences.
those circumstances, I am satisfied that the Sentencing Remarks referred to, and
took account of, all of the relevant features
which were necessary to be
considered, and that no error in that process has been shown.
would not uphold Ground 1.
2 contends that the sentencing Judge erred “
... in not giving any or
sufficient weight to a reduction in moral culpability ...
regard to the applicant’s background and his mental health
conditions.
applicant submits that the sentencing Judge did not make any findings or specify
the way in which Dr Dorman’s report was
considered, in relation to
sentence. He submits that, specifically, any interaction between his
psychological disorders, past trauma
and substance abuse, insofar as it affected
his offending, was not considered by the sentencing Judge, thereby constituting
particular, the applicant argues that, despite the Crown conceding that moral
culpability may be reduced by reason of the applicant’s
upbringing, the sentencing Judge did not make any finding that the
applicant’s moral culpability was, in fact, reduced,
having regard to that
deprived upbringing.
Crown accepts with respect to the reduction of moral culpability on account of
any mental health conditions, that no such finding
was specifically made. It
draws attention to the fact that no submission was made to the sentencing Judge
that the evidence supported
such a finding.
respect to the position about the applicant’s deprived upbringing and
considerations”, the Crown submits that the sentencing
Judge did not accept the whole of the applicant’s evidence as to
background, on the balance of probabilities. As well, the Crown notes that the
defence counsel at sentencing did not submit that
the evidence of the
applicant’s deprived upbringing and background operated to reduce his
moral culpability.
Crown submits that, when the Sentencing Remarks are read fairly and as a whole,
the sentencing Judge did make a finding, at least
implicitly, that the
applicant’s moral culpability was reduced by reason of his deprived
upbringing.
respect to the issue of the applicant’s mental illness, the only
submission made by his counsel to the sentencing Judge,
was one referring to the
decision of
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa
; (2010) 79 NSWLR 1, where, at [177], McClellan CJ at CL set out a
number of principles to be considered where mental health issues
were relied
upon in sentencing.
in fact was said to the sentencing Judge by defence counsel on this point was
the following:
“The issue of mental health, I’d ask the Court to take into account
the factors of
and where, as I mentioned earlier at para 74
[of the report of Dr Dorman]. there is a diagnosis of persistent depressive
and post-traumatic disorder. So, he does have a real mental illness
that requires treatment.”
note that [74] of Dr Dorman’s report is the paragraph in which he
expresses his diagnoses “
based on the current
was no submission that the applicant’s mental health diagnoses, to which
reference was made, had contributed to the commission
of the offences in a
material way. Without such a submission, and elucidation of the basis of it, I
do not take the submission by
applicant’s counsel to the sentencing Judge
set out at [
to refer to the first principle identified in
which refers to the reduction of moral culpability.
in the context in which the submission was made, and having regard to the fact
that the diagnosis of mental health conditions
was not one which described a
historical diagnosis, but rather one expressed as a contemporaneous diagnosis, I
take the submission
of counsel for the applicant before the sentencing Judge to
be referring to the propositions that the offender was an inappropriate
for general deterrence, that any custodial sentence may weigh more heavily on
that person and whether or not the significance
of specific deterrence was
fact that the submissions of counsel to the sentencing Judge did not encompass
any proposition that the mental health of the applicant
was being relied upon to
reduce his moral culpability is readily seen from the fact that, when he was
called to give evidence, the
applicant himself did not suggest that, in any way,
his mental health conditions had been causally connected to his offending
As well, the report of Dr Dorman, the forensic psychologist, did not
make any link between the applicant’s mental health conditions
offending conduct.
[100], Dr Dorman said this:
“Mr Demir’s struggles with intimacy, and his patterned use of
crystal methamphetamines has been important in contributing
to his initial
sexual offending behaviour, as well as his current offending behaviours.”
light of the fact that Dr Dorman did not diagnose a substance abuse disorder, it
is unsurprising that this opinion does not suggest
any causal link between that
applicant’s mental health conditions and his offending, sufficient to
warrant a conclusion that
his moral culpability ought to be reduced. Rather, it
draws attention to the self-generated use of drugs by the applicant as a
contributing factor.
those circumstances, I am unpersuaded that the sentencing Judge made any error
relating to a reduction of the applicant’s
moral culpability by reason of
any mental health condition.
the extent that Ground 2 contends that the Judge did not take into account the
applicant’s generally deprived or disadvantaged
upbringing, I am
unpersuaded that that is so. The sentencing Judge quoted, at length, material
upbringing. He paid specific attention
to the family violence to which the applicant was exposed in the home, as well
as the fact
that he had suffered a form of sexual abuse at the hands of a
teacher when he was in high school. The fact that the sentencing Judge
concession of the Crown when considering all of the factors relevant to his
assessment, supports the contention of the
Crown that he did take the
applicant’s deprived and disadvantaged upbringing into account in
assessing the applicant's moral
culpability in the commission of the
my view, on a fair reading of the sentencing Judge’s Remarks, he has
carefully considered the applicant’s deprived
upbringing and has taken it
into account in considering his moral culpability for the offence and in
assessing the appropriate sentences.
third ground is that the sentences which were imposed, were manifestly
Court recently considered the principles applicable to grounds of appeal
alleging manifest excess or manifest inadequacy of a
sentence imposed in a lower
[2023] NSWCCA 26
, the Chief Justice (with whom
Davies and Fagan JJ agreed) referred to the applicable principles with respect
to an appeal that a
sentence was manifestly excessive in this way:
“The principles relevant to an appeal against sentence on the grounds of
manifest excess were stated by R A Hulme J (with whom
Bathurst CJ, Leeming JA,
Hamill J and N Adams J agreed) in
(2017) 96 NSWLR
[2017] NSWCCA 221
, as follows:
‘When it is contended that a sentence is manifestly excessive it is
necessary to have regard to the following principles derived
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
at 505 ...:
Appellate intervention is not justified simply because the result arrived at in
the court below is markedly different from sentences
imposed in other cases.
Intervention is only warranted where the difference is such that it may be
concluded that there must have been some misapplication
of principle, even
though where and how is not apparent from the reasons of the sentencing judge,
or where the sentence imposed is
so far outside the range of sentences available
that there must have been error.
It is not to the point that this Court might have exercised the sentencing
discretion differently.
There is no single correct sentence and judges at first instance are allowed as
much flexibility in sentencing as is consonant with
consistency of approach and
application of principle.
It is for the applicant to establish that the sentence was unreasonable or
plainly unjust.’”
[2025] NSWCCA 121
, Bell CJ (with whom I agreed) said
“4. Mere disagreement by appellate judges with the
sentence imposed is not enough to warrant a conclusion that a sentence
manifestly excessive (or manifestly inadequate). The significant degree of
latitude afforded to sentencing judges when reviewing
sentences for manifest
excess or manifest inadequacy reflects the fact that sentencing is a
discretionary exercise in which there
is no one correct sentence and that,
within a range of acceptability, the judgment of a sentencing judge as to an
appropriate sentence
should be respected:
[2025] NSWCCA 111
5. As noted in
(2021) 104 NSWLR 518
, an applicant seeking to challenge a sentence on the ground
of manifest excess has a ‘very heavy practical burden’, and
show a kind of disproportion which is so ‘manifest on its face as to be
indicative of, not a mere difference of idiosyncratic
opinions, but, rather, of
substantive error of law’, citing
[2000] NSWCCA 235
offence relating to the child abuse material, contrary to
, carries a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment. His
Honour indicated a term of imprisonment of 2 years and 9 months after the
application of a 25% discount for the applicant’s plea of guilty. The
notional starting point, therefore, for this sentence,
was 3 years and 8 months.
regard to the fact that the applicant had a prior conviction for possessing
child abuse material, i.e., the same offence for
which he was being sentenced,
the sentencing Judge did not think that the applicant had strong prospects of
rehabilitation, rather
confining his assessment to the applicant as having
at least some capacity for rehabilitation
” and that he had
some insight into his offending
” and, further, the
sentencing Judge had to take into account a Form 1 offence with respect to that
indicative sentence.
respect to the bestiality offence, the indicative sentence was 1 year and
3 months after a discount of 25% for the plea of guilty,
which would have
the effect of amounting to 1 year and 8 months in circumstances where the
maximum term of imprisonment was 3 years.
is to be remembered that, with respect to this offence, the applicant had
downloaded a very considerable number of videos (261)
onto the relevant mobile
phone – many of which were more than merely brief video clips. Some
extended up to one hour or more.
applicant submits, with respect to this indicative sentence, that it was
Additionally,
the applicant submits that the extent of notional accumulation between the two
indicative sentences supports the argument
that the resulting aggregate sentence
is manifestly excessive. The applicant submits that, in effect, the aggregate
sentence represents
the entirety of the child abuse material offence, plus 9
months with respect to the possess bestiality material offence. He submits
“The extent of cumulation of these two offences is excessive taking into
account the principle of totality and giving due regard
to the somewhat similar
nature of the offences, the less serious nature of the bestiality offences and a
proper appreciation of the
objective seriousness of both.”
am unpersuaded that the sentence was manifestly excessive.
may be thought that there could have been greater accumulation between the
offences, but given the disparate time periods, by reference
to Annexures A and
B, at which the videos were downloaded onto the applicant’s mobile phone,
it was open to the sentencing
Judge to conclude that each offence had to have
significant recognition for the individual criminality which the offences
my view, neither of the indicative sentences display any latent error by way of
excessive sentence of a kind which could, or did,
influence the aggregate
regard to the totality of the criminality, including the Form 1 offence, in my
view, it was open to the sentencing Judge to
impose the sentence that he did,
and the applicant has not discharged the very heavy practical burden of
persuading this Court that
the sentence was manifestly excessive.
would not uphold this ground of appeal.
propose the following orders:
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
(2) Appeal dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (316 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter