URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/279.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moustapha v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force [2025] NSWCATAD 279; (14 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Moustapha v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 279
Hearing Date(s):
22 August 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
J McAteer, Senior Member
The decision to refuse the Applicant’s Category AB Firearms Licence
is affirmed.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - Firearms – objects of legislation – public
interest – public safety – fit and proper
– associations
– confidential evidence
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Firearms Act 1996
Firearms Regulation 2017
Cases Cited:
Artridge v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force
[2021] NSWCATAD
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 94 ALR 11
Aluminium (Bell Bay) Ltd v O’Connor
[1995] IRCA 540
(1995) 131 ALR 657
Commissioner of
Police v Toleafoa
[1999] NSWADTAP 9
Constantin v Commissioner of Police NSW
Police Force
[2013] NSWADTAP 16
Cusumano v Commissioner of Police
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs [1979] AATA;
(1979) 46 FLR 409
Livadaru v Commissioner of Police
[2008] NSWADT
Masterson v Commissioner of Police New South Wales Police Force
NSWCATAP 205
State of New South Wales (Justice Health) v Dezfouli
NSWADTAP 69
Ward v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Service
[2000] NSWADT 28
Wiltshire v Commissioner of Police
[2005] NSWADT 75
Shire Council – v- Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
146 CKLR 40
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Louay Moustapha (Applicant)
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
(Respondent)
Representation:
One Group Legal Solicitors (Applicant)
Crown Solicitor
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/001235088
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to s 64 (1) (b), 64 (1) (c ) and 64 (1) (d) of the
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
, the publication and release of the material in
those paragraphs marked ‘[Not for publication]’ – paragraphs
– [44] inclusive are not to be published or released to any person
other than the respondent or their representative.
REASONS FOR DECISION
What these proceedings are about
proceedings concern the Commissioner of Police’s decision to refuse the
applicant’s Category AB Firearms licence
on 10 April 2024 and the
upholding of that decision by way of Internal Review determined on 20 June 2024.
Introduction
applicant in these proceedings is Mr Louay Moustapha (Mr Moustapha). The
respondent is the Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force
(the Commissioner).
The Commissioner’s delegate in dealing with the application for a licence
formed the view that it was not
in the public interest for Mr Moustapha to hold
a Category AB Firearms Licence.
Moustapha first applied to be issued with a Category AB Firearms Licence on 28
September 2009. That licence was approved and subsequently
reissued every five
years in 2014 and 2019 until on 11 December 2023 when the Commissioner’s
delegate determined to revoke
that licence.
revocation arose in circumstances whereby Police had obtained information
concerning a breach of certain requirements and obligations
for maintaining a
licence. Specifically as the licence was issued for the genuine reasons of
recreational hunting – hunting
club, Mr Moustapha was required to maintain
membership of a relevant hunting club and participation requirements. In
November 2023
Police learnt that Mr Moustapha had failed to comply with the
minimum participation requirements for 2019/2020, 2020/202, 2021/22
2022/2023 membership years.
of the information received concerning the failure to comply with minimum
participation requirements, the delegate determined
to revoke Mr
Moustapha’s Category AB Firearms Licence on 11 December 2023.
appears that NSW Police undertook an audit of Mr Moustapha’s compliance
with the licence requirements including membership
of an approved shooting club
/ association and compliance with attendance requirements at activities
organised in that context. Email
correspondence between Police and the Club
Australian Hunters occurred in late November 2023.
initial decision maker relied on three separate provisions of the
Firearms Act
to revoke the licence. The provisions are set out below:
Genuine Reason
for the licence the delegate referred to:
(2) (a) and
24 Revocation of licence
(2) A licence may be revoked—
(a) for any reason for which the licensee would be required to be refused a
licence of the same kind, or
12 Genuine reasons for having a licence
(1) The Commissioner must not issue a licence that authorises the possession
and use of a firearm unless the Commissioner is satisfied
that the applicant has
a genuine reason for possessing or using the firearm.
the participation requirements the delegate relied upon
(2) (b) (iii) of
Firearms Act
and clause 107 of the
Firearms Regulation 2017
and regarding
genuine reason
clauses 31 and 108 (i) of the Regulation were relied upon.
24 Revocation of licence
(2) A licence may be revoked—
(a) ..., or
(b) if the licensee—
(i) supplied information which was (to the licensee’s knowledge) false
or misleading in a material particular in, or in connection
application for the licence, or
(ii) contravenes any provision of this Act or the regulations, whether or
not the licensee has been convicted of an offence for the
contravention
(Emphasis added)
Firearms Regulation 2017
29 Sport/target shooting
A licence that is issued for the genuine reason of sport/target shooting is
subject to the following conditions (in addition to any
other conditions to
which the licence is subject)—
(a) the licensee must comply with any applicable requirements of
(Participation requirements for club members),
107 Participation requirements for sport/target shooters (other than pistol
The holder of a licence issued for the genuine reason of sport/target
shooting (not being a category H licence) must be a member of
at least one
approved shooting club (other than a pistol club) and must, during each
compliance period for such a club of which the
person is a member, participate
in not less than 4 shooting activities of an approved shooting club (other than
a pistol club) whether
or not of a club of which the person is a member.
31 Recreational hunting/vermin control—approved hunting clubs
A licence that is issued for the genuine reason of recreational
hunting/vermin control is subject to the condition that the licensee
must comply
with any applicable requirements of
(Participation requirements for club
Participation requirements for club members only apply if membership of the
club is the sole ground on which the licensee has established
that genuine
108 Participation requirements for member of approved hunting club
(1) The holder of a licence issued for the genuine reason of recreational
hunting/vermin control to a member of an approved hunting
club must be a member
of at least one approved hunting club and must, during each compliance period
for such a club of which the
person is a member, participate in no less than 2
hunting club events.
(2) This clause applies only where membership of an approved hunting club is
the sole ground on which the licensee has established
the genuine reason of
recreational hunting/vermin control.
(3) In this clause—
hunting club event means any event approved by any approved hunting club
(whether or not a club of which the licensee is a member)
involving hunting,
shooting or firearms safety training.
the initial delegate relied upon
(2) (d) of the
Firearms Act
and Clause 20
Firearms Regulation
to revoke Mr Moustapha’s licence as set out
Firearms Act 1996
24 Revocation of licence
(2) A licence may be revoked—
(d) for any other reason prescribed by the regulations.
(Emphasis added)
Firearms Regulation 2017
20 Revocation of licence—licence not in the public interest
The Commissioner may revoke a licence if the Commissioner is satisfied that
it is not in the public interest for the licensee to continue
to hold the
Clauses set out above from the Regulation deals with requirements around
compliance with the hunting genuine reason, which was
the basis for Mr Moustapha
taking up a licence. These matters were referred to in the revocation decision
as well as the failure
to comply with the nominated genuine reasons.
24 February 2024 Mr Moustapha applied afresh for a Firearms Licence. In
completing the application he referred to the revocation
decision where asked
whether he had ever had a licence refused, revoked or suspended.
10 April 2024 the delegate refused Mr Moustapha’s application for a
Firearms Licence. The refusal was ostensibly on the same
grounds that the
revocation was made three months prior. The reviewer noted that not enough time
had passed since the earlier revocation
to determine that Mr Moustapha was a fit
and proper person to hold the licence and holding the licence would in all of
the circumstances
be in the public interest.
Moustapha then sought Internal Review of that refusal decision. In support of
his Internal Review request Mr Moustapha requested
whether any additional
information was required to address the Commissioner’s concerns through
his Solicitor.
conducting the Internal Review the delegate set out the history of Mr
Moustapha’s firearms licencing and made findings about
administrative events. Fresh matters raised by Mr Moustapha included an
inadvertent oversight in his February 2024 application
whereby he failed to
alert the Commissioner to the fact that he was eligible for approval of
recreational hunting / vermin control
genuine reasons as he was a rural land /
farm owner since November 2019. Evidence of a Certificate of Title was provided
to the Commissioner.
concluding the Internal Review, the delegate considered the evidence supplied by
Mr Moustapha, but also identified and raised possible
criminal associations
between Mr Moustapha and a person currently detained awaiting trial in the
United States of America. That person
was awaiting trial on offences of:
possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine and cocaine, possession of
a firearm and
drug trafficking.
20 June 2024, the delegate having taken Mr Moustapha’s information into
account concluded that:
In giving further consideration to the
information available to me at the time of conducting this review, I deemed it
relevant to
apply weight to your familial circumstances, noting the information
contained within my findings of fact, I am of the view, that
even when there is
no evidence of a firearm licence applicant having personally engaged in criminal
activities, there are real and
relevant concerns, in respect to public safety,
should a person associate with criminals.
I am of the view, when looking at this decision holistically, that it cannot
be said that there is
virtually no risk
to public safety in the context
of you having unfettered access to firearms, accordingly the decision to refuse
your licence is affirmed.
(Emphasis added)
this basis like the initial decision maker, the delegate on review had revoked
the licence on the basis of
(2) (b) (iii) and
(2) (d) of the
and cl 20 of the Regulation. That provision provides:
Revocation of licence—licence not in the public interest
The Commissioner may revoke a licence if the Commissioner is satisfied that
it is not in the public interest for the licensee to continue
to hold the
26 June 2024 Mr Moustapha lodged his administrative review application with the
Tribunal. The Internal Review decision of 20 June
2024 being the matter
currently before the Tribunal.
Commissioner had revoked Mr Moustapha Firearms Licence application on the basis
of cl 20 of the Regulation, which is set out at
[18] above.
Firearms Act
provides that a person aggrieved by any of the seven
listed actions of the Commissioner can apply to the Tribunal for administrative
review of that decision. The second matter listed at
concerns the refusal
of a licence. Relevantly the section provides:
Applications
to Civil and Administrative Tribunal
75 Administrative reviews by Civil and Administrative Tribunal of certain
(1) A person may apply to the Civil and Administrative Tribunal for an
administrative review under the
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
of the following decisions—
(a) the refusal of or failure by the Commissioner to issue a licence
or permit (other than a permit in respect of a prohibited firearm) to the
(b) a condition imposed by the Commissioner on a licence or permit issued to
the person,
(c) the revocation of a licence or permit issued to the person (other than a
revocation on the basis that the holder of the licence
or permit is subject to a
firearms prohibition order or an apprehended violence order),
(Emphasis added)
Tribunal’s powers in relation to an application for administrative review
are governed by s 63 of the
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
ADR Act), which provides:
(1) In determining an application for an
administrative review under this Act of an administratively reviewable decision,
the Tribunal
is to decide what the correct and preferable decision is having
regard to the material then before it, including the following:
(a) any relevant factual material,
(b) any applicable written or unwritten law.
(2) For this purpose, the Tribunal may exercise all of the functions that are
conferred or imposed by any relevant legislation on
the administrator who made
the decision.
(3) In determining an application for the administrative review of an
administratively reviewable decision, the Tribunal may decide:
(a) to affirm the administratively reviewable decision, or
(b) to vary the administratively reviewable decision, or
(c) to set aside the administratively reviewable decision and make a decision
in substitution for the administratively reviewable
decision it set aside,
(d) to set aside the administratively reviewable decision and remit the
matter for reconsideration by the administrator in accordance
directions or recommendations of the Tribunal.
Tribunal has jurisdiction under the
Firearms Act
as noted at [21] above.
noted from the section above, an application under
Firearms Act
is an administrative review. The Tribunal’s function on review under
section 63 of the ADR Act is to make the correct and preferable
decision having
regard to the material before it, and any applicable written or unwritten law.
It is well established that in considering
an application for review the
Tribunal is not constrained to have regard only to the material that was before
the agency, but may
have regard to any relevant material before it at the time
of the review:
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR 409.
Administrative Review by the
parties agree that Mr Moustapha filed his application for Administrative Review
on 26 June 2024 being six days after receipt of
notice of the Internal Review
Decision. The application to the Tribunal was clearly within the 28 day period
provided to lodge an
application for Administrative Review. Therefore the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the matter having regard to
Firearms Act 1996
and the ADR Act.
Applicant’s written
‘A-1’. Applicant’s affidavit sworn 11 July 2025 including
‘A-2’ Character reference local Member of Parliament 19 August
‘A-3’ Character reference Lebanese Community Council NSW Program
Coordinator 20 August 2025.
‘A-4’ Character reference Lebanese Community Council NSW President
21 August 2025.
‘A-5’ Character reference Secretary Bint Jbeil Association 20 August
‘A-6’ Character reference President Kfarsaroun Charity Association
21 August 2025.
The applicant
also relied written submissions and his Solicitor made submissions in reply at
Respondent’s written evidence
‘R-1’ Documents filed under s 58 ADR Act (57 pages) filed 23 July
‘R-2’ Further documents filed by the respondent (open evidence) 18
pages filed 4 February 2025.
‘R-3’ Further documents under s 58 ADR Act (pages 58-143 continuing
numbering from ‘R-1’) filed: 13
August 2025.
The commissioner
also filed detailed written submissions in August 2025. They also relied on
confidential written material which is
set out and addressed in the confidential
section of these reasons.
Mr Moustapha and the Commissioner were legally represented. Both sides also made
oral submissions at hearing at the conclusion
of the open evidence. Mr Moustapha
was subject to cross-examination during the open hearing.
noted the Commissioner relied on confidential evidence in the proceedings which
was dealt with at the conclusion of the open sessions
by way of a confidential
session. The existence of confidential evidence was not itself confidential to
the applicant and his Solicitor,
only the nature and detail of that evidence.
This is addressed in further detail below and also in confidential reasons.
Mr Moustapha’s evidence at hearing
evidence in chief Mr Moustapha adopted his Affidavit (Exhibit ‘A-1’)
as true and correct.
cross-examination Mr Moustapha was asked about his spouse and in particular any
involvement in criminal activity. He stated emphatically
that she was not
involved in criminal activity. He confirmed the identity of his ex-brother in
law who he said that his sister had
divorced in 2021 or 2022. He also confirmed
that his family was not involved in criminal activities.
Confidential Evidence of the Respondent
noted at [27] above the Commissioner relied upon confidential evidence the
existence of which was not confidential. The contents
of that evidence were
explored during a confidential session whereby the Commissioner’s
representative took the Tribunal through
the confidential evidence.
Firearms Act
provides the following in respect of the receipt of
confidential evidence relied upon by the Commissioner:
determining an application for an administrative review of any such decision,
the Civil and Administrative Tribunal (and any
Appeal Panel of the Tribunal in
determining any internal appeal against such a review under the
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(a) is to ensure that it does not, in the reasons for its decision or
otherwise, disclose the existence or content of any criminal
intelligence report
or other information referred to in
(b) in order to prevent the disclosure of any such report or other
information, is to receive evidence and hear argument in the absence
public, the applicant for the administrative review and the applicant’s
representative.
these reasons for decision the Tribunal has decided to receive that evidence on
a confidential basis. The Tribunal previously made
orders on a
application hearing to grant confidentiality orders under sections 49 and 64 (1)
(b) (c) and (d) of the NCAT Act and s 59
of the ADR Act (in respect of the
requirement not to file certain evidence) until further order of the Tribunal.
Mr Moustapha opposed
those orders.
have decided to continue the orders made under section 49 and 64 of the NCAT Act
because having reviewed the material, the evidence
suggests that the
circumstances of this case are sufficiently special that the making of the
orders sought is “desirable”
within the meaning of s 64(1).
respondent submitted that the evidence was highly relevant to the proceedings,
and the witnesses and individuals could be constructively
identified.
making any order the Tribunal must be satisfied that it is appropriate to make
the order in the circumstances. The Appeal Panel
of the former Tribunal has
examined the circumstances where it would be appropriate to make an order.
relevant case on this issue is
State of New South Wales (Justice Health) v
[2008] NSWADTAP 69
, the Appeal Panel of the ADT examined the
equivalent provisions in the ADR Act at, [50] – [53] and [81] –
50 Within the opening words of section 75(2) of the ADT Act
(and indeed of section 35(2) of the AAT Act), three elements of prime
are the word ‘desirable’, the phrase ‘for any other
reason’ and the word ‘may’. These
indicate that the purpose
(or purposes) to be served by a suppression order may be ‘any ...
reason’ (or reasons) whatever,
that the power arises when the Tribunal is
satisfied that the order is ‘desirable’ and that the actual making
order is not mandatory but within the Tribunal’s discretion.
51 There are evident and important differences between a power conferred in
these terms and the common law power to prohibit or restrict
the reporting of
matters occurring in open court described by McHugh JA in John Fairfax &
Sons Ltd v Police Tribunal of New South
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
at 4. As set
out above at [44], his Honour stated that by virtue of the principle of open
justice, an order prohibiting fair and
accurate reports of what occurs in the
courtroom is only valid if it is ‘really necessary to secure the proper
administration
of justice in proceedings before it’. In this statement of
principle, both the purposes to be served by a suppression order
criterion for determining whether one may be made are formulated in distinctly
narrower terms than in section 75(2) of the
52 In a number of leading authorities dealing with suppression orders at
common law, the order sought was (as in the present case)
an order preventing
the public identification of a person – most commonly a witness –
involved in proceedings being heard
in open court. Frequently (though not in the
present case) the order was sought at or near the commencement of the hearing
the application was granted, the order made was that throughout the
proceedings the person concerned should be identified by a pseudonym.
53 In such cases, the courts have applied a criterion of
‘necessity’, such as that stated by McHugh JA. They have, however,
widened the permitted range of purposes so as to include securing the proper
administration of justice generally – i.e., in
future proceedings as well
as in the proceedings currently being heard.
81 It is difficult if not impossible to set out in short form all the matters
that, according to the case law just discussed, should
be taken into account in
deciding whether an order should be made under section 75(2). It must suffice
here simply to draw attention
to the following points of relevance to our
decision in this case: (a) the presumption in favour of open justice; (b) the
an applicant for a suppression order to establish good grounds for
making the order; (c) the comparative breadth of the criterion
‘desirability’; (d) the important differences between the types of
suppression order that may be made – between
(for instance) an order (as
in this case) prohibiting disclosure of the identity of a participant and an
order that a hearing occur
in closed session, without notice to a party; (e) the
undoubted breadth of the range of purposes that may be served (‘any other
reason’); (f) the possibility that the purposes to be served may be a
mixture of private and public interests; and (g) the
possibility that, although
generally speaking the prospect of damage to reputation or
‘embarrassment’ affecting a participant
in the proceedings will not
provide sufficient grounds for a suppression order, there may be unusual
circumstances where this is
the principal consideration underlying an order.
82 In view of Ms Johnson’s submission regarding the criterion stated by
the Court of Appeal in Walton v Momot, unreported, 17
April 1997 (BC9708241)
(see [37] above), it is appropriate for us to express an opinion on its
applicability. In the light of our
examination of the authorities, we would not
dispute that, for an order to be made, the circumstances should be
or ‘out of the ordinary’ (though a requirement
that they be ‘exceptional’ may involve setting the bar too
But it is important to recognise that this is at most a necessary, not a
sufficient, condition....Grant v Commissioner of
Police, New South Wales Police
[2020] NSWCATAD 158
reviewed those provisions and the evidence, I propose to make the orders as
sought in effect to continue the existing orders
and receive and apply (to the
extent necessary) weight to the confidential evidence. In my view that evidence
makes a clear and strong
case for the grant of confidentiality, especially as
the evidence appears relevant to the matters that I must consider having regard
to the objects of the
Firearms Act
in respect of the substantive consideration
Tribunal is therefore required to have regard to the confidential evidence (as
now received) and when considering it, the Tribunal
cannot disclose the details
of that evidence when determining whether granting Mr Moustapha the licence
would be in the public interest.
Firearms Act
those reasons a number of paragraphs that deal with the confidential evidence
below are marked ‘[Not for publication]’.
for publication]
for publication]
for publication]
for publication]
for publication]
Applicant’s submissions
Moustapha’s Solicitor referred to the case of
Wyong Shire Council
[1980] HCA 12
146 CKLR 40 at [13-17] when considering
categories of risk which as the practical import of the Commissioner’s
decisions in
respect of whether the licence should be issued.
13. A risk of injury which is quite unlikely to occur, such as
that which happened in Bolton v. Stone
[1951] UKHL 2
(1951) AC 850
nevertheless be plainly foreseeable. Consequently, when we speak of a risk of
injury as being "foreseeable" we are not making
any statement as to the
probability or improbability of its occurrence, save that we are implicitly
asserting that the risk is not
one that is far-fetched or fanciful. Although it
is true to say that in many cases the greater the degree of probability of the
of the risk the more readily it will be perceived to be a risk, it
certainly does not follow that a risk which is unlikely to occur
foreseeable. (at p47)
14. In deciding whether there has been a breach of the duty of care the
tribunal of fact must first ask itself whether a reasonable
defendant's position would have foreseen that his conduct involved a risk of
injury to the plaintiff or to a class of
persons including the plaintiff. If the
answer be in the affirmative, it is then for the tribunal of fact to determine
what a reasonable
man would do by way of response to the risk. The perception of
the reasonable man's response calls for a consideration of the magnitude
risk and the degree of the probability of its occurrence, along with the
expense, difficulty and inconvenience of taking alleviating
action and any other
conflicting responsibilities which the defendant may have. It is only when these
matters are balanced out that
the tribunal of fact can confidently assert what
is the standard of response to be ascribed to the reasonable man placed in the
defendant's
position. (at p48)
15. The considerations to which I have referred indicate that a risk of
injury which is remote in the sense that it is extremely unlikely
to occur may
nevertheless constitute a foreseeable risk. A risk which is not far-fetched or
fanciful is real and therefore foreseeable.
But, as we have seen, the existence
of a foreseeable risk of injury does not in itself dispose of the question of
breach of duty.
The magnitude of the risk and its degree of probability remain
to be considered with other relevant factors. (at p48)
16. In this case, however, the argument was aimed at the foreseeability of
the risk. I need not restate the facts as they have been
conveniently set out by
Wilson J. It was contended that the jury could not reasonably find that a
reasonable man in McPhan's circumstances
would have foreseen that the message
conveyed by the sign placed in the position in which it was fixed might lead to
a risk of injury
by inducing an inexperienced water-skier unfamiliar with the
area to ski in the water immediately beyond the sign in the mistaken
belief that
it was deep whereas in fact the depth was only three feet six inches. (at
17. Despite the force of Mr. McHugh's argument I am not persuaded that a
finding of breach of duty was beyond the jury's competence.
A reasonable man
might well have concluded that the sign was ambiguous and that it could be read
as an indication that there was
a zone of deep water beyond, rather than in
front of, the sign. A reasonable man might also have concluded that a
water-skier, so
reading the sign, might be induced to ski in that zone of water,
mistakenly believing it to be deep. The possibility might also have
occurred to
a reasonable man that it would be unsafe for an inexperienced water-skier to ski
in water having a depth of three feet
six inches and no more. He might well
contemplate the possibility of a skier being projected into the water at a
relatively high
speed in consequence of a mishap and thereby sustaining injury
in striking the bed of the lake. (at p48)
submissions were made as to whether Mr Moustapha being granted a licence posed a
real and appreciable risk to public safety
in that the would not be able to
maintain continuous safe control of firearms. It was submitted that the risk if
any was far-fetched
and fanciful. It was also submitted that the Tribunal should
take a pragmatic and practical approach to the confidential evidence
contrast that evidence with the uncontested matters in the open evidence such as
Mr Moustapha’s affidavit which had been
received without objection.
was emphasised that Mr Moustapha had held a firearms licence for 15 years with
no infractions, and one breach described as a technical
breach which was said to
have been self reported. Further submissions were made that it would be unfair
to place any weight on the
intelligence material that would undoubtedly be
contained within the confidential evidence.
was also made to the unsupported opinion expressed at page 33 of the
material concerning inferred risk and references in the Commissioner’s
submissions (at [67]) to the applicant’s involvement
with the criminal
conduct of a relative and that by extrapolation he is involved in criminal
activity including the importation of
illegal firearms. It was submitted that Mr
Moustapha is clearly related to his brother but does not associate with him.
conclusions drawn by the Commissioner arising for these purported associations
as set out at [69] of the Commissioner’s
submissions, that Mr Moustapha
could as a result not be trusted to have possession of firearms, was flatly
rejected. It was submitted
that when persons are scrutinised and no charges
arise, then the weight should go the other way in that the facts work in favour
of being considered fit and proper to be considered for possession of firearms.
was also submitted that the public interest goes to making the correct decision
when there is limited probative evidence as to
risk. Mr Moustapha accepted the
revocation and did not challenge it. Mr Moustapha’s Solicitor submitted
that he is only seeking
to have a rifle for use on his rural property in
accordance with the stated genuine reason.
Respondent’s
submissions
Commissioner submitted that the Tribunal should dismiss Mr Moustapha’s
application as he is not a fit and proper person
to hold a firearms licence and
that it was not in the public interest for him to hold a licence due to his
associations with criminals.
It was submitted that he is the brother of a person
who had signed a Guilty Plea Agreement in the United States.
respect of the submissions that scrutiny with no resulting charges should assist
an applicant the Commissioner submitted that to
the contrary the evidence goes
the other way against the individual. Without expanding on this issue the
position appeared to be
that if an individual was subject to Police scrutiny,
irrespective of whether there was any proven criminality or even a prima facie
case, such scrutiny established that an individual was not fit and proper.
Commissioner submitted at hearing that the Tribunal needed to be positively
satisfied that Mr Moustapha is a fit and proper person
and trustworthy in that
he can be entrusted with the responsibility to have access to firearms and
comply with the requirements.
Commissioner submitted that Mr Moustapha is not fit and proper because of his
failures to comply with the
Firearms Act
and Regulation in respect of his Club
attendance conditions regarding the genuine reason for holding a licence prior
to the revocation.
The Commissioner also relied on the argument by Mr Moustapha
that the breach was purely administrative in nature. The Commissioner
that it was not. The third basis relied upon concerned the position that Mr
Moustapha is involved in criminal activities
due to his associations with his
mother, brother and sister.
Commissioner submitted that it was common ground that Mr Moustapha failed to
comply with the sport / target shooting requirements.
The only matter in dispute
relates to hunting vermin under clause 108 subclause 2 of the Regulation.
Commissioner referred to the open evidence at page 12 of Exhibit
‘R-2’ that establishes that an unlawful firearm was
Moustapha‘s mother by her son based in the United States, being a family
member with criminal antecedents.
Commissioner also raised an issue that there remains a risk as the US based
brother could still return to Australia notwithstanding
his current
incarceration.
Commissioner noted the open evidence that the brother and sister were identified
in a car together and that Mr Moustapha did not
deny contact with his sister.
Exhibit ‘R-3’ at pages 76 and 77 addresses this issue.
respect of the references provided by Mr Moustapha the Commissioner submitted
that they were of little value and limited weight
because they cannot go to the
central question of risk. They submitted that they only address character
a brief reply in the open session Mr Moustapha‘s representative referred
to his character generally and noted that all of
the ‘association’
matters now complained of and relied upon by the Commissioner, were present
during his previous years
of unblemished firearm usage without undue
inappropriate influence or incident.
Consideration
decision under review is based upon the notion that having access to firearms
would be contrary to the public interest.
note that Deputy President Hennessy observed in the case of
Commissioner of Police
[2008] NSWADT 160
that in reference to the public
interest at [54]:
In considering the public interest, regard must be
had to the underlying principle of the Act. ....
been previously observed, the underlying principle of the Act concerns public
respect of the public interest I note that such matters include public
protection, public safety and public confidence in the administration
licensing system. The
Firearms Act 1996
identifies a purpose to deal with
public safety at s-3 (1) (a) of the Act.
Firearms Act 1996
3 Principles and objects of
(1) The underlying principles of this Act are:
(a) to confirm firearm possession and use as being a privilege that is
conditional on the overriding need to ensure public safety,
(b) to improve public safety:
(i) by imposing strict controls on the possession and use of firearms,
(ii) by promoting the safe and responsible storage and use of firearms,
Appeal Panel of the ADT in the case of Constantin v Commissioner of Police NSW
Police Force
[2013] NSWADTAP 16
discussed how the Tribunal should approach
matters of public interest in licensing regime reviews.
noted in Commissioner of Police v Toleafoa
[1999] NSWADTAP 9
[at 33] the 'public
interest' is:
33. The 'public interest' allows, we consider, for issues going beyond the
character of the applicant to be taken into account. These
may include concerns
in relation to public protection, public safety and public confidence in the
administration of the licensing
system. In this case the public interest case
was a very strong one. The public would, we believe, be quite concerned that a
with a serious history of violence, including violence using weapons, for
which he served several years' imprisonment might now be
entrusted with a
not the main basis for the decision for review before the Tribunal, the notion
of ‘fit and proper’ is often referred
to in the lead case of
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321 and the
various ADT and Tribunal cases that have relied on
The case of
provides the general principle that fitness and propriety are not to
be narrowly construed or confined and can extend to any aspect
of fitness and
propriety that is relevant to the public interest.
position is consistent with the notion of applying the concepts in a broad
manner to the available evidence and having regard
to the objects and purpose of
the regime. In this instance the regime is designed to protect the public as a
primary consideration
and for this reason under the
Firearms Act
access to and
use of firearms is not a right but a privilege.
Artridge v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force
[2021] NSWCATAD 188
Senior Member Ransome observed at [21] – [27] the public interest question
is the main task facing the Tribunal in this
public interest
21. What is meant by the term “the public interest” has been
discussed in many cases. In Comalco Aluminium (Bell Bay)
Ltd v O'Connor and
[1995] IRCA 540
(1995) 131 ALR 657
, the Industrial Relations Court stated at 681:
“The purpose of the reference to 'public interest' is to ensure that
private interests are not the only matters taken into account:
to make clear
that the interests of the whole community are matters for the Commissioner's
consideration. The effect of the reference
is to amplify the 'scope and purpose'
of the legislation.”
22. In Constantin v Commissioner of Police
[2013] NSWADTAP 16
Appeal Panel said that:
“The ‘public interest’ allows, we consider, for issues
going beyond the character of the applicant to be taken into
account. These may
include concerns in relation to public protection, public safety and public
confidence in the administration of
the licensing system.”
23. In Cusumano v Commissioner of Police
[2001] NSWADT 50
President Hennessy stated:
“There is no guidance in the legislation in relation to how these
discretions [to revoke firearms licences] should be exercised.
In my view, the
discretion should be exercised in a way which promotes the principles and
objects of the
Firearms Act
24. Importantly, s 3 of the Act emphasises that firearm possession and use is
a privilege conditional on the overriding need to ensure
public safety. Thus, it
is the community’s interests which take precedence over the private
interests of an individual. In
Ward v Commissioner of Police
[2000] NSWADT 28
Deputy President Hennessy said that in terms of public safety:
27 ...The question for the Tribunal is whether, based on all the evidence, it
would have confidence that Mr Ward would not pose a
risk to public safety if he
had access to firearms.
28 The Tribunal could never be totally satisfied that a person would not pose
any risk to public safety if they were given access
to a firearm. However, in
the context of the Act, the Tribunal must be satisfied that there is virtually
25. That case dealt with whether the applicant was a “fit and proper
person” to hold a licence, but the comments have
been held to apply to the
public interest test as well: Masterson v Commissioner of Police, New South
[2017] NSWCATAP 206
, at [130] – [134].
26. The question of risk is not, however, to be approached in an absolute or
mechanistic way, but in a nuanced way, taking account
of all the circumstances,
including attitudes, character and prior conduct, with an overriding focus on
public safety: Martin v Commissioner
of Police, New South Wales Police Force
[2017] NSWCATAD 97
– [66]; Laing v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force
[2017] NSWCATAD 315
- [64]. The question is whether there is
in all the circumstances a real and appreciable risk to the public: Kavalieratos
v Commissioner
of Police, New South Wales Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAD 117
; Kopco v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force
NSWCATAD 124
27. It has also been stated that the public interest requires that all
licensees be aware of, and comply with, the legislative requirements:
Commissioner of Police
[2003] NSWADT 30
. Responsibilities extended to
licence holders are of a serious nature and licence holders must not only
understand and comprehend
the guidelines and laws that govern them, they also
must act in accordance with them: Wiltshire v Commissioner of Police
has been well established that the legislation and precedents indicate that the
discretion is to be applied consistent with the
purpose of the
Firearms Act
of which is to ensure public safety in accordance with
(1) (a) of that Act.
However it is conceded that the purpose of the licencing regime is protective
not punitive and all endeavours
are directed towards maintaining and enhancing
public safety.
balancing those risk matters with the objects and the overall protective purpose
of public safety from
Firearms Act
I am satisfied that on the
evidence and material before the Tribunal, it would be in the public interest to
maintain the refusal
of the licence.
a broad public interest perspective, notwithstanding the clear unfairness to Mr
Moustapha, I find the confidential material which,
whilst unfair to Mr
Moustapha, it is of probative value and must be given some weight
notwithstanding that it cannot be tested further
in these proceedings. That
evidence essentially tips the balance against Mr Moustapha combined with the
open evidence matters, and
in particular the actions of family members in the
open evidence and Mr Moustapha’s albeit innocent but understandable
relationship
with some family members.
accept that the technical breaches which resulted in the revocation might well
have enabled the licence to issue on review, had
it not been for the open
evidence concerning the U.S. Affidavit, and the matters identified at [54] to
[58] above. Those matters
combined with the confidential evidence create a level
of risk that in my view meets the threshold.
do not agree with the Respondent’s reliance on the notion of virtually no
risk, as that concept has lessened in the years
since the notion was first
raised in the former Tribunal in
Ward v Commissioner of Police
Mr Moustapha’s submission that the risk would need to be real and
appreciable is made in the absence of the confidential
evidence. The relevant
matter is in my view set out in the cases of
Masterson v Commissioner of
Police, New South Wales
[2017] NSWCATAP 206
, Martin v Commissioner of
Police, New South Wales Police Force
[2017] NSWCATAD 97
Laing v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2017] NSWCATAD 315
[64]. The relevant approach could be described from those cases as not to be
approached in an absolute or mechanistic way, but in
a nuanced way, taking
account of all the circumstances, including attitudes, character and prior
conduct, with an overriding focus
on public safety. Whilst Mr Moustapha’s
history and character is broadly pro-social, taking into account all of the
(including the confidential evidence), in all the circumstances is he a
real and appreciable risk to the public as per: Kavalieratos
v Commissioner of
Police, New South Wales Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAD 117
noting that the underlying principles and objects of the
Firearms Act
firearms possession and use is a privilege conditional on the overriding need to
ensure public safety, and noting the confidential
evidence adduced in the
proceedings and the findings already made about that evidence, I find that it is
not in the public interest
for Mr Moustapha to hold a firearms licence at this
time, because of the risk.
a result the appropriate approach will be that the Tribunal affirms the
of the findings that I have made, it is appropriate to affirm the decision of
the Commissioner in refusing Mr Moustapha’s
Category AB Firearms Licence
application on 10 April 2024 and the upholding of that decision on 20 June 2024.
this is an administrative review matter, it therefore follows that the correct
and preferable decision is to affirm the decision
of the respondent.
therefore make the following order:
(1) The decision to refuse the Applicant’s Category AB Firearms Licence
application is affirmed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (325 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter