URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Coles [2025] NSWNMPSC 1 (21 August 2025)
Professional Standards Committee Inquiry
Constituted Under Part 8 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National
to hold an Inquiry into a
Complaint in relation to:
Debra Suzanne Coles
NMW0002080350
Date/s of Inquiry:
21 August 2025
Committee members:
A/Prof Chantal Bostock
A/Prof Leanne Hunt
Ms Bernadette
Ms Alison Gray
Appearance for Complainant:
Hannah Panizzutti, instructed by Helaina Drakos, Legal Officer
Appearance for Mrs Debra Suzanne Coles:
Benish Haider from Nursing and Midwifery Association of NSW
Decision date:
8 September 2025
The Committee finds unsatisfactory professional conduct and determined to
impose conditions on her registration.
Publication of decision:
No non-publication directions have been made.
REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
Mrs Debra Suzanne Coles, a registered nurse, was working
at William Cape Gardens (WCG), an aged care facility, when her supervisor
notified the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA) that from
December 2022 until April 2023, S8 drugs had become
unaccounted for at the
facility. An investigation revealed that Mrs Coles was the common signatory of
the S8 Drug Register on the
occasions where S8 drugs went missing. She was
accordingly stood down from her employment on 11 April 2023. Mrs Coles resigned
the facility on 26 April 2023.
The events at the WCG gave rise to a
complaint made on 14 March 2025 by the NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(the Commission)
that Mrs Coles was guilty of unsatisfactory professional
Legislative Provisions
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is defined in section 139B of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
(the National Law), the full text of which and
other relevant provisions are set out at Attachment 1.
Standard of
The Committee accepted the Commission’s following
submissions:
In determining an application under the National Law, the
paramount consideration must be the protection of the health and safety
Commission bears the onus of proving the factual content of its allegations on
the balance of probabilities. In determining whether
that burden has been met,
the Committee should have regard to all of the relevant evidence before
standard does not
strictly apply, it remains instructive in that the Committee should have proper
regard to the nature and seriousness
of an allegation when determining whether
it is “comfortably satisfied” that each particular has been
“unsatisfactory professional conduct” is defined in section 139B of
the National Law. The seriousness of any
instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct is to be measured not by comparing the gravity of the relevant
malfeasance against
the worst cases, but rather by reference to the extent to
which the conduct departs from the proper
be determined
The following issues are to be determined by the
Which, if any,
of the particulars of the complaint are proven?
Does the proven
conduct amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct?
orders or directions pursuant to the National Law
appropriate?
In reaching its decision,
the Committee had regard to the oral evidence given by Mrs Coles, the
Respondent, at the hearing and to
the material submitted by the parties listed
at Attachment 2.
Regulatory Background
On 8 May 2023, the
Nursing and Midwife Council (NMC) held proceedings under section 150 of the
National Law. As a result, the condition
that Mrs Coles not work as a registered
nurse until reviewed by the NMC was imposed on her registration.
Consideration of the Issues
Are the particulars of the
complaint proven?
The complaint and particulars, or details, of the
complaint are set out in full at Attachment 3. In short, particulars 1 - 5 and
7 - 8 of the complaint allege that Mrs Coles on each occasion transcribed and
carried forward an incorrect (
and reduced
) balance of morphine in on the
new page of the drug register on 7 occasions, in circumstances where the ampules
were unaccounted
for. Mrs Coles admitted the facts alleged in these particulars
of the complaint: Reply to Complaint.
At the hearing, Mrs Coles
attributed the transcribing errors to ‘her own personal issues’. She
explained to the Committee
the circumstances of her mother’s death in
February 2023, in relation to which she stated she was denied leave by her
Mrs Coles described these events as ‘very traumatic’ for
reasons which she explained to the Committee.
The Committee noted that
the circumstances underpinning particular 1 occurred before her mother’s
death. Mrs Coles could not
explain the error, particularly given the passage of
Particular 6 provides as follows:
On 10 April 2023, the
practitioner at WCG recorded a balance of 24 tablets in the Targin 5/2.5 mg
Register in circumstances where
there was in fact a balance of 23
In her reply to the complaint, Mrs Coles denied particular 6
as follows:
RN Coles has recorded 24 tablets which was the balance at
that time. A tablet has then been signed out by another RN ... without a
witness. There is an asterix recording this entry as an error, but it is unclear
what the error was, and the first handwritten word
related to this error in the
footnotes is illegible...
The Committee reviewed the relevant
material, including the drug register, with Mrs Coles, who admitted that
initially she had incorrectly
transcribed the balance from the top of the
previous page, rather than the bottom page but the error was subsequently
checked and
corrected, as noted in the drug register: p 125 of the
Commission’s bundle of material. As far as she is concerned, the drug
register was correct when she checked the administration of Targin. Mrs Coles
said she was not on shift when the error was made
at 18.29 and then
‘checked and correct[ed]’ at 1900, as she was working the day shift.
She had not previously seen the
incident form until the day of the present
hearing. She was stood down on the day in question and the issue was not drawn
attention. Mrs Coles denied responsibility for the error, if any, made.
Particular 9 of the complaint provides as follows:
conduct in particulars 1 to 8, the practitioner breached:
Care’s Medication Management Policy; and
and Midwifery Board’s Code of Conduct.
The Commission
submitted at [26] of its written submissions dated 20 August 2025 that
“[a]mong the obligations set out in that code is a requirement that a
nurse must: Comply with relevant poisons legislation,
authorisation, local
policy and own scope of practice, including to safely use, administer, obtain,
possess, prescribe, sell, supply
and store medications and other therapeutic
products...Further, as an employee at WCG she was required to comply with their
policies, including the medication management policy, which included
clear directions to maintain the drug register in a manner consistent
PTGR and provided a procedure for reporting any identified discrepancies in the
At the hearing, the Commission submitted that the Cranbrook
Care Medication Management Policy presently before the Committee was published
on 2 March 2023 and thus came into effect after the circumstances underpinning
particulars 1 and 2. The Commission noted that they
had not been able to obtain
a copy of the preceding policy. Nevertheless, the Commission submitted that the
NMB’s Code of Conduct
dated 1 March 2018 was in force throughout the
relevant period of time relating to the complaint and that Mrs Coles was in
of that Code of Conduct.
The Committee had regard to the
Commission’s written submissions:
10. Medications listed on Schedule 8 of the Poisons
Standard (Cth) are known as ‘controlled drugs’ or ‘Schedule
drugs’ and are subject to strict regulation to manage the risks of abuse,
misuse and physical or psychological
dependence.
11. Morphine
10mg/1mL is an opioid based analgesic solution. It is packaged in 1ml ampoules,
for delivery by injection.
12. Targin 5/2.5mg is a brand name for an
opioid based analgesic combining 5mg of oxycodone hydrochloride and 2.5mg of
naloxone hydrochloride
in a modified release tablet.
13. Both Morphine
and Oxycodone are controlled
14. In NSW the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
(NSW) (PTGR) establishes the
requirements for the management of controlled drugs, referred to in that
instrument as ‘drugs
of addiction’.
15. Under the PTGR,
residential care facilities such as nursing homes are required to keep a
register of any drugs of addiction that
are kept in that
Relevantly, any time a
person administers a drug of addiction, an entry must be made the register. Each
entry must include, inter
alia, the quantity of the administered, and the
quantity of the drug remaining after administration, i.e. the
Entries in the register
must be signed by the practitioner who administered the medication, and
countersigned by a person who either
supervised, directed or witnessed the
administration.
addition to maintaining digital records on the electronic management system
BESTMED, WCG kept analogue ward register books,
consistent with the requirements
of the PTGR.
Once a page of the
book was filled, practitioners were required to record the balance of the
relevant drug, and then carry that balance
over to a new page. When a book was
filled, the balance would be carried over to a new book.
Cranbrook Care Medication Management Policy (the medication management
outlined the manner in
which medication was to be stored, accessed and administered at WCG, and
included specific provisions relating
to the management of controlled
18. The Policy
included detailed directions as to the management of controlled drugs, including
outlining all the steps required to
comply with relevant legislative
requirements, including obligations under the PTGR...
In her evidence
at the hearing, Mrs Coles admitted that she had ‘cut corners’ in the
past, as a result of a high-pressure
and stressful environment, which included a
lack of staffing. Mrs Coles described the process for administering
WCG, which, in brief, was as follow:
Each resident
drugs had their own page on the register;
Of 20 residents,
some 5 – 6 were prescribed
The facility
used written (a book) and electronic (iPad) records;
facility’s iPad indicated the patient, route, medication, the dose and the
time for the
administration (‘
the 5 rights’
), which are
then checked for administration;
She and the
“checker” (in other words,
the person witnessing, supervising or
directing the person administering or supplying person
) went to the
cupboard, which was not kept in an orderly fashion, in order to identify the
The use-by-date
of the drug was checked and the dose drawn and checked;
As most of the
patients receiving
drugs were non-verbal, they had to verify that it was the
correct patient, which was easy given that they knew the patients well;
medication was disposed of in the sharps bin before the administration of the
drug was documented; This was done Mrs Coles
said, by her tapping the ampule on
the side of the sharps bin to empty the ampule; The
register required,
amongst other things, the noting of the dose administered, discarded dose, the
name and signature of the person
administering or supplying, and once
administered, the name and signature of the other person checking its
administration. Once the
pin was entered into the iPad, the person’s name
came up for signature in a little box.
Mrs Coles acknowledged
that she was ‘not 100% accurate’, admitting that she and the checker
needed to supervise each other’s
actions more closely. Generally-speaking,
while vials in unopened boxes were not counted in accordance with policy, she
more mindful to have a closer look to see if the box had already been
In light of the material before the Committee, including Mrs
Coles’s admissions, the Committee is comfortably satisfied that
particulars 1 - 5 and 7 - 8 of the complaint are proven. With respect to
particular 6, the Committee is not satisfied that an error,
if any, was made,
which is attributable to Mrs Coles. The Committee is also comfortably satisfied
that particular 9 is proven, as
it finds that Mrs Coles
“to take due care and make correct entries in drug registers”,
thereby breaching the NMB’s Code of Conduct and Cranbrook Care’s
Medication Management Policy, as it relates to particulars
3 – 5 and 7
Having made our findings as to the allegations, we will
consider the following issues:
Does the proven conduct amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct?
The Commission alleges that Mrs
Coles is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under s 139B(1)(l) of the
National Law in that
she engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to
the practice or purported practice of nursing.
are not defined in the National Law. The Macquarie Dictionary
(Pan MacMillan Australia 2025) defines
not proper; not strictly belonging,
applicable, or right: an improper use for a
not in accordance with propriety of
behaviour, manners, etc.: improper
unsuitable or inappropriate, as
for the purpose or occasion: improper
abnormal or
Furthermore, it defines
contrary to moral precept;
in contravention of some code of
professional conduct.
As noted in
HCCC v Aref
[2018] NSWCATOD
‘Improper’ conduct does not need to be
intentional and includes conduct not in conformity with standards of
professional
conduct: HCCC v Phung (No 1)
[2012] 1 NSWDT 3
[2016] NSWCATOD 62
HCCC v Flekser
[2016] NSWCATOD
. Improper and
unethical conduct may be dishonest, disreputable to the profession, in breach of
explicit professional standards such
as codes of conduct, guidelines and
competencies, and may also be determined by reference to the views of reasonable
members of the
profession: Slezak, Dr Peter
[2011] NSWMPSC 10
The Commission made written submissions that
these breaches constitute improper or unethical conduct, in that the
practitioner’s conduct was not in conformity with the expected
professional standard, regardless of the practitioner’s intention or state
Furthermore, the lack
of care exercised in undertaking a task which is significant not only to the
health and safety of patients,
but also the broader community, falls below the
ethical standards expected of a registered practitioner
”. Ms Haider
referred to falling short of expected standards, in
relation to which Mrs Coles had been “upfront”. However, she
that Mrs Coles’ conduct was not unethical as it was
unintentional and arose out of poor practice and lack of self-care. The
Committee is comfortably satisfied that Mrs Coles’ conduct is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct in that she engaged
in improper conduct
relating to the practice of nursing.
Are orders or directions
pursuant to the National Law appropriate?
Considerations
The Commission made the following submissions, which
the Committee accepted:
30. In determining an application for
protective orders in disciplinary proceedings,
the Committee must
“exercise its functions having regard to the objectives and guiding
principles”
National Law, paramount among them being the protection of the health and safety
of the public.
There are, broadly speaking, five matters which will be of general
a. The need
to protect the public, and in particular future patients of
practitioner, against further misconduct by the
practitioner;
b. The need to protect the public through general
deterrence (of other
practitioners);
c. The need to protect
the public by reinforcing high professional
standards and denouncing
transgressions;
d. The maintenance of public confidence in the
profession which is
achieved by setting and maintaining the standards;
e. The desirability of making available to the public any special
possessed by the practitioner.
32. Ultimately, any
protective orders imposed should not result in “more
consequences for the practitioner than is reasonably necessary
in execution
of the protective purpose of the
legislation”.
146B of the National Law (NSW) provides as
General powers to
caution, reprimand, counsel etc [NSW]
(1) A Committee may do
one or more of the following in relation to a relevant health practitioner the
subject of a complaint referred
(a) caution or
reprimand the practitioner;
(b) impose the conditions it
considers appropriate on the practitioner’s
registration;
(c) order that the practitioner seek and
undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or counselling (including, but not
limited to,
psychological counselling);
(d) order that the
practitioner complete an educational course specified by the
(e) order that the practitioner report on the
practitioner’s practice at the times, in the way and to the persons
by the Committee;
(f) order that the practitioner
seek and take advice, in relation to the management of the practitioner’s
practice, from the
persons specified by the Committee.
Coles’ evidence
In her evidence, Mrs Coles explained that she has
‘worked her way up from the kitchen’ to become a registered nurse in
the aged care facility. As a result of the condition on her registration, she is
currently working as a factory worker at the Woolworths’
Distribution
Centre. In relation to her plans on re-entering the profession, she intends to
order to regain her confidence. She would
like to return to aged care or alternatively, she may work in wound care in a
Mrs Coles has completed further professional
development, evidence of which was before the Committee, to better understand
the processes
governing the administration of medications and the importance of
these processes. She recognises that S4D and S
drugs are highly addictive,
needing strict regulation for staff and resident safety. She now understands
that she must only do ‘one
thing at a time’, to carefully check and
to articulate the administration of medications, for example, by calling out the
She now also knows that it is important to do ‘everything by the
book’ and that ‘falling into bad habits’
is unhelpful. When
asked about what habits she sought to remediate, she stated that she would focus
on giving the administration
of drugs her full attention, including leaving the
telephone on the desk or giving it to someone else to answer. She would also
that the care staff, who were checking the administration of drugs, were
fully focused on the task at hand. She assured the Committee
that she would not
allow outside influences to distract her professionally. Mrs Coles understands
that she needs to lead by example
when administering drugs, which includes
following relevant policies and procedures. When asked about a culture of
safety, Mrs Coles
noted that she was friendly, actively introducing herself and
assisting other members of staff. She believes she is amenable to being
challenged by other staff members.
Mrs Coles is looking forward to
re-entering the profession and doing a ‘good job’, including
managing boundaries. She
noted that the residents were periodically in lockdown
on account of infectious diseases. Because she lived ‘two minutes away
foot’, she would be called in regularly to administer
medications
without pay. Mrs Coles attributed her errors to exhaustion and vowed to never
live so close to work again. If there was
an issue with managing workload, she
would henceforth escalate the issue.
Mrs Coles noted that she
‘needed to do better’. She has worked hard to become a registered
nurse and realises that many
factors impacted on her practice, including
emotional burdens and lack of staffing in her employment. Now she would stand up
to management
and seek advice and guidance from the nursing union of which she
is a member.
Mrs Coles acknowledged that she had not been in a
‘good state’ to work because of her personal circumstances. She is
closely with her long-standing GP, to manage her mental health and her
husband and sister provide ‘excellent support’.
She has undertaken a
variety of steps to improve her mental health including continuing to lose
weight, improving her work/life balance,
undertaking more hobbies such as cross
stitching and spending more time with her husband and her family, including
trips away. Her
youngest of four sons has recently turned 18 years of age. She
acknowledges that she should have taken leave when she was not in
frame of mind but she is confident that she will manage stressors more
appropriately in the future.
The Committee discussed with Mrs Coles
whether she had undiagnosed dyslexia, something which she had raised in her
interview with
the Commission. Mrs Coles informed the Committee that she has not
had issues reading at work but was happy to discuss further with
her GP. The
Committee noted that it was important to explore this issue, if she was
concerned. The Committee also discussed with
Mrs Coles her previous medical
history, which included well-managed sciatica.
The Committee found Mrs
Coles to be a forthcoming and open witness and accepted her evidence.
The Committee discussed at length the Commission’s proposed
protective orders. Ms Haider submitted that the proposed first condition,
not to work as the sole practitioner on any shift, ward or unit
severely hamper Mrs Coles’ ability to practise and was unclear and
difficult to apply. As an alternative, the parties
agreed that a condition be
imposed, which prevented Mrs Coles from being in charge. The second proposed
condition relating to practice
indirect supervision
considered acceptable to the parties. Finally, the Committee discussed the
possibility of imposing a condition which prevented
Mrs Coles from supervising
colleagues and students alike but after hearing from the parties in relation to
the broad scope of the
condition, the Committee decided against it.
DETERMINATION AND ORDERS
to practise as the practitioner in charge
practise under indirect supervision in accordance with the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW regulatory supervision policy (as
varied from time to time) and
as subsequently determined by the appropriate review body
nominate a supervisor for approval by the Council, within 14 days of commencing
work or as specified by the Council
authorise the approved supervisor to provide written reports to the Council at
quarterly intervals, or as specified by the Council.
forward evidence to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW within 14 days of
commencing employment/practice, that the practitioner
has provided a copy of the
full conditions to the Director of Nursing
14 days of a change in the nature or place of their practice, the practitioner
is to forward evidence to the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW that they
have provided a copy of the full conditions to the Director of Nursing
authorise the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW to notify current and future
persons or organisations at any places where they
work as a health practitioner
in Australia of any issues arising in relation to compliance with these
must only be employed as a health practitioner in circumstances where the
employer has agreed to notify the Council of any breach
of the conditions or
unsafe practice; and exchange information with the Council related to compliance
with the condition
Nursing and Midwifery Council is the appropriate review body for the purposes of
, Division 8 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
125 to 127 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law are to apply
whilst the practitioner’s principal place
of practice is anywhere in
Australia other than in New South Wales, so that a review of these conditions
can be conducted by the
Nursing and Midwifery Board of
APPEAL AND REVIEW RIGHTS
Mrs Debra Suzanne Coles has the right to appeal this decision to the NSW
Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of these
written reasons.
Mrs Debra Suzanne Coles also has the right to seek a review by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of NSW of the Committee’s order
conditions. Should Mrs Debra Suzanne Coles’s principal place of practice
be anywhere other than NSW at the time
of seeking a review of conditions, Mrs
Debra Suzanne Coles may make an application for review to the National Board.
DISTRIBUTION OF DECISION
We will provide a copy of this
written statement of our decision to:
Debra Suzanne Coles,
Health Care Complaints Commission,
National Board, and
complainant
_________________________
Chairperson
_________________________
Date: 8 September
Attachment 1
139B Meaning of “unsatisfactory professional conduct” of
registered health practitioner generally [NSW]
"Unsatisfactory
professional conduct"
of a registered health practitioner includes each of
the following-
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
(b) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law
or under the NSW
regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the
contravention.
(c) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of-
(i) a condition to which the practitioner’s registration is subject;
(ii) an undertaking given to a National Board.
(d) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
decision or order made by a Committee or the Tribunal in
relation to the
practitioner.
(e) A contravention by the practitioner of
section 34A(4)
Care Complaints Act
(f) Accepting from a health service provider (or from another person on
behalf of the health service provider) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for-
(i) referring another person to the health service provider; or
(ii) recommending another person use any health service provided by the
health service provider or consult with the health service
provider in relation
to a health matter.
(g) Accepting from a person who supplies a health product (or from another
person on behalf of the supplier) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for recommending that another person use the health product, but does not
include accepting a benefit that
consists of ordinary retail conduct.
(h) Offering or giving a person a benefit as inducement, consideration or
reward for the person-
(i) referring another person to the registered health practitioner; or
(ii) recommending to another person that the person use a health service
provided by the practitioner or consult the practitioner
in relation to a health
(i) Referring a person to, or recommending that a person use or consult-
(i) another health service provider; or
(ii) a health service; or
(iii) a health product;
if the practitioner has a pecuniary interest in giving that referral or
recommendation, unless the practitioner discloses the nature
of the interest to
the person before or at the time of giving the referral or recommendation.
(j) Engaging in overservicing.
(k) Permitting an assistant employed by the practitioner (in connection with
the practitioner’s professional practice) who is
not a registered health
practitioner to attend, treat or perform operations on patients in respect of
matters requiring professional
discretion or skill.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(i), a registered health
practitioner has a
"pecuniary interest"
in giving a referral or
recommendation-
(a) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a public
company and the
practitioner holds 5% or more of the issued share capital of the company; or
(b) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a private
company and the
practitioner has any interest in the company; or
(c) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
whom the referral or recommendation relates is a natural
person who is a partner
of the practitioner; or
(d) in any circumstances prescribed by the NSW regulations.
(3) For avoidance of doubt, a reference in this section to a referral or
recommendation that is given to a person includes a referral
or recommendation
that is given to more than one person or to persons of a particular
(4) In this section-
means money,
property or anything else of value.
"recommend"
a health product
includes supply or prescribe the health product.
includes sell.
146B General powers to caution, reprimand,
counsel etc [NSW]
(1) A Committee may do one or more of the following
in relation to a relevant health practitioner the subject of a complaint
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) direct that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s
practising of the practitioner’s profession, it considers
appropriate be
imposed on the practitioner’s registration;
(c) order that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling (including, but not limited to, psychological
counselling);
(d) order that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by
the Committee;
(e) order that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice
at the times, in the way and to the persons specified
by the Committee;
(f) order that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the
persons specified by
the Committee.
(2) If the relevant health practitioner is not registered, a direction
may still be given under this section but has effect only so
as to require the
conditions concerned to be imposed when the health practitioner is
registered.
(3) If a Committee acting under this section makes an order
or directs that any condition be imposed on a health practitioner’s
registration, the Committee may order that a contravention of the order or
condition will result in the health practitioner’s
registration in the
health profession being cancelled.
(4) The order or condition concerned
"critical compliance order or condition"
National Law
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Wilcox
[2020] NSWCATOD 10
Briginshaw v
(1938) CLR 336.
Bronze Wing International Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2017] NSWCA 41
[2020] NSWCATOD 39
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630,
See Reader’s Guide
Poisons Standard
. NB the footnotes in this decision have been
renumbered but the content from the written submissions remains the same.
Poisons Standard
Ibid s 117(1).
HCCC Material, Tab
20: Cranbrook Care – Medication Management
HCCC v Aref
[2018] NSWCATOD 133.
National Law,
National Law
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Chahoud
[2022] NSWCATOD 36
Care Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
the first four factors) and inter
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2015] NSWCATOD 142
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Schmaman
[2019] NSWCATOD 82
, [88] citing
Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 340
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.28 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter