URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/140.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Nkanyezi [2025] NSWCATOD 140; (15 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Health Care Complaints Commission v Nkanyezi
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 140
Hearing Date(s):
19 May 2025
Date of Orders:
15 October 2025
Decision Date:
15 October 2025
Occupational Division
A Starke, Senior Member
C Hutchins, Senior Member
S Kelly, Senior
J Barker, General Member
(1) The practitioner’s registration as a health
practitioner is cancelled for a period of 12 months pursuant to s 149C(1)(b)
s 149C(1)(c) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW), with
a non-review period of 12 months pursuant to s 149C(7)
of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW).
(2) Pursuant to
s 149C(5)(a) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW), the
practitioner is prohibited from providing
health services as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(NSW) for a period of 12
(3) Pursuant to clause 13 of Schedule 5D to the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW), the practitioner is to pay
Commission’s costs as agreed or assessed in accordance with the
applicable costs legislation.
Catchwords:
OCCUPATION – Paramedicine – Application for disciplinary
findings and orders where a complaint pursuant to s 144(a) of
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) concerned the practitioner having
been convicted of sexually assaulting a female
paramedic colleague in the United
Kingdom – practitioner found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
in that he failed
to notify the National Board of his criminal charge or his
criminal conviction as required under s 139B(1)(b) of the Health
Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) – practitioner found guilty of
professional misconduct under s 139E of the Health Practitioner
National Law (NSW) in that he engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of
a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration and engaged in more than one instance of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
the suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s registration.
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Evidence Act 1995
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
Sexual Offences Act 2003 (UK)
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Bronze Wing International Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2017] NSWCA 41
v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2017] NSWCA 186
Clyne v NSW Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Director General, Department of Ageing,
Disability and Home Care v Lambert
[2009] NSWCA 102
Gautam v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2021] NSWCA 85
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2019] NSWCATOD 20
Health Care Complaints Commission v Bolton
NSWCATOD 160
Health Care Complaints Commission v Brush (No. 2)
NSWCATOD 154
Health Care Complaints Commission v Brush
[2015] NSWCATOD
Health Care Complaints Commission v Collins
[2021] NSWCATOD 132
Care Complaints Commission v CSM
[2016] NSWCATOD 125
Health Care Complaints
Commission v De Lore [2020] NSWCATO 72
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
Health Care Complaints Commission v Drakopoulos
NSWCATOD 173
Health Care Complaints Commission v Elshaimy
[2019] NSWCATOD
Health Care Complaints Commission v FLJ
[2023] NSWCATOD 7
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Karunaratne (No 2)
[2018] NSWCATOD 201
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Limboro
[2018] NSWCATOD 117
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2016] NSWCATOD 133
Health Care Complaints Commission v Meneghetti
NSWCATOD 39
Health Care Complaints Commission v Menz (No 2) NSWCATOD
Health Care Complaints Commission v Turner
[2016] NSWCATOD 163
Care Complaints Commission v Wood
[2020] NSWCATOD 60
Lee v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
(1998) 193 CLR 72
Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
Texts Cited:
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency, Code of Conduct (June
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency, Registration
Standard: Criminal History (1 July 2015)
NSW Health, NSW Health Code of
Conduct (December 2015)
Paramedicine Board of Australia, Code of Conduct for
Registered Health Practitioners (June 2018)
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Sipho Gift Nkanyezi
(Respondent)
Representation:
E Bayley, Solicitor Advocate, Health Care Complaints Commission
(Applicant)
Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Applicant)
Respondent (self-represented)
File Number(s):
2025/00015916
Publication Restriction:
Under an order made on 19 May 2025 pursuant to clause 7 of Schedule 5D of
the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW), the
disclosure of the
identity of Person A listed in the Schedule to the Complaint in these
proceedings and the disclosure of the identity
of Person B referred to in
material filed in these proceedings, is prohibited.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction and overview
matter concerns an application by the Health Care Complaints Commission
Commission”) for disciplinary findings and orders with
respect to a complaint (“the Complaint”) against the health
practitioner, Sipho Gift Nkanyezi, a paramedic (also referred to in these
Reasons as “the
practitioner” or “the
respondent”).
practitioner had qualified as a paramedic in Queensland in 2014 and had
travelled to the United Kingdom in 2016 where he became
registered with the
Health & Care Professionals Council (“HCPC-UK”). He started
working as a registered paramedic
with the London Ambulance Service NHS Trust
(“LAS”) on 8 February 2016. He continued working as a paramedic with
LAS during 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2019 (until his resignation on 31 July
January and February 2019, while working with the LAS, the practitioner
successfully applied for employment with NSW Ambulance
and applied for
registration as a paramedic through the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Authority (“Ahpra”).
3 May 2019, at the invitation of Person A who was a newly qualified paramedic
employed by the LAS, the practitioner attended a
birthday party for Person B,
who was Person A’s housemate and was also a paramedic employed by the
A alleged that the practitioner sexually assaulted her after she had gone to bed
in the early hours of 4 May 2019. Person A
2019 to report the incident. The practitioner was immediately suspended from LAS
or around 6 May 2019, the practitioner was charged with sexual assault on Person
A, contrary to s 3 of the
Sexual Offences Act 2003
started working for NSW Ambulance on 5 August 2019 and then took leave to attend
his criminal trial in the United Kingdom which
commenced on 7 December
practitioner pleaded not guilty but was convicted by a jury on 10 December
2021 of one count of sexual assault and sentenced to
18 months imprisonment (to
be served as a 24-month suspended sentence).
practitioner failed to notify the National Board within 7 days of his charge and
within 7 days of his conviction, as required
under s 130(1) of the National Law.
He also never notified Ahpra or NSW Ambulance of his charge or his conviction.
On renewals of
his Australian registration with Ahpra, he answered
“no” to a question asking whether there had been a change to his
criminal history in one or more countries other than Australia that he had not
continued working for NSW Ambulance and renewed his registration with Ahpra.
Following an anonymous complaint to Ahpra on 28 November
2023, that the
practitioner had been convicted in the United Kingdom for sexual assault, then
fled to Australia and had been practising
as a paramedic without notifying the
registration board or his new employer, he resigned from NSW Ambulance.
Complaint is comprised of four parts, with particularised grounds for each part.
The Commission determined to prosecute the Complaint
pursuant to
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(NSW) (“the
Act”), alleging that:
(1) the practitioner was convicted on 10 December 2021 at Crown Court Chelmsford
in the United Kingdom of a criminal offence, in
particular, one count of sexual
assault on a female, which is a ground for complaint under s 144(a) of the
National Law (“Complaint
(2) the practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under
s 139B(1)(b) of the National Law in that he contravened
s 130(1) of the
National Law by failing to give notice of a “relevant event” as
defined in s 130(3) to the National Board,
being notice that he had been
charged and notice that he had been convicted of an offence punishable by
imprisonment (“Complaint
(3) the practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under
s 139B(1)(l) of the National Law in that he engaged in
improper or
unethical conduct relating to the practice of paramedicine by failing to
disclose his criminal history to Ahpra (“Complaint
Three”); and
(4) the practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct under s 139E of the
National Law in that he has engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration,
or, in the alternative, engaged in more than
one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the instances are
together, amount to conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify the suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration
(“Complaint Four”).
practitioner’s registration in the United Kingdom has now been cancelled
and his Australian registration is currently suspended.
Commission filed an application for disciplinary findings on 14 January 2025,
seeking orders to have the practitioner’s
registration cancelled pursuant
to s 149C(1)(b) for professional misconduct and pursuant to s 149C(1)(c) of the
National Law because
the circumstances of the offence render him unfit in the
public interest to practise paramedicine. The Commission sought orders to
disqualify him from being registered for 12 months and to prohibit him from
providing health services for a period of 12 months,
and an order for
practitioner did not file a reply to the Commission’s Complaint and did
not file any written submissions for consideration.
On the day of the hearing,
the practitioner advised that he had decided not to attend the hearing.
to s 149 of the National Law, the Tribunal may exercise disciplinary power if it
finds the subject matter of the Complaint
against the practitioner to have been
proved, or he admits to it in writing to the Tribunal. After considering all the
relevant evidence,
we find the subject matter of Complaints One, Two, Three and
Four to have been proved.
are satisfied that the practitioner’s failure to notify the National Board
of his charge and conviction and his deliberately
dishonest renewal declarations
to Ahpra reach the threshold of professional misconduct justifying cancellation
of his registration
pursuant to s 149C(1)(b) of the National Law. We are also
satisfied that the circumstances of the offence committed by the practitioner
render him unfit in the public interest to practice paramedicine justifying
cancellation of his registration pursuant to s 149C(1)(c)
of the National
have accordingly decided to cancel his registration and to set a non-review
period of 12 months effective from the date of this
decision before the
practitioner will be entitled to apply for a review of the cancellation order
and seek to be reinstated.
are also satisfied that the respondent poses a substantial risk to the health of
members of the public as a paramedic, and accordingly
we make a prohibition
order under s 149C(5)(a) of the National Law prohibiting him from providing
health services for a period of
12 months effective from the date of this
we order the respondent to pay the applicant’s costs of these
proceedings.
Non-publication order
Tribunal made an order on 19 May 2025 pursuant to clause 7 of Schedule 5D to the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) that publication of the
identity of Person A listed in the Schedule to the Complaint in these
proceedings and that publication
of the identity of Person B referred to in
material filed in these proceedings, is prohibited.
note (hearing in the absence of the respondent)
the request of the Presiding Member, the Tribunal’s Registry wrote to both
parties on 14 May 2025 and noted that if the respondent
did not attend the
proceedings, the hearing may proceed and a decision may be made in his absence.
The Registry further noted that
it may be in the respondent’s interests to
attend the hearing as listed on 19 May 2025.
practitioner did not respond to the Registry’s correspondence.
the morning of the hearing, at around 10.03am, the Commission sent an email to
the respondent, asking him to confirm whether he
would be attending the hearing.
The respondent responded by email at 10.42am, saying that he had decided not to
Tribunal Panel considered whether it should exercise its discretion to conduct
the hearing in the absence of the practitioner.
The Panel was satisfied that the
practitioner had received proper notice of the hearing and that he had been
advised that the hearing
may proceed in his absence, with a decision made
concerning the allegations in the Complaint and any protective orders considered
to be appropriate. Having regard to the practitioner’s lack of engagement
with the proceedings, the Panel found there was no
reason to believe that an
adjournment would result in him attending a hearing of the Commission’s
application in the future.
The Panel accepted that there was inevitably a
potential disadvantage to a practitioner who did not attend a hearing, but it
that against the necessity to facilitate the just, quick and cheap
resolution of the real issues in the proceedings, with the available
resources. A decision was made to conduct the hearing in the absence of the
practitioner.
Material filed in the proceedings
Filed on behalf of the Commission
support of its Application for disciplinary findings and orders, the Commission
filed the following documents:
(1) a bundle of documents (comprising a report by the London Ambulance Service
of an investigation into the conduct of the respondent,
together with the
respondent’s criminal history as recorded by the Queensland Police
Service) filed on 14 April 2025 (marked
for identification as “Exhibit
(2) a bundle of documents (including the Complaint, s 150 proceedings,
transcript of proceedings in the Chelmsford Crown Court in
December 2021, the
practitioner’s renewal disclosures to Ahpra, witness statements and the
record of interview with the respondent
at Chelmsford Police station in May
2019) filed on 23 April 2025 in two volumes (marked for identification as
“Exhibit A2,
Volume 1” and “Exhibit A2, Volume 2”);
(3) a further bundle of documents (including affidavits of service and
screenshots of the respondent’s renewal applications
with AHPRA) filed on
28 April 2025 (marked for identification as “Exhibit A3”);
(4) a Chronology filed on 28 April 2025 (marked for identification as
“Exhibit A4”);
(5) further material (generally comprising correspondence between the Commission
and the respondent) handed up during the hearing
on 19 May 2025 (marked for
identification as “Exhibit A5”);
(6) an Evidentiary Certificate dated 2 May 2025 issued by AHPRA, filed on 5 May
2025 (marked for identification as “Exhibit
(7) an email from the respondent on 19 May 2025 advising the Commission that he
had decided to not attend the hearing (marked for
identification as
“Exhibit A7”);
(8) written submissions dated 28 April 2025 (not marked).
Filed on behalf of the respondent
documents were filed on behalf of the respondent.
Complaint set out four grounds and particulars which constituted the Complaint
in these proceedings together with the background
to each of Complaints One,
Two, Three and Four.
BACKGROUND TO ALL COMPLAINTS
In 2014, the practitioner completed a Bachelor of Paramedic Science at the
University of Queensland.
On 8 February 2016, the practitioner commenced employment as a paramedic at
London Ambulance Service NHS Trust in the United Kingdom.
Person A was a 25-year-old female paramedic who worked alongside the
practitioner at London Ambulance Service NHS Trust.
On or around 6 May 2019, the practitioner was charged with sexual assault on
On 20 May 2019, the practitioner was first registered as a paramedic in
On 5 August 2019, the practitioner commenced employment with NSW Ambulance.
Between around 30 November 2021 and 16 January 2022, the practitioner travelled
to the United Kingdom.
On 10 December 2021, the practitioner was found guilty of one count of sexual
assault on a female at Chelmsford Crown Court in the
United Kingdom in relation
to Person A.
On 6 February 2022, the practitioner resumed his role with NSW Ambulance.
COMPLAINT ONE
Pursuant to section 144(a) of the
National Law
, the practitioner has been
convicted of a criminal offence.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
1. On 10 December 2021, at Crown Court Chelmsford in the United Kingdom the
practitioner was convicted of one count of sexual assault
on a female.
COMPLAINT TWO
The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section
139B(1)(b) of the
National Law
in that the practitioner contravened
section 130(1) of the
National Law
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
1. The practitioner failed to notify the National Board in writing, within 7
days of being charged or at any other time, that he
had been charged with an
offence punishable by 12 months imprisonment or more.
2. The practitioner failed to notify the National Board in writing, within 7
days of 10 December 2021, that he had been convicted
of one count of sexual
assault on a female.
COMPLAINT THREE
The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section
139B(1)(l) of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has engaged in
improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of paramedicine.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
1. On 24 November 2022, the practitioner provided false information to the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (“Ahpra”)
completed an application for renewal of general registration, in that he
responded ‘No’ to the question ‘Since
your last declaration to
Ahpra, has there been any change to your criminal history in one or more
countries other than Australia
that you have not declared to Ahpra?’
2. On 9 November 2023, the practitioner provided false information to Ahpra when
he completed an application for renewal of general
registration, in that he
responded ‘No’ to the question ‘Since your last declaration to
Ahpra, has there been any
change to your criminal history in one or more
countries other than Australia that you have not declared to Ahpra?’
COMPLAINT FOUR
The practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct under section 139E of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
i. engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration, or
ii. in the alternative, engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory
professional conduct that, when the instances are considered
together, amount to
conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify the suspension or
cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FOUR
1. Complaints Two and Three, and the particulars therein, are repeated and
relied upon both individually and cumulatively.”
Issues for the Tribunal to consider and determine
issues for the Tribunal to determine are:
(1) whether Complaint One (the conviction) is proven;
(2) whether Complaint Two (failure to notify) (constituting unsatisfactory
professional conduct) is proven;
(3) whether Complaint Three (false renewal amounting to improper and unethical
conduct) (constituting unsatisfactory professional
conduct) is proven;
(4) whether any proven unsatisfactory professional conduct amounts to
professional misconduct (Complaint Four);
(5) whether, if the subject matter of the Complaint is proven, to exercise its
disciplinary powers to make appropriate protective
orders; and
(6) whether to order the practitioner to pay the Commission’s costs of
these proceedings.
Background leading to the proceedings
Tribunal acknowledges that it was greatly assisted by the provision of a
Chronology prepared and filed by the Commission, from
which we have drawn a
substantial amount of information which is referred to in the following summary
of relevant events leading
to these proceedings.
practitioner is currently 41 years of age and is married with two children. He
graduated with a Bachelor of Paramedic Science
at the University of Queensland
in December 2014. He did not immediately register to practise as a paramedic in
Australia, and worked
as an Emergency Medical Technician at St John Ambulance
Auckland in New Zealand from 8 September 2015 to 20 January 2016. He then
travelled to the United Kingdom and became registered with the HCPC-UK and
started working as a registered paramedic with the LAS
on 8 February 2016.
completed the London Paramedic Practice Course, including in coaching and
mentoring for students undertaking a student paramedic
program on 1 March
2016. He completed the LAS practice educator certificate on
31 July 2016. He continued working with the LAS during
2016, 2017,
2018 and 2019 (until his resignation on 31 July
working with the LAS, and before the incident on 4 May 2019 that resulted in
criminal charges being laid against him, the practitioner
applied for employment
with NSW Ambulance (on 30 January 2019). He also applied for registration in
Australia through Ahpra on 25
February 2019. He initially failed to disclose his
criminal record concerning an incident in 2011 but subsequently provided a
declaration on 21 March 2019 to Ahpra explaining that he had been
fined $200 for obstructing a Police Officer. His statutory declaration
an incident on 16 November 2011 in which he was in a vehicle while his wife was
driving and she was pulled over by traffic
Police for a routine stop. His young
child was crying, suffering heat distress, and the practitioner interrupted the
Police officer’s
enquiries of the practitioner’s wife, following
which he was charged with obstruction. He said that he did not realise it was
conviction on his record. In point of fact, we note that no conviction was
recorded in relation to this incident.
few weeks prior to 3 May 2019 (the date of the party at Person A’s house),
while still working as a paramedic in London, the
practitioner was rostered to
work with Person A who was 25 years old and a newly qualified paramedic with
LAS. The practitioner was
35 years old at the time and occupied a more senior
position than Person A. During the shift, the practitioner said he had had a
“rough few months” and felt that he needed to “blow off
steam”. Person A invited him to a birthday party
for her housemate (Person
B) who was also a paramedic with LAS. The plan was to meet up any time between 8
and 10pm to have a drink
at Person A’s house and then go to a pub and
club. Person A invited the practitioner to bring a duvet as they had offered
to stay overnight.
the evening of 3 May 2019 and into the very early hours of 4 May 2019, the group
went to a bar and a club. Person A’s
account of the practitioner’s
conduct during the evening culminating in his sexual assault upon her, is
described in more detail
under the heading “Circumstances of the
Offence” below.
the day following the party, 4 May 2019, Person A contacted the LAS to report
the incident. The practitioner was immediately suspended
A provided a statement and an impact statement to Police on
4 May 2019. The Police contacted the practitioner on 4 May 2019
interviewed him on 6 May 2019.
after 6 May 2019, the practitioner was charged with sexual assault on Person A,
contrary to s 3 of the
Sexual Offences Act 2003
(UK). A person guilty of
an offence under that section is liable, on conviction, to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 10 years.
practitioner failed to notify the National Board in writing, within 7 days of
being charged, or at any other time, that he had
been charged with an offence
punishable by 12 months imprisonment or more.
practitioner did not disclose any change in his criminal history to Ahpra.
16 May 2019, the practitioner was interviewed by the LAS and denied the
allegations made against him.
20 May 2019, the practitioner was first registered as a paramedic in Australia.
Once registered, he was obliged to comply with
the Paramedicine Board of
Australia (“PBA”) Code of Conduct.
29 May 2019, while suspended from LAS duties, the practitioner attended an
interview with NSW Ambulance. He did not disclose any
information about his
charge at any point prior to, or during, his employment with NSW Ambulance.
was offered employment with NSW Ambulance on 23 July 2019, and accepted the
offer on 24 July 2019. He provided a resignation letter
to LAS effective on 31
July 2019, and commenced employment with NSW Ambulance on 5 August 2019. After
undergoing training and induction,
he commenced as a paramedic intern on 7
September 2019.
29 November 2019, in his application for renewal of his registration, the
practitioner answered “no” to the question:
“Since your last
declaration to Ahpra, has there been any change to your criminal history in one
or more countries other than
Australia that you have not declared to
2020, the practitioner continued to work as a paramedic at NSW Ambulance.
6 February 2020, the HCPC-UK imposed an interim suspension on his paramedic
registration for a period of 18 months.
16 October 2020, in his application for renewal of his registration, the
practitioner again answered “no” to the question:
“Since your
last declaration to Ahpra, has there been any change to your criminal history in
one or more countries other than
Australia that you have not declared to
29 December 2020, an indictment was issued, charging the practitioner with
sexual assault of Person A contrary to s 3 of the
Sexual Offences Act
practitioner did not notify the National Board or Ahpra of his
indictment.
2021, he continued to work as a registered paramedic with NSW Ambulance. On 31
March 2021, he provided his Defence, denying
touching or sexually assaulting
11 November 2021, upon renewal of his registration, the practitioner again
answered “no” to the question: “Since
your last declaration to
Ahpra, has there been any change to your criminal history in one or more
countries other than Australia
that you have not declared to Ahpra?”
working with NSW Ambulance, the practitioner took leave (from 30 November 2021
until 5 February 2022) in order to travel to
the United Kingdom and attend his
criminal trial at Chelmsford County Court commencing on 7 December 2021. He
pleaded not guilty.
Person A and Person B gave evidence. The practitioner gave
evidence on 9 December 2021.
10 December 2021, the jury found him guilty and he was convicted of one count of
sexual assault on a female.
practitioner did not notify the National Board in writing within 7 days of his
conviction. He did not disclose any change in his
criminal history to Ahpra. He
did not disclose any information about his conviction to NSW Ambulance at any
point during his employment
with NSW Ambulance.
14 December 2021, the practitioner was sentenced to 18 months imprisonment, to
be served as a 24 month suspended sentence. He was
subjected to an indefinite
restraining order, not to contact Person A. His name was entered on a sex
offenders database for 10 years
under Part 2 of the
Sexual Offences Act
(UK). He was ordered to pay the prosecution costs, and to pay
compensation to the victim as well as a surcharge.
practitioner did not appeal the conviction or the
practitioner returned to Australia on 16 January 2022 and resumed working for
NSW Ambulance on 6 February 2022.
June 2022, he was obliged to comply with the Ahpra Code of Conduct.
working with NSW Ambulance, after his conviction, he again provided false
information to Ahpra on his registration renewal
on 24 November 2022 by
answering “no” to a question asking whether there had been a change
to his criminal history in
one or more countries other than Australia that he
had not declared. He failed to disclose his sexual assault conviction when
his registration with Ahpra.
practitioner also did not disclose the sexual assault conviction on his
registration renewal with Ahpra on 9 November 2023. He
again provided false
information to Ahpra by answering “no” to a question asking whether
there had been a change to his
criminal history in one or more countries other
than Australia that he had not declared.
20 November 2023, the HCPC-UK emailed the practitioner notice of a hearing on 18
December 2023 before the Conduct and Competence
Committee Panel (“the
Panel”) to consider whether he should be struck off. The practitioner did
not respond. The Panel
conducted the hearing in his absence and was satisfied
that a striking off order was appropriate and proportionate in the circumstances
to protect the public, maintain public confidence in the profession and maintain
public confidence in the regulatory process. On
18 December 2023, the
practitioner was struck off the UK Register.
28 November 2023, the practitioner worked his last shift at NSW Ambulance.
28 November 2023, Ahpra received an anonymous complaint stating that the
practitioner had been convicted at Chelmsford Crown Court
for sexual assault,
then fled to Australia and had been practising as a paramedic without notifying
the registration board or his
new employer.
29 November 2023, the Paramedicine Council of NSW (“the Council”)
provided a copy of the complaint to the practitioner,
requesting him to provide
information by 1 December 2023 and to attend section 150 proceedings on
4 December 2023.
30 November 2023, the practitioner sent a resignation letter to NSW Ambulance,
due to an “immediate personal matter”.
1 December 2023, the practitioner emailed the Council, saying that he did not
intend to attend the s 150 hearing. He attached an
information form in which he
stated that he was not currently working as a health professional.
4 December 2023, the Council held s 150 proceedings which are outlined below in
the sub-heading “Section 150 hearing”.
28 December 2023, a news article about the practitioner was published online:
“London paramedic groped female coworker in
her bed after night
out”. NSW Ambulance had no prior knowledge of the practitioner’s UK
criminal history until the article
was published.
Section 150
s 150 proceedings on 4 December 2023 were held in the practitioner’s
absence. The hearing was therefore conducted on the
papers. The Council noted
that there were no previous complaints relating to the practitioner in the
Australian context but noted
that he had been suspended from the UK register
after being convicted of sexual assault and that these matters had not been
to Ahpra as required.
considering whether it was appropriate to take action for the protection of the
safety or health of the public, or otherwise in
the public interest, the Council
considered whether there were any conditions that could be imposed on his
registration.
Council considered whether the practitioner had demonstrated the required level
of honesty and credibility in accordance with
professional codes of conduct for
health professionals. In light of the practitioner’s failure to declare
his conviction to
Ahpra, his false declarations to Ahpra and his failure to
present an explanation of those matters, the Council formed the view that
appropriate to take action under s 150 of the National Law. The Council
considered if there were conditions that could be
imposed on the
practitioner’s registration that would sufficiently mitigate the risks to
the health or safety of the public,
or would mitigate concerns regarding the
public interest. On the basis of information before it that the practitioner was
not working
as a paramedic, the imposition of conditions would not offer any
protection. Accordingly, in all the circumstances, the Council decided
suspend his registration effective from 5 December 2023.
Council referred the matter to the Commission under s 150D of the National Law,
to be dealt with as a complaint for investigation.
Investigation
by the Commission
17 January 2024, the Commission emailed the practitioner a letter notifying him
that the complaint against him was being investigated
and inviting him to
provide a response and current CV.
8 April 2024, the practitioner provided a response to the Commission, confirming
that he had not disclosed the sexual assault charge
and conviction to Ahpra or
the Council. He also confirmed he was not working as a paramedic in NSW or any
other State or Territory
of Australia, or outside Australia. He advised that he
was working as a warehouse labourer with various labour hire agencies.
10 July 2024, at the end of its investigation, the Commission sent the
practitioner a letter pursuant to s 40 of the HCC Act advising
him that the
Commission was of the view that he had engaged in improper and unethical conduct
and that he may not be a suitable person
to hold registration as a paramedic.
The Commission’s letter advised that the matter was being referred to the
Director of
Proceedings under s 39(1)(a) of the HCC Act for determination
whether to prosecute a complaint before a professional body. The practitioner
was invited to provide submissions on the proposed prosecution of the complaint.
The practitioner did not provide a response.
Commission filed its Application for disciplinary findings and orders, attaching
a copy of the Complaint, on 14 January 2025.
practitioner did not provide or file a response or defence to the
Application.
Circumstances of the Offence
practitioner arrived at Person A’s house on 3 May 2019 for the party being
held for her housemate, Person B. Other paramedics
also attended the party. The
practitioner went, along with a group of other attendees, to a pub and then
moved on to a club where
they were drinking and dancing. Person A’s
evidence in the criminal trial was that she started to feel uncomfortable that
practitioner was staring at her and dancing too close to her. She described
his dancing as “sexualised” and she asked
him to stop, but he
continued. Person A then asked a friend to come to her aid if the practitioner
came close again.
B’s oral evidence during the trial was that the practitioner was dancing
at the club and Person A had said that he had
touched her and she was feeling
uncomfortable. She described his dancing as “sexual”. He was
pressing himself upon Person
A from behind her.
A and others returned to Person A’s house at around 3.30 or 4 am on 4 May
2019. Person A then arranged bedding for those
who were staying (including the
practitioner) and then she retired to the top floor where her friend, a nurse,
had already gone to
bed. The practitioner was invited to sleep on the ground
floor along with those remaining.
A went upstairs to her bedroom where she was sharing a bed with her friend, the
nurse. At 5:54am on 4 May 2019, the practitioner
sent a message to Person A. The
message simply said Person A’s name, and she ignored the message. She then
heard someone coming
up the stairs to where her room was located and sat at the
top of the stairs. She was aware that it was the practitioner and pretended
be asleep. She heard him moving and then was aware of his presence, sitting on
the floor next to the bed. He then assaulted Person
A while she was in her
A described that he put his hand down inside her shorts and touched her vaginal
area. She said she froze and crossed her legs.
He then moved his hand up and
touched her breast, moving his hand around her nipple. She again said she froze.
She didn’t say
anything and turned away on the bed, hoping he would stop.
He then put his hand down the back of her shorts and touched her vaginal
again. She said she was “scared”. She hit her friend on the back to
get her awake and said “Get him to stop”
or “Please make him
stop and get him out”. She then remembers getting out of bed and screaming
at the practitioner “Get
out! Get out of my house!”
B’s oral evidence during the trial was that Person A had run into Person
B’s room, screaming “Get him out,
get him out, get him out”.
Person B said that Person A was really upset, crying and shaking. Her evidence
was that the practitioner
didn’t look confused or surprised, but had a
deadpan expression as he was leaving the house and he didn’t ask Person
practitioner then messaged Person A on Facebook Messenger, complaining that her
friends had kicked him out. Person A replied saying
“You fucking touched
me while I was sleeping, you can fuck off”. The practitioner repeatedly
tried to call her. After
Person A asked him to stop calling, he continued to
message her in a deflective manner, sending her a series of messages suggesting
that nothing untoward had occurred but if he had upset her, he would take the
blame for that. Person A repeatedly asked him to stop
he continued to seek to deflect responsibility by saying “...if you put
allegations like that toward
me, am bound to respond. Please don’t be
prejudiced, Am ready to fight every allegation you mentioned with all my might
and I can. Be assured of that. I did nothing but help, if your night was
bad and you need lay blame, by all means go ahead, I came
into your house with
gifts, yet you sent me out like a dog? KARMA... Reputation does precede, I do no
wrong to anyone, I’ve
not done wrong to anyone ... your night ended badly,
I was not responsibly for that. Blame it on me I don’t mind ... but do
pull me through your dirt ... In fact Never pull me through dirt
his interview with Police, the text messages were read to the practitioner and
he gave context according to his own view of what
had occurred. In response to
Person A’s message: “You fucking touched me when I was sleeping you
can fuck off”,
he said “I’m so sorry”. He told Police
that he was just “giving a courtesy apology to someone who’s
me for the night and yet kicked me out in the morning that way”. He said
he had wanted to talk to Person A with the
intention of getting to the bottom of
what happened after what he felt had been a good night. He was asked by Police
what his opinion
would be if, hypothetically, he saw somebody else engaging in
the behaviour that had been alleged against the practitioner. His response
“If I saw someone sexually assaulting someone you know that’s not,
that’s not good, it’s not acceptable.
It’s not acceptable by
society standards by any means. I’m a paramedic you know.”
practitioner was then asked to reply from the perspective of his own standards
and viewpoint, to which he said “No it’s
not right” and
“That should never happen to anyone”.
practitioner denied the allegations to Police. In his Defence Statement filed in
the Crown Court, the practitioner denied a number
of matters including that he
was very drunk during the night in question, that he had been flirting with
Person A, that he was ‘grinding’
with her when dancing, that he
entered her room uninvited and sat on the floor next to her while she was in
bed, that he touched
her in the manner described or at all, and that he had
apologised for sexually assaulting her.
Defence Statement also asserted that Person A had invited him to sleep on her
bed if he wished, that he had laid down on the bed
on top of the bedcover on his
right side facing away from her, that he fell asleep only to be woken by persons
in the house shouting
at him, that he did not know why he was being shouted at
and asked to leave and that any subsequent communication between himself
Person A was an attempt by him to discover what it was that he was alleged to
Relevant statutory provisions and legal
Guiding principle and paramount consideration
all matters before it under the National Law, the Tribunal is guided by
s 3A which states:
The main guiding principle of the national registration and accreditation scheme
is that the protection of the health and safety
of the public must be the
paramount consideration.
Accordingly,
when assessing whether it is appropriate to make disciplinary orders against a
practitioner, the fundamental and paramount
consideration for the Tribunal is
the protection of the health and safety of the public.
for complaint against registered health practitioners
144 of the National Law sets out the grounds on which complaints may be made
having regard to the
allegations in the case before us, we set out below ss 144(a) and
Criminal conviction or criminal finding
A complaint the practitioner has, either in this jurisdiction or elsewhere, been
convicted of or made the subject of a criminal finding
for an offence.
Unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct
A complaint the practitioner has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
Meaning of “unsatisfactory professional conduct”
139B(1) of the National Law sets out the meaning of “unsatisfactory
professional conduct” of registered health
practitioners.
the purpose of these proceedings, we note that reference to
“unsatisfactory professional conduct” includes:
(1) in s 139B(1)(b) a contravention of a provision of the National Law; and
(2) in s 139B(1)(l) any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the
practice of the practitioner’s profession.
Failure to give notice of a “relevant event” to the National
Board constitutes “unsatisfactory professional conduct”
s 130(1) of the National Law, a registered practitioner must, within 7 days of
becoming aware that a “relevant event”
has occurred, notify the
National Board in writing of the event.
“relevant event” is defined, under s 130(3) to mean:
(1) the practitioner is
with an offence punishable by 12 months
imprisonment or more, whether in a participating jurisdiction or elsewhere;
(2) the practitioner is
with an offence punishable by
imprisonment, whether in a participating jurisdiction or elsewhere.
practitioner’s failure to notify the National Board in writing of a
“relevant event” is a contravention of a provision
of the National
Law under s 139B(1)(b) and constitutes “unsatisfactory professional
Applications for renewal of registration and
statement about criminal history
s 107(1) of the National Law, a registered practitioner may apply to the
National Board for renewal of registration.
s 109(1)(b) of the National Law, an application for renewal of registration must
include a statement that includes details of
any change in the
practitioner’s criminal history that occurred during the preceding period
of registration.
is alleged that, in making false renewals for registration, the practitioner
engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the practice
paramedicine.
Meaning of “professional
misconduct”
s 139E of the National Law, “professional misconduct” of a
registered health practitioner means the following:
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration;
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the
instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
Powers of the Tribunal if a complaint is proved or admitted
a complaint is proved or admitted, the Tribunal may exercise its disciplinary
powers as set out in s 149 of the National Law:
The Tribunal may exercise any power conferred on it by this Subdivision in
relation to a registered health practitioner or student
(a) it finds the subject-matter of a complaint against the practitioner or
student to have been proved; or
(b) the practitioner or student admits to it in writing to the Tribunal.
Tribunal’s general powers to suspend or cancel a practitioner’s
registration are found in s 149C(1) of the National
Law as set out below:
(1) The Tribunal may suspend a registered health practitioner’s
registration for a specified period or cancel the registered
practitioner’s registration if the Tribunal is satisfied—
(a) the practitioner is not competent to practise the practitioner’s
profession; or
(b) the practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct; or
(c) the practitioner has been convicted of or made the subject of a criminal
finding for an offence, either in or outside this jurisdiction,
circumstances of the offence render the practitioner unfit in the public
interest to practise the practitioner’s profession;
(d) the practitioner is not a suitable person for registration in the
practitioner’s profession.
Tribunal’s power to make a prohibition order
addition to its powers to suspend or cancel a practitioner’s registration,
the Tribunal has power to make a prohibition order
against a practitioner if it
is satisfied that the practitioner poses a substantial risk to the health of
members of the public.
The power to make a prohibition order is found in s
149C(5) of the National Law, as set out below:
(5) If the Tribunal suspends or cancels a registered health practitioner’s
or student’s registration and it is satisfied
the person poses a
substantial risk to the health of members of the public, it may by order
(a prohibition order) do any one or more
of the following—
(a) prohibit the person from providing health services or specified health
services for the period specified in the order or permanently;
Orders are intended to be protective and not punitive
are made under the National Law for the protection of the public and not for the
purpose of punishing the practitioner, as
pointed out by the High Court of
Australia in the context of the disbarment of a legal practitioner in
NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
) at 201-202:
“Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order
is in no sense
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made from the public
point of view, for the protection of
those who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.”
decision in
has been adopted in a number of Tribunal decisions
Health Care Complaints Commission v Liu
[2016] NSWCATOD 133
) at [42] and
Health Care Complaints Commission v Meneghetti
[2020] NSWCATOD 39
the specific purpose for which orders are made is protective of the public
interest and not punitive with respect to the
practitioner, it is acknowledged
that such orders may be punitive
in their effect
, and that punitive
effect may be relevant in formulating a protective order:
Lee v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
) at [20] citing
Director General, Department of Ageing,
Disability and Home Care v Lambert
[2009] NSWCA 102
(2009) 74 NSWLR 523
Maintaining ethical and professional standards
orders arising from disciplinary proceedings against members of a profession are
intended to maintain proper ethical and
professional standards, primarily for
the protection of the public but also for the protection of the profession:
at [98] citing
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
; (1997) 41 NSWLR 630 (
Maintaining public confidence in high standards of a
orders serve to maintain public confidence in the high standards of the medical
profession:
at [98] citing
Prakash v Health Care Complaints
[2006] NSWCA 153
of deterrence
orders also involve an element of deterrence, encouraging other practitioners to
recognise the importance of complying
with professional standards and the risks
of failing to do so:
at [98] citing
Burden of proof and standard of proof
burden of proof rests with the Commission:
Gautam v Health Care Complaints
[2021] NSWCA 85
standard of proof required to establish a complaint is the civil standard, that
is, on the balance of probabilities:
at [40]. Because of the
seriousness of the allegations and the gravity of their consequences, the
Tribunal must have “a reasonable
satisfaction” that the particulars
of a complaint have been proved, as per Dixon J in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
“The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of
the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue
has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) provides that matters including the
gravity of the matters alleged may be taken into account when making findings of
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), provides that the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence.
Therefore, strictly speaking, neither the
civil standard
(having the particulars of a complaint proved to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Tribunal) nor
Evidence Act 1995
applies directly in
decision-making by the Tribunal:
Bronze Wing International Pty Ltd v SafeWork
[2017] NSWCA 41.
as noted in
at [13]-[14], the general accepted approach is
that when deciding whether the evidence is sufficient to meet the civil standard
proof, the Tribunal will be informed by matters including the seriousness of
an allegation and the gravity of the consequences of
Use of approved standards, codes or guidelines in
disciplinary proceedings
of the National Law, an approved code or guideline approved by a National
Board is admissible in disciplinary proceedings.
Accordingly,
the Code of Conduct for Paramedics issued by the Paramedicine Board of Australia
(“PBA”) in June 2018 which
sets out the standards for practitioner
behaviour and seeks to assist and support practitioners to deliver appropriate,
services within an ethical framework, is admissible in these
proceedings. The PBA Code of Conduct is a legitimate standard or benchmark
against which the practitioner’s conduct may be assessed or measured.
the Code of Conduct issued by Ahpra & National Boards in June 2022 sets out
the standards of professional conduct the
National Boards expect and is used by
Boards to evaluate practitioners’ conduct. The Ahpra Code of Conduct
specifically states
that practitioners have a professional responsibility to be
familiar with, and to apply, the Code. The Ahpra Code of Conduct is admissible
in these proceedings and is a legitimate standard or benchmark for assessing the
practitioner’s conduct.
Consideration
examining all the relevant evidence, we make the following findings with respect
to Complaints One, Two, Three and Four.
Complaint One
One is that the practitioner has been convicted of a criminal offence, which we
note is a ground for complaint pursuant
to s 144(a) of the National Law.
evidence supporting Complaint One includes:
(1) the transcript of the hearing on 10 December 2021 in which the jury found
the practitioner guilty on the indictment;
(2) the transcript of the sentencing hearing on 14 December 2021 in the Crown
Court at Chelmsford;
(3) the certificate of conviction or finding issued by the Crown Court on 14
December 2021;
(4) the Restraining Order made on 14 December 2021;
(5) the Suspended Sentence Order issued on 16 December 2021;
(6) the practitioner’s email dated 8 April 2024 to the Commission in which
he acknowledged tacitly that he had been charged
with, and convicted of, sexual
assault on a female whilst working for the LAS.
find Complaint One to be proven.
Complaint Two
Two asserts that the practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct under s 139B(1)(b) of the National Law
in that he contravened s 130(1)
of the National Law by failing to notify the National Board of his criminal
charge (Particular 1
of Complaint Two) or his conviction (Particular 2 of
Complaint Two).
1 of Complaint Two alleges that the practitioner failed to notify the National
Board in writing, within 7 days of being
charged or at any other time, that he
had been charged with an offence punishable by 12 months imprisonment or
2 of Complaint Two alleges that the practitioner failed to notify the National
Board in writing, within 7 days of 10 December
2021, that he had been convicted
of one count of sexual assault on a female.
s 130(1) of the National Law, all registered practitioners including paramedics
have a statutory obligation to notify the National
Board in writing within 7
days of being aware of being charged with an offence punishable by 12 months
imprisonment or more. That
statutory obligation also requires paramedics to
notify the National Board in writing within 7 days of being convicted of any
punishable by imprisonment.
Practitioners
are obliged to inform themselves of their regulatory requirements and a failure
to do so does not excuse non-compliance:
Health Care Complaints Commission v
Drakopoulos
[2021] NSWCATOD 72
Drakopoulos
“...It is incumbent upon health practitioners to inform themselves of the
regulatory requirements under which they practice.
A failure to do so does not
excuse non-compliance.”
of the profession of paramedicine ensures the health and safety of the public
and enhances the confidence of the public
in the integrity and competence of the
profession. Regulatory authorities such as the Paramedicine Board of Australia
are able to
maintain control over any practitioner who has engaged in conduct
that is harmful to the profession. The importance of complying
with s 130(1) was
explained in
Drakopoulos
at [31], a case concerning a dentist’s
failure to notify the regulatory authority of his convictions with respect to
involving prohibited drugs:
... A requirement that dentists are compelled to inform the
regulatory authority of any criminal charges and convictions for criminal
offences, in each case of a serious nature, is a means by which the regulatory
authority is able to maintain control over any practitioner
who has engaged in
conduct which is inimical to the proper and ethical conduct of dentists. Not
only is there a requirement to provide
this information as and when it occurs,
but also on renewal of registration. A failure to comply with these requirements
as and when
compelled to do so is potentially a matter of some
seriousness.”
to notify about certain types of criminal charges and convictions deprives
regulatory authorities of the opportunity to assess
risk and take appropriate
action to protect the health and safety of the public at the earliest stage. As
explained in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Bolton
[2021] NSWCATOD
) at [100]:
“Provisions requiring the notification of certain types of criminal
charges to AHPRA are a significant tool in the regulatory
framework. By not
notifying a transgression, a practitioner in effect deprives regulatory bodies
of the opportunity to assess risk
and take appropriate action to protect the
health and safety of the public at the earliest possible stage. Moreover by not
a practitioner continues to hold the benefits of registration, and
depending on the nature of the transgression, could potentially
give themselves
the opportunity to continue the same or similar conduct which brought them to
the attention of the police and criminal
justice system in the first
130 is seen as being part of the protective architecture of the National Law.
Compliance with s 130 allows regulatory authorities
to decide whether a
practitioner’s criminal history is relevant to the practise of their
profession and ensure that only those
practitioners who are suitably trained and
qualified to practise in a competent and ethical manner are registered:
Additionally,
the PBA Code of Conduct sets out reporting obligations in paragraph 8.3 which
“Practitioners have statutory responsibility under the National Law to
report matters to the National Boards: please refer
to the Board’s
guidelines on mandatory reporting and sections 130 and 141 of the National Law
... Good practice involves:
a) being aware of these reporting obligations
b) complying with any reporting obligations that apply to practice...”
an employee of NSW Ambulance, the practitioner’s contract of employment
required him to comply with the NSW Health Code of
Conduct and the core values
and principles that it promotes. Under paragraph 4.3.11, practitioners are
required to “observe
all laws, professional codes of conduct and ethics
relating to their profession”. Paragraph 4.3.18 echoes the statutory
to notify regulatory authorities of criminal charges and convictions.
Employees must:
“Report criminal charges and convictions against them involving offences
punishable by imprisonment for 12 months or more to
their Chief Executive within
7 days of the charge being laid or a conviction recorded.”
Evidence relied upon to establish Particulars 1 and 2 of Complaint
25 February 2019, the practitioner applied for registration in Australia through
6 May 2019, he attended an interview at Chelmsford Police. Soon after that date,
he was charged by Police with sexual assault on
Person A, contrary to s 3
Sexual Offences Act 2003
(UK). The offence was punishable by up to
10 years imprisonment and therefore attracted the obligation to disclose the
the National Board.
20 May 2019, he was first registered as a paramedic in Australia. Once
registered, he was obliged to comply with the PBA Code of
Conduct, including the
reporting obligations noted above.
29 December 2020, an indictment was issued charging the practitioner with sexual
assault of Person A.
31 March 2021, the practitioner provided his Defence, denying the charge.
7 – 9 December 2021, he attended the Crown Court at Chelmsford and pleaded
not guilty to the charge.
10 December 2021, the jury found him guilty.
29 November 2019, in his application for renewal with Ahpra, the practitioner
answered “No” to the question “Since
your last declaration to
Ahpra, has there been any change to your criminal history in one or more
countries other than Australia
that you have not declared to Ahpra?”
16 October 2020, the practitioner again answered “No” to the same
question in his application for renewal with Ahpra.
practitioner did not at any time disclose any change in his criminal history to
practitioner failed to notify the National Board in writing within 7 days of
being charged or at any other time that he had been
charged with an offence
punishable by 12 months imprisonment or more. This is a clear contravention of s
130(1) with respect to a
“relevant event” under s130(3)(a)(ii) of
the National Law. Even allowing for an argument that his obligation to notify
did not crystallise until he was first registered as a paramedic in Australia on
20 May 2019, the practitioner failed to notify the
National Board in writing
within 7 days of becoming registered.
the practitioner failed to engage with the s 150 proceedings and failed to
engage with this proceeding, it is not known whether
he was perhaps
“hedging his bets”, hoping to defend the charge and clear his name,
and thereby avoid conviction. Nonetheless,
the obligation to notify the National
Board of the charge is clearly articulated in the National Law (as well as the
PBA Code of
Conduct and the NSW Health Code of Conduct) and the facts establish
his contravention of the Codes and, importantly, s 130(1) of
the National
practitioner failed to notify the National Board in writing within 7 days of 10
December 2021, that he had been convicted of one
count of sexual assault on a
female. On the facts, this is a contravention of s 130(1) with respect to the
“relevant event”
as set out in s 130(3)(b)(ii) of the National
contraventions by the practitioner of s 130(1) of the National Law with respect
to both the criminal charge and his conviction
have been established as a matter
of fact. Accordingly, under s 139B(1)(b) the contravention is designated to be
unsatisfactory professional
therefore find Complaint Two to be proven.
Three asserts that the practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct under s 139B(1)(l) of the National
Law, in that he engaged in improper
or unethical conduct relating to the practice of paramedicine by failing to
declare his criminal
history when renewing his Australian registration through
Ahpra in 2022 and 2023.
s 107 of the National Law, all registered paramedics are required to apply to
renew their registration every year. The registration
period is from 1 December
to 30 November each year. Section 109(1) of the National Law requires an
applicant to provide a statement
that provides details of any change in the
applicant’s criminal history that occurred in the applicant’s
preceding period
of registration.
the National Law, “criminal history” is defined to include every
charge made against the person for an offence,
in a participating jurisdiction
or elsewhere, and whether before or after the commencement of the National
PBA Code of Conduct sets out in paragraph 1.2 the professional values and
qualities which all practitioners are expected to have:
“...there are certain professional values on which all practitioners are
expected to base their practice...They must be ethical
and trustworthy. Patients
or clients trust practitioners because they believe that, in addition to being
competent, practitioners
will not take advantage of them and will display
qualities such as integrity, truthfulness ...”
8.1 in the PBA Code of Conduct sets out the professional behaviour expected of
all practitioners:
“In professional life, practitioners must display a standard of behaviour
that warrants the trust and respect of the community.
This includes observing
and practising the principles of ethical conduct.”
words “improper” and “unethical” are not defined in the
National Law. The assessment of what constitutes
“improper” or
“unethical” conduct is based upon the ordinary meaning of those
relevant principles regarding a failure to disclose under s 109
(1) that it is not necessary to find that the practitioner knowingly gave false
information on the renewal applications in the sense
of a deliberate intention
to deceive. It is sufficient to find that, at the time of completing the
applications, the practitioner
was aware of the criminal charges and convictions
and failed to answer the relevant questions accurately:
(2) that providing false information on a renewal application is contrary to
moral precepts and has been found to amount to improper
and unethical conduct:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Achurch
[2019] NSWCATOD 20
(3) that providing false information on a renewal application to maintain
registration does not recognise the ethical obligations
to be honest and candid
with the registration authorities.
a contravention of s 109 of the National Law has been established as a matter of
fact, s 139B(1)(b) designates the contravention
as unsatisfactory professional
Evidence relied upon to establish
Particulars 1 and 2 of Complaint 3
registered as a paramedic in Australia on 20 May 2019, the practitioner was
obliged to comply with the PBA Code of Conduct.
being convicted on 10 December 2021, the practitioner continued to work as a
registered paramedic with NSW Ambulance during
June 2022, the practitioner was obliged to comply with the Ahpra Code of
Conduct, with obligations to be ethical and trustworthy
and display qualities
such as integrity and truthfulness.
24 November 2022, the practitioner provided false information to Ahpra when
completing an application for renewal of his registration.
He answered
“No” to the question “Since your last declaration to Ahpra,
has there been any change to your criminal
history in one or more countries
other than Australia that you have not declared to Ahpra?”
2023, the practitioner continued to work as a registered paramedic with NSW
Ambulance until his final shift on 28 November
9 November 2023, he again provided false information to Ahpra when completing an
application for renewal of registration. He answered
“No” to the
question “Since your last declaration to Ahpra, has there been any change
to your criminal history
in one or more countries other than Australia that you
have not declared to Ahpra?”
renewal form also included a declaration: “I undertake to comply with all
relevant legislation and National Board registration
standards, codes and
guidelines”.
practitioner had previously explained (in March 2019) an aspect of his criminal
history relating to the charge against him in
2011 for obstructing a Police
Officer. He clearly would have been aware that a charge of sexual assault would
be a matter to be disclosed
as part of his criminal history. He had professional
and ethical obligations to complete documents relating to his renewal
accurately.
He failed to fulfil these obligations by making deliberately false
statements to Ahpra, knowing they were untrue. The conduct was
dishonest and
deceptive, and in breach of the professional behaviour and conduct expected of
paramedics to embody integrity and honesty.
The practitioner’s conduct was
thus, plainly, “unethical”.
deliberate falsehoods constitute a standard of conduct that falls well below the
conduct expected of a paramedic to be honest
and ethical, and to have integrity.
The practitioner’s conduct has the potential to bring the profession into
disrepute and
reduce public confidence in the profession.
find that the practitioner engaged in the alleged conduct as particularised. We
also find that his conduct meets the threshold
of being “improper or
unethical” under s 139B(1)(l) of the National Law, to support a finding
that the practitioner has
been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
therefore find Complaint Three to be proven.
Four asserts that the practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct pursuant
to s 139E of the National Law in that the
practitioner engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or
cancellation
of the practitioner’s registration and/or engaged in more
than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when
instances are considered together, amounts to conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify the suspension or cancellation
of the practitioner’s
registration.
evidence relied upon in support of Complaint Four is the same evidence relied
upon in support of Complaints Two and Three.
s 139E(a) of the National Law, “unsatisfactory professional conduct”
of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of a
practitioner’s registration equates to “professional
misconduct”. In
Chen v Health Care Complaints Commission
) at [19], the Court of Appeal per Basten JA regarded
professional misconduct as merely a category of unsatisfactory professional
conduct which is sufficiently serious to justify suspension or cancellation.
the degree of seriousness is sufficient to warrant suspension or cancellation is
a matter of degree and judgment. Each case
will depend upon an evaluative
judgment to be made by the Tribunal as to the nature and seriousness of the
assessing its gravity, the offending conduct is not to be measured by reference
to the worst cases but by reference to the extent
to which it departs from
proper standards:
a result of the practitioner’s conduct:
(1) his employer remained unaware that he had been charged and convicted of
sexually assaulting a paramedic for a lengthy period
(from 5 August 2019 until
after his resignation on 30 November 2023) and was deprived of the opportunity
to ensure that other paramedics
and patients were not exposed to any risk that
the practitioner may repeat his offending conduct. The practitioner took leave,
carer’s leave, to attend his criminal trial and the sentencing
hearing. The practitioner did not disclose any information about
his charge or
the hearing or his conviction at any point prior to, during or after his
employment with NSW Ambulance;
(2) the Council was unable to take any action to protect the public for a
lengthy period;
(3) Ahpra remained unaware that the practitioner had been charged and convicted
of sexually assaulting a paramedic for a lengthy
period of time. Ahpra became
aware on 28 November 2023, after receiving an anonymous complaint.
are of the view that the practitioner’s improper and unethical conduct
deprived the Council and Ahpra from protecting the
health and safety of the
public and deprived NSW Ambulance from protecting other paramedics and its
patients. The practitioner’s
conduct is so incompatible with what is an
acceptable standard of behaviour for a registered paramedic that his conduct is
of a sufficiently
serious nature to meet the threshold of “professional
misconduct” under s 139E of the National Law, to justify suspension
cancellation.
therefore find that Complaint Four is proven.
Justification for
cancellation of the respondent’s registration
now consider whether or not the practitioner’s conduct warrants suspension
for a specified period or cancellation of her
registration.
these proceedings, the Commission submitted that the practitioner’s
registration ought to be cancelled, and argued that there
were two grounds to
support their submission:
(1) first, if the practitioner is found guilty of professional misconduct, his
registration ought to be cancelled pursuant to s 149C(1)(b)
of the National
(2) additionally, or in the alternative, the circumstances of the offence for
which the practitioner was convicted rendered him unfit
in the public interest
to practise paramedicine, thereby justifying cancellation of his registration
pursuant to s 149C(1)(c) of
the National Law.
determining what protective orders are appropriate, the paramount consideration
is the protection of the health and safety of the
national scheme provides for the protection of the health and safety of the
public by ensuring that “only health practitioners
who are suitably
trained and qualified to practise in a competent and ethical manner are
registered”: s 3(2)(a) of the National
making protective orders, we also have regard to the following recognised
principles:
(1) maintaining the standards of the profession, to preserve public confidence
in the integrity of the profession and thereby protect
the community:
(2) deterring both the practitioner and others from engaging in similar conduct,
to maintain professional standards and thereby ensure
public safety and faith in
the profession:
(3) protecting the health and safety of the public is not confined to protecting
current or potential patients but includes protecting
the public from similar
misconduct of others and upholding public confidence in the standards of the
profession:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
(4) whilst the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is primarily protective and not
punitive, it is unavoidable that protective orders may
be incidentally punitive:
at 201-202;
at [20] and [31] and
at [97]-[98].
Cancellation on the ground that the practitioner is guilty of professional
misconduct under s 149C(1)(b)
firstly consider our finding of professional misconduct and whether it justifies
cancellation of the practitioner’s registration.
are mindful of the decision made by the Conduct and Competence Committee of the
HCPC (UK) on 18 December 2023 which resulted in
the practitioner being struck
off the UK Register. The Committee Panel was satisfied that a striking off order
was appropriate and
proportionate because the nature and gravity of the concerns
were such that any lesser sanction would be insufficient to protect
the public,
maintain public confidence in the profession and maintain public confidence in
the regulatory process. The Panel considered
that to allow a registrant to
remain in or return to unrestricted practice while they are on the sex
offenders’ database was
incompatible with the HCPC’s obligation to
protect the public.
the case before us, there is no evidence of remorse or remediation or insight,
from which we conclude there remains an ongoing
risk to the practitioner’s
female colleagues, patients and the public. Any sanction other than cancellation
of his registration
would be insufficient to protect those persons and would be
insufficient to maintain public confidence in the profession.
are of the view that the practitioner’s improper and unethical conduct is
so incompatible with what is an acceptable standard
of behaviour for a
registered paramedic, that cancellation of the practitioner’s registration
is warranted under s 149C(1)(b)
of the National Law.
Cancellation
on the ground that the circumstances of the Offence render the practitioner
unfit in the public interest to practise
nursing: s 149C(1)(c)
Notwithstanding
our finding that cancellation of the practitioner’s registration is
warranted on the grounds of his professional
misconduct, we also consider
whether his conviction and the circumstances of his offence render him unfit in
the public interest
to practise paramedicine, such that, additionally and on
those alternative grounds, cancellation of his registration is also
number of Tribunal cases have considered the phrase “unfit in the public
interest to practise the practitioner’s profession”,
since it is not
defined in the National Law. Whether a practitioner is unfit in the public
interest to practice requires consideration
of the nature of the conviction and
the circumstances in which the offence was perpetrated:
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Turner
[2016] NSWCATOD 163
submissions made on behalf of the Commission helpfully summarised how the phrase
is interpreted. We adopt some of those submissions
as set out below:
“c. whether a practitioner is unfit in the public interest to practice
will require the Tribunal to take into account not only
the offence but also the
circumstances in which they were committed, including the relevant factual
background and the impact of
the conviction on the practitioner in terms of any
insight, contrition and remorse:
HCCC v Karunaratne (No 2)
NSWCATOD 201
d. whether a practitioner is unfit in the public interest to practise will
consider both the direct risk to patients and the indirect
risk to the public
through damage to their trust in the profession. When health professionals are
convicted of serious criminal offences
and where there is a close nexus between
the criminal conduct and professional role and responsibilities, the
public’s ability
to entrust their care to those health professions may be
imperilled if the convicted practitioner continues to practise. The serious
nature of the offences and the length of time over which they occurred, may
cause most reasonable members of the public to fear placing
themselves, or their
loved ones, in the care of a convicted practitioner lacking rehabilitation and
HCCC v Wood
[2020] NSWCATOD 60
e. Whether a practitioner is unfit in the public interest to practise must be
assessed in light of a holistic inquiry into suitability
which takes into
account the wider context of the practitioner’s conduct, including
motivation, insight into the harm caused
and any attempts at rehabilitation. All
of these considerations, past and present, must inform an assessment of current
suitability
to practise, within a legislative framework of public protection in
which the health and safety of the public are the paramount consideration.
Public protection goes beyond specific questions of individual deterrence and
the risk of repetition to encompass the broader goal
of safety through the
setting and maintaining of professional standards and public confidence in the
health professions:
HCCC v Limboro
[2018] NSWCATOD 117
AHPRA’s Registration Standard: Criminal History
assessing whether the nature of the conviction and the circumstances in which it
was perpetrated render the practitioner unfit
in the public interest to practise
paramedicine, we consider Ahpra’s “
Registration Standard:
Criminal History
” (1 July 2015). This standard sets out ten factors
relating to a practitioner’s criminal history that the National Board
considers may be relevant to determining their registration. Those factors are
considered below:
The nature and gravity of the offence and its
relevance to health practice
sentencing the practitioner, Mr Recorder Khalil QC presiding in the hearing of
the case in the Crown Court Chelmsford, noted that
the practitioner “must
well have known” that he had sexually assaulted his victim. Sexual assault
is regarded in Australia
and the UK as one of the most serious of offences,
carrying penalties ranging from fines to lengthy terms of imprisonment. His
referred to aggravating factors in the case including that the offence
was committed in the victim’s home where she should
have felt safe and
secure, and that the practitioner had been invited there as a trusted colleague
and friend.
person found guilty of an offence on conviction on indictment under section
3(4)(b) of the
Sexual Offences Act 2003
(UK) is liable to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 10 years. The gravity of the offence is considered in
more detail below with
respect to the sentence imposed on the practitioner.
Honour referred to the effect of the assault on Person A. Whilst acknowledging
that she had a pre-disposition to suffer from post-traumatic
stress disorder and
anxiety, she had suffered an exacerbation in her pre-conditions in the immediate
aftermath of the assault, and
had sought counselling for her feelings of lack of
self-worth and feelings of self-harm, with suicidal ideation. The assault had
caused a significant upheaval in her life and she had given up her employment
with the LAS.
highest standards of professionalism, ethics and respect for colleagues are
regarded as central to the practice of paramedicine.
As set out in the PBA Code
of Conduct, good relationships with colleagues and other practitioners
strengthen the practitioner-patient/client
relationship and enhance patient
care. This is echoed in Principle 5 of the Ahpra Code of Conduct. The
practitioner’s conduct
offended those standards and principles, and
destroyed the trust that Person A had held for him, as a senior colleague. There
therefore no question that the offending conduct is relevant to the practice
of paramedicine under the National Law.
practitioner’s conduct was contrary to the Ahpra Code of Conduct which
notes at paragraph 4.9 (with respect to professional
boundaries) that good
practice includes that a practitioner is “clear about the professional
boundaries that must exist in
professional relationships for objectivity in
care” and avoids “conflicts of interest, as well as under or
over-involvement”.
Additionally, under section 5.3 of the Ahpra Code of
Conduct, there is no place for harassment, including sexual harassment, in
in Australia. Respect for colleagues is described as a
“cornerstone of good practice”, and a feature of constructive
relationships between practitioners, their peers and colleagues, and with
submitted on behalf of the Commission, the public is entitled to expect that
paramedics will never touch them unless clinically
indicated and may fear
entrusting themselves into the care of a practitioner convicted of sexually
touching a colleague without consent.
The practitioner was found to have
sexually assaulted his colleague whilst in her own home, while attempting to
sleep. His conduct
is incompatible with the role of a paramedic, which often
involves working one-on-one with colleagues, attending patients in their
and working with vulnerable patients, including patients who are unconscious,
asleep or semiconscious.
The period of time since the health
practitioner committed, or allegedly committed, the offence
offence was committed on 4 May 2019 and Ahpra did not become aware of the
offence for around 4.5 years because the practitioner
failed to disclose either
his charge or his conviction.
Whether a finding of guilt or a
conviction was recorded for the offence
place a considerable amount of weight on the fact that the practitioner pleaded
not guilty but was convicted by a jury for the
sentence imposed for the offence
case was considered to be at the higher end of category 2B of the sentencing
guidelines in the UK, such that his Honour had in
mind a range somewhere between
a high community order and two years in prison. His Honour considered the matter
to be so serious
that it crossed the custody threshold and said “No
sentence other than prison can properly reflect that which you did to [Person
on that occasion”. However, his Honour took into account some mitigating
circumstances, including that the practitioner
had returned to the UK to face
trial at considerable and personal cost and that he had not previously offended
and had not offended
in the period after the offence.
was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 18 months, suspended for a period of
two years. In addition, he was fined the sum of
two thousand pounds to be paid
as compensation to Person A. He was ordered to pay the prosecution’s costs
of two thousand and
eight hundred pounds, as well as a victim surcharge cost of
one hundred and forty pounds. The practitioner was made subject to an
restraining order, prohibiting him from ever contacting Person A directly and
indirectly. His name was entered on the
UK sex offenders database for 10
The ages of the health practitioner and of any victim at
the time the health practitioner committed the offence
practitioner was aged 35 and the victim was aged 25 at the time of the
Whether or not the conduct that constituted the offence
has been decriminalised
offence of sexual assault under s 3 of the
Sexual Offences Act 2003
has not been decriminalised.
The health practitioner’s
behaviour since committing the offence
the immediate aftermath of committing the offence, the practitioner sent a
number of messages to Person A which have already been
interviewed by Police, he denied touching Person A, claiming it was a
“massive misunderstanding with a work colleague”.
He acknowledged
that sexual assault was wrong and not acceptable by society standards. He denied
sexually assaulting Person A in
his Defence and suggested that Person A was
lying, claiming that she had invited him to sleep on her bed. However, his
by a jury of his peers concluded that the practitioner’s
account of events was not true and found him guilty.
previously noted, after committing the offence, the practitioner returned to
Australia and started working for NSW Ambulance from
5 August 2019. He travelled
working for NSW Ambulance
as a paramedic until the discovery of his conviction
and his resignation on 30 November 2023.
little is known about the practitioner’s current circumstances after his
resignation from NSW Ambulance other than the
information disclosed in his email
on 8 April 2024 to the Commission. In that email he answered “No” to
a question about
whether he had disclosed the sexual assault charge and his
conviction to Ahpra when renewing his registration at any time before
his return to Australia. He also answered “No” to the question
asking whether he had informed the Council of
the sexual assault charge and
conviction. In his email, the practitioner said he was not working as a
paramedic in NSW or in any
other State or Territory of Australia or outside
Australia. He said that he was working as a warehouse labourer with various
hire agencies.
practitioner elected to not attend the s 150 hearing, and elected to not file
any defence or reply to the Commission’s Application
and Complaint. He
also elected to not attend the hearing before this Tribunal.
far as we are aware, the practitioner does not appear to have reoffended since
his conviction.
The likelihood of future threat to a patient of
the health practitioner
practitioner declined to participate in the hearing and we were therefore not
able to ask him about the nature of any psychological
counselling he may have
undertaken, or his reflections on his conduct and whether he has genuine remorse
for his conduct. We were
unable to assess whether he has insight into the impact
of his conduct on Person A and, more broadly, upon the reputation of the
profession and how his conduct would be viewed by the broader community. We were
unable to assess, with any confidence, the likelihood
of his re-offending.
However, his past sustained behaviour of failing to disclose his criminal
history to his employer and to Ahpra
on multiple occasions is not easily
overlooked. It suggests that the practitioner is likely to fail to disclose his
criminal history
in an attempt to conceal his conviction if he can avoid it, to
gain employment.
Information given by the health
practitioner
noted above, the practitioner has not provided information in response to the
matters prosecuted by the Commission.
Any other matter of
practitioner’s election to not engage with the Council or the Commission
or these proceedings indicates a reluctance to
come to terms with the gravity of
his criminal conduct and the impact upon the victim and the reputation of
paramedics. We hold concerns
that the practitioner does not fully understand his
obligations under the National Law and does not have an appreciation of the
and behaviours expected of paramedics (as articulated under the PBA Code
of Conduct or the Ahpra Code of Conduct).
Is the practitioner
unfit in the public interest to practise paramedicine?
a practitioner is unfit in the public interest to practise may include
consideration of whether the practitioner’s criminal
offence exhibits
traits in the practitioner inconsistent with the practise of an honourable
profession:
Health Care Complaints Commission v FLJ
[2023] NSWCATOD 7
the rationale in
we have concerns about the character traits exposed
in the practitioner, particularly with respect to his attempts to hide his
conviction.
We have found that the practitioner’s conduct breached the
National Law and breached the fundamental values of integrity and
honesty under
the PBA Code of Conduct. The practitioner’s repeated failures to honestly
disclose his conviction demonstrate
that he has traits that are inconsistent
with the practise of paramedicine.
place a substantial amount of weight on the nature and circumstances of the
offence when considering whether the practitioner is
unfit in the public
interest to practice paramedicine.
regard to the evidence before us, and our consideration of Ahpra’s ten
factors relevant to registration standards, we
find that the conviction and the
circumstances of the offence render the practitioner unfit in the public
interest to practise paramedicine,
justifying as an additional ground,
cancellation of his registration.
Period of non-review
Tribunal has the power and discretion to set a non-review period with respect to
an order cancelling a practitioner’s registration.
The purpose of setting
a non-review period is to protect the health and safety of the public. The
effect of setting a non-review
period is that a practitioner may not make an
application for review of the cancellation order during the non-review period:
of the National Law.
the end of the non-review period, the practitioner will be entitled to make an
application to the Tribunal for reinstatement: s
163A(1) of the National
paramount consideration when determining the length of time set by a non-review
period is the protection of the health and safety
of the public. The duration of
the non-review period indicates the minimum period within which the Tribunal
considers the practitioner
should not be able to practise their profession by
sending a clear message of denouncement of the offending conduct to the
practitioner,
the profession of paramedicine and the public about professional
standards to be maintained.
practitioner declined to attend the hearing which meant that the Tribunal had no
opportunity to evaluate his disposition towards
his criminal conduct and no
opportunity to evaluate whether he had made any effort to rehabilitate.
agree with the Commission’s submission that a non-review period is needed
in the circumstances of this case. We are of the
view that the non-review period
will allow the practitioner further time to demonstrate whether:
(1) he has gained genuine insight into the gravity of his conduct and the impact
it had on Person A and the reputation of paramedics;
(2) he has undertaken appropriate rehabilitation to identify and address his
risk factors;
(3) he has completed meaningful further education, particularly to address
ethical professional conduct;
(4) he has remained free of any further criminal conduct;
(5) his character is truly reformed, such that he can demonstrate his worthiness
to hold registration and reliability that he will
behave honestly and ethically
in the future.
decision on the period of time during which a practitioner may not apply for
review, is dependant on the facts and circumstances
of each case. The
predominant consideration is the protection of the public:
The non-review periods imposed in previous Tribunal decisions do not set a
benchmark for subsequent cases:
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2019] NSWCATOD 17
general public needs to be confident that they are protected from this
practitioner and to be confident that the conduct is strongly
balance, for the reasons set out above, we consider that a non-review period of
twelve months is appropriate in the circumstances
Prohibition order
Commission also sought a prohibition order against the practitioner under s
149C(5) of the National Law, arguing that the practitioner
could seek to use his
paramedic training and experience to work as an unregistered health practitioner
and there is a risk that prospective
employers will be unaware of his criminal
history which would not necessarily be detected via a routine Australian
criminal history
circumstances when the Tribunal cancels a practitioner’s registration, and
is satisfied the person poses a substantial risk
to the health of members of the
public, it may exercise its discretion to make an order prohibiting the person
from providing health
services. The phrase “substantial risk to the health
of members of the public” is not defined in the National Law. It
however, been considered by the Tribunal to be a risk that is material and real
or apparent on the evidence. It is not a risk
that is without substance and is
not merely speculative:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Brush
NSWCATOD 120
and more recently in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2021] NSWCATOD 132
question of whether a person poses a substantial risk to the health of the
public is assessed by evaluating the risk posed to
the public if the person were
to be involved in the provision of health services:
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Menz (No 2)
[2017] NSWCATOD 172
Health Care
Complaints Commission v De Lore
[2020] NSWCATOD 72
our view, if the practitioner was permitted to provide health services as an
unregistered practitioner during the period when his
registration is cancelled,
it would undermine the protective purpose of the cancellation order, where the
Tribunal holds a concern
assessing the practitioner’s risk, we consider whether there is a
likelihood that he will repeat his offending conduct with
female colleagues and
patients when working as an unregistered paramedic. Since the practitioner
declined to attend the hearing,
the Tribunal had no opportunity to evaluate his
disposition towards his criminal conduct and no opportunity to evaluate whether
had made any effort to rehabilitate. We therefore took into consideration his
previous conduct and behaviour including:
(1) his persistence in dancing in a sexualised manner with Person A despite her
asking him to stop;
(2) his persistence in touching Person A on her genitalia and breasts despite
her crossing her legs and turning away;
(3) his persistence in contacting Person A after she told him to stop;
(4) that he denied the allegation of sexual assault when interviewed by the LAS
and the UK Police, pleaded not guilty to the charge
in the UK criminal
proceedings, and continued to assert that Person A was lying which may suggest
that he has not accepted responsibility
for his offending and has no insight
into the impact of his conduct on Person A;
(5) that he has not shown any remorse for Person A;
(6) his concealment of the charge against him from a number of authorities,
including NSW Ambulance when being interviewed for employment
(7) his concealment of his conviction from NSW Ambulance and from Ahpra;
(8) his failure to make honest declarations to Ahpra about his criminal
(9) that there is no evidence of any effort on his part to rehabilitate
following his conviction.
the sentencing hearing on 14 December 2021, reference was made to the
practitioner’s persistence in messaging Person A in
a deflective manner
after the assault. We acknowledge that this eventually ceased. However, his
Honour noted that there were aggravating
factors to take into account, including
that the offence was committed in the home of Person A where she should have
felt safe and
secure, and that he had been invited there as a trusted colleague
and friend. We have a concern that the practitioner’s denial
of guilt when
he must have known that he had sexually assaulted the victim (as his Honour
noted), together with his sustained concealment
of his conviction demonstrates
that he has not fully accepted responsibility for his conduct. Additionally,
there is no objective
evidence of remorse or rehabilitation. As a result, the
risk that he may repeat his conduct with a female colleague or patient cannot
ignored. The risk posed is real and material and is not merely speculative. It
can be mitigated during the non-review period of
the cancellation order, with a
prohibition order.
Accordingly,
we consider that a prohibition order under s 149C(5) of the National Law, for a
period of twelve months, is reasonable
and appropriate in the
circumstances.
Awarding costs against the respondent
clause 13(1) of Schedule 5D to the National Law, the Tribunal has the power to
order the respondent to pay the Commission’s
costs. Under clause 13(3A) of
Schedule 5D, the Tribunal may fix the amount of costs itself or order that the
amount of costs be assessed
by a costs assessor under the applicable legal costs
legislation or on any other basis.
Court of Appeal has affirmed that, as a general rule, costs of proceedings
before the Tribunal should follow the event (that is,
the successful party is
entitled to receive their costs), and mere impecuniosity is not a justifiable
reason for departing from that
presumption that a successful party is entitled to receive their costs is
generally only displaced where there has been some disentitling
conduct by the
successful party:
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
applied by the Tribunal in several decisions including
Health Care Complaints Commission v CSM
[2016] NSWCATOD 125
Health Care Complaints Commission v Brush (No. 2)
[2015] NSWCATOD 154
Tribunal accepts there has not been any disentitling conduct by the Commission
to warrant a departure from the general rule. Accordingly,
we have decided to
order the respondent to pay the Commission’s costs as agreed or assessed
in accordance with the applicable
legislation.
make the following orders:
(1) The practitioner’s registration as a health practitioner is cancelled
for a period of 12 months pursuant to s 149C(1)(b)
and s 149C(1)(c) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW), with a non-review
period of 12 months pursuant to s 149C(7) of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
(2) Pursuant to s 149C(5)(a) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
(NSW), the practitioner is prohibited from providing health services as
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(NSW) for a period
of 12 months.
(3) Pursuant to clause 13 of Schedule 5D to the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
(NSW), the practitioner is to pay the
Commission’s costs as agreed or assessed in accordance with the applicable
costs legislation.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (470 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter