URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDT/2012/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v BOSANQUET [2012] NSWDT 2 (9 August 2012)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL
LAW (NSW) No 86a
DENTAL TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 167
ARTHUR GIFFARD BOSANQUET
(AKA ARTHUR GIFFORD
MATTER NUMBER: DT03/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER: DE0041592
(Previous NSW Registration Number)
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION
ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v BOSANQUET [2012] NSWDT 2
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr P Strickland of Senior Counsel instructed by Ms Faye
Westwood, Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Arthur Giffard Bosanquet
(Respondent) – did not appear and
unrepresented.
FILE NUMBER: DT03/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Angie Lang (Dentist
Em. Prof. Keith Lester (Dentist Member)
Catherine Berglund (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 7 February 2012
DATE OF DECISION: 9 August 2012
FINDINGS (in summary): All Particulars of Complaints established (save for
Particular VI – Complaint Three as repeated in Particular
Complaints Four and Five). Complaints One, Three, Four and Five established
(Complaint Two not relied upon).
CATCHWORDS: Dentist – conviction for three criminal offences -
subject of a criminal finding in relation to three offences
- assault with act
of indecency (s61L) - incite person 16 years or over to commit act of
indecency (s61N(2)) -
Crimes Act 1900
– not a suitable person to hold
registration - unsatisfactory professional conduct – professional
misconduct.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law – NSW) – ss 55(1)(h), 139B, 139E, 144
(a), 144(b), 144 (e), 145A, 167;
Dental Practice Act
ss 37(1)(b)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Crimes Act 1900
section 61L(1)
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Dental Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional Councils
Authority (HPCA) Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney on
7 February 2012 to conduct
an Inquiry with respect to a complaint (Complaint) made in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No
(National Law - NSW) by Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health
Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated 25 July 2011
in relation to a
previously registered dentist, Arthur Giffard Bosanquet (the Respondent).
Respondent was initially charged in relation to offences regarding Patient A in
2008. Two further victims then came forward to
police and additional charges
were laid against the Respondent in relation to Patient B and Patient C.
Ultimately the Respondent
was convicted of three offences in the Local Court on
4 December 2009 and a term of imprisonment was imposed after a protracted
process. On appeal to the District Court the convictions were upheld,
the terms of imprisonment reduced and the sentence suspended.
Respondent’s good behaviour bond term expired in October 2011.
Complaint alleges the Respondent has been convicted of three criminal offences
in New South Wales (section 144(a
) National Law
), that he is not a
suitable person to hold registration as a dentist (section 144(e)), that he is
guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct
(section 144(b)) with respect to the improper and unethical conduct –
being the conduct
relating to his three convictions and additional matters (as
set out in the Particulars).
6 February 2012 the Respondent’s legal representatives advised that he no
longer wished to appear before the Tribunal in
respect of the Complaint filed by
the HCCC and that he no longer wished to rely upon the reports of Dr Emma
Collins (psychologist),
Dr Olav Nielssen (psychiatrist) or Dr Jeremy O’Dea
(psychiatrist) which had been filed with the Tribunal and served upon the
The Tribunal was also advised that the Respondent no longer required Patient B
and Patient C for cross-examination.
the Respondent’s name was removed from the Register at the end of 2009 his
name has not ever been entered onto the National
Register created under the
National Law.
The Complaint
Complaint (as amended – see underlining) alleges that the Respondent
(referred to in the Complaint as the practitioner),
being a formerly registered
dentist under the
Dental Practice Act
(a corresponding prior
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been convicted of three criminal offences
Particulars of Complaint One
practitioner was convicted of three offences on 30 April 2010,
(a) That he pleaded guilty on 5 November 2008 at Wollongong Local Court NSW to
inciting a person 16 years or over (namely Patient
A) to commit an act of
indecency on 4 May 2007, at [omitted] NSW, contrary to
section 61N(2)
Crimes Act 1900
(b) That he was found guilty following a hearing at Wollongong Local Court on 4
December 2009 of the offence of assault with act
of indecency (on Patient B),
namely fondling his testicles, on 19 December 2000, at [omitted] NSW, contrary
section 61L
. This conviction was upheld
after the practitioner appealed to the Wollongong District Court on 1 October
(c) That he pleaded guilty of
13 May 2009 at Wollongong Local Court
to inciting a person 16 years or over (namely Patient C) to commit an act of
indecency between
1 March 1999 and 30 April 1999, at [omitted] NSW, contrary to
section 61N(2)
Crimes Act 1900
COMPLAINT TWO
Not pressed
Has been the subject of a criminal finding in relation to three
Particulars of Complaint Two
following offences were also taken into account on 30 April 2010, when imposing
sentences for the above mentioned offences:
(a) That he admitted without entering a plea on 13 May 2009 at Wollongong Local
Court to common assault of a person (Patient B) on
a date between 12 December
2000 and 20 December 2000 at [omitted] NSW, contrary to
(b) That he admitted without entering a plea on 13 May 2009 at Wollongong Local
Court to common assault of a person (Patient C) on
a date between 1 March 1999
and 30 April 1999 at [omitted] NSW, contrary to
(c) That he admitted without entering a plea on 13 May 2009 at Wollongong Local
Court to common assault of a person (Patient C) on
a date between 1 March 1999
and 30 April 1999 at [omitted] NSW, contrary to
COMPLAINT THREE
Is not a suitable person to hold registration in the practitioner’s
profession:
Particulars of Complaint Three
A fractured his mandible in August 2006, and was operated on by the
practitioner. After the surgery during a follow-up appointment,
the practitioner
took a swab from Patient A’s penis with his own hands.
November – December 2006
, Patient A was initially approached by the
practitioner while he was attending his surgery in Fairy Meadow to take part in
Patient A was informed by the practitioner that the fee for removing
his wisdom teeth could be offset or waived by his participation
masturbation “study” through the university.
subsequent offence the practitioner was convicted of concerning Patient A,
referred to in Complaint One Particular 1(a), occurred
at Patient A’s
house on 4 May 2007.
B was treated for facial injuries by the practitioner. During a follow-up
consultation on 11 August 2000, the practitioner
informed Patient B that he
needed to remove his wisdom teeth. When discussing the cost, the practitioner
informed Patient B of his
masturbation “study” and said he could be
paid $300 per session to participate and that he could participate multiple
times. During an appointment on 12 December 2000 to remove 2 wisdom teeth, and
after being given 5 valium tablets, the practitioner
asked Patient B if he would
like to participate in the “study”. Patient B replied that he would
prefer to do it at home.
A week later the practitioner called Patient B at his
house and attended where the indecent assault occurred on 19 December 2000,
referred to in Complaint One Particular 1(b).
C was given a free Hepatitis B immunisation by the practitioner in March/April
1999 through his association with the Wollongong
Rugby Club. The practitioner
during this period informed him of a masturbation “study” by a
“friend” who
was a heart surgeon who was offering $150 per session
to participate and asked if he was interested and Patient C agreed. Later,
week day, Patient C attended the practitioner’s practice at Crown Street,
Wollongong where he participated in the masturbation
“study” and was
paid $150 by the practitioner and further, Patient C subsequently attended the
practitioner’s home
(the following Sunday) for a final masturbation
“study” session, which he participated in and was paid $150,
to in Complaint One Particular 1(c).
practitioner contravened
section 37(1)(a)
Dental Practice Act
, in that the practitioner failed to notify the Dental Board in
writing within seven days of three criminal convictions being recorded
April 2010 and the penalties imposed for those offences.
practitioner contravened
section 37(1)(b)
Dental Practice Act
, in that the practitioner failed to notify the Dental Board in
writing within seven days of criminal proceedings being commenced
2008 in respect of a sex offence alleged to have been committed in the course of
the practice or purported practice of
the practitioner.
COMPLAINT FOUR
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 139B of the National Law in that he has engaged
in improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of the
practitioner’s profession:
Particulars of Complaint Four
practitioner was convicted of three offences on 30 April 2010, as set out in
Complaint One.
practitioner also admitted three offences which were taken into account on 30
April 2010,
at the Wollongong Local Court
when imposing sentences for the
three offences
he was convicted
A fractured his mandible in August 2006, and was operated on by the
practitioner. After the surgery during a follow-up appointment,
the practitioner
took a swab from Patient A’s penis with his own hands.
November – December 2006
, Patient A was initially approached by the
practitioner while he was attending his surgery in Fairy Meadow to take part in
Patient A was informed by the practitioner that the fee for removing
his wisdom teeth could be offset or waived by his participation
masturbation “study” through the university.
subsequent offence the practitioner was convicted of concerning Patient A,
referred to in Complaint One Particular 1(a), occurred
at Patient’s house
on 4 May 2007.
B was treated for facial injuries by the practitioner. During a follow-up
consultation on 11 August 2000, the practitioner
informed Patient B that he
needed to remove his wisdom teeth. When discussing the cost, the practitioner
informed Patient B of his
masturbation “study” and said he could be
paid $300 per session to participate and that he could participate multiple
times. During an appointment on 12 December 2000 to remove 2 wisdom teeth and,
after being given 5 valium tablets, the practitioner
asked Patient B if he would
like to participate in the “study”. Patient B replied that he would
prefer to do it at home.
A week later the practitioner called Patient B at his
house and attended where the indecent assault occurred on 19 December 2000,
referred to in Complaint One Particular 1(b).
C was given a free Hepatitis B immunisation by the practitioner in March/April
1999 through his association with the Wollongong
Rugby Club. The practitioner
during this period informed him of a masturbation “study” by a
“friend” who
was a heart surgeon who was offering $150 per session
to participate and asked if he was interested and Patient C agreed. Later,
week day, Patient C attended the practitioner’s practice at Crown Street,
Wollongong where he participated in the masturbation
“study” and was
paid $150 by the practitioner and further, Patient C subsequently attended the
practitioner’s home
(the following Sunday) for a final masturbation
“study” session, which he participated in and was paid $150,
to in Complaint One Particular 1(c).
practitioner contravened
section 37(1)(a)
Dental Practice Act
, in that the practitioner failed to notify the Dental Board in
writing within seven days of three criminal convictions being recorded
April 2010 and the penalties imposed for those offences.
practitioner contravened
section 37(1)(b)
Dental Practice Act
, in that the practitioner failed to notify the Dental Board in
writing within seven days of criminal proceedings being commenced
2008 in respect of a sex offence alleged to have been committed in the course of
the practice or purported practice of
the practitioner.
COMPLAINT FIVE
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section
of the National Law in that he has engaged in improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of the
practitioner’s profession:
Particulars of Complaint Five
As per Complaint Four.
Appearances
Respondent was initially represented by Ms Karen Kumar, Solicitor, Hicksons,
Lawyers. Correspondence was received from the Respondent’s
legal advisers
up until just prior to the commencement of the Inquiry. This correspondence
included advice that there would be no
appearance for or by the Respondent. The
Respondent’s legal representatives wrote to the Tribunal on 6 February
2012 providing
this advice. The letter also advised that the Respondent admitted
the subject matter of the complaint and accepted that his registration
have been cancelled had he been registered. The letter further advised that the
Respondent would now, in the circumstances,
not be relying upon the reports of
Drs O’Dea, Nielssen or Collins. The HCCC were represented as per the
Suppression Orders
Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation to the names of
Patient A, Patient A’s mother, Patient
B and Patient C, Patient C’s
father and others in accordance with Schedule 5D Clause 7 of the Act as
indicated in the schedule
annexed hereto and marked ‘C’. Any
information beyond that contained in this Reasons document which may identify
is also not to be published. Annexure C will only be attached to the
original Reasons for Decision held by the Registry and must
not be reproduced.
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in Annexure
‘A’ hereto. The documents relied upon by the
HCCC became exhibits 1
– 37. The only document relied upon by the Respondent was his statement
which became R1.
witnesses gave evidence before the Tribunal.
information
Background of the Respondent
Respondent was born in 1954. He completed a Bachelor of Dental Surgery in 1979
and a Master of Dental Surgery in 1988. He was
first registered as a dentist on
17 December 1978. He was also registered as an oral surgeon in 1989 and then as
an oral and maxillofacial
surgeon in 2000.
the time the Respondent prepared his CV he had completed the course work for a
Graduate Diploma of Health Law. The course information
provided by the
Respondent indicates that the topic of ‘Professional Discipline’
included clinical ethics, legal duties
as well as the disciplining of health
care professionals.
Respondent worked as an oral and maxillofacial surgeon from 1989 until his
suspension in 2008. His CV lists an appointment as
a ‘Visiting Medical
Officer’ in the South Eastern Sydney Illawarra Area Health Service (AHS),
in addition to numerous
appointments at various private hospitals. The
Respondent has published a number of articles and presented at conferences and
at a level consistent with an experienced member of the profession. The
Tribunal also notes that the Respondent records that he has
held various senior
positions in sporting organisations and had accompanied numerous football teams
on tours, including a ‘schoolboy’
team and an ‘under 21 year
old’ team as the ‘Medical Officer’. Further comments regarding
the contents of
the Respondent’s CV are set out below.
Background of the Complaint
Chief Executive of the South Eastern Sydney Illawarra Area Health Service (AHS)
wrote to the Registrar of the NSW Dental Board
(as it then was) on 12 September
2008 (exhibit 2) advising of information received regarding the Respondent
having been charged with
offences relating to Patient A. Patient A had presented
at one of the Sexual Assault Services provided by that AHS. His letter noted
that the Respondent held an appointment as a Visiting Dental Officer with the
Board wrote to the Respondent on 12 September 2008 advising of the receipt of
the Complaint from the AHS, noting that he had been
charged with a criminal
offence on 5 August 2008 and that the Board had not been notified of same (as
was required by
section 37(1)
Dental Practice Act 2001
- NSW). The Board
further advised the Respondent that a
Inquiry was to be held on 15
September 2008 (exhibit 8).
Inquiry the Board imposed a ‘chaperone’ condition on
the Respondent’s registration and referred the matter to the
investigation (exhibit 9).
Tribunal notes that during the
Inquiry there was evidence that the
Respondent was notified of the charge on 20 June 2008 (page 8 – exhibit
11). The Respondent
was formally charged on the first court return date (5
August 2008) at which time he entered a not guilty plea.
Inquiry was held on 7 November 2008 (see Decision at exhibit
12). The Inquiry noted the Respondent’s guilty plea and ordered
Respondent be suspended from 7 November 2008.
Dental Board of New South Wales resolved to remove the Respondent’s name
from the Register as at 31 December 2009 pursuant
to Clause 26(1) - Schedule 1,
Dental Practice Act 2001
exhibit 1 (d).
HCCC wrote a
letter to the Respondent on 22 January 2010 (exhibit
24). The Respondent’s lawyer replied indicating that there were no
submissions
to be made at that stage (exhibit 25).
Evidence before the Tribunal
Tribunal had the benefit of a large amount of documentary evidence including the
‘Briefs of Evidence’ from the criminal
proceedings.
Evidence of Patient A
A made a statement to the police dated 11 May 2007 (exhibit 31.7) which reads as
am 16 years of age. My date of birth is 30/01/1991.
left school at the end of 2006 after finishing my School Certificate. I am now
looking for work. I was receiving Centrelink payments
until one week ago, as
I’m supposed to be doing a course but I’ve been stressed and
haven’t gone to the course.
I used to get $190.50 per
August 2006 I was assaulted and my jaw was broken. I was taken to Wollongong
hospital and had surgery to fix my broken jaw. The
surgeon who operated on my
jaw was Dr Bosanquet. He put 2 plates and 8 screws in my jaw. I was in
hospital for about one week.
I remember seeing Dr Bosanquet once before the
operation and once afterwards while I was in hospital.
I left the hospital I had an appointment made to see Dr Bosanquet for a
follow-up check-up. I can’t remember when it was
that I had this
appointment, but I did see him at his surgery, it could have been at Fairy
Meadow. I went to this check-up with
my mum. My mum was present during the
whole time. I remember at the check-up he told me I’d said some weird
stuff during
the surgery. He told me I was talking about getting a sex change.
I thought it was pretty weird when he told me this and I didn’t
whether to believe it or not. When I left his surgery he made another
appointment to come back to his surgery and have a HEP
remember going back to Dr Bosanquet’s surgery with my mum and he gave me
the HEP B injection. I went back two more times
after this one because you have
three injections for the course.
had to go back to see Dr Bosanquet another time because he said he wanted to
take blood from me to make sure the HEP B was working.
When he took the blood
from me he took it from my arm. He also took a swab from my groin area. He
told me he did this swab to
check for Chlamydia (sexually transmitted disease).
When he did this swab it looked like a long ear bud and he put this in my penis.
I remember he held my penis in his own hands when he did this swab. I did think
it was a bit weird him doing this to me, but at
the same time I trusted him
because he is the Doctor and I wouldn’t know if it was the correct
procedure or not with how he
Bosanquet used to ask me all the time about girls. He would ask me if I spoke
to or saw girls on the weekends. I’d tell
him if I was with any girls but
I wouldn’t tell him what I did with the girls. We became mates sort of,
but I did think it
became a bit weird with the phone calls from him. I think
he’s about 40ish years old, but I thought he just wanted to be mates
me, and I hang out with my uncle so it didn’t seem too
think Dr Bosanquet is married, but I don’t know if he has any kids or not.
I remember he got a call on his mobile telephone
one day when he was at my house
and I asked him if it was his wife and he told me yes.
remember the first time I got a telephone call from Dr Bosanquet was on my
mobile sometime in January 2007. I think when he rang
me it was just a general
conversation, like asking me if I was still playing footy and
not sure if I had my current mobile telephone number back then when Dr Bosanquet
first rang me. I had another mobile stolen
from me and that was a different
mobile number. I think that was stolen early January 2007. That number was
[omitted] and it was
Optus prepaid. After my mobile was stolen I got a new
phone and I got my mum’s old sim card because she got a new phone on
plan. I remember Dr Bosanquet ringing my mum’s number and I answered the
call. I think he was ringing my mum for something
and he asked me why I was
answering my mum’s phone. I told him how my phone got stolen and that I
now was using my mum’s
so he had my new telephone number. My new number
is [omitted], it is a prepaid Optus.
think Dr Bosanquet has rung my mobile number about 25-30 times since January. I
remember he made another appointment for me to
go and see him for another
check-up. This appointment was to book a date for the plates to come out of my
jaw. I had an earlier
x-ray before I went to see him. When I went to see him I
think it was in February 2007 and I went with my mum. He told me that
my molars at the back of my mouth take out because he could see this on the
mum was with me when Dr Bosanquet told me that there was this thing that if I
had a wank I would get paid for it and this would
make the operation cheaper. I
can’t remember word for word but it was basically this. When he told me I
thought it was through
the Uni and had nothing to do with him. When we left the
surgery my mum said it was up to me whether I wanted to do it or not.
couple of times to Dr Bosanquet that I wasn’t too keen to do this, but he
kept ringing me and asking me to do this.
a while when he kept ringing me and asking me it felt like he was hassling me
and pressuring me to do this. So after a while
I agreed to do it and that I
would go to the Uni and do it. I kept putting it off going to the Uni to do it,
but Dr Bosanquet kept
ringing me. I remember him ringing once and saying,
“I can come to your house to do it for you”. I said, “Nah,
I’m not at home at the moment”. The phone calls kept coming for
months asking me to go to the Uni and do this.
got a call from Dr Bosanquet about 4.00pm on Friday 27 April 2007 on my mobile.
He suggested he could come to my house and do the
thing we were talking about.
He never went into details when he spoke to me on the telephone it was always,
just what we have talked
I’d get paid to do it. I said, I’m not at home at the
He said, “I’ll give you a ring about 4pm on Monday
because I have Monday and Tuesday off”. I said, “Alright,
I’ll speak to you then”.
3.30pm on Monday 30 April 2007 I got another call from Dr Bosanquet on my
mobile. He said, “Is it possible for me to
come over this weekend so we
can do the thing”. I don’t know if these are the exact words but
similar. I said, “I
have a course with Centrelink for a week, so I
can’t do it”. He said, “Ok, I’ll give you a ring at the
of the week”.
4.00pm on Thursday 3 May 2007 I got another call from Dr Bosanquet on my mobile.
He said, “Have you finished with your
course?”. I said,
“Yeah, I didn’t really go because the last couple of days I’ve
been really sick”.
He said, “Are you better now”. I said,
“Yeah”. He said, “Are you home so we can do that thing
I said, “No, I’m not at home, I’m at a
friend’s house at Port”. He said, “Do you want me to
a ring tomorrow because I finish work early”. I said, “Yeah, just
give us a ring”. I was going to speak
to my mum about it and see if she
could speak with him to lie to him for me and come up with an excuse. I was
going to do this because
I didn’t really want to do this thing with the Dr
because I felt pressured into it with him and I felt I couldn’t ever
him that I didn’t want to do it. I don’t know if I was scared of
him or not but I definitely felt pressured by
3.40pm on Friday 4 May 2007 I got another call from Dr Bosanquet on my mobile.
I was at home with my friend [omitted]. I was
speaking with Centrelink on the
house phone when the Dr rang my mobile so [my friend] answered my mobile for me.
He spoke with Dr
Bosanquet and told him to ring me back because I was on the
house phone.
Bosanquet rang my mobile again at 3.47pm on the same day. I spoke to him this
time. He said, “Do you still want me to come
over to do the thing”.
I said, “Mum and [xxx] aren’t home”. He said, “That
doesn’t matter”.
I said, “Well, alright I guess”. He
said, “Alright, where do you live”. I said, “In
[omitted]”.
He said, “What’s the name of the street”.
I said, “[omitted]”. He said, “Ok, how long does
roughly”. I said, “About 15-20 minutes”. He said, “Ok,
I’ll see you then”.
4.10pm on the same day Dr Bosanquet arrived at my house in a grey car. I
can’t remember what type of car it was he had
but it looked like a wagon
and posh. He came by himself to my house and he was carrying a little bag. The
bag looked black in colour.
Bosanquet knocked on my front door and I let him inside, my friend and I were
just watching a movie. I offered him a drink, and
he didn’t want one. He
said, “Nah lets just do this thing”. I think I might have
introduced [my friend] to him
but I can’t remember. Dr Bosanquet said,
“Are we going to do this in your room”. I said, “Yeah”.
He said, “You lead the way”. I walked to my bedroom and he followed
me while [my friend] stayed in the lounge room watching
tv. I can remember what
the movie was about we were watching but I can’t remember what the movie
was called.
I walked into my bedroom Dr Bosanquet followed me inside and he was holding his
bag. Dr Bosanquet closed my bedroom door shut
behind him. I don’t have a
lock on my door. I have a double built-in wardrobe with mirror doors in my
wardrobe. I remember
moving my wardrobe doors but I don’t know which way.
I have a double bed in my room and I had a mattress on the floor because
friend] stayed over the night before. I have three pillows on my bed and a
doona which I think was probably thrown over my bed.
My doona is brown in
colour and it’s just plain brown with no patterns on
Bosanquet said, “Can you lie across your bed”. I said, “Yeah,
no worries”. I never usually wear any shirts
and I know I wasn’t
wearing a shirt at this time, but I had a pair of black with maybe grey stripes
board shorts on. I had
nothing on my feet. I lied across my bed like the Dr
asked me to do on top of my doona. I was leaning on my back and the Dr was
sitting on the bottom of my bed. I saw Dr Bosanquet take a blood pressure thing
out of his bag, one that takes your blood pressure.
He put this around my arm
and took my blood pressure. He said, “Alright we’re going to take
blood out of your right
arm”. He put a needle in my right arm and took
blood from me.
he took the blood from my arm he said, “Pull your pants down”. I
said, “Can I get under the blankets”.
He said, “No, grab a
towel or something”. I got up and grabbed a towel out of the linen
cupboard which is outside my
door in the hallway. It was a white towel that I
grabbed. When I went back inside my bedroom I pushed the door closed but I left
it open a bit and it didn’t shut closed.
layed back down on my bed and Dr Bosanquet closed my bedroom door closed
properly shut. He sat back down on the end of my bed and
he was sitting less
than a metre away from me. I put the towel over me, over the bottom half of my
body. He said, Take your pants
down”. I took my board shorts down and I
think it was only down to my knees. I was wearing underwear and I took them
only a tiny bit. Dr Bosanquet said, “Alright now you have to get a
hard on and then we have to take blood again”. I
said, “Can you
leave the room so I can do this”. He said, “Yeah” and he left
the room. He pulled the bedroom
door closed a little bit but it wasn’t
closed shut when he went out of the room.
he was outside the bedroom I just layed there and thought to myself what can I
say to him to get him away from me? I didn’t
do what the Dr had asked me
to do because it felt wrong and I didn’t want to do it. I think after
the Dr back into my bedroom. I said, “Yeah
alright” and Dr Bosanquet came back into my room and closed the door shut
behind him.
sat back down on my bed and took my blood pressure. He then took some more
blood from my left arm this time. He said, “Ok
now do what you were
doing”. I said, “I can’t it doesn’t feel right”.
He said, “Think of things
that turn you on”. I didn’t say
anything to him, I just looked at him and gave him a weird look. He said,
kind of things turn you on”. I said, “I don’t
know, girls”. He just sat there just looking at me, my face.
was sitting watching me I pretended to masturbate myself. I was getting nervous
and scared so I didn’t really
do anything, but I just moved my hand up and
down underneath the towel so that it looked like I was masturbating myself.
was doing this with my hand Dr Bosanquet I could see him watching my
face. I said to him, “It doesn’t feel right”.
“Don’t worry about it, once I had a threesome with a guy and a
girl”. I looked at him and I said, “Oh,
really”. He said,
“Yeah, it’s good when that kind of thing happens and you touch the
guy”. I thought, he
was weird when he said this to me and I thought I
want him out of my room. He said, “My friend and I organised it. I was
laying there with the girl and we were both naked, and I’d organised for
my friend to come in, we layed down, the girl started
touching us and we started
touching the girl, then the girl grabbed both of our hands and made us touch
each other, it was good because
a guy knows what a guy wants”. I said,
“Fair enough, this really isn’t working, can we maybe do it another
He said, “Yeah ok”. I pulled my pants back up and I
stood up and opened my bedroom door. I stood there while Dr Bosanquet
his needles. He took all his rubbish with him. I felt that when he was telling
me this story of himself and the other
guy that he was hinting towards touching
Dr Bosanquet was sitting on my bed and before he took any blood from me he got a
call on his mobile telephone. He had a conversation
with someone on the phone
and I could hear the voice was a lady who he was speaking with. He said,
“I’m just about to
leave work now”. I remember when he hung
up I said, “Was that your wife”. He said, “Yes”. I
“Where is she”. He said, “On her way home from Taren
Point”. I think this is what he told me because my
auntie worked at Taren
Point and so this is why I remember him saying this to me.
Bosanquet left my house after he got all his stuff in his bag. He nearly left a
small bag with needles inside and I told him not
to forget it. When he left he
said, “I’ll give you a ring in the next couple of days”. I
said, “Oh ok”.
He walked back through the lounge area where [my
friend] was still watching tv and he went back out through the front door to his
car. His car was parked out the front of the house. I walked out the front
with him and I waited until he drove away before I went
back inside. I told [my
friend] everything that happened when I went back inside. I was upset and
wanted to know if anyone else
thought it was weird like me. I also told both my
mum and dad about what happened.
next time I heard from Dr Bosanquet was about 3.57pm on Thursday 10 May 2007.
He rang my mobile and I was in my bedroom watching
tv with two of my friends
[omitted]. I looked at my mobile and I didn’t recognise the number when I
answered the call. I
knew straight away that it was Dr Bosanquet as soon as I
heard his voice. I walked out of my bedroom to look for my mum because
me not to answer of the Dr’s calls.
Bosanquet said, “Are you still playing football?”. I said,
“Not really at the moment, I’ve got too many
things on”. I
then found my mum in the laundry. I was holding the phone near my ear and I
wasn’t really listening to
him and I whispered to my mum,
“It’s the doctor”. She said, “Come here”. She
opened the back door
and I followed her outside while I was still holding the
pone with Dr Bosanquet talking. I put my phone onto loud speaker so my
could hear the conversation as well. He said, “What days do you
train”. I said, “Wednesday and Friday”.
He said, “What
days do you play?”. I said, “Saturday”. He said, “Ok,
so do you still want to do
that thing”. I said, “No, not
really”. He said, “I didn’t think so, get in contact with
your solicitor”.
I said, “How come”. He said, “Because
of your jaw”. I said, “Ok”. He said, “Ok, just
don’t forget that you need to get your molars out”. I didn’t
say anything and my mum walked back inside the house.
“I’ll keep in touch”. I said, “I hope not”. He
laughed and said, “You’re a
funny kid, ok, I’ll let you
go”. I said, “Ok, bye”. I hung up the phone and I walked
back inside the house
and looked for mum.
I spoke this last time with him I tried to act strong about him calling me
because I know my mum isn’t taking it too well
and I felt like I had to
act like it was just a normal call from him because of my mum. I just thought
he was a bit of a dickhead
for ringing me and I felt numb and felt like laughing
at him. I believed what he told me about getting some money from doing what
was asking me to do up until he got to my house. I didn’t believe him
then that it was true because of the way he was talking
to me, it was like a
dickhead to me but I felt even more pressured when he got to my house and I
couldn’t tell him I didn’t
want to do what he wanted me to do and
that’s why I still went into my bedroom with him. I haven’t heard
from him or
spoke with Dr Bosanquet since this 10/5/07.
have got some numbers out of my phone from some of the times that Dr Bosanquet
has rung my mobile telephone. The first one is number
[omitted] and this is his
surgery number. I have saved the times of his calls from this number he called
me are on the 2/5/07 at
4.04pm and this call lasted for 12.35min. the next time
he called again from this number was on 4/5/07 at 3.47pm and this call lasted
for 18 seconds. The next time he called me from this number was on 4/5/07 again
at 3.40pm and this call lasted for 20 seconds.
telephone number that Dr Bosanquet called me on was from [omitted] and this is a
surgery of his. The date he called my mobile
was 3/5/07 at 2.59pm and this call
lasted for 3 minutes. He called me again on my mobile on 3/5/07 at 5.10pm and
this call lasted
for 1 minute 30 seconds.
telephone number that Dr Bosanquet called me on was from [omitted] and I’m
not sure what number this is for. The date
he called me from this number on my
mobile was on 4/5/07 at 3.54pm and that call lasted for 2 minutes 30 seconds.
The same number
again he called me on was on 4/5/07 at 2.23pm and that call
lasted for 2 minutes 4 seconds.
telephone number that Dr Bosanquet called me on my mobile was [omitted] and this
is his surgery at Bowral. He called me on
10/5/07 at 3.57pm and this call
lasted for 2 minutes 11 seconds.
Patient A’s
Clinical Records
details of Patient A’s clinical records are recorded elsewhere in this
Patient B’s statement
B made a statement to the police dated 4 December 2008 (exhibit 32.8).
Paragraphs 9-29 (reproduced below as 9 - 33 as there
were two paragraphs
numbered 11, 26 and 27 in the original document) of that statement read as
August 2000, I returned to see Dr Bosnaquet
per our appointment. During that consultation the doctor informed me that I was
suffering from impaired wisdom teeth which he
claimed needed surgical
extractions, during this he discussed costs. The doctor informed me that the
operation would be expensive
on my income and age.
The doctor then asked, “What payments are you
receiving?”
I said, “I am getting the youth allowance.”
I recall I told him I was getting a couple of hundred a fortnight I think
it was around $270.00. I then told the doctor that if my
teeth were serious I
would speak to my father and that it should not be a problem. After I told him
my father could help me out
the doctor said will I have a group of friends at
the University of Melbourne doing a study.
was when Doctor Bosanquet informed me of a study he was currently participating
in with the Melbourne University which requires
a patient to give a sample of
blood, after a sample was taken the patient was then required to masturbate.
After the patient had
ejaculated a second blood sample was to be taken
immediately after.
I clearly remember Dr Dosanquet
saying, “The test was
to determine a male’s blood pressure before and after ejaculation to
determine any changes.”
(in pressure)
then stated that he would offer me three hundred dollars ($300.00) for my
participation. I then told him that I would think
asking him if there was a limit to how many times I could do this to make three
hundred dollars ($300.00).
Bosanquet replied, “There is no limit and it was sure money whenever
I needed it.”
At the time it did seem a little strange but I believe this experiment at
the time legitimate.
After that second consultation with the doctor I went back home and spoke with
dad about what Doctor Bosanquet told me about my wisdom
teeth. I also spoke to
dad about the study Dr Bosanquet wanted me to participate in. I told dad the
doctor offered me three hundred
dollars to have a vial of blood taken and my
blood pressure checked. I also told dad the doctor wanted me to masturbate
blood was taken so they could determine any change in pressure or
something like that. When I told dad this he like I felt it was
experiment but we both said Doctor Bosanquet was a respected surgeon and at the
time we trusted him. At the time dad and
I were not rolling in money and the
offer of $300.00 was attractive. My father left the decision up to me but he
did make one suggestion
that he wanted to be present at the house or surgery
when the procedure took place.
I remember correctly the cost to extract four (4) wisdom teeth was around
$800.00 so the three hundred dollars was very attractive
to us. After
discussions with dad I informed Dr Bosanquet that I would get the wisdom teeth
November 2000, Dr Bosanquet booked me in for a surgical teeth
extraction at his surgery in Crown Street Wollongong. It was early
in the day I
cannot recall the exact time when I was contacted by Dr Bosanquet. The doctor
omitted]. This was on the day of the
surgery and the doctor told me to meet him in the undercover carpark at the back
of his Crown
Street surgery.
was late afternoon when I arrived at his surgery as arranged, the doctor wanted
to show me his car I recall it was a blue Lexus
which was a very sporty possibly
2000 model. I think it was I who first said to the doctor “Is that your
car?” I was
just making small talk it was the only car in the parking lot
at the time. I remember him then asking for some help with taking
into his office, he handed me a box from his car which I think was a new fax
machine and I carried the box in for him.
we entered the surgery’s back door I noticed a lot of new items such as
computers etc. in one of the rooms. I then placed
the box down in the back
room. As I walked into the waiting room I noticed there was no body there. I
was expecting other people
to be there at the time someone there to assist the
doctor with the surgery. Dr Bosanquet then gave me five (5) valium tablets to
take and said they would calm me down if I was anxious about the operation. I
knew they were valium as my mother is prescribed the
same brand ‘Ducene
5mg’. I was asked to take them (which I did take with water) and wait for
before the operation.
no more than about twenty five (25) minutes Dr Bosanquet called me into his
office, by this time I felt quite relaxed and somewhat
sedated. Once I was in
his office he then began asking me questions such as:
Doctor asked, “Do you go out partying often?”
I said, “Yeah, I go out every weekend”.
Doctor asked, “Am I happy about not having much
I said, “No not very happy about that”.
The doctor then asked me, “Do I take various drugs?”
I said, “Yes I have experimented with speed and smoked some
this point I remember thinking to myself that he was OK and sort of a rebel as
he was swearing and he pretty much sounded as if
he were nineteen (19) years old
himself. It was about this time when Dr Bosanquet asked me if I had made a
decision about taking
part in the masturbation study claiming that there was not
many easier ways to make three hundred dollars ($300.00) whenever I
was at this time I agreed to participate in the study (I thought it was an easy
way to make money) Dr Bosanquet at that stage did
not go into any details how
and where the experiment was going to happen, but I was under the impression I
would have total privacy
during this experiment.
doctor then started removing my wisdom teeth. On that occasion the doctor
removed two of my wisdom teeth and made an appointment
for me to get the two (2)
remaining teeth removed on the 12
recall the appointment on the 12
of December 2000 was late in the
afternoon and again I met him at the rear entrance of his surgery in Crown
Street Wollongong. I
remember the boxes in the back room were still there. I
am one hundred percent (100%) sure there was no one in the surgery at the
and was after hours but being ten (10) years ago it is hard to remember whether
my first consultation was after hours or my
second but I’m fairly sure it
was the latter.
entering I was again given the same dose of valium shortly after I was called in
by the doctor and he asked me if I wanted to
do the masturbation study before
removing my remaining teeth.
I recall the doctor saying, “Are you ready to participate with the
study we talked about because we can do it right now?”
I said, “I’d rather do it at home I didn’t feel
comfortable here”.
I wanted someone to be close like my dad.
told the doctor that I would feel more comfortable if I could do this at home if
possible. Dr Bosanquet knew I was living with
my father at this
Dr Bosanquet asked, “Would your father be OK with
I informed him I had already spoken to my father and that it was
When I agreed to this experiment in my mind I was agreeing to what the
doctor asked me to do that is to give blood and then masturbate,
then give a
second blood sample after ejaculation. At no stage did I think the doctor would
be present during the masturbation or
did I expect him to touch my genitals. I
it would have been done professionally and in
discussing the experiment I then had my remaining teeth removed. After the
procedure Dr Bosanquet said he would call me. I
recall it was approximately one
week later that Dr Bosanquet rang me. At the time I was at home with dad and it
was late in the
afternoon. Dr Bosanquet asked if I was ready, he was referring
to the experiment and I told him yes and gave him directions to my
house which
at the time was [omitted].
doctor arrived a short time later in his Lexus parking the car directly in front
of the house. As the doctor approached my house
I noticed he was carrying a
suitcase and was wearing an Australian Rugby Union t-shirt. After entering my
house the doctor spoke
with me and my father who was present. Dad made the
doctor a cuppa and they spoke about my operation. We all had a conversation
the doctor I liked his car. He then offered to ‘Take
me for a spin’
which I accepted.
drove very fast around [omitted], as I said I’m one hundred percent (100%)
sure it was a blue Lexus and ninety percent (90%)
sure it was a two door five
speed manual. During that drive we spoke about football. I recall the doctor
telling me he was a coach
or played Union I think he said something about him
coaching some young Union team. On returning home we began the doctor’s
so called study. Doctor Bosanquet told me to go to my room and he followed me
directly behind me. At the time my father was in
the lounge room. As the
doctor and I entered my room he told me to lie down on the bed which I did. He
then inserted a butterfly
which is a needle with tubing attached to it into my
arm, and he extracted a vial of blood. I recall he put that vial of blood in
his suitcase which he brought into the room.
taking the blood he asked me to get an erection but I couldn’t because he
was standing there over me. That’s when
the doctor told me he had
pornography on him and he had injections which could help me get an erection
which I declined. I then
asked him to leave the room to make it easier for me
to get an erection. He asked me to tell him when I got an erection and he left
the room. Once I was able to get an erection I called out to the doctor who
immediately walked into the room. At this point I was
covered from my waist
down with my blanket. Once the doctor was in the room he told me not to worry
passed me a towel which was not much larger than a
tea towel. I then covered myself with it like the doctor
Bosanquet then told me to shut my eyes and think of something that turned me on.
As my eyes were closed, he was saying things
like, “Just think of fucking
a nice young virgin pussy”.
As he said that I felt him grab hold of my genitals. I felt the
doctor’s hand take hold of my scrotum. I immediately opened
my eyes and
pushed his hand away from my genitals and as I did that I noticed he had his
other hand inside his trousers. I saw the
doctor had his trouser zipper open
and one hand inside the zipper playing with his penis. When I saw what he was
doing I was angry,
scared and bewildered. I called out for my dad, I was not
sure if dad heard and that’s when I told Dr Bosanquet to “Fuck
The doctor immediately zipped up his pants and left my room and the
the doctor walked out of my room I got off the bed and pulled my pants up and
followed Doctor Bosanquet down the hallway and
out the front
The doctor said something along the lines, “I am sorry I have wasted
your time.”
I said nothing to the doctor I just wanted him out of the house.
That’s when I saw dad coming out of the kitchen.
Dad asked, “What’s going on what’s going
I said, “He is queer, he is queer, he tried to get on to
I sat down with dad and told him what happened in my room with the
both sat down and talked about what could be done about the doctor and we both
agreed that it would be hard to take the matter
further because of the
doctor’s reputation and we had no money anyway. After some discussion we
agreed to let it go at that
but I have carried that incident with me for all
these years. I trusted the doctor and yes I was looking forward to the money
did not expect the doctor to do what he did to me. I never seen the doctor
again after that incident and I know he took the blood
vial he took from me away
was in 2002 after the incident with Doctor Bosanquet that I told a Dr XY at the
[omitted] Clinic about the incident with Doctor
Bosanquet. I recall Dr XY
telling me if I did anything to do it smart and go through the right avenues. I
am one hundred percent
sure that I told a Doctor XX at the [omitted] Medical
Centre about eight months ago before anything came out on the papers. There
a chance I may have mentioned the incident to Doctor XY2 at the [omitted]
Medical Centre and a Doctor XY3 who at the time was
working at the [omitted]
Street Medical Centre. I would have told both of them some three years
father and I let the incident alone until 2008 when we read in a story about Dr
Bosanquet in the Illawarra Mercury and that’s
when I knew that I
wasn’t the only one. After reading the story I contacted the Illawarra
Mercury and Illawarra Police informing
them about the incident with Dr Bosanquet
and told them the story of what happened to me. Later I was contacted by
Detective Sanvitale
at Wollongong Police Station. I had a number of meetings
with Detective Sanvitale and on Wednesday the 10
of December 2008 I
gave police this signed statement in relation to the incident with Doctor
Patient B’s Clinical Records
B’s clinical records form exhibit 32.16. These notes record that Patient B
went for a follow-up consultation on 11 August
2000. During that consultation
the Respondent recorded that Patient B complained of
‘intermittent
soreness associated (with) wisdom teeth’
Chair-side Assistant/Receptionist records in the notes for 8 November 2000 that
she provided Patient B’s father with 10
mg of diazepam
instruction’
. The Chair-side Assistant/Receptionist records in the
notes for 9 November 2000 that Patient B was administered with 5 mgs of diazepam
at 10.45am. The Respondent notes that local anaesthetic and 8mg IV Decadron
(dexamethasone) were administered to the patient prior
to the removal of two
wisdom teeth and the prescribing of an antibiotic and analgesic.
notes record a couple of follow-up telephone calls before Patient B returns for
review on 25 November 2000. During this consultation
the Respondent recorded
that Patient B will return to have his remaining two wisdom teeth removed.
12 December 2000 the Chair-side Assistant/Receptionist recorded that Patient B
stated that he did not wish to take the pre-medication.
The Respondent recorded
that he administered local anaesthetic and 8mg of Decadron (dexamethasone) to
the patient prior to the removal
of two wisdom teeth. He again recorded that he
provided Patient B with an antibiotic. He also recorded two forms of analgesia
recommended.
B failed to attend an appointment on 22 December 2000. The Tribunal notes at
this point that the incident subject of the criminal
charges against the
Respondent relating to Patient B occurred on 19 December 2000. The final entry
in the clinical notes recorded
that a letter had been dictated for Patient
B’s solicitors on 22 June 2002.
in the clinical notes is a letter dated 3 October 2000 addressed to Patient B.
The letter from the Respondent advises Patient
B of the dates for the removal of
the wisdom teeth under local anaesthesia (9 November and 12 December 2000) and
the need to collect
medication from the surgery prior to both dates. The letter
stated that one tablet was to be taken the night before the procedure
other on the morning of the procedure.
Statement of Patient
C gave a statement to the Police of 8 February 2009 (exhibit 32.10). Paragraphs
3 to 14 of his statement read as follows:
first met Arthur in 1997 when he was brought in by my rugby coach at the time to
coach us in scrummaging. I used to play rugby
in the under 19’s division
for XX University. I was one of the eight in the scrum so I was one of the ones
Arthur was coaching
in scrummaging. Arthur Bosanquet was a very good rugby
player in his time. I knew that he had represented South Australia in rugby.
mother also knew Arthur through her work as a nurse at the
November of 1998 I turned 19 so I was no longer eligible to play in the under
19’s division. The next year (1999) I moved
up to the open age divisions
and was playing in then second grade. At this time Arthur Bosanquet was the
full time coach for the
under 19’s.
1999, about the beginning of the rugby season which is usually around March or
April, the club was offering free Hepatitis B immunisations.
We were told that
it would be worth while doing because of the chance of blood in the game. I
can’t remember who it was that
was actually giving us the details. They
told us to get in contact with Arthur and that Arthur would give the
immunisation shots
in his surgery. At the time his surgery was opposite XX
Hospital, on the corner of Staff and Crown Street.
agreed to take up the offer and I agreed to get the Hepatitis B immunisations
shots from Arthur. I approached Arthur and had a
conversation with him about
the Hepatitis B shots. Because of how long ago it was I do not remember the
exact conversation. I only
remember general points of the conversation. I told
Arthur that I would be taking up the offer and wanted to get the Hepatitis B
shots. At this time Arthur told me that a friend of his, who was a heart
surgeon on Adelaide, was doing a study on how sex affected
the heart and blood
pressure. This seemed legitimate to me because I knew Arthur played rugby and I
thought that he had studied
in Adelaide. Arthur said that the guy was offering
$150 for the participants in the study. Arthur also stated that his friend was
finding it difficult to find couples to participate in the study so he was doing
the next best thing and was getting individuals
to masturbate. Arthur asked me
if I wanted to participate in the study so I agreed. I agreed to participate
because it sounded
legitimate and the money was also a factor. $150 at the time
was about the same money I was earning for a week working in a local
convenience
store so the money sounded good. Arthur told me that I had to go to his surgery
to carry out the study.
week day I went to Arthur’s surgery as we had arranged. It was definitely
not a Saturday because that’s the day we
played Rugby and it was
definitely not a Tuesday or Thursday because that is when we had rugby training.
It was not a Sunday either
so it had to have been Monday, Wednesday or Friday.
When I arrived there were other patients in the waiting room and his
receptionists
were there. As I went in his receptionists were packing up to
finish work for the day. Arthur had seen to his other patients and
then called
me into his room.
went into the room and sat down with Arthur. Arthur gave me the Hepatitis B
shots and then went through how the procedure was going
to work. Arthur then
took my blood pressure and then took a sample of blood from me. I was sitting
in the chair with my feet up.
There were two doors in the room. One door was
in front of me and to the right, as I was sitting in the chair. This door was
main door that led out to the waiting room. There was also another door
that was behind me which led through to another room. Arthur
went over to a
table in the room and was writing things down. I was attempting to get an
erection however I couldn’t because
Arthur was still in the room. I asked
Arthur if I could go down the road and get a magazine to assist in my arousal.
the 7-11 across the road and got a magazine and returned to the
surgery. At this time I noticed that the receptionists were no longer
went back to the room and layed down in the chair. Arthur said I’ll be
over here and indicated to the door behind me. I
assumed that he meant he would
be out of the room while I did my business. Arthur mentioned to me that I
needed to call him just
before I ejaculated so that he could take my blood
pressure. Arthur moved behind me out of sight. I was lying back in the chair
and I could not see Arthur directly behind me. When I called him Arthur
appeared next to me in a second. It was like he had been
standing right next to
me while I was masturbating but just far away so that I could not see him.
Arthur took my blood pressure.
Arthur said, “Don’t try to ejaculate as quickly as you can
because when you’re having sex normally you try and
hold off to make it
last longer, so try and hold off”.
At the time this seemed pretty weird to me. I didn’t think it
would matter how long it lasted for, for the purpose of the
study. I eventually
ejaculated and then he gave me a towel to clean myself. After that we arranged
that I come back on Sunday and
complete the procedure again. We arranged that
instead of going to the surgery that I was to meet him at his place in
I don’t recall the street number. He said that he
wasn’t working so I had to go to his place to complete the study.
that Sunday I went to Arthur’s home. I don’t remember there being
anyone else home at the time. Arthur’s home
had four levels. As you came
in from the street you walked into the third level. There is a void as you walk
in with a big water
feature. There were two levels down and one level up. When
I got there Arthur told me to go up the stairs, to a bedroom which was
the very back of the house. There was a double bed in the room and a TV at the
end of the bed. I had with me the same magazine
that I bought at the 7-11 on
the previous occasion. Arthur asked me if I wanted a video put on instead of
the magazine and asked
whether I wanted heterosexual, lesbian or gay videos. I
took him up on the video because this time Arthur was sitting beside me
whole time.
put the blood pressure monitor on me which stayed on me the whole time. Arthur
took blood from me again on this occasion.
Arthur said, “Remember this time try not to ejaculate straight away
to make it look more realistic”.
I began to masturbate and eventually ejaculated. Arthur gave me tissues
and I cleaned myself up. Arthur gave me $150 in $50 denominations.
fair bit of money for me to get in one whack so I was excited about that and
that’s why I remembered. I left and
that was the end of the study with
didn’t speak to Arthur about the study after that. I did not tell anyone
to talk to all my mates
time although I thought
it to be a bit weird I still thought that it was
legitimate because I knew and trusted him and because of his background and
as a highly qualified and experienced doctor. Because I was at uni
at the time, I knew that studies like this were probable. It
sounded too far
fetched to not be legitimate.
late 2008 on a Sunday I read on the front page of the Mercury that Arthur had
been charged. I was in Mollymook at the time on
holidays with my daughter and a
mate with his wife and daughter. When I read the circumstances surrounding his
charges I thought
to myself that it was exactly the same as what happened to me.
All it needed was to change the other victim’s name to mine
it was that
same Sunday I left Mollymook with my daughter and I was driving home. As I was
driving I was stopped by police for speeding.
By this time I was very emotional
and was thinking about what I went through with Arthur. The police officer gave
me a warning
and let me go. After that I went to the police station at Nowra
and reported my incident involving Arthur to the police. I spoke
to a man at
the front counter. I don’t remember the name. He took down my details
and said that he would pass it on to the
police officer already involved in
Arthur’s case.
NSW Police Fact Sheet – re
Fact sheet records that Patient C met the Respondent while playing for a
football team. The Respondent was one of the coaches
for the team. In March and
April 1999 the Respondent offered Hepatitis B immunisations to the football
players in his surgery. When
the Respondent spoke to Patient C about the
immunisation he invited him to participate in a ‘study’ which he was
undertaking
with a friend who was a heart specialist in Adelaide. The Respondent
offered Patient C money (about the equivalent of one week’s
Patient C) for participation in the study. The actual immunisation and
‘study’ were undertaken after the
usual practice opening hours of
the Respondent’s surgery. The repeat of the ‘study’ was
undertaken in Patient C’s
Patient C’s Clinical Records
15 are the clinical notes held by the Respondent for Patient C. The treatment
provided by the Respondent occurred after the
time of the conduct which resulted
in the criminal charges.
Tribunal notes the evidence of Patient C that he attended upon the Respondent in
his consulting rooms for the purpose of being
provided with a Hepatitis B
injection in 1999 and also notes that there is no record of this administration
in the clinical notes
produced before the Tribunal. At this point the Tribunal
notes that the usual practice when an immunisation is administered is to
the details of the particular batch of vaccine into the clinical records. This
does not appear in the clinical notes held by
the Respondent for Patient C. It
is the Tribunal’s view and concern that there can be no certainty as to
what was administered
to Patient C or any other patients where records do not
Evidence of the Ethics Officers
Tribunal notes that the Respondent fabricated a ‘study’ that he
requested Patients A, B and C to undertake. As part
of the fabrication, the
Respondent stated that the ‘study’ was research associated with a
university. The Respondent
used the name of a number of different universities.
As part of the investigation of this matter the Ethics Officers of two
organisations
were contacted and statements obtained to the effect that no study
of the nature described had been approved by the relevant ethics
committees.
Patient A’s mother also contacted another organisation to check the bona
fides of the study. The Tribunal notes
the Respondent Statement acknowledges
that the use of the ‘study’ was an attempt to legitimise his actions
to it as a ‘bogus study’.
documentary evidence
Tribunal also notes that the NSW Police Service wrote to the Respondent on 1
February 2007 stating that there was an investigation
into the assault of
Patient A that had occurred on 11 August 2006. The records indicate that the
Respondent was providing treatment
to Patient A as a result of the injuries he
sustained during this assault. The Respondent was informed that a report from
to the nature of the injuries and the treatment to date was required for
the court hearing relating to this assault (exhibit 14).
transcript of the sentencing proceedings for the Respondent held on 30 April
2010 contains an extract from the report of the Probation
Officer. The extract
The offender demonstrated little empathy for the victim and only expressed
his sorrow for the effect his offending behaviour had on
his own life.
Probation Officer was cross-examined about the report and indicated that she was
not aware that the Respondent had been charged
with offences relating to three
victims. She was only aware of the charges relating to Patient A (exhibit 28C).
There was evidence
of a conversation between the Probation Officer and Dr Emma
Collins (the Respondent’s treating psychologist) that treatment
respect to the offending behaviour would not commence until after sentencing and
that the focus had, until that time, been on
the Respondent’s mental
health and on providing relationships counselling.
Respondent’s evidence
Board Inquiry 15 September 2008
11 is the Transcript of the Board Inquiry held on 15 September 2008. The written
submission prepared by the Respondent forms
exhibit 22. The Respondent stated
that he denied the charges (at that stage the only charges related to Patient A)
and indicated
that it was likely to go to a defended hearing. The Respondent put
forward that he was ‘well respected’ in his specialty
in support of
his submission that the Board should not exercise powers under
section 72.
Respondent stated to the Board that he had initially received an appointment
with the AHS as a ‘Visiting Medical Practitioner’
and then later it
became an appointment as a ‘Visiting Dental Practitioner’.
Respondent indicated on numerous occasions during this Inquiry that he was
unable to answer questions on the basis of legal advice
(having regard to the
pending criminal charges).
Respondent accepted that he had breached his obligation under
Dental Practice Act 2001
by failing to notify the Board when he was charged with
criminal offences (exhibit 11 - T page 13), and offered the explanation that
had not in fact read the legislation and so had not been aware of this
obligation. The Respondent stated that he was similarly
unaware that he had a
contractual obligation to inform the AHS, where he held an appointment, of the
fact that he had been charged
with an offence.
Respondent stated that he did not take a swab from the penis of Patient A (T
page 16). The Tribunal however notes the pathology
reports for Patient A for a
urethral swab testing taken on 2 January 2007 for chlamydia trachomatis PCR
formed part of the patient
file held by the Respondent for Patient A (exhibit
14) and that the pathology report is addressed to the Respondent (as the
practitioner). The Tribunal also notes that the Respondent had
requested testing of Patient A for SW1, HCV, HIV, HBsAb, HepB Serology,
and Herpes PCR.
Respondent also gave evidence to the
Inquiry that he had only been to
the home of patients that had been ‘friends’. In answer to a further
question he stated
that Patient A was not a ‘friend’ of his.
Respondent provided the Inquiry with details of two previous legal claims
against him of a clinical nature, both of which were
settled ‘out of
Respondent’s submission to the Board was that there was no material that
would satisfy the Board that a suspension was warranted
for the purpose of
protecting the life, or physical or mental health of any person. When asked by
the Board the Respondent stated
that he did not consider he was
‘qualified’ to express an opinion as to whether or not his actions
(should the allegations,
as they then were, be found to be true)
‘endangered the life, physical or mental health of any person’ (and
specifically
Patient A). This Tribunal notes that the Respondent made these
comments in the context of his knowledge that his conduct extended
beyond that
which the Board was then considering (noting the only charges at this time were
those relating to Patient A as the subsequent
charges had not yet been made) and
his subsequent guilty plea.
Board Inquiry 7 November
Board held a further
Inquiry on 7 November 2008. By this time the
Respondent had pleaded guilty to various criminal matters in the Local Court
(transcript
at exhibit 12). The Respondent was advised of the Inquiry and
through his solicitors indicated that he would not be attending or
represented. The letter from the Respondent’s solicitor also indicated the
Respondent conceded that his Registration
would be suspended.
Inquiry proceeded in the absence of the Respondent and a suspension from 1pm on
7 November 2008 was imposed on the Respondent.
written by the Respondent
CV provided to the Tribunal by the Respondent was dated December 2011. This
document contains the following heading ‘
Positions held until December
2008 (then retired)’
. The Respondent did not include Dubbo Private
Hospital and Nowra Private Hospital which are mentioned on page 4 of his
(exhibit R1). The Tribunal also notes there is no end date recorded
against the Wollongong Day Surgery Hospital appointment. There
is nothing in the
CV to indicate that the Respondent was suspended from practising as a dentist on
7 November 2008 or that he was
suspended from his Visiting Dental Officer (VDO)
position with the AHS in September 2008. The Tribunal further notes that the VDO
position is recorded as a Visiting Medical Officer (VMO) position in the CV (see
exhibit 2 – letter to the Respondent from
CEO of the AHS dated 12
September 2008 in which the Respondent is notified of the suspension of his VDO
appointment). There are abbreviated
and incomplete suggestions in the CV of the
Respondent holding registration as a ‘Specialist Oral and Maxillofacial
NSW’ from 1989 to the date of the CV (December 2011).
Tribunal notes that the qualifications listed on page 1 of the
Respondent’s statement and in the body of the CV under the
qualifications are not consistent with the qualifications listed at the top of
the Respondent’s CV. The initials (OMS)
do not appear after the FRACDS on
the CV header.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent lists ‘Prosector in Dental
Anatomy’ under the heading Qualifications, however this
is not a Diploma,
Bachelor or Masters qualification.
the top of page two of the Respondent’s CV he states ‘I was the
registered Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery specialist in the
Illawarra until December 2008’.
page two of the CV the Respondent provides details of the research project that
he undertook for his Master of Dental Surgery.
The Tribunal notes that this
degree is a research Masters and does not include course work. Undertaking
research of this nature would
have required ethical approval from the University
Ethics Committee.
appears from the CV of the Respondent that he trained in hospitals in South
Australia (Royal Adelaide Hospital, Flinders Medical
Centre, Queen Elizabeth
Hospital and Adelaide Children’s Hospital), the Northern Territory (Royal
Darwin Hospital) and in America
(Louisiana State Medical Centre and Charity
Tribunal notes that the CV records that the Respondent does not list an end date
for his May 2008 ‘Appointment’ as
an Honorary Clinical Associate
Professor in the Graduate School of Medicine, University of Wollongong. On page
three of the CV the
Respondent records a number of professional memberships
which include the Australian Dental Association and the Illawarra Medical
Association.
page four of his CV the Respondent records that he has been a member of the
Medical Advisory Committee of the Figtree Private Hospital
from 1994 to present
and a member of the Education Sub-committee, Australian & New Zealand
Association of Oral & Maxillofacial
Surgeons Research & Education
Foundation from 2006 to present.
Respondent provides details of numerous continuing education courses he attended
both within Australia and overseas which demonstrate
a commitment to
professional development.
the eighth page of the Respondent’s CV under the heading
Medical/Health Community Involvement’
the Respondent lists a number of
rugby union teams for which he has acted as ‘Medical Officer (rugby
union)’ between
1991 and 2001. This included under 21 teams and going on
tours with the Australian Aboriginal Schoolboys Team in 1995 -1996 and 2001.
the heading
‘Outside Interests’
and the subheading
‘Rugby Union’
the Respondent records a significant
contribution ranging over the period 1977 to 2000. This include the position of
Vice President
of the Wollongong University Rugby Union Club between 1991 to
2000 and the position of Coach of the Illawarra Under 19 Representative
from 1992 to 1994 and the Illawarra Academy of Sport 1995 – 1998, and the
Under 19 team from Wollongong University for
1990 and 1999. During 1991 he held
four positions within rugby union and in 1999 he was the Coach of the Under 19
team as well as
the Vice President of the Club. The Tribunal also notes that he
was the Medical Officer for the NSW Country Senior Representative
Team during
this time. From the statement of Patient C the Tribunal is aware that the
Respondent was also the scrummaging coach of
the Under 19 Team in 1997 (exhibit
32.10) and, as detailed above, the Patient C’s contact with the Respondent
arose out of
advice he received from the Club regarding the availability of free
Hepatitis B injections from the Respondent. The Respondent also
notes he has
contributed to rowing in the Illawarra area as well as being involved in golf.
2 to the Respondent’s statement dated 16 December 2011 (exhibit R1) is a
detailed account of the studies he has undertaken
in the Graduate Diploma of
Health Law and the proposed studies for the Master of Health Law which he
intends to undertake in 2012.
The Respondent lists a large number of text books
covering ethical matters in health law. One of the subjects undertaken by the
‘Health Care and Professional Liability’
The description of the subject content provided by the Respondent indicates
broad reading regarding legal requirements. The Tribunal
notes topics included
factors vitiating consent, function of consent and duty of care. The Respondent
noted that he studied the particular
subject area of professional discipline of
health care professionals.
The Respondent’s statement
dated 16 December 2011
Respondent provided a statement to the Tribunal (exhibit R1) dated 16 December
2011. The Respondent provides a very detailed account
of his qualifications.
paragraphs 8 to 25 of this statement the Respondent provided a very detailed
account of his extremely busy work schedule. This
is difficult to reconcile with
his ability to find the time to attend to the numerous sporting and other
commitments that he has
recorded in his CV.
Respondent made the following admissions with respect to the Complaint and the
Particulars of Complaint at paragraph 26 (the first
paragraph 26) of his
response to the Notice of Complaint made against me, I admit Complaints 1 and 2.
In relation to Complaints 4 and 5 I admit that
I have been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct but do not admit
the particulars of the Complaints.
I do not admit Complaint
balance of the Respondent’s statement from the second paragraph 25 reads
(noting that the paragraph numbering doubles up
paragraphs numbered 25 and 26):
cannot express the contrition and sorrow I feel for what I have done. I am
thankful for Patient A having the courage to speak
up and make a complaint about
my actions. I say this, despite all the ramifications that have resulted from
that complaint. His
action forced me to obtain professional help, with the
result that I can now acknowledge that I was not fit to practise as a healthcare
professional, I was guilty of criminal behaviour and professional misconduct and
violated the dentist-patient ethical boundaries.
unreservedly apologise for the professional misconduct that I engaged in, and
for the consequences my conduct has had on the victims
and their families, my
professional colleagues, my friends and my family. This conduct certainly
crossed the dentist-patient ethical
boundary by exploiting my position of
authority and my patients’ vulnerability, and there is no excuse for it.
the trust all these people and the community had in me, and I let
them all down.
also apologise to the dental profession as a whole because of the adverse
publicity my conduct caused, thus detracting from the
high ethical standards and
status of my profession, and possibly creating a feeling of distrust in patients
of dentists.
are many reasons, which I now believe combined together to cause me to offend.
It is only recently that I have had the courage
to write them down and verbalise
them. It is really only since the criminal court case concluded and with the
knowledge gained from
my university studies in Health Law that I have been able
to grasp the enormity of what I have done. Dr Collins (Psychologist) has
provided me the framework in which to articulate the
had an underlying homosexual/bisexual interest.
retrospect, my fetish for inserting needles into the arms of friends when I was
a teenager was a childhood manifestation of homosexuality
but no thoughts about
sex as such.
used the blood taking as a purported justification for my underlying sexual
used the concept of a “study” to try and legitimise my
was totally misguided in thinking that the verbal consent of the victims to
participate in the bogus study was valid, when in fact
“consent” was vitiated by the deception of my sexual interest and
needle fetish.
was deluded in thinking that what I was doing was only “bizarre”,
“odd”, “out there”, instead
of realizing that it was
unethical and criminal.
was insufficiently emotionally aware to realise that I was violating the
dentist-patient boundary.
think it was prompted, in part, as a result of my upbringing, and partly related
to my over-investment in work, striving for perfection,
always being
“on-call”, treating emergency patients out of hours, emotional
investment in patients’ well-being,
poor communication skills and
inability to acknowledge my staff which resulted in a stressful and unhappy
office workplace.
had a lack of awareness of the outside world, and I could not see that I was in
a huge rut, which was causing me to spiral downwards
physically and
emotionally.
now realise that I did not have the emotional or psychological skills required
to cope with the rigours, stresses and responsibilities
of an Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgeon without jeopardising my career and relationships,
particularly with my wife. I became distant,
had periods of very low mood, and
had declining intimacy.
believe that I have rehabilitated to the point where I am able to return safely
to practice Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, subject
to some conditions. I
believe this is possible through ongoing treatment with my Psychologist and
Psychiatrist, the support of my
friends and family, university study and
“self-directed” learning. The 3½ years since my actions were
can be divided into 2 stages with regard to my rehabilitation to
(approximately 2 years): where the criminal and civil trials took their course,
and I underwent treatment and counselling.
During this time I did not
adequately understand or gain any significant insight into my misconduct. This
time was spent predominantly
dealing with my depression and emotional state, and
the criminal and civil proceedings.
of criminal trial (October 2010) until present: During this time I continued
seeing my psychologist and psychiatrist;
the 3 civil actions against me were
settled, I completed the Graduate Diploma of Health Law (Sydney University); and
I have undertaken
a process of self-directing learning. This has, I believe,
given me a substantial insight into my past behaviour, and provided me
reasons, strategies and deterrents to avoid reoffending in
am committed in the future to continuing my treatment with both Dr Collins and
Dr Nielssen (Psychiatrist) for as long as they feel
it is necessary. I know
there are several areas of treatment that still need to be addressed with Dr
will continue my studies in Health Law at Sydney University (see below) to
increase my knowledge of the law and ethics in relation
I am given the opportunity to work again as an Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon, I
know that I will not reoffend, and will do my
utmost to restore both the
professional and lay communities’ faith in me as a clinician and a
the continued help of Dr Collins and Dr Nielssen I have been able to reflect on
my behaviour, acknowledge what I did was morally
and ethically wrong, and gain
an insight into why I offended. I have also been able to formulate strategies
that will prevent me
from offending again.
an attempt to gain further insight and understanding into ethics for health
professionals, I enrolled in the 1 year Graduate Diploma
of Health Law course at
Sydney University, and commenced study in first semester 2011. Until then my
head was still too ‘mixed
up’ to study as a result of coming to
grips with what I had done, and dealing with the court case. As I was not sure
I would cope with the added stresses of study again, I enrolled in the
1-year Diploma course, rather than the 2-year Master of Health
Law course. This
course has added significantly to my knowledge and understanding about the law
and medical ethics in relation to
healthcare professionals. I completed it with
a Distinction average. Attached is an outline of the subjects undertaken and
textbooks studied (Annexure 2).
have now transferred to the Master of Health Law degree to be completed in 2012.
It is likely the subjects I will study are (see
Ethics (through the Faculty of Medicine)
Independent
Research Project – topic to be decided, but hopefully related to Dentistry
and/or Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
– skills and theory
Regulation, Health Policy and Ethics
small group of family, friends and former colleagues have provided me with an
invaluable emotional and physical support network.
It was extremely difficult
for me to explain to these people what I had done, and the problems I was
having. Coming to grips with
“the other Arthur” (the one they had
no idea existed) would no doubt have created much turmoil in their minds, but
elected to stand by me. Some even made the effort to attend one or more of
my criminal court hearings. Two former colleagues even
gave evidence on my
the last few months I have researched the literature in an endeavour to gain a
greater insight and understanding of what I have
done from an academic point of
view. Attached (and marked Annexure 3) is a list of journal articles, reports
and books I have accessed
and read concerning the “doctor-patient”
boundaries and professional misconduct.
that I have learnt about include:
expectations that a healthcare professional must act with the utmost
ethical basis of the doctor-patient relationship (confidence, trust, honesty,
concept of boundaries in clinical practice, why they are essential, and that it
is the responsibility of the healthcare professional
to maintain those
boundaries,
different degrees of boundary violations (Stacy, 2003): boundary blurring, dual
relationships, sexual impropriety, boundary transgressions,
violations,
‘slippery slope’ to unethical boundary violation,
power differential in a doctor-patient relationship (where the doctor has a
position of power and authority) and the vulnerability
of patients,
of patient who are more vulnerable: young, naïve, sexually abused, drug
user, unemployed, psychological problems,
psychological
harm caused to patients as a result of crossing the boundary that may be
enduring (confusion, loss of trust, depression,
rejection, anger, guilt,
self-blame, sense of betrayal and exploitation),
consequences
for the doctor of violating the doctor-patient boundaries (loss of career, loss
of friends, criminal and civil charges
and punishment, emotional
instability),
for offending doctors to prevent future boundary violation (education, awareness
of ethical principles, awareness of warning
potential for rehabilitation of offending doctors.
have not reoffended in the last 3½ years, and have no intention or desire
to do so in the future. I have invested much emotion,
time and money into
trying to understand why I behaved so badly, that I believe that I will not
reoffend in any way in the future.
The personal costs, emotional and otherwise,
to me are so great that I am determined to act ethically in the
now believe I have insight as to the reasons behind my offences, and a very
clear understanding of doctor-patient boundaries.
performing my bogus study I had no intent to cause the victims harm. However, I
now realise the potential for my actions to have
caused enduring psychological
problems for them. I have no desire to cause anyone harm, and I deeply regret
that my misconduct has
caused the three men harm.
am aware that reoffending is possible, and I am acutely aware of the inevitable
consequences of reoffending. This awareness will
prevent me from
reoffending.
I am allowed to resume practice, the strategies I will employ to ensure that I
will not reoffend include the following:
a stressful work environment;
Professional
supervision;
psychological and psychiatric counselling;
University study in Health Law;
awareness of the doctor-patient boundaries;
of warning signs – eg. stress, unaccounted for boundary blurring,
disclosing personal information, purposefully meeting
in a social context, not
charging for services;
to discuss the problems with members of my support network. Previously I had
been unable to discuss any personal or emotional
problems with anyone, and it
took some considerable time for me to feel able to “open up” to Drs
Collins and Nielssen.
a result of my actions, 3 civil cases were brought against me. Settlements were
negotiated for a total sum of $290,000 (excluding
legal costs), which I
personally had to pay. My liability was not covered by insurance. This
financial cost, if repeated, would
put an enormous financial strain on me, and
is a further deterrent against me reoffending.
am ashamed of what I have done, and will bear the mental scars of my actions
the past 3½ years I have told my family, friends and former colleagues that
I will not reoffend. I could not go back on
my word to such valued people, as I
know that they would be lost from my life forever. Both my wife and I have
already lost many
what we considered to be valued friends because of my actions,
and I could not bear to be responsible for the loss of any
would like to return to work as an Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon. I am not yet
ready to retire emotionally, and I feel the need
to be gainfully employed. OMFS
is the only work I know and love. I trained for many years to gain my clinical
expertise and I feel
I still have something to contribute to society using those
skills and knowledge. There is a need within the community for OMFS
– lengthy waiting times for consultation and surgery. I need to pay my
bills – I have paid $290,000 for civil
compensation and in excess of
$200,000 in legal fees to date.
acknowledge that I have made enormous mistakes. I have tried to take
responsibility for my actions. I have taken steps to understand
the reasons
behind those actions and to learn how to avoid reoffending, in the hope that I
may be given the opportunity to return
to a meaningful professional life as an
Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon, under whatever conditions the Dental Tribunal
may think appropriate
understand the journey to complete recovery will take time, but I am committed
to continue treatment for as long as is necessary,
and to becoming a better
person in all aspects of my life.
this point the Tribunal notes the contents of the letter from the
Respondent’s legal advisers dated 6 February 2012 (exhibit
33) in which
the Respondent
‘admits the subject matter of the complaint’
and pursuant to section 149C(4) of the National Law accepts that had he been
registered that his registration would have been
Local Court Proceedings – 5 November 2008
(exhibit 26)
Respondent entered a plea of guilty to certain charges and other charges were
withdrawn. The matter was stood over for sentencing
until 4 February 2009.
Local Court Proceedings – 4 December 2009 (exhibit
Tribunal is uncertain as to why the sentencing hearing did not proceed until 4
December 2009, some 13 months after the plea was
entered, that it continued on 9
February 2010 and ultimately did not conclude until 30 April 2010. Some of the
delay appears to relate
to counsel’s availability and the time to obtain
reports from Dr Emma Collins, Dr Christopher Lennings and Dr Olaf Nielsen.
page 52 of the Transcript of the proceedings (line 44-45) the learned
magistrate noted the evidence of Patient B’s father
as follows (which
corroborates the statement made to police by Patient B):
His son yelled out things like, “He’s a f....... poof and
grabbed me. Dad, he grabbed me on the nuts”.
Tribunal notes that the magistrate made adverse comments about the
Respondent’s credibility as a witness in the Local Court
proceedings
(exhibit 28A - T58 4/12/09).
Tribunal notes that the Probation officer gave the following evidence to the
Local Court on 30 April 2010 (Exhibit 28.C page 7,
Q. You state, “The offender demonstrated little empathy for the
victim and only expressed his sorrow for the effect his offending
behaviour had
on his own life”, how was that expressed by Mr Bosanquet?
A. Just the impact that it had had on his family, on his career, the
impact that it had on his whole life. He didn’t sort of
express any
concern about the impact it had had on the victim, it was mainly for us (sic)
own, impact on his own life.
Graham Storey (anaesthetist) gave character evidence in support of the
Respondent in the Local Court proceedings regarding the
criminal charges (see
exhibit 28C – from T 23). He detailed his working relationship with the
Respondent and confirmed that
he was aware that the Respondent had been involved
with the football community both as a coach and as the ‘team doctor’
for teams travelling overseas. Dr Storey stated that he thought the Respondent
was genuinely sorry for his conduct and he thought
the Respondent was genuine in
his expressions of remorse and contrition. Dr Storey stated that he was the
first person the Respondent
had told what had actually happened in relation to
the victims and that the Respondent had stated that it would ‘never ever
happen again’ (T page 25).
Michael Bowler (oral and maxillofacial surgeon) also gave character evidence in
support of the Respondent in the Local Court. He
stated that he had known the
Respondent for 25 years and considered him to be a friend as well as a
colleague. Dr Bowler described
the contribution of the Respondent to the
community as
‘remarkable’
. Dr Bowler expressed the view that
undertaking the type of work the Respondent had done in the public system to
be ‘immensely stressful at times, the hours are extremely
. Dr Bowler expressed the view that everybody
with stress differently’
Local Court Sentencing
Hearing – 30 April 2010
Respondent gave evidence during his sentencing hearing in the Local Court
(transcript – exhibit 28C). The Respondent stated
that he had been
receiving treatment since December 2008 or January 2009. With the help of the
psychiatrist, the medication and the
psychologist he now
‘realised that
what I’d done as just horrific’
(T page 15).
Respondent stated that he had settled a claim made by one of the victims to
compensate them for the impact that his conduct had
had on them. When asked
‘just did my job’
‘Unfortunately I
didn’t do my job very well’
(T 16). Later the Respondent added
that he ‘failed miserably’ with respect to holding a position of
trust and responsibility.
Respondent stated that he did not see any prospect of him ever returning to his
profession (T 17).
Respondent told the Court that there was no point denying his conduct. The
Tribunal notes the shift in the Respondent’s
position from the statement
he provided to the Board Inquiry in September 2008 that he intended to defend
the matter.
Respondent stated that he first had the idea of conducting a ‘phoney
study’ to have young men masturbate in front
of him in the
‘80’s’ (T 19) but denied to the Court that it was undertaken
for the purpose of his own sexual gratification,
rather he thought that it was
perhaps a fantasy (T 20).
Respondent denied some of the conduct to which he had pleaded guilty (the
conduct relating to Patient B).
asked whether he had taken advantage of the three young men the Respondent
replied ‘In a way, yes’, he accepted that
he had abused the trust
placed in him in his role as a ‘medical practitioner’ (T 21). He
accepted under cross-examination
that his conduct was ethically, morally and
criminally wrong (T 22).
learned magistrate helpfully summarises the history of the proceedings in the
Local Court on page 33 of the Transcript (exhibit
28C). The Tribunal notes that
the Respondent entered a guilty plea on four charges and that one charge
proceeded by way of a defended
hearing (the charge relating to Patient B). The
Respondent was found guilty of the defended charge. The magistrate took some
offences into account by way of a Form 1 (being other criminal matters the
magistrate takes into account when sentencing on the charges
that have been
proven). The Tribunal has noted the magistrate’s remarks on sentencing and
adds the observation that at least
one of the criminal acts occurred in the
Respondent’s surgery.
CV provided by the Respondent
Respondent provided a CV as at December 2011 as Annexure 1 to his statement
dated 16 December 2011. The CV records that the Respondent
held a number of
appointments at hospitals until December 2008 when he
. The Tribunal notes there is no mention of having been
suspended by the Board in November 2008. With respect to the period 1989 –
2008 the Respondent records that he was a Visiting Medical Officer – Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgery at South Eastern Sydney
Illawarra Area Health Service
which contrasts with the description of the Respondent as a Visiting Dental
Officer given in the letter
from the Chief Executive Officer of that Area Health
Service in his letter dated 12 September 2008 (exhibit 2). This letter also
informed the Respondent that his appointment was suspended as at 12 September
2008. The CV notes under the heading ‘Registration’
Specialist Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon, NSW.
Tribunal notes that the terms Visiting Medical Officer and Visiting Dental
Officer are defined in the Health Services Act 1984.
Submissions
Submission made by the HCCC
HCCC provided a written outline of submissions which were supplemented by oral
submissions. The transcript reflects the oral submissions
Respondent’s Submissions
submissions were received on behalf of the Respondent.
Findings re Particulars of Complaint One & Complaint One
Tribunal notes the Certificates of Conviction in evidence and finds all of the
Particulars of Complaint One established.
Tribunal is of the view that the circumstances of the offences that the
Respondent has been convicted of render him unfit in the
public interest to
practice. The Tribunal is of the view that the intrinsic seriousness of the
offences is high. Further, the conduct
has a strong nexus with the practice of
dentistry. Without holding registration the Respondent would not have been
likely to have
sufficient access to these young men to commit the offences. The
conduct was repeated on numerous occasions over a lengthy period.
The Tribunal
did not have the benefit of hearing evidence directly from the Respondent.
However, on no view of the evidence could
the Tribunal be satisfied that the
Respondent had a motivation other than self-gratification.
Respondent used his position as a registered health care professional to procure
and induce young men to participate in acts of
indecency and in one instance to
commit an act of indecency upon a young man. The abuse of trust placed in him is
substantial. The
abuse occurred over a significant period of time and was
repeated. It cannot be considered to be in the nature of ‘one off’
behaviour. The offending conduct of the Respondent does not just traverse one
class of conduct but demonstrates deficits in a number
of areas as well as
character traits inconsistent with the holding of registration.
the Tribunal is of the view that in the particular circumstances of this matter
the Respondent’s previous good character
could not assist the Tribunal to
make a finding other than one of unfitness. Similarly, the Tribunal is not
persuaded that the Respondent’s
steps towards remediation are complete,
have been to any effect, or have provided the Respondent with the opportunity to
the requisite insight into his conduct.
respect to the Particulars of the balance of the Complaints that relate to the
criminal conduct of the Respondent the Tribunal
adopts the Remarks on Sentence
made by the sentencing magistrate surrounding the criminal conduct of the
Respondent as set out above
as far as they are relevant to these Particulars.
Tribunal also notes at this point that Complaint Two was not pressed by the
Findings re Particulars of Complaint Three and Complaint
Tribunal notes the admissions made in the Respondent’s statement dated 16
December 2011 (exhibit R1) and the change in his
position outlined in the letter
from his legal advisers dated 6 February 2012 (exhibit 33). The Respondent
initially did not admit
Complaint Three but admitted the entirety of the
complaint in the later document.
Particular I
respect to Particular I of Complaint Three the Tribunal sets out the reasons for
finding this Particular established under the
Heading Particular III of
Complaints Four and Five.
Particular II
respect to Particular II of Complaint Three please refer to the Tribunals
comments below regarding Particular IV of Complaints
Particular III
respect to Particular III of Complaint Three (and Particular V of Complaints
Four and Five) the Tribunal accepts the evidence
that the conduct occurred at
Patient A’s home. The Tribunal notes that this incident (Particular III)
is detailed by Patient
A in paragraphs 18 to 29. Particular III is established
to the reasonable satisfaction of the Tribunal.
Particular IV
respect to Particular IV of Complaint Three (and Particular VI of Complaints
Four and Five), the Tribunal notes the statement
made by Patient B to the Police
as set out above in paragraphs 9 to 29.
Tribunal notes that the Clinical records for Patient B form exhibit
evidence before the Tribunal indicates that Patient B may have received up to 35
mg of Valium in the period prior to the procedure
on 9 November 2000. The
Tribunal notes that it was during this consultation that the Respondent asked
Patient B if he had made his
mind up about participating in the
‘study’. Patient B stated that the Respondent asked him if he had
decided to take
part in the study after he had ingested the Valium tablets but
prior to the extraction of the two wisdom teeth.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Patient B that the Respondent attended his home
a week later and indecently assaulted him under
the ruse of having him
participate in a ‘study’ with the inducement of the waiving of fees
for services provided (and
to be provided). The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied
that Particular IV is established.
Particular V
respect to Particular V of Complaint Three (and Particular VII of Complaints
Four and Five which is in identical terms) the Tribunal
accepts the evidence of
Patient C with respect to this Particular. The Tribunal takes particular note of
the content of paragraphs
5 to 11 of his statement (see above).
Tribunal finds Particular V established.
Particular VI
Tribunal notes that despite the fact that the Respondent admits this Particular,
the Respondent was not on the register as at
30 April 2010 (see exhibit 1D) when
the three criminal convictions were recorded. The Tribunal does not find this
Particular established.
Particular VII
Tribunal notes that the Respondent was charged with criminal offences (which
fall within the category of a sex offence) on 14
June 2008 (see charge date
recorded of exhibit 21c – Bail report). The Tribunal notes exhibit 8 is a
letter from the Dental
Board of New South Wales (as it then was) dated 12
September 2008 which advised that it had received information from AHS that he
had current criminal proceedings against him for aggravated indecency. The
letter also records that the Board had not received notification
Respondent in accordance with
section 37(1)
Dental Practice Act
The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Particular VII is
established.
Finding re Complaint Three
Tribunal notes that the term ‘suitable person’ is not defined in the
National Law. This has no doubt been done to
ensure that bodies such as this
Tribunal and the Boards charged with the important responsibility of ensuring
high standards are
maintained in registered professions are able to consider
each case on its individual merits. High standards are required within
professions to ensure that the privilege of membership of such a profession is
not abused and the public safety is protected. The
Tribunal accepts that
assistance may be provided by the terms of
section 55(1)(b)
of the National Law
which reads as follows:
....having regard to the individual’s criminal history to the extent
that is relevant to the individual’s practice of
the profession, the
individual is not, in the Board’s opinion, an appropriate person to
practice the profession or it is not
in the public interest for the individual
to practice the profession
Tribunal also accepts the submission made by the HCCC that it is appropriate to
look beyond a person’s criminal convictions
when determining the question
of ‘suitable person’ as indicated by
....in the Board’s opinion, the individual is for any other reason
not a fit and proper person for general registration in the
profession.
a person may not have any or any significant criminal history and may still not
be a suitable person to hold registration.
Tribunal has regard to the Particulars of Complaint Three.
I involved the Respondent undertaking an invasive examination of a 15 year old
youth. This in itself is sufficient to cause
the Tribunal to doubt the
suitability of the Respondent to hold Registration. The Tribunal’s concern
is increased in the context
of all of the pathology tests ordered by the
Respondent in terms of the possible motivation he had for such testing. The
was well beyond his scope of practice (in the extreme) as an oral and
maxillofacial surgeon.
the Tribunal has not had the opportunity of hearing evidence from the Respondent
regarding the clinical justification of
this matter and will leave this issue to
be explored by a future tribunal in dealing with any application for
re-registration that
the Respondent may make given the protective jurisdiction
exercised by this Tribunal. The issue of the abuse of the Medicare system
meet the costs of the pathology testing undertaken for ‘personal’
reasons may also be explored at this time.
Tribunal also notes that Patient A had received treatment from the Respondent
and had particular vulnerabilities known to the
Respondent.
II is an example of the Respondent’s abuse of his position of power due to
his holding the privilege of registration.
The Respondent’s offer to
offset/waive the fees associated with the provision of his professional services
took advantage of
Patient A in many ways.
conduct was then compounded when the Respondent visited Patient A’s home
and committed and incited him to commit an act
of indecency.
respect to Patient B not only did the Respondent take advantage of the
patient’s financial position, he also obtained the
agreement to be involved in the study while he was under the influence of
medication.
again, the Respondent attended the home of the patient to continue the
V repeats the pattern of inducing a young man to be involved in two sessions of
his ‘study’. The first incident
with Patient C occurred in the
Respondent’s surgery and the second in the Respondent’s home. The
prelude to this engagement
was the offer of a free Hepatitis B immunisation and
the aggravating factors are the association with Patient C through a football
club and his familiarity with the Respondent as his mother had worked in a
hospital with the Respondent.
VII is a contravention of the relevant legislative requirements. All registered
health care practitioners are expected
to know and understand all legislative
obligations placed upon them. This would be so whether the practitioner was
recently graduated
or relatively experienced as was the Respondent.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC in paragraphs 8 to 40 (with
the exception of paragraph 38) of the Submissions
(see Annexure B hereto) and
makes the following comments:
With respect to
paragraph 11 the Tribunal finds that the evidence is that the Respondent took
blood from Patient A’s arm and
a swab from his urethral opening at the end
of his penis.
With respect to
the conduct of the Respondent detailed in paragraph 14, the Respondent showed no
regard for the fact that a minor
cannot give the informed consent required for
With respect to
paragraph 25 the Tribunal notes that the Respondent received two amounts of $400
for the extraction of Patient B’s
four wisdom teeth (see accounts in
exhibit 16).
With respect to
paragraph 32 the Tribunal notes that Patient C’s father reported that
Patient C had a
significant
‘reaction’ to the Respondent
fondling his testicles not just a ‘reaction’.
With respect to
paragraph 33 and generally, the Respondent only provided vague and general
information to Patient A, Patient B and
Patient C about the nature of the test
and what was actually required. It is unlikely that this approach would have
worked on males
of more advanced years.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent is not a suitable person to
hold registration. The Tribunal finds Complaint
Three established. The
Respondent’s conduct demonstrates he is not suitable for a variety of
reasons, not the least being his
serious and repeated abuse of the trust reposed
in a person who is a member of a profession such as dentistry.
Findings re Particulars of Complaints Four and Five
Particular I
Tribunal has already made a finding with respect to Complaint One. It follows
that the Tribunal relies upon the Certificates of
Conviction and is reasonably
satisfied that Particular I of Complaints Four and Five is established.
Tribunal notes the admissions made in the Respondent’s statement dated 16
December 2011 (exhibit R1) and the change in his
position outlined in the letter
from his legal advisers dated 6 February 2012 (exhibit 33). The Respondent
initially did not admit
Complaint Three but admitted the entirety of the
complaint in the later document.
Particular II
respect to Particular II the Tribunal notes that the Respondent pleaded guilty
to these offences on a Form 1 basis. He was not
formally convicted of these
offences but they were taken into account on sentencing in the Local Court. It
does not appear to this
Tribunal that they were taken into account when the
Respondent was re-sentenced in the District Court. These offences related to
assault of taking blood from Patient A, Patient B, and Patient C and obtaining
consent to do so by fraud or deception. The Tribunal
accepts the evidence of
each of the patients with respect to this conduct and is reasonably satisfied
that this Particular is established.
Particular III
respect to Particular III of Complaints Four and Five (and Particular I of
Complaint Three) the Tribunal notes the evidence (set
out above) that the
pathology results in Patient A’s clinical file for a urethral swab taken
on 2 January 2007 list the referring
practitioner as the Respondent. The
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Patient A as to how this specimen was obtained
by the Respondent.
there is sufficient evidence for the Tribunal to be comfortably satisfied that
Patient A suffered an injury in August 2006
which required surgical repair by
the Respondent. The Tribunal is further reasonably satisfied that the Respondent
took a swab from
Patient A’s penis during a subsequent consultation. The
Tribunal notes the evidence of the Respondent to the Board Inquiry
(exhibit 11
– page 16) wherein he denied taking the swab of the penis. The Tribunal
notes that the Respondent’s clinical
file for Patient A contained reports
from a Pathology Laboratory recording results from both a urethral swab and
serology from a
blood sample. The request noted that the sample was taken on 2
January 2007 and the testing requested is noted as Post Hepatitis
B vaccination,
STD screen and unknown blood group. These screening test results included: HIV,
Hepatitis B, Chlamydia, Hepatitis
C, Syphilis, Herpes Simplex 1 and 2 (PCR),
blood group O+. The report also notes that Patient A was 15 years of age at the
these tests (DOB recorded as 30/01/91). The Tribunal notes at this point
that the Respondent performed major surgery relating to
a traumatic compound
fracture of the mandible some five months earlier through Patient A’s
admission to a public hospital.
Tribunal notes that Patient A was not accompanied by an adult during the
consultation when the swab was taken nor is there any
record of consent for this
swab to be taken and tested for the range of infections listed in the Pathology
report. The Tribunal also
notes the evidence of Patient A’s mother that
she was informed by her son after this incident that when he had attended the
Respondent for the purpose of receiving an Hepatitis B injection he had also
signed a document giving the Respondent permission to
perform the swab and test
for ‘AIDS’.
Tribunal notes that in his statement Patient A describes the conduct of the
Respondent as follows
‘When he did this swab it looked like a long ear
bud and he put this in my penis. I remember he held my penis in his own hands
when he did this swab. I did think it was a bit weird him doing this to me, but
at the same time I trusted him because he is the
Doctor and I wouldn’t
know if it was the correct procedure or not with how he did this’
(paragraph 7, exhibit 31.7).
Particular IV
respect to Particular II of Complaint Three and Particular IV of Complaints
Three and Four the Tribunal notes the evidence of
Patient A regarding his
relationship with the Respondent and his conduct as detailed in particular at
paragraphs 5, 8, 9, 10, 12,
13, 14, 15 and 31 of Patient A’s police
statement as set out above.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Patient A regarding the approach made by the
Respondent to enlist his participation in a ‘study’
Patient A that the fee for participation may lead to the offset or waiving of
the fee for the removal of his wisdom teeth.
The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that the conduct as alleged by Patient A occurred. The Tribunal finds
this Particular established.
this point the Tribunal notes that Patient A was not in a financial position to
pay for the extraction of his wisdom teeth and
that this information was likely
known to the Respondent given the history provided to him by Patient A. The
Respondent had access
to information such as the fact that Patient A had been to
Sexual Assault Service in 2003 (exhibit 3) and was aware that Patient
awaiting compensation arising from the assault.
Particular V
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established for the
reasons set out for Particular III of Complaint Three
Particular VI
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established for the
reasons set out for Particular IV of Complaint Three
Particular VII
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established for the
reasons set out for Particular V of Complaint Three
Particular VIII
Tribunal is not able to find this Particular established for the reasons set out
for Particular VI of Complaint Three (above).
Particular IX
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established for the
reasons set out for Particular VII of Complaint Three
Findings re Complaints Four and Five
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC in paragraphs 41 to 45.
Tribunal makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
each of Particulars I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII,
and IX. The Tribunal finds that
the conduct demonstrated was improper and unethical within the meaning of
section 139B of the National
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct described in each of Particulars I, II,
III, IV, V, VI, VII, and IX is of such a sufficiently
serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of the Respondent’s registration. The Tribunal
finds professional misconduct
with respect to each of these Particulars. The
Tribunal notes at this point that a breach of
section 37(1)(b)
Practice Act 2001
may not always be professional misconduct. However, it is the
nature of the convictions that persuades this Tribunal to make such
a finding on
this occasion.
Observations of Tribunal
Tribunal notes it appears that the Respondent initially pleaded not guilty to
the charge relating to Patient A and that he defended
the charge relating to
Tribunal notes that for the offences committed in 1999 the victim was 19 years
of age, for the offences committed in 2000 the
victim was 18 years of age and
for the offences committed in 2008 the victim was 16 years of age (although some
of the conduct occurred
when Patient A was 15 years of age).
fact sheet relating to Patient B reveals that there was grooming behaviour
demonstrated by the Respondent as well as the aggravating
features of the use of
prescription medication (namely Valium) in addition to the payment of money for
participation in the ‘study’
(exhibit 19). The Tribunal also notes
the evidence that when the Respondent attended Patient B’s home he wore an
Rugby Union t-shirt.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent attempted to use his intense work load as
some sort of mitigation for his behaviour. The Tribunal
notes that the
Respondent did however find time to engage in the numerous episodes of
premeditated suggestion and contact between
himself and the patients (the
subject of the assaults).
Tribunal notes that when the Respondent appeared before a Board Inquiry on 15
September 2008 he informed the Board that he had
not had a complaint made
against him by a patient or any other person since 10 May 2007 (Board Inquiry,
see page 17). This is apart
from the matters raised in the charge relating to
Patient A and the two other clinical complaints that were settled out of
Identity Issue
Tribunal is acutely aware of the unfair and unfortunate advantage taken by the
Respondent of his standing as a health care professional
in his dealings with
the three patients in the matters put forward in the Complaints. This gross
breach of trust appears to have
been compounded by the Respondent assuming the
responsibilities and role of a registered medical health care practitioner with
deliberately groomed and targeted patients who are the subject of these
complaints. These patients and their families were, as a
result, rendered more
susceptible to the proposals put to them in terms of the fraudulent masturbation
research project and the matters
of Hepatitis B vaccination and the penile swab
testing (in the case of Patient A) for a sexually transmitted
Needle Fetish
Tribunal also notes the facts as presented:
Respondent in his statement of a long-held fetish for sticking needles into
young men; and
Respondent in his statement, and by his dental assistant/receptionist in her
statement, of the Respondent offering and
providing free Hepatitis B
vaccinations to young men from a local Rugby organisation over a period of 16
Respondent in his statement that this was done in his role as a “Medical
in this context, the pursuit by the Respondent of his bogus masturbation
research study through visits to the homes of two
of the patients, in the
presence of relatives and with a bag containing the necessary materials for
pursuing the bogus masturbation
research study, and through a visit by one of
the patients to his own home, is a matter of considerable concern to the
Decision not to attend
of the decision of the Respondent not to attend the hearing, the Tribunal finds
itself in a position where its members are
unable to fully assess the present
degree of awareness of the Respondent of the totality of the effect of his
actions, which are
the subject matter of the Complaint. This is compounded by
the absence of psychological and/or psychiatric reports available to
Tribunal on the progress of any treatment and of its effectiveness. This is
against a background of the Respondent having, through
the various legal
proceedings, progressively denied and then accepted to a degree, and
incrementally, responsibility for the matters
which are subsequently the subject
of the Complaint. The judiciary was quite critical on a number of occasions of
the credibility
of the Respondent as a witness to those proceedings. The
Tribunal did not have the benefit of the opportunity to make an assessment.
Respondent has also progressively changed his admissions to the Complaint before
the Tribunal. The Tribunal then is simply not
in a position to ascertain whether
the Respondent understands the full extent of his damaging transgressions
against these vulnerable
young men and takes full responsibility for them. It
follows that the Tribunal, in its prime role of protecting the public, must
its own assessment with the limited information and opportunities available to
it of the credibility and rehabilitation of the
Respondent at this time.
Professional and Clinical Behaviour
Tribunal has made numerous findings, above, regarding the deficits in the
Respondent’s professional and clinical behaviour.
Tribunal chooses to make no comment on a number of matters surrounding the
Respondent’s professional and clinical behaviour
in relation to the
Complaint. These matters go to the clinical protocol of (purported) Hepatitis B
vaccinations and to the procuring,
handling, associated record taking, and
disposal of blood from patients A, B and C.
the Tribunal leaves the question of the ethics of the taking and testing of the
urethral swab from Patient A and the use
of the Medicare system to fund such
testing to any future tribunal.
Considerations relevant to
Tribunal notes and accepts the submissions made regarding protective orders in
paragraphs 46 to 71 and makes the following comments:
With respect to
paragraph 55 it may be that only Patient A was a minor at the time of the
offences. In any event, all three victims
were either minors or young men under
20 years of age.
The Tribunal
would add to the comments of Conlon DCJ that the conduct was not only
‘morally reprehensible’ but also professionally
reprehensible.
With respect to
paragraph 58 the Tribunal notes the Respondent’s admission that he also
had a ‘fetish’ involving
the sticking of needles into other people.
The Tribunal is concerned about the possible connection of a fetish to the
behind the Respondent’s conduct, the subject of these
complaints.
the context of the registration of a health care professional the criminality of
the offences is substantial with the presence
of a number of aggravating factors
discussed above.
Significant
trust was placed in the Respondent, and the Tribunal notes that the Respondent
was requested by NSW Police (in the case
of Patient A) or legal representatives
and a psychiatrist (in the case of Patient B) to provide medical reports
regarding the injuries
and subsequent treatment to both Patient A and Patient B.
Copies of these reports are not contained in the clinical notes of the
Respondent in evidence before the Tribunal. Reports of this nature are
frequently used in the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator
of the assault or
for a personal injuries or Victims’ Compensation claim. Further, Patient C
knew of the Respondent through
his mother’s role as a nurse, and so had
held him in high regard.
various denials and misrepresentations made by the Respondent firmly raises the
question of how long it may take the Respondent
to remediate his position. The
Tribunal notes the comments above regarding his credibility and insight. The
Tribunal considers a
considerable period of disqualification is appropriate in
the circumstances.
Tribunal notes there are discrepancies in the descriptions of the
Respondent’s qualifications and appointments in the evidence
before it so
that it was difficult to form a settled view on these matters without the
benefit of the Respondent’s attendance
before the Tribunal to give
evidence. In particular the Tribunal notes the discrepancy between the AHS
recording the Respondent as
a VDO and the Respondent’s CV noting this as a
VMO appointment.
the registration of the Respondent not been cancelled the Tribunal would have
proceeded to issue a reprimand and seek submissions
as to a prohibition order.
The Respondent clearly not only used his position also as a registered health
care practitioner but also
as an ‘official’ in sporting
organisations to access young men for the purpose of committing the criminal
offences. It
is the view of this Tribunal that the Respondent would not be
suitable to provide any other health service as defined under
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Respondent has now been out of practice for nearly four years. His time away
from the profession will no doubt trigger recency
of practice issues when any
application for registration is considered by a tribunal.
the nature of the Complaints herein this Tribunal is of the view that any
application for Registration that the Respondent should
make after the
disqualification period ordered herein has expired should be placed before a
tribunal and not considered by the Board.
the reports of the Respondent’s treating psychologist and psychiatrist
were not before this Tribunal there was evidence
as to some of the contents
therein in the transcripts of the Local Court Proceedings and significantly in
the statement from the
Respondent himself. Clearly evidence as to the mental
state and condition of the Respondent will have to be examined carefully by
future tribunal.
rehabilitation of the Respondent’s lack of suitability to practise as
identified by the conduct proven, will also need to
be demonstrated to any
future tribunal. In particular the Respondent has demonstrated a lack of candour
and frankness and these are
matters of the upmost importance when consideration
is made as to whether trust may again be reposed in a person to allow them to
have the privilege of holding registration.
is imperative that all registered health care practitioners do not abuse the
trust reposed in them by the public, do not act in
a manner that damages the
reputation of the profession, and do not act in a manner that puts the public at
risk of harm or harms
the public.
Findings and
The Tribunal decided that if the Respondent was still
registered then his registration would be cancelled. The Tribunal further orders
(the Respondent is referred to as the Practitioner for the purpose of these
Orders being applied to the Register):
Practitioner is disqualified from being registered for a period of period of 3
years and six months from the date of the decision
HCCC v Bosanquet [2012]
the Orders made in
HCCC v Bosanquet [2012]
NSWDT 2 may not be reviewed
for a period of 3 years and six months from the date of that
Dental Board of Australia is required to record on the National Register held by
the Board the fact that had the Practitioner
been registered then his
Registration would have been cancelled by the Dental Tribunal of New South
Practitioner is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed or assessed. If agreement
cannot be reached the parties have leave to have
the matter relisted before the
Tribunal for assessment and further
Publication
A copy of this
Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Respondent and his legal adviser
2) The HCCC,
Dental Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
Dental Council of New South Wales,
Chief Executive, South Eastern Sydney and Illawarra Area Health Service.
Chief Executive, Figtree Private Hospital,
Chief Executive, Wollongong Day Surgery Hospital,
Chief Executive, Shellharbour Private Hospital,
Chief Executive, St George Private Hospital,
Chief Executive, Southern Highlands Private Hospital,
Chief Executive, Dubbo Private Hospital,
of School, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Wollongong,
Pharmaceutical Services Unit of the NSW Health Department.
___________________
___________________
___________________
Keith Lester
___________________
Catherine Berglund
Annexure A – Index of documents in evidence
Annexure B –
Redacted Submissions of the HCCC
Annexure C – Schedule of Names
HCCC v BOSANQUET
INDEX TO DOCUMENTS
INDEX TO THE DOCUMENTS OF
THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
VOLUME ONE OF TWO
Certificate
of Registration (to be provided)
of Dental Board of NSW Minutes 12 May 2011
from the Dental Board to the HCCC dated 21 January 2010
Facsimile from Terry Clout, Chief Executive Officer, South Eastern
Illawarra Area Health Service (SEIAHS) to Commission of 12/09/2008
letters to Barbara Cameron, Registrar, NSW Dental Board and Dr Bosanquet of
Email from Margaret Savage to Commission of 24/09/2008
Commission’s letter to Terry Clout of 25/09/2008
Letter from Elizabeth Koff, Acting CEO, SEIAHS to Commission of 22/10/2008
DENTAL BOARD
Letter from Barbara Cameron to Dr Bosanquet of 12/09/2008
Letter from Barbara Cameron to Commission of 18/09/2008
Letter from Barbara Cameron to Commission of 21 January 2010 advising about
the removal of Dr Bosanquet’s name from the register
INQUIRY under
Dental Practice Act, 2001
Transcript of hearing on 15/09/2008
Letter from Barbara Cameron to Commission of 14/11/2008 enclosing the
Board’s decision under
Dental Practice Act
Statement of Peter Fink, Executive Officer, Human Research Ethics
Committee, Central Network dated 01/10/2008
CLINICAL RECORDS
Clinical records of Patient A
Clinical records of Patient C
Clinical records of Patient B
POLICE DOCUMENTS (and refer to Volume Two)
Fact sheet regarding Patient A of 26/08/08
Fact sheet regarding Patient B and Patient C of 27/02/2009
Fact sheet (Full Facts) regarding Patient C (undated)
(a) Court Attendance notices of 26/08/2008 and 02/02/2009
(b) Court Attendance Notice relating to Patient C and Patient B
(c) Criminal History (Dr Bosanquet) and RTA Certificate (car owned by Dr
Submission prepared by Dr Bosanquet for the
hearing dated
Commission’
letter to Dr Bosanquet’s solicitor, Tim Heenan
dated 19/02/2009
Commission’
letter to Dr Bosanquet’s solicitor, Tim Heenan
dated 22/01/2010
Response to
letter from Sparke Helmore Lawyers dated 24/02/2010
RECORDS FROM WOLLONGONG COURT
Transcript of hearing on 05/11/2009 at Wollongong Local Court
Letter from Wollongong Local Court of 01/03/2010 regarding convictions and
date for sentencing (30/04/2010)
– Wollongong Local Court
9 February 2010;
– Wollongong Local Court
30 April 2010;
– Wollongong Local Court
4 December 2010;
– District Court
12 October 2010.
VOLUME TWO OF TWO
Letter from HCCC to Registrar Wollongong Local Court dated 27/10/2010
(a) Certificates of Conviction R v A G Bosanquet
(b) NSW District Court: Advice of Court’s Result
Indictable Brief of Evidence:
– Aggravated
Indecency (relates to Patient A)
of Brief of Evidence, Witness List and summary of evidence, Court Attendance
Police Officer Statements
of Detective Senior Constable Cooper dated 13/10/2008
of Detective Senior Constable Cooper dated 21/10/2008
of Detective Senior Constable Willis dated 15/10/2008
of Detective Senior Constable Sharwood dated 26/08/2008
of Patient A dated 11/5/2007
of Patient A’s mother dated 6/6/2007
of Patient A’s mother dated 20/10/2008
of Patient A’s friend dated 1/7/2008
of Ethics Officer dated 2/10/2008
of Peter Fink (not received by Police)
(is in Volume One, Tab 13)
of Adam Gelfe concerning Telstra subscriber checks dated 29/9/2008 (2
of Adam Gelfe concerning Telstra call charge records dated 29/9/2008 and
Annexures A - D
of Marissa Wicks concerning Optus subscriber checks dated 15/9/2008 and
Annexures A1 – A5
of submissions made by Arthur Bosanquet to the Dental Board of New South Wales
(also in Volume One, Tab 22)
records of Patient A (see Volume One, Tab 14)
of A4 notebook entered as Exhibit D634405
of Quote dated 27/10/2006
of search warrant, reference number 14/07 (also in Volume One, Tab 17)
of search warrant, reference number 62/2008 (also in Volume One,
of property seizure/exhibit form A83439
230 certificate for motor vehicle XBB-608 (also in Volume One, Tab
history (not included in Brief of Evidence)
(is in Volume One, Tab
Unavailable
dates (not included in Brief)
of defendant’s right (not included in Brief)
Indictable Brief of Evidence:
– Common assault,
assault with act of indecency, incite person 16 years or over to commit act of
indecency. (relates to Patient
C and Patient B)
Contents of Brief of Evidence, Witness List and Summary of Evidence
, Court Attendance Notice, Factsheets
Certificate
of defendants right
Police Officers Statements
Senior Constable Frank SANVITALE dated 23/3/2009
Senior Constable Haley GRAHAM dated 2/4/2009
Samuel YOUNG (not attached – was on leave)(not
Victim Statements
of Patient B dated 4/12/2008
Declaration – made by Patient B, undated
of Patient C dated 8/2/2009
of Doctor Pooba GOVENDER dated 11/12/2008
of Patient B’s father dated 16/12/2008
of Patient C’s friend dated 24/3/2009
of staff member at Respondent’s practice dated 13/3/2009
of Respondent’s chair-side assistant and receptionist dated 13/3/2009
of Ethics Officer – Ethics Officer, University of
from Kate MURPHY – Ethics Executive Officer, University of Melbourne dated
records of Patient B (see Volume One, Tab 16)
records of Patient C (see Volume One, Tab 15)
230 RTA certificate for motor vehicle RAD18U
of search warrant, reference number 113/08
of search warrant, reference number 26/09
History of Arthur BOSANQUET
Unavailable
Letter dated 6 February 2012 from Respondent’s solicitor to Tribunal
regarding Respondent not appearing at directions hearing
or hearing in February
Letter dated 24 February 2012 from HCCC to Respondent’s solicitor
regarding procedure of matter.
Letter dated 28 February 2012 from Respondent’s solicitor to HCCC
advising Respondent’s instructions as to re-registration
and further
procedure of matter.
Email dated 28 February 2012 from HCCC to Respondent’s solicitor
of 28 February 2012 regarding proposed Orders
Letter dated 29 February 2012 from Respondent’s solicitor to HCCC
advising of Respondent’s instructions regarding proposed
Documents supplied by Respondent
Statement of Respondent dated 16 December 2011
HCCC v BOSANQUET
REDACTED SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE HCCC
submissions set out the complaints; the evidence supporting the complaints; the
protective orders sought by the Commission and
the reasons for those orders.
THE COMPLAINTS
1 March 1999 and 4 May 2007, Dr Bosanquet (the practitioner) was a Registered
Dental Practitioner practising as an Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgeon registered
Dental Practice Act,
, now repealed.
Dental Tribunal of New South Wales received a Notice of Complaint dated 25 July
2011 from the Health Care Complaints Commission
following consultation with the
Dental Council in accordance with section 39(2) and 90(3) of the
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
National Law).
are 5 Complaints:
: That the practitioner was convicted of three criminal offences (section
144(a) of National Law);
: Not pressed;
– That he is not a suitable person to hold registration in the
practitioner’s profession (section 144(e) of National
: - He has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 139B of the National Law in that he has
engaged in improper
or unethical conduct relating to his practice (section 144(b) of National
: – he has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning
of section 139E of the National Law in that he has engaged
in improper or
unethical complaints relating to his practice (section 144(b) of National
PART 2: EVIDENCE IN SUPPORT OF EACH COMPLAINT
Complaint 1:
respondent has admitted the subject matter of the four
section 178 Certificate of Conviction proves that the practitioner was convicted
of three offences under the
– Convictions
Date of Offence
Date of Conviction in Local Court
Date of Conviction in District Court
on District Court appeal
Inciting A, a person 16 years or above, to an act of indecency towards
himself. (masturbation) (61N(2)
30 April 2010
12 October 2010
6 months suspended sentence
Indecent assault to wit fondling testicles
19 December 2000
30 April 2010
1 October 2010
12 months suspended sentence
Inciting C, a person of 16 years or above to an act of indecency
(masturbation)
1 March 1999
30 April 2010
12 October 2010
6 months suspended sentence
Complaint 2:
Complaint 3: Not suitable to hold registration in the practitioner’s
phrase “suitable person” is not defined in the National Law.
Guidance as to its meaning is provided by
section 55(1)
of the National Law
which sets out grounds upon which the National Board may decide that an
individual is not a “suitable person”
to hold a general registration
in a health profession. Those grounds include:
“having regard to the individual’s criminal history to the extent
that is relevant to the individual’s practice
of the profession, the
individual is not, in the Board’s opinion, an appropriate person to
practice the profession or it is
not in the public interest for the individual
to practice the profession”
the Board’s opinion, the individual is for any other reason not a fit and
proper person for general registration in
the profession.”
law in this jurisdiction has provided some guidance as to the criteria for
establishing whether a person is a fit and proper
person to be registered as a
practitioner.
admitted subject matter of Complaint 3 would cause the Tribunal no difficulty in
finding that the practitioner was not a suitable
person to hold registration in
the profession on either basis described in [7] above.
August 2006,
, who was then aged
, was assaulted and his jaw was
broken. The practitioner operated on his jaw at the Wollongong Hospital. He
put two plates and eight
screws in his jaw. Patient A saw the practitioner once
before and once afterwards whilst in
the operation, A attended the practitioner’s surgery because the
practitioner said that he wanted to take blood from A
to make sure that the
Hepatitis B shot was working. The practitioner took a swab from A’s arm
and his groin area. The practitioner
said he did this swab to check for
Chlamydia and herpes. He took the swab with a long cotton bud. A says the
practitioner held
A’s penis in his own hands when he did this swab.
Particular I
mother, was angry that the practitioner took tests for sexually transmitted
disease from A because she had not been informed
of that fact and she believed
that A was consulting the practitioner about his broken jaw, not for the purpose
of taking tests for
sexually transmitted
the course of an appointment in October 2006, the practitioner told A that he
should consider having his four wisdom teeth
taken out. Patient A’s
mother, said she did not have the money to pay for the wisdom teeth to come out
and she spoke about
the possibility of joining a Health Fund in order to have
A’s teeth taken out. She said that the practitioner told her that
time she had made all of the required payments to the Health Fund, she might as
well just pay him to take A’s wisdom
teeth out. She obtained a quote to
have A’s wisdom teeth taken
November and December 2006
practitioner said to Patient A that:
there was this thing that if I did it through the University that
it will be cheaper for me to have my molars out. He told me that
wank I would get paid for it and this would make the operation cheaper. I
can’t remember word for word but it was
basically this. When he told me I
thought it was for the Uni and had nothing to do with him. When he left the
surgery, my Mum said
it was up to me whether I wanted to do it or
(Particular
A’s mother confirms that A told her about the University study but does
not confirm that she was present when the practitioner
discussed this with
Patient A. Patient A’s mother states that this conversation occurred
whilst her mother was in Australia
between 10 November 2006 and 12 December
stated that he was not keen on participating in the study idea, but the
practitioner kept ringing him and asking him to “do
this”. A felt
that the practitioner was hassling and pressuring him to engage in the
University study. A eventually agreed
to participate in the study and told the
practitioner that he (A) would go to the University and do it. He kept putting
to the University, but the practitioner kept ringing him. On one
occasion the practitioner rang him and said “
I can come to your house
to do it for you
”. A said that the practitioner called him on his
mobile between 25 and 30 times between about August and September 2006 and
January 2007.
27 April 2007, 30 April 2007 and 3 May 2007, the practitioner called A, and
asked if he could come over to A’s house so they
could do the
4 May 2007 the practitioner again called A, and made an arrangement to attend
A’s house. A told the practitioner that his
mother was not at home. The
practitioner arrived at 4:10pm carrying a little black bag. The practitioner
and A went to A’s
bedroom. A closed the bedroom door behind him. A lay
across his bed as requested by the practitioner. The practitioner took
blood pressure and then took blood from his arm by a needle. The
practitioner then asked A to pull his pants down. A asked if he
could get under
the blankets and the practitioner said “
No, grab a towel or
”. A did so.
took off his pants and was wearing underwear. The practitioner said
Alright now you have to get a hard on and then we have to take blood
”. A said “
Can you leave the room so I can do
The practitioner said “
” and left the
room but did not completely pull the bedroom door closed. A did not want to do
what the practitioner had asked
him to do because he felt it was wrong. After
one or two minutes, A called the practitioner back into the bedroom. When the
practitioner
returned, A said “
I can’t. It doesn’t feel
”. The practitioner then asked him to think of things that
turned him on. He asked A what kind of things turned him on and
”. Whilst the practitioner was there, A pretended to
masturbate. A was getting nervous and scared but went through the motions
masturbating. He said to the practitioner “
It doesn’t feel
”. The practitioner said “
Don’t worry about it,
once I had a threesome with a guy and a girl
”. He then embellished
upon what happened during that “threesome”. A then said
This really isn’t working. Can we maybe do it another
The practitioner agreed. (
10 May 2007 the practitioner again telephoned A on his mobile and engaged in
small talk. The practitioner asked A if he still
wanted to do that thing and A
No not really
”. The practitioner advised A to get in
that he needed to get his molars out.
A’s mother listened in to part of that
conversation.
20 April 2000 Patient B
victim of an assault in a nightclub in Wollongong. B was taken to Wollongong
Hospital for treatment and x-rays to his head.
2 May 2000, Patient B (then 18 years 11 months) attended the
practitioner’s surgery at Crown Street Wollongong. He had fractures
his right cheek bone, eye socket, and nerve damage and felt numbness to the
right side of his face.
3 May 2000 the practitioner operated upon Patient B at Wollongong
11 August 2000 during a follow up consultation the practitioner informed B that
he needed to remove his wisdom teeth. The practitioner
informed B that the
operation would be expensive given his age and income. B had told the
practitioner that he was getting a Youth
Allowance for about $270 per fortnight.
B told the practitioner his father could not [sic] help him out. (The Tribunal
however notes
the patient’s statement is rather to the effect that his
father could help him.) The practitioner then told B that he had a
friends at the University of Melbourne doing a study which required the patient
to give a sample of blood. After the sample
was taken the patient was required
to masturbate. After the patient ejaculated a second blood sample was to be
taken. The practitioner
the test is to determine a male’s
blood pressure before and after ejaculation to determine any changes
The practitioner told B that he would receive $300 for his participation in the
study. There was no limit to the number
of times he participated and he could
make $300 on each occasion.
told his father about the study proposed by the practitioner. B said that he
felt it was a strange experiment “
but we both said Dr Bosanquet was a
respected surgeon and at the time we trusted him. At the time Dad and I were
not rolling in money
and an offer of $300 was
9 November 2000, B attended the practitioner for the extraction of his wisdom
teeth at the Crown Street Surgery in Wollongong.
B said that the practitioner
gave him five Valium tablets
take and said they would calm him down if he was anxious about the operation.
They had the brand “Ducene”
B said that when he
arrived at the surgery in the late afternoon he noticed no one else
9 November 2000, B agreed to participate in the study because he thought it was
an easy way to make money. Two of his wisdom teeth
were removed on that
12 December 2000, B was booked in to see the practitioner at his surgery to
remove the remaining two wisdom teeth. He said that
he was not 100% sure but
there was no one in the surgery at that time, it was after
The practitioner again
gave B a dose of Valium (five tablets) shortly after he was called in by the
practitioner. He asked whether
he wanted to do the masturbation study before
removing the remaining teeth. B said he would rather do the study at his house
he wanted someone to be close, like his Dad. B told the practitioner
that he had already spoken to his father about the study.
B said he did not
think that the practitioner would be present during the masturbation and did not
expect him to touch his genitals.
that the practitioner allowed him to drive around
in his blue Lexus car before
the study commenced. The practitioner and B went to B’s bedroom. The
practitioner took B’s
blood by inserting a butterfly needle [Form 1
count]. After taking the blood, the practitioner asked B to get an erection. B
not, because the practitioner was standing over him. The practitioner
said he had pornography with him and he had injections “
which could
”. B declined that offer. B asked the
practitioner to leave the room and the practitioner asked B to tell him when B
erection. The practitioner left the room. Once B got an erection, B
called out to the practitioner who immediately walked into
the room. B was
covered from the waist down with a blanket. The practitioner told B not to
worry about the blanket and instead
passed B a towel, not much larger than a tea
towel, the practitioner told B to think of something that turned him on. The
practitioner
was saying things like “
Just think of a fucking nice
virgin pussy
”. As he said this, B felt the practitioner grab hold of
B’s genitals. He immediately opened his eyes and pushed the
practitioner’s hand away from his genitals. As he did this he noticed the
practitioner had his trouser zipper open, one hand
was inside his zipper playing
with his penis. B was angry, scared and bewildered. He called out for his
father. He said to the
practitioner “
practitioner immediately zipped up his pants and left B’s room and the
house. He said “
I’m sorry I’ve wasted your
”. B’s father arrived and asked what was going on. B said
He’s a queer, he tried to get on to
said that after discussing the matter with his father he agreed it would be hard
to take the matter further because of the practitioner’s
reputation and
they had no money.
“After some discussion we agreed to let it go but
I’ve carried that incident with me for all these years. I trust the
doctor and yes I was looking forward to the money but I did not expect the
doctor to do what he did to
B’s father, corroborated B’s account of his reaction to the
practitioner fondling B’s
March or April 1999, when Patient C was 19 years old the Wollongong University
Rugby Club offered free Hepatitis B immunisations.
C got in contact with the
practitioner who said he would give the immunisation shots in his Surgery at
Crown Street Wollongong.
During the conversation about the Hepatitis B shots,
the practitioner told C about a friend of his, who was a Heart Surgeon in
who was doing a study on how sex affected the heart and blood
pressure. C said this seemed legitimate because he knew the practitioner
rugby and believed he had studied in Adelaide. The practitioner said that the
Heart Surgeon was offering $100 to those who
agreed to participate in the study.
The practitioner told C he had to go to his surgery to carry out the study.
Particular V
thereafter Patient C went to the practitioner’s Surgery late in the
afternoon and after the practitioner had taken
C’s blood pressure and a
blood sample, C masturbated at the Surgery. The practitioner told C
Don’t try to ejaculate as quickly as you can because when
you’re having sex normally you try and hold off to make it last
try and hold off
practitioner and C arranged for C to come back on a Sunday and complete the
study. The arrangement was for C to meet the practitioner
practitioner’s place at [omitted]. On this occasion the practitioner
showed C some erotic videos. The practitioner
put the blood pressure monitor on
C and stayed with him the whole time. The practitioner reminded C not to
ejaculate straight away
to make it look more realistic. C masturbated and
eventually ejaculated. He was given $150.
the first occasion, the practitioner said to C that he would be behind a door
and that C should call him before he ejaculated.
The practitioner moved out of
site and C began masturbating and when he was about to ejaculate called the
practitioner. The practitioner
appeared next to C in a second and it appeared
to C that the practitioner must have been standing next to C whilst he was
masturbating
but far enough away so that C could not see him.
said that he participated in the study because “
I still thought that it
was legitimate because I knew and trusted him and because of his background and
reputation as a highly qualified
and experienced
Staff member at Respondent’s practice was employed as a Receptionist at
the practitioner’s Surgery from July 1997 to
Dental Practice
required the
practitioner to notify the Board in writing within 7 days after he was convicted
of an offence and was required to give
details of the conviction and any penalty
imposed for the offence. The practitioner was convicted of the three offences
in Table 1 above at Wollongong local court on 30 April 2010. He failed
to notify the Board as required. The lodgement of an appeal
against those
convictions did not abrogate or suspend the practitioner’s obligation
s 37(1)(a).
(Particular VI)
Dental Practice Act
required the practitioner to notify
the Board in writing within 7 days after criminal proceedings had been commenced
in NSW in respect
of a “sex/violence” offence alleged to have been
committed against a minor (whether or not alleged to have been committed
course of the practice or purported practice of dentistry). A
“minor” is defined in
Interpretation Act
(NSW) to mean an individual under the age of 18 years. A was a minor at the
time of the misconduct.
“Sex violence offence”
is defined to
“an offence involving sexual activity, acts of
indecency”.
The practitioner was charged on 14 June 2008 with two
offences – committing an act of indecency towards a 16 year old in
circumstances
of aggravation – to wit that A was under the authority of
the practitioner contrary to
section 61O
(1A) of the
and inciting a
16 year old to an act of indecency towards himself under
N(2) of the
. The charges “involved” sexual activity and acts of
He failed to disclose
to the Board that he had been charged with the offence against A. The
practitioner acknowledged this breach
in an interview with the Commission on 15
September 2008.
practitioner demonstrated that he was not a fit and proper person to practice
dentistry. His misconduct manifested qualities of
character incompatible with
the conduct of dental practice
because it involved (a) a gross breach of trust with his young patients; (b) a
serious breach of the criminal law; and (c) putting
his own need for sexual
gratification before the needs of his patients; (d) a significant departure from
appropriate ethical standards
of a dental practitioner.
Complaints 4 and 5: Unsatisfactory and Professional misconduct
‘Unsatisfactory
professional conduct’ is defined in s 139B of the National Law.
‘Professional misconduct’
is defined in section 139E of the National
Law. Both terms define the conduct as including
“any other improper or
unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of the
practitioner’s profession”.
“Professional
misconduct” is defined to
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct that, when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration.
particulars in complaints 4 and 5 repeat the particulars in complaint 3, and add
particulars that the practitioner was convicted
of three offences and admitted
three offences which were taken into account on 30 April 2010 when imposing
sentences for the three
conduct the subject of complaints 4 and 5 “related to” the practice
or purported practice of the practitioner’s
profession. In the context of
the National Law, the phrase “related to” means that there is some
connection between the
“conduct” and the practitioner’s
practice or his purported
First, the unethical
and improper conduct was directed at his patients. Secondly, the conduct arose
directly from his recommendation
as a dentist about the need to have the
patients’ wisdom teeth extracted. The practitioner had suggested to the
patients (all
of whom were young, impecunious men), that they could save money
for that procedure by participating in the masturbation ‘study’.
Thirdly, the patients agreed to participate in the study because they trusted
the practitioner as their
. Fourthly, the
masturbation ‘study’ involved the practitioner purporting to engage
in a medical procedure – namely,
taking blood and measuring blood
pressure. In the minds of the patients at least, this was a procedure that the
practitioner was
qualified to perform as a health practitioner.
II in Complaints 4 and 5 (which was not included in particular 3) involve three
offences admitted to by the practitioner
which were taken into account on a Form
1 at the Wollongong local court on 30 April
. Those offences involved
the practitioner taking blood as part of the masturbation
clear whether two or three charges were taken into account, but that is
immaterial.
The masturbation
study was bogus. The taking of blood was part of that bogus study. The patients
were deceived by the practitioner
into agreeing to a totally unnecessary medical
procedure in order for the practitioner to obtain sexual pleasure at watching
young patients masturbate. This also represents a gross breach of his
patients trust, and represents highly improper and unethical
PROTECTIVE ORDERS
practitioner is no longer a registered health practitioner. He was first
registered in NSW on 17 December 1978. He was registered
as an oral surgeon in
1989 and as an oral and maxillofacial surgeon in 2000. On 15 September 2008,
conditions were imposed on his
registration pursuant to
Practice Act
6 November 2008, the Registrar advised the Dental Board that the practitioner
had pleaded guilty in the Local Court – this
related to the plea of guilty
for patient A.
7 November 2008, the practitioner was suspended by the Dental Board pursuant to
Dental Practice
5 February 2010, the Dental Board removed the practitioner from the register
because he was ‘unfinancial’ on 31 December
practitioner is no longer registered as a dental practitioner. He has never been
registered under the National
Commission seeks the following orders:
(a) The Tribunal would have cancelled the practitioner’s registration if
he had been
The practitioner is disqualified from being registered for 3
(c) an order requiring the Dental Board to record the fact that the Tribunal
would have cancelled his registration in the National
(c) an application for review of these orders may not be made until after 3
practitioner through his solicitor accepts that his registration would have been
cancelled had he been
registered.
He also has
instructed his solicitors that he has decided not to seek
re-registration.
practitioner makes no concession or submission as to any period of
disqualification.
determining the appropriate protective orders, the Tribunal should have regard
(a) The gravity
of the misconduct;
(b) When the
misconduct occurred;
practitioner’s level of remorse and insight into his misconduct;
(d) What (if
any) steps have been taken by the practitioner at rehabilitation;
(e) The need to
protect the health and safety of the public. The jurisdiction is protective not
Gravity of misconduct
totality of the misconduct by the practitioner was very serious. The misconduct
spanned a period of 8 years and involved three
patients. It involved a gross
breach of trust towards those patients (and their parents). The misconduct was
not spur of the moment
or opportunistic. It involved a deliberate, premeditated
course of conduct where the practitioner set out to cultivate a relationship
with his young male patients to fulfil his own sexual gratification at their
misconduct was particularly serious in the case of patients A and B, both of
whom were minors, because the practitioner used his
position as a dentist to
persuade and cajole them to participate in the study. His conduct was predatory.
A described his relationship
with the practitioner as follows:
“We became mates sort of, but I did think it kind of a bit weird
with the phone calls from him. I think he’s about forty
years old, but I
thought he just wanted to be mates with me, and I hang out with my uncle so it
didn’t seem too
The practitioner called A on his mobile between 25 and 30 times between about
August/September 2006 and January
This is corroborated by
the Telstra telephone records.
B described the practitioner’s conduct shortly before he asked B to
participate in the masturbation study. The practitioner
asked B a series of
personal questions about his partying and whether he took drugs. B said
“At this point, I remember thinking that he was OK and sort or a rebel as
he was swearing and he pretty much sounded as if
he were 19 years
the heart of the misconduct was the deliberate deception by the practitioner in
convincing his three patients that it was necessary
to masturbate in his
presence in order to participate in a scientific study, which the practitioner
said was sanctioned by a university.
The practitioner practiced that deception
by exploiting his position as a trusted and highly experienced dental
practitioner. The
practitioner exploited both the naïveté and
impecuniosity of his patients by offering to pay them for masturbating in
presence, which would, in turn assist them in paying his fees for an expensive
dental procedure, which he had recommended. It
was a thoroughly exploitative
arrangement. As His Honour Judge Conlon observed, that was
reprehensible
practitioner’s conduct harmed his patients, particularly patient B. B
stated that the practitioner’s conduct left
him angry, scared, bewildered
and betrayed. He stated that shortly after the event, he fell into a serious
narcotic and tranquilliser
habit followed by serious
“carried” that incident with him for years. B’s father,
corroborates B’s testimony. He stated that
on the afternoon after the
practitioner had “scurried” past him,
“[Patient B]
’s demeanour changed quite dramatically. He became
withdrawn and he continued like that for a very long time. His entire
personality
changed from here on in and his life began to spiral out of control.
He began taking drugs and getting in trouble with the police.
That I know of
Patient B had never taken drugs before this and apart from a fight in the school
yard he had never been in trouble
practitioner’s conduct was completely antithetical to the ethics of his
profession, which is to provide appropriate dental
care and treatment to his
patients. As stated above, the misconduct involved conducting completely
unnecessary medical procedures
on all three patients. In engaging in the
misconduct, the practitioner was wholly motivated by his desire for sexual
gratification
in watching his patients masturbate in front of him.
Insight, remorse and rehabilitation
practitioner has demonstrated a limited insight into his own misconduct. In
relation to patient A, he was charged with two offences
on 14 June 2008. He
entered pleas of not guilty to both
On 15 September 2008,
the practitioner signed a submission for a
hearing before the Dental
Board where he did
admit the complaints made about him by A or his
mother, and stated that he would “contest” the forthcoming criminal
proceedings.
He denied that the “materials” before the Board
suggested that he endangered the mental health of patient A at any time.
stated that this was his first complaint of professional misconduct made against
him since he commenced practice.
Whilst the latter statement was literally true, the practitioner made it knowing
that he had deceived B and C in participating in
the masturbation study in
December 2000 and April 1999 respectively. On 5 November 2008, the practitioner
pleaded guilty to one offence
of inciting Patient A aged 16 to committing an act
of indecency.
relation to Patient B, the practitioner pleaded not guilty to the charge of
indecent assault against B on 19 December 2000 contrary
section 61L
practitioner gave evidence in the criminal proceedings before Magistrate Mabbutt
on 4 December 2009. He admitted that at some
point during his consultations
with patient B he mentioned to B he was undertaking a study which involved
looking at changes in blood
pressure and hormone levels while
masturbating.
The practitioner
said that it was a pilot study and it was likely to become a University study
but that the process had not been
formalised. He admitted that there was no
such study on foot. He said that he offered to pay B $150 to $200 for partaking
study. He denies that this conversation was linked to the cost of the
procedure for extracting the wisdom
practitioner agreed that he had a telephone conversation with B in which he
agreed that he would go to B’s house in relation
to the masturbation
study. He denied administering any drugs to B when he was vulnerable in his
surgery to facilitate his agreement
practitioner agreed that he gave B a ride in his blue Lexus car and that he
engaged in the conduct that B complained of. However
he denied touching or
fondling B’s genitals. He admitted the study was a ruse. When he was
asked why he did this he gave
the following
“I was just very sick and after twelve months of treatment with
psychologists and psychiatrists I am now in a position to see
that I was sick
and I’m continuing to get treatment to find all the answers to that
from denying that he fondled or touched B’s genitals, he also equivocated
as to the reason why he deceived B into participating
in the masturbation study.
It was expressly put to him that he did so for his own sexual gratification. He
said that was ‘partly’
true. He denied that he was sexually
attracted to B and when asked to explain his conduct he repeated that he was
was asked the following questions in
cross-examination:
the time you didn’t think there was anything wrong in asking a young male
to masturbate in front of you, you didn’t
think there was anything wrong
A: I discussed it with him, having discussed it with his father, it was
bizarre, it was odd, it was weird that with that verbal consent,
Q: No you didn’t think it was wrong?
A: That’s correct
answer was disingenuous. It is inconceivable that the practitioner did not know
at the time that what he was doing was wrong
in both a legal and moral sense.
The notion that the verbal consent made any difference at all to the wrongness
of the matter is
nonsense because he knew that the consent was obtained as a
result of his deception.
practitioner’s evidence in the local court demonstrates a lack of remorse
in relation to the touching of B’s genitals
and a lack of insight into the
reasons why he engaged in the conduct.
practitioner’s most recent statement to this Tribunal dated 16 December
2011 does not make any reference to what actually
happened in relation to B (or
to the other two patients). The practitioner makes a general apology to all his
victims, which includes
B, but he does not describe what he actually did to B.
The Tribunal is left with the account that the practitioner gave in his evidence
at the Local Court on 4 December 2009.
practitioner’s December 2011 statement, expresses contrition and sorrow
for his misconduct and apologises unreservedly for
the professional misconduct
he engaged in and for the consequences his conduct has had on the victims and
their families, his professional
colleagues, friends and
He acknowledges that he
betrayed the trust of all these people and that he let them all down. He
apologised to the dental profession.
He states that it is only since ‘the
criminal court case’ that he has been able to grasp the enormity of what
done. It is not clear which criminal court case he is referring to
because as late as October 2010, the practitioner was appealing
against his
conviction in relation to B.
his December 2011 statement, the practitioner attempts to explain the reasons
for his misconduct. He had an underlying homosexual/bisexual
interest and a
fetish for inserting needles into peoples’ arms. He said he used the
blood taking as a purported justification
for his underlying sexual interest.
He accepts that it was misguided thinking that the verbal consent of the victims
to participate
in a bogus study was valid when that consent was vitiated by the
deception of his sexual interest and needle fetish.
expresses that he is rehabilitated and referred to the stages of his
rehabilitation.
He referred to
his continuing treatment by both Dr Collins and Dr Neilsen.
evidence before the Tribunal would satisfy the Tribunal to some extent that he
has taken certain significant steps towards rehabilitation,
and that he has
gained some insight into his misconduct and the reasons for it. Having said
that, the Tribunal would remind itself
that the practitioner’s evidence
concerning remorse, insight and rehabilitation cannot be tested because the
practitioner has
not been cross-examined in these
proceedings.
gravity of the misconduct must be marked by a significant period of
disqualification. The period of 3 years is comparable with
similar periods of
disqualification imposed by like Tribunals in this
expiry of the disqualification period does not mean that the practitioner has an
automatic right to be re-registered as a practitioner.
He will have to
demonstrate that he is a suitable person to be registered. That is a heavy onus.
The Commission submits that particularly
bearing in the gravity of the
misconduct and the need to protect the public (in particular young male dental
patients), he should
not be considered for registration for at least three
Letter from Karen Kumar to
David McMahon dated 6 February
Brief Tab 30A.
Although the Tribunal is not bound by the Rules of Evidence, section 92(2) of
Evidence Act
makes evidence of convictions admissible in civil
proceedings.
HCCC v Pierce
[2010] NSWNMT 23
was born on 30 January 1991
Statement of Patient A dated 11 May 2007 Tab 31 sub tab 7 paragraph 4
Tab 31 sub tab 7 paragraph 6.
Patient A’s medical records indicate that the swabs were
collected on 2 January 2007: Tab 14. Test results and handwritten medical
records for A dated 2.1.07
32 sub tab 8 paragraph 7
13 sub-tab 8. Statement of Patient A’s mother [6]. A quote in the sum of
$1310 dated 27
October 2006 appears in Patient A’s medical records:
Particular 2 refers to the discussion occurring in February 2007. This is
inconsistent with both the medical record which records
no consultations beyond
5 January 2007 (Tab 14 handwritten notes) and Patient A’s mother
recollection of her discussions with
Patient A about the University test: (Tab
32 subtab 8 paragraph 7)
31 subtab 7 at paragraph 13.
Tab 31 subtab 8 paragraph 7 [Particular
Tab 31 subtab 7
paragraphs 12-14
subtab 7 paragraphs 18-29
Born 3 June 1981. He was 19 years and 6 months at the time of the misconduct
Handwritten medical
records Tab 16; Tab 32 subtab 8 paragraph
Tab 32 subtab 8
paragraphs 9-11
The meeting
at the surgery is confirmed by the handwritten medical records: Tab
Tab 32 Subtab 8
paragraph 11
There is no
reference in the medical notes to the practitioner providing five tablets of
Valium to B.
may be inaccurate about this fact. The handwritten medical notes signed by SJ
contain the note “5mg Diazepam at 10:45am”. SJ was Samantha
Jones - the practitioner’s full time receptionist:
Tab 28C p 11 line 47
Whether the Tribunal accepts B on this matter does not in any way derogate from
the serious nature of the conduct.
Subtab 8 paragraphs 13,
The medical records
indicate that “patient does not wish to have pre-med. SJ” which is
signature of a nurse. (Tab
Tab 32 sub tab 8
paragraphs 27, pages 5-6 paragraph 27 (note there are two paragraphs
Tab 32 subtab 12
paragraphs 8 and 9
subtab 10 paragraph 6
Paragraph 12
Tab 32 subtab
14 (it is her signature on the
Dental Practice
remained in force until 30 June 2010. It was repealed on 1 July 2010 by
Schedule 3 to the
Health Practitioner Regulation Amendment
Act 2010 N0
Inciting an act of
indecency “involves” an act of indecency and may also
“involve” sexual
A Solicitor v Law
Society of NSW
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
A Solicitor v Law
Society of NSW
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
, [32]; See
Compensation Board of QueenslaInd v Technical Products Pty Ltd
at 653 for the meaning of “related to” and like phrases. D C
Pearce and RS Geddes,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(Lexis Nexus
Edition, 2011) pages 375-376 .
A Solicitor v Law Society of
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
Patient C – tab
32 sub tab 10 paragraph 12
They were not taken into account by His Honour Judge Conlon although the Form 1
was before His Honour: Tab 28D page 9; Proceedings
on 1 October 2010 page 2. The
respondent infers that His Honour overlooked the Form 1
Tab 28B pages
41.38, 42.05-25.
reference to five charges at page
The conditions are
set out at Tab 11 page 23; Confirmation of Registration Status dated 27 February
Tab 12; Confirmation
of Registration Status
Extract of Dental Board Minutes of meeting dated 5 February
Confirmation of
Registration Status
149C(4) of the National Law
Section 149C(4) of the National
Section 149C(7)
of the National Law
13 of Schedule 5D of the National
Letter from Karen Kumar
to David McMahon dated 6 February
HIcksons Lawyers to
HCCC dated 28 February 2012
His Honour Judge Conlon found that the practitioner’s touching of patient
B’s crotch was “a
spur of the moment decision followed by a quick retreat from the
premises”: Tab 28D p 5. That may be so. However, whereas the
touching of
the crotch was the essential fact in the criminal case, the gravamen of the
misconduct against B in these proceedings
was tricking B into participating in
the masturbation study for his sexual gratification. That conduct was not a spur
of the moment
Statement of patient Aparagraph
Statement of patient A
paragraph 12
Tab 31 sub-tab
14. Note patient A’s mobile was 0412 795 215. tab 31 sub tab 9. Phone
records at tab 31 sub tab
Tab 32 sub tab 9
Tab 28D page
Tab 32 sub tab 8 page
Tab 32 sub tab 12
paragraph 11
Tab 11 page
See Tab 28C page
Tab 28C page
Denial at page
HCCC v Dr Piyush
[2009] NSWMT 9– 3 years; Dr John McEvoy (Medical Tribunal of
NSW, 30 October 2000, unreported) – 3 years;
Mr Anthony Griffin
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.19 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter