URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1095.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cicolini v Transport Secretary [2025] NSWIRComm 1095 (29 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Cicolini v Transport Secretary
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1095
Hearing Date(s):
28 October 2025
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Decision Date:
29 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner Muir
The application is dismissed.
Catchwords:
WORKERS COMPENSATION — Protection of injured workers —
Application to Industrial Relations Commission for reinstatement
worker fit for reinstatement sought
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Glen Robson v GWA Group Limited
[2015J NSWIRComm 9
Health Secretary in
respect of HealthShare NSW v Betts
[2023] NSWIRComm 1104
HealthShare NSW v
[2023] NSWIRComm 1104
Hofman v Penford Australia Limited
NSWIRComm 1026
Jenkins v Secretary of the Ministry of Health on behalf of
Nepean Blue Mountains Local Health District
[2023] NSWIRComm 1045
Industrial Relations Secretary in respect of the Department of Regional New
South Wales (No 2)
[2023] NSWIRComm 1026
Ronald MacDonald v Jetstar Airways
[2019] NSWIRComm 1010
Principal judgment
Tina Cicolini (Applicant)
Transport Secretary (Respondent)
Representation:
M Watts (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Sparke Helmore
Lawyers (Respondent)
J Cooper, Rail Tram and Bus Union
(Applicant)
H Bellette, Rail Tram and Bus Union (Applicant)
File Number(s):
2025/274002
Publication Restriction:
an application filed with the Industrial Relations Commission (Commission) on 17
July 2025, the applicant sought reinstatement
pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(WC Act). That Part provides, inter alia, a
process whereby a worker who has been dismissed because of a compensable injury
reinstatement if they are fit for work.
has been used by workers who have been unable to work at the time of
their dismissal, but who subsequently regain their health sufficiently
to work. It has been previously used by applicants in such circumstances and has
largely been understood in such a context.
application challenges that prism because it is apparent that the
applicant’s health and, consequently, her fitness for
employment as at the
date of application is not materially different from that at the date of her
dismissal. I say “apparent”
for reasons which are set out below in
the Commission’s consideration of the issues.
the applicant’s health is the same would hardly be surprising, given there
was barely more than three weeks between her
dismissal and her request to her
former employer, the respondent. There was less than three months between her
dismissal and her
application to the Commission.
the medical evidence on which she relies predates her dismissal by three months
and yet it is conceivable her application
fits within the structure of
There are undoubtedly challenges facing her, not the least of which is the scope
and how that scope is constrained by the purpose of the Part.
respondent submitted that a great many matters which were put in issue by the
applicant would have been relevant if the application
had been made pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 1996
, but were not relevant in an
application pursuant to Part 8 of the WC Act.
reasons set out below, the Commission has determined the application in its
current form must be dismissed because the request
to the employer to be
reinstated did not comply with the requirements of Part 8. In such
circumstances, many of the issues ventilated
during the hearing of the matter,
and most of the evidence, is not relevant to the decision the Commission must
novelty of the application, in that the applicant has essentially the same
fitness for work as at the date of the dismissal; the
submissions as to the
relevance of the employer’s conduct; that from the applicant’s
submission that conduct was wanting;
and whether, as the respondent submitted,
this was irrelevant; do not fall to be determined and the Commission does not
the Applicant’s Outline of Submissions (
), the applicant set out
a background to the application and the Commission extracts that in
1. The Applicant has been employed by the Respondent in a Grade 9 permanent
Substantive Role
) since October 2021. The Substantive Role was
as a Resource and Deployment Manager.
4. The Applicant suffered a workplace injury ..., being adjustment disorder with
anxious distress
(the Injury
5. Between 30 March 2023 and 24 April 2023, the Applicant took a period of sick
leave due to the Injury. In this period, she accessed
a psychologist for
6. Between 24 April 2023 and 22 May 2023, the Applicant accessed worker’s
compensation payments and continued her leave on
this basis.
7. On 8 May 2023, the Applicant submitted a certificate of capacity. This
certificate stated that she was fit to return to full-time
work, but not with
the ‘same work colleague’ who triggered the Injury.
8. On 25 May 2023, the Applicant commenced an alternate role in a different team
of the Respondent (
the Alternate Role
). This Alternate Role was at a
Grade 7 level, rather than Grade 9. The Applicant was, however, paid the
substantive Grade 9 rate.
14. On 30 January 2025:
(a) the Respondent wrote to the Applicant, formally notifying her of their
intention to medically retire her;
(b) the Applicant’s treating General Practitioner provided an updated
medical opinion to the Respondent, opining that the Applicant
was medically fit
to return to her previous role, in so far as she was not directly supervised by
[the employee who she said triggered
her injury].
17. On 29 April 2025, the Respondent medically retired the Applicant.
18. On 20 May 2025, the Applicant wrote to the Respondent, formally requesting
reinstatement to her Substantive Role (
the Reinstatement Request
July 2025, the Respondent rejected this request.
19. The Applicant subsequently filed in the Industrial Relation Commission of
NSW, seeking that the Applicant be reinstated within
the meaning of
section 242
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(Emphasis in original.)
limiting the extract, because that is all that is relevant to the
Commission’s decision, the Commission observes that the
respondent then
agrees with that extract as a proper description of the
background.
to the applicant’s witness statement was the letter to the respondent of
20 May 2025 requesting that she be reinstated.
That letter and the attachments
to the letter were attachments TC-7 to the applicant’s witness statement.
The letter was from
the Rail Tram and Bus Union (
applicant’s behalf. The relevant parts of the letter are:
RE: Tina Cicolini – Formal request for reinstatement
We write on behalf of our member, Ms Tina Cicolini making a formal request for
her to be reinstated back to her position of Manager
Legal Support and
Development, previously called Resource and Deployment Manager due to her being
fully fit for preinjury duty with
no work restrictions.
A. Background
1. Ms Cicolini was a Manager Legal Support and Development within Transport for
) which is a grade 9 position.
2. Ms Cicolini unfortunately suffered a workplace injury resulting in her
lodging a workers' compensation claim.
5. On 20 January 2025, Ms Cicolini provided a letter from her treating
practitioner clarifying she was fit to return to her pre-injury
hours and full
duties of her previous role, attached and labelled ‘
7. On 29 April 2025, TfNSW advised Ms Cicolini of their decision to proceed with
the ROMA providing her 5 weeks paid notice, attached
and labelled
Attachment 6
Workers Compensation Act
Workers Compensation Act 1987
workers who are dismissed as the result of a work-related injury to seek
reinstatement or reemployment within two years.
9. We further note that
of the Act advises of the requirements an
injured worker must satisfy when seeking reinstatement, which states:
9.1 If an injured worker is dismissed because he or she is not fit for
employment as a result of the injury received, the worker
may apply to the
employer for reinstatement to employment of a kind specified in the
application.
9.2 The kind of employment for which the worker applies for reinstatement cannot
be more advantageous to the worker than that in
which the worker was engaged
when he or she first became unfit for employment because of the injury.
9.3 The worker must produce to the employer a certificate given by a medical
practitioner to the effect that the worker is fit for
employment of the kind for
which the worker applies for reinstatement.
10. When applying the above to Ms Cicolini’s matter it is noted she is:
10.1 Applying to be reinstated to her previous position, which is Manager Legal
Support and Development (previously called Resource
and Deployment Manager);
10.2 The position is not more advantageous to her previous position; and
10.3 Ms Cicolini has provided to TfNSW a certificate given by her medical
practitioner advising she is fit for employment of the
kind for which Ms
Cicolini is applying for reinstatement.
C. Conclusion:
11.Ms Cicolini is seeking reinstatement to her previous position based on the
medical certificate that was issued on 20 January 2025.”
(Emphasis in original.)
contents of an attachment to the 20 May letter, itself dated 30 January 2025,
Medical Report
30/01/20205
RE: Ms Tina Cicolini
To Whom It May Concern,
Re: Tina Cicolini - Return to Work Capacity
I am writing to provide clarification regarding Tina's capacity to return to
work for her workers' compensation claim.
I believe that Tina is medically fit to return to her pre-injury work hours and
is capable of performing her role as previously undertaken.
The one restriction is that Tina is unable to work with or under the direct
supervision of her previous senior staff member, ....
Tina has previous
explained that this individual was directly involved in the circumstances that
led to her workers' compensation
claim, and ongoing interaction with this person
would likely exacerbate her stress and negatively impact her mental health.
Additionally, I would like to note that there are now no restrictions to Tina
working with the individuals she previously had restrictions
in relation to ....
These restrictions have been lifted, and she is able to work alongside them
without issue.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you require further information or
clarification regarding Tina's return-to-work capacity.
Dr Steven Vo”
relevant parts of the WC Act provide:
Part 8 Protection of injured workers from dismissal
240 Definitions
(1) In this Part—
reinstatement
includes re-employment.
(2) For the purposes of this Part, an injured worker is a worker who receives an
injury for which the worker is entitled to receive
compensation under this Act
Workers’ Compensation (Dust Diseases) Act 1942
(3) For the purposes of this Part, a person is the employer of an injured worker
only if the injury arose (either wholly or partly)
out of or in the course of
employment with that person.
241 Application to employer for reinstatement of dismissed injured worker
(1) If an injured worker is dismissed because he or she is not fit for
employment as a result of the injury received, the worker
may apply to the
employer for reinstatement to employment of a kind specified in the
application.
(2) The kind of employment for which the worker applies for reinstatement cannot
be more advantageous to the worker than that in
which the worker was engaged
when he or she first became unfit for employment because of the injury.
(3) The worker must produce to the employer a certificate given by a medical
practitioner to the effect that the worker is fit for
employment of the kind for
which the worker applies for reinstatement.
Submissions
the AOS, the applicant’s relevant submissions were that:
20. Section 241 of the Act has been referred to as the ‘gateway’
provision – the fulfillment of which will allow
a worker to bring an
application before the Commission.
21. To meet the gateway, the Applicant must:
(a) be an injured worker;
(b) be dismissed because she is not fit for employment as a result of this
(c) apply to the employer for reinstatement to employment not more advantageous
than previously held;
(d) produce a certificate by a medical practitioner ‘to the effect that
the worker is fit for employment of the kind for which
the worker applies for
reinstatement’.
Injured worker – s.241(1)
22. The Applicant is an injured worker within the meaning of the Act as:
(a) the Applicant received a personal injury, being adjustment disorder with
anxious distress (s.4), as attested by the First Psychiatrist
(b) this Injury arose out of or in the course of employment (s.4); and
(c) the Applicant was entitled to receive compensation under the Act for the
Injury, and indeed did receive worker’s compensation
payments on this
basis between 24 April 2023 and 22 May 2025.
Dismissed as not fit for employment – s.241(1)
23. There is a presumption under the Act (s.244) that the Applicant was
dismissed due to unfitness as a result of the Injury.
24. The Respondent medically retired the Applicant on the basis of the Injury
and subsequent unfitness for employment. As such, this
ground is made out,
presumably uncontested.
Application to employer – s.241(2)
25. On 20 May 2025, the Applicant applied to the Respondent seeking to be
reinstated to her Substantive Position.
Certificate of fitness – s.241(3)
26. The Applicant attached the following medical certificate to her application
for reinstatement:
(a) Medical Report issued by Dr Steven Vo, General Practitioner, dated 30
January 2025 (
GP Certificate
27. ‘The plain words of s 241(3) do nothing more than require the worker
to produce a certificate given by a medical practitioner
to the effect that the
worker is fit for employment of the kind for which the worker applies for
reinstatement’:
Health Secretary in respect of HealthShare NSW v
[2023] NSWIRComm 1104
28. The GP Certificate states that the Applicant:
(a) is medically fit to return to her pre-injury work hours;
(b) is capable of performing her role as previously undertaken, with the sole
restriction being that she must not work ‘with
or under the direction
supervision’ of OB.
29. In the production of the GP Certificate, the requirements of s.241(3), and
hence the preliminary gateway eligibility are prima
facie met.”
(Emphasis in original. Footnotes omitted, citations lifted to submissions.)
applicant also set out:
“30. The Commission may order that the Applicant be reinstated to her
Substantive Role, if the Commission is satisfied that
the Applicant is fit for
‘that kind of employment’.
32. The Act refers to a ‘kind of employment’, rather than the more
specific ‘position’ mandated by the unfair
dismissal provisions of
Fair Work Act
Industrial Relations Act
. ‘The notion
of a kind of employment has been established to be far broader than the notion
of a position... the Legislation
has been specifically worded to avoid the
notion of more restrictive engagement in positions, but instead uses the broader
of employment of a kind’:
Hofman v Penford Australia
[2008] NSWIRComm 1026
[61]; [65].”
(Emphasis in original. Footnotes omitted, citations lifted to submissions.)
oral submissions Ms Cooper, Legal Officer RTBU, for the applicant took the
Commission to the decision of Commissioner Cambridge
Hofman v Penford
Australia Limited
[2008] NSWIRComm 1026
to make good her submission as to
the meaning of “kind of employment”:
“64 Therefore there is a clear difference between what might be described
as reinstatement to the position of Plant Operator
at the Tamworth production
facility, as opposed to reinstatement to employment of the kind associated with
the employer's Tamworth
production facility.
65 When the applicant made written application to the employer for reinstatement
as is required under
section 241
Workers Compensation Act
, he did not use
the broad descriptor of employment of a kind associated with, or in connection
with, the Penford Tamworth production
facility. Instead he sought reinstatement
to his previous position as a Plant Operator or, in the alternative he suggested
other identified positions. It is quite understandable that the applicant
would take an approach to reinstatement to refer to positions
such as Plant
Operator or a position in the Starch Laboratory etc. It would seem however that
the Legislation has been specifically
worded to avoid the notion of more
restrictive engagement in positions, but instead uses the broader concept of
employment of a kind.
66 Consequently any application for reinstatement of an injured worker could be
very broad and need not be confined to specification
of a particular position.
It would be sufficient to broadly identify employment of a kind that might
subsequently follow from either
a successful approach conducted under
or, as part of any Orders made under
section 243.
67 The amended Draft Orders that were sought on behalf of the applicant sought
reinstatement to any of four identified areas of the
Tamworth production
facility. The applicant expressed a preference for reinstatement to the first
identified area, (a) Starch Laboratory.
The employer sought to resist Orders for
reinstatement in any of the identified areas contained in the amended Draft
Orders. In doing
so evidence about the desirability of having Plant Operators
rotate through various areas of the production facility was said to
impediment to the applicant being reinstated to work solely in the Starch
Laboratory, (or the Wet Circuit Area).”
respondent submitted, in summary, that the application to the respondent for the
applicant to be reinstated was such that the
accompanying certificate by a
medical practitioner as to fitness did not comply with the requirements of
s241(3) of the WC Act. The
respondent’s outline of submissions set
Has the Applicant passed through the 'jurisdictional
10. The Respondent accepts that:
(a) the Applicant was an ‘injured worker’ within the meaning of Part
8 of the WC Act (AS[22]); and
(b) the Applicant was dismissed by the Respondent because she was not fit for
employment due to her compensable injury (AS[23]).
11. It follows that, pursuant to s 241(1) of the WC Act, the Applicant was
entitled to ‘
apply to the (Respondent) for reinstatement to employment
of a kind specified in the application
’. This invites attention to the
application made by the Applicant to the Respondent for reinstatement and the
kind of employment
to which the Applicant sought reinstatement (
Reinstatement
Application
12. The Reinstatement Application was made on 20 May 2025 by way of
correspondence from the Rail, Tram and Bus Union on the Applicant's
relevantly stated:
We write on behalf of our member, Ms Tina Cicolini making a formal request
for her to be reinstated back to her position of Manager
Legal Support and
Development, previously called Resource and Deployment Manager due to her being
fully fit for pre-injury duty with
no work restrictions.
10. ...it is noted [Ms Cicolini] is:
10.1 Applying to be reinstated to her previous position, which is Manager
Legal Support and Development (previously called Resource
and Deployment
10.2 The position is not more advantageous to her previous position;
10.3 Ms Cicolini has provided to TfNSW a certificate given by her medical
practitioner advising she is fit for employment of the kind
for which Ms
Cicolini is applying for reinstatement.
11. Ms Cicolini is seeking reinstatement to her previous position based on
the medical certificate that was issued on 20 [sic] January
12. We are now requesting for TfNSW to commence the process to reinstate Ms
13. The Reinstatement Application was expressed in unambiguous terms. It was
confined to a request that the Applicant be reinstated
to the role that she held
immediately prior to her dismissal, being the position of Manager, Legal Support
and Development (
Substantive Role
). She did not seek reinstatement to any
other position, nor seek employment of any other kind.
14. The Respondent assumes that the reference in the Reinstatement Application
20 January 2025
’ medical certificate is, in fact, a
reference to the medical certificate provided by her general practitioner, Dr
dated 30 January 2025 (
30 January Certificate
). It can be
immediately observed that this medical certificate significantly pre-dates the
Applicant's dismissal, which took effect
on 29 April 2025. It was medical
evidence to which the Respondent already had regard prior to the dismissal
decision being made.
15. Contrary to the characterisation at AS[14(b)], the 30 January Certificate
relevantly states:
I believe that Tina is medically fit to return to her pre-injury work hours
and is capable of performing her role as previously undertaken.
The one restriction is that Tina is unable to work with or under the direct
supervision of her previous senior staff member ... ongoing
interaction with
this person would likely exacerbate her stress and negatively impact her mental
16. The 30 January Certificate does not refer to the nature of Ms Cicolini's
injury or illness, or any prognosis, including when
(if ever) the medical
restriction to which Dr Vo referred was likely to be lifted.
17. Pursuant to s 241(3), the Applicant was obliged to produce to the
Respondent, with her Reinstatement Application, a certificate
from a medical
practitioner to the effect that the Applicant was fit for employment of the kind
for which she sought reinstatement.
Given the terms of her Reinstatement
Application, it follows that the Applicant needed to provide medical evidence
she was fit to
perform her Substantive Role. This obligation to produce such
evidence is expressed in mandatory terms. It is a ‘jurisdictional
gateway’ to the Commission considering the Originating Application:
Glen Robson v GWA Group Limited
[2015J NSWIRComm 9
Industrial Relations Secretary in respect of the Department of Regional New
South Wales (No 2)
[2023] NSWIRComm 1026
18.0 It is difficult to see how a medical report that was outdated by around
four months at the time of the Reinstatement Application,
and which had been
provided to the employer prior to dismissal, could ever properly satisfy s
241(3) of the WC Act. As the authorities
make clear, the medical certification
needs to establish current fitness for work:
Jenkins v Secretary of the
Ministry of Health on behalf of Nepean Blue Mountains Local Health District
[2023] NSWIRComm 1045
(at [23]-[25], [31]) and the authorities cited therein;
Ronald MacDonald v Jetstar Airways Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWIRComm 1010
[62)-[64], [70]);
Cansino and South Western Sydney Area Health Service
NSWIRComm 355
(at 12, (7)). A historical medical certificate cannot achieve
19. In any event, the fatal flaw with the 30 January Certificate is that, to
satisfy s 241(3) of the
, it needed to certify the Applicant as
being fit to perform the Substantive Role. On any objective view, it does
20. The 30 January Certificate clearly states that the Applicant's fitness to
Applicant accepts as much
(AS[28(b)]). The 30 January Certificate expressly provides that the Applicant
cannot work or interact with,
or work under the supervision of, a particular
colleague and
. There is no apparent dispute that the Manager
continues to be employed by the Respondent, and that if the Applicant were to be
to her Substantive Role, she would need to interact and work with,
and work under the supervision of, that same Manager.”
(Emphasis in original. Footnotes omitted, citations lifted to submissions.)
Applicant’s Outline of Submissions in Reply set out, responding to the
respondent’s submissions:
A. Jurisdiction – s.241
1. The Respondent submits that the Applicant does not have jurisdiction to make
an application for reinstatement pursuant to
Compensation Act 1987
), having failed to meet the
requirements of
of the Act.
– Medical Certificate
2. Section 241(3) of the Act grants relevant jurisdiction if, amongst other
requirements, the Applicant ‘produce(s) to the
employer a certificate
given by a medical practitioner to the effect that the worker is fit for
employment of the kind for which
the worker applies for
reinstatement’.
3. The Respondent submits that medical report under the hand of Dr Steven Vo
(the Certificate) does not meet this requirement on
the basis of:
a) currency
Issue A - Currency
4. The Respondent submits that as the Certificate dates four months prior to the
Application, it could not satisfy s.241(3) of the
5. The cases provided by the Respondent do not act as authority for this
proposition. The Applicant further takes issue with the
categorization of the
Certificate as ‘historical’.
does not mandate the currency of medical evidence pursuant to
s.241(3) of the Act. It only establishes that the Commission must be
that the employee is ‘fit’ for specified employment (at [23]):
Jenkins v Secretary of the Ministry of Health on behalf of Nepean Blue
Mountains Local Health District
[2023] NSWIRComm 1045
(at [23]-[25],
7. The Respondent provides no authority for their proposition that a
‘historical medical certificate’ could not establish
current fitness
8. Indeed, as already canvased in the Applicant’s submissions
the plain words of s 241(3) do nothing more than require the worker to
produce a certificate given by a medical practitioner to the
effect that the
worker is fit for employment of the kind for which the worker applies for
reinstatement”
Health Secretary in respect of HealthShare NSW v
[2023] NSWIRComm 1104
9. The context of the Certificate is also pertinent. Following the provision of
the Certificate to the Respondent in January 2025,
the Applicant made repeated
requests (on 30/01, 05/02, 10/02, 11/02, 14/02 and 18/02) that the Applicant be
reassessed by the employer
psychiatrist to confirm the updated medical opinion.
The Respondent provided no substantial response to this request.
10. In such circumstances, it is not appropriate for the Respondent to raise
currency objections to the Certificate, when the Applicant
went to great lengths
to obtain an updated medical assessment from the Respondent.
11. The currency objection to the Certificate is not established on the
Respondent’s submissions.
Issue B - Content
12. The requirements of s.241(3) are couched in two generalisations. First, the
Certificate must be only ‘
to the effect
’ that the worker is
fit. Secondly, the certificate must certify fitness for employment ‘
for which the worker applies’.
‘To the effect’?
11. The Certificate states that the Applicant is ‘
medically fit to
performing her role as previously undertaken
’. The Certificate clearly
provides evidence ‘to the effect’ that the Applicant is fit for
employment.
12. The other criteria sought by the Respondent (at [16]) are simply not
demanded by the legislation, noting that s.241 functions
as a preliminary
‘Of the kind’?
The notion of a kind of employment has been established to be far
broader than the notion of a position... the Legislation has been
specifically
worded to avoid the notion of more restrictive engagement in positions, but
instead uses the broader concept of employment
Hofman v Penford Australia Limited
[2008] NSWIRComm 1026
[61]; [65].
14. The Applicant has provided a medical certificate attesting for fitness for
the ‘kind’ of employment sought, namely
‘her role as
previously undertaken’.
15. The Respondent’s objections as to whether the employer could, in fact,
impose proposed adjustments to separate OB and the
Applicant (
Adjustments
) within the substantial role are not engaged in the gateway
provision, and rather relate to the exercise of the Commission’s
discretion.
16. Accordingly, the Applicant has met the preliminary requirements of s.243 of
(Emphasis in original. Footnotes omitted, citations lifted to submissions.)
CONSIDERATION
THE SECTION 241 APPLICATION
20 May 2025 letter from the RTBU, by which the applicant sought reinstatement,
should be read without an eye to technicality,
but plainly as to what it says on
its face. Given the beneficial nature of Part 8, and its intention, being the
enhanced rehabilitation
of an injured worker by their return to work, any doubt
would reasonably fall to the benefit of the worker.
Unfortunately
for the applicant, the letter is unambiguous. It sets out reinstatement to her
“previous position” and indeed
using that exact phrase three times.
The letter names the role sought. Clearly the letter seeks reinstatement to one
role, and it
is specific as to which role.
decision of Commissioner Cambridge cannot assist the applicant. Commissioner
Cambridge’s analysis of the meaning of “kind
of employment” is
rational, and I do not suggest any disagreement with the Commissioner. The term
“kind of employment”
as Commissioner Cambridge set out:
“ ... could be very broad and need not be confined to specification of a
particular position ...”.
the request to a specific position is what the applicant did in the letter of 20
so far as Commissioner Cambridge at [65] of
found that although
the application to the employer was confined to four specific roles and yet the
Commissioner, at [67], contemplated
a wider range of employment for
reinstatement, I observe that Commissioner Cambridge was conducting
considerations at that point
in the context of s 243 of the WC Act.
this matter, there were indeed submissions about the “kind of
employment” the Commission now could and should make.
They extended beyond
the applicant’s “previous position”. They do not arise in the
context of s 241 and because
of the conclusion that the Commission has reached
in this matter, these are not determined in this application.
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE
the certificate predated the application to the respondent for reinstatement,
and indeed the dismissal of the applicant, is unusual
in the context of Part 8
applications to the Commission. By the time of the application to the
respondent, the medical certificate
was nearly four months old.
respondent says this is too old to be current, as it says nothing of the state
of the applicant’s fitness as at 20 May 2025.
The applicant says,
apparently fairly, that her fitness for work has not changed and this is not
seriously challenged by the respondent.
consider the respondent does actually challenge this, but because of the
conclusion the Commission has reached, it is not necessary
or appropriate to
make any conclusions or conduct any further analysis of this issue.
have used the word “apparent” as to the applicant’s fitness
for work in the context of it not changing between
at least the dismissal on 29
April 2025 and the application for reinstatement on 20 May 2025, and in all
likelihood from 30 January
2025 to 20 May 2025 and indeed to this day. This is
because the documentation, the evidence of the applicant, and the way in which
the matter has been conducted has proceeded on the foundational assumption that
the applicant is in fact fit for her previous duties,
and possibly a wide range
of other related work, except to the extent that she would work with or be
supervised by a previous manager.
also proceeded on the basis that the manager is still the manager of the
applicant’s previous position or the manager of
that position’s
manager, the so-called “two-up”. I am satisfied on the evidence of
Maria Karam, Director People
Portfolio 3, People and Culture Transport for NSW,
there is a proper basis to conclude that person is the “two-up
Less clear is whether that is a lengthy two-up or a regularly
engaging relationship.
to a qualification, I am also satisfied that the medical report of Steven Vo of
30 January 2025 is a certificate given by
a medical practitioner and that the
report, if it had been unqualified, would have been sufficiently worded to be to
the effect required
by s 241(3) of the WC Act.
qualification is significant, but unnecessary to resolve in this case. It is
that the medical report is an attachment, to an
attachment, to the
applicant’s witness statement.
Vo, the medical practitioner, did not give evidence to the Commission. If the
contents of his medical certificate were in dispute,
and the respondent had
clearly indicated it would be if the Commission proceeded past the gateway of s
241, the evidentiary value
of the medical report would have been subject to
doubt. Ultimately the question of the medical report’s sufficiency or it
stale is not necessary to resolve.
the medical report its highest value as current and as a medical report it sets
out that the applicant is not medically fit
for the employment to which the 20
May 2025 letter applied for her to be reinstated:
“The one restriction is that [the applicant] is unable to work with or
under the direction supervision of her previous senior
member ... ”
evidence is that the “previous senior member” remains a manager of
the applicant’s previous position. The application
fails at the s 241
is cause to be concerned that a range of matters canvassed during the hearing of
this matter are left unresolved but the previous
decisions of the Commission,
including those set out above in the submissions of the parties, make clear that
the gateway is not
a discretionary question for the Commission to consider.
Cansino v South Western Sydney Area Health Service
[1999] NSWIRComm 355
the Full Bench set out a 21-paragraph step-by-step analysis of Part 8
applications. Relevantly:
“(3) Such a person may apply to the employer who dismissed him or her for
reinstatement to ‘employment of a kind’
which the person must
specify when making the application: s92(1).
(5) Prima facie, the word ‘reinstatement’ imports a notion of
becoming re-employed in the work which the person was undertaking
at the time of
termination of employment: see the discussion of the concept in
International Courier Pty Limited v. Transport Workers' Union of Australia, New
South Wales Branch
[1993] 50 IR341 at 350-354; in any event, s91(3) defines
‘reinstatement’ to include ‘re-employment’. But,
notion is displaced because the reinstatement is said to be available to
employment of a kind specified in the application
which, necessarily, imports
the possibility of employment to something other than the precise pre-dismissal
employment.
(6) ‘Employment of a kind’ refers to the work as specified in the
application. The kind of employment applied for cannot
advantageous to the employee’ than the work in which the person was
engaged when he or she first became unfit
for employment because of the injury:
s92(2). What is ‘more advantageous’ may be open to debate having
regard to remuneration,
general working conditions, status and the like; such
debate does not arise in these proceedings. However, the kind of employment
which the employee applies for reinstatement may indeed, at his or her election,
be less advantageous to the employee than the
pre-injury employment, so long as
it is not more advantageous.
(7) It is necessary for the person to ‘produce’ (that is, show) to
the former employer a certificate from a medical practitioner.
The effect of the
certificate, that is its general thrust, must be that the employee is fit to
undertake the work as described by
the employee when making application for
reinstatement: s92(3).”
Accordingly,
the Commission orders that the application is
Application is dismissed.
Commissioner
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (314 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter