URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION V KAHLI MICHELLE BARD [2013] NSWNMT 15 (6 September 2013)
Matter No: 001/2013
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION V KAHLI MICHELLE BARD
[2013] NSWNMT
INQUIRY INTO A COMPLAINT AGAINST A
Applicant: Health Care Complaints
Kahli Michelle
The Hon Jennifer Boland
(Chairperson)
Ms Lucy Burns (Nurse Member)
Ms Karen Sherwood
(Nurse Member)
Ms Margaret Knibb (Lay Member)
Date and place of Hearing:
Tuesday 25 June 2013
orders and reasons for decision:
6 September 2013
NON PUBLICATION
ORDERS APPLY
Representation:
Applicant: Ms E S Brus of Counsel
instructed by Ms J Dinihan, Solicitor, Health Care Complaints
Respondent: No appearance by or on behalf of
the respondent
Where complaint asserts the practitioner has engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct –where
asserted that
conduct is of a sufficiently serious nature to justify cancellation or
suspension of practitioner’s registration.
Where practitioner has pleaded
guilty to fifteen charges of stealing Pethidine from the hospital where she was
employed. HELD –
complaints proved to requisite civil standard. Whether
practitioner suffers an impairment – evidence insufficient to prove
practitioner is impaired at date of hearing. Where practitioner fails to comply
with directions orders or to appear at hearing –
matter should proceed as
undefended.
Legislation cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
Section 3, s3A, s 5, s55, s139A, s139B, s144, s163, Schedule 5D
Cases cited:
Arian v Nguyen
[2001] NSWCA 5
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Clyne v NSW Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1980) 104 CLR 186
Donnelly v Health Care Complaints Commission (NSW)
[2011] NSWSC 70
Health Care Complaints Commission v Cahill [2013] NSWPT 4
Health Care Complaints Commission v Cieslak [2013] NSWNMT
Health Care Complaints Commission v Rolleston
[2013] NSWMT 12
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 363
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Lee v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 9
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
Pillai v Messiter
1989 16 NSWLR 197
Richter v Walton
(unreported
NSW Court of Appeal 15 July
Williams v Lever
(1974) 2 NSWLR 91
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
6 September 2013 the Tribunal found that, if Kahli Michelle Bard (“the
practitioner”) was registered at the date of
the hearing on the register
of practitioners maintained by the Australian Health Practitioner Agency
(“AHPRA”) in conjunction
with the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia (“the Board”), it would have ordered her registration be
to s149C (4) (c) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
86a (“the National Law”) the Tribunal requested that AHPRA record
that, if the practitioner had been registered
at the date of the hearing, the
Tribunal would have cancelled her registration.
Tribunal further ordered that a period of two (2) years elapse before the
practitioner may again apply under s163 of the National
re-instatement to the register.
to any application under s163 (1) (1a) of the National Law the appropriate
review body for the purposes of Order 3 is the
Nursing and Midwifery
Tribunal ordered that the practitioner pay fifty (50) per cent the costs of
Health Care Complaints Commission of and incidental
to the proceedings as agreed
and failing agreement as determined by the Tribunal.
Tribunal also made a non publication order.
are the Tribunal’s reasons for the orders
Introduction
proceedings before the Tribunal arise because of series of thefts of the drug
Pethidine from the Deniliquin District Hospital
(“the hospital”) by
Kahli Michelle Bard (“the practitioner”). The practitioner asserts
she subsequently
self-administered the stolen drugs at her home. The thefts all
took place in the period April to August 2011.
practitioner, prior to the hearing, conceded to hospital authorities, and the
NSW Police, incidents of stealing, forgery, falsification
of documents and
substitution of other drugs in place of Pethidine by her while she was a
registered nurse employed at the hospital.
The practitioner’s employment
was terminated, and she was charged with, and convicted of, 15 criminal
after the Health Care Complaints Commission (“the HCCC”) commenced
proceedings in the NSW Nursing and Midwifery
Tribunal (“the
Tribunal”), the practitioner, who was then represented by the New South
Wales Nurses and Midwives’
Association (“the Association”)
executed a Statutory Declaration dated 15 March 2013 in which she declared that
she proposed
to request AHPRA to remove her name from the register of nurses
pursuant to s137 of the National Law, that she undertook “not
registration or enrolment as a nurse in any jurisdiction”, and that she
further undertook “not to practice [sic]
nursing in any
sought enrolment as a nurse, the
HCCC may proceed against her in the Tribunal
alleging professional misconduct.
the date of the hearing the practitioner’s registration (which is subject
to conditions placed on it by the NSW Nursing and
Midwifery Council in October
2011) had lapsed.
a document (“the complaint”) filed with the Tribunal dated 17
December 2012, and amended by leave of the Tribunal at
the hearing, the HCCC
asserts that the practitioner is guilty of five complaints. The Tribunal
granted leave to the HCCC to make
the amendments sought because there was no
possibility of procedural unfairness to the practitioner as the amendments only
matters from the complaint.
HCCC submits the Tribunal should find, if the practitioner was registered, that
her registration should be cancelled, and a period
of two to three years elapse
before the practitioner may seek a review of the cancellation. The HCCC also
seeks an order that the
practitioner pay its costs of and incidental to the
complaints alleged against the practitioner, in summary, are that the
practitioner:
has committed
and been convicted of fifteen criminal offences of stealing Pethidine from the
because of her
criminal convictions, her conduct in stealing Pethidine, forging signatures of
other practitioners, falsifying the
Drugs of Addiction Register (“the
register”), and substituting other drugs (Stemetil and Buscopan) for
Pethidine the
practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
as a result of
serious nature of the practitioner’s unsatisfactory professional conduct
she is guilty of professional misconduct;
is impaired
because she suffers from depressive disorder, Pethidine dependence, and panic
disorder; and
suitable person to hold registration because of her criminal convictions,
conduct in stealing Pethidine, forging signatures,
falsifying the register and
substituting Stemetil and Buscopan for Pethidine.
copy of the complaint, as amended, without the Schedule which identifies certain
patients and nurses, is annexed to these reasons
and marked “Annexure
practitioner was initially represented by the Association. The
Association’s solicitor appeared at a Directions Hearing
February 2013 when hearing dates were allocated and directions made for the
filing of documents. However, on 11 June
2013, the Association notified the
HCCC that it no longer represented the practitioner.
the request of the HCCC a further directions hearing was conducted by the
Chairperson on 19 June 2013. The practitioner was notified
of the further
Directions Hearing by email dated 14 June 2013. The Assistant Co-Ordinator of
the Tribunal also forwarded a letter
to the practitioner dated 14 June 2013 by
express post. Attempts by the administrative staff of the Tribunal to contact
the practitioner
by telephone were unsuccessful, although messages were left on
a voicemail.
practitioner was notified in the correspondence referred to above that the
Chairperson had extended time for her to file any material
on which she may seek
to rely by 5 p.m on Thursday 20 June 2013, and that if she failed to file any
material, or to appear at the
commencement of the hearing, that the complaint
would proceed on an undefended basis. No documents were filed by the
practitioner,
and she did not appear at the hearing. Accordingly the Tribunal
proceeded “on the papers” supplemented by submissions
from counsel
appearing for the HCCC.
following matters are uncontroversial. Unless noted by us to be an assertion,
the Tribunal accepts the facts set out below as
established before us to the
requisite civil standard.
practitioner was born in September 1984. She obtained a Bachelor of Nursing
from Australian Catholic University, Melbourne in
2006 and was first registered
on 11 January 2007. Her registration remained valid until 31 May 2012 when it
lapsed. On 11 October
2011 the Council notified the practitioner of conditions
imposed on her registration under s150 (1)(b) of the National Law. Those
conditions were varied on 6 April 2012 after a requested review by the
practitioner.
her first registration the practitioner worked at the Epworth Hospital,
Melbourne for 12 months. She was later employed at
various hospitals in
Melbourne through an Agency, and then obtained employment at the Austin
Hospital. In 2009, whilst employed
at the Austin Hospital, the practitioner
commenced a postgraduate Masters of Perioperative Nursing Program. The
practitioner did
not complete this program due to an asserted back
practitioner commenced employment at Deniliquin District Hospital on 16 August
2010 as a casual registered nurse. She worked
predominantly in the Emergency
Department and the operating theatre. On 20 December 2010 she was appointed to
a permanent part-time
25 April 2011 the practitioner requested to work permanent night duty and was
rostered to the Emergency Department as the “in
charge hospital”
practitioner.
is asserted that during her employment in the Emergency Department the
practitioner spent significant periods of time alone in
that department. It is
further asserted in an Internal Audit Investigation Report of the Murrumbidgee
Local Health District, September
2010 (“the Internal Audit Report”)
at [23] that “Staff reported concern that [the practitioner] would attend
care including drug administration without another nurse present”.
The Internal Audit Report also asserts that “Ms Fay
Harrington the ED
Nursing Unit Manager had raised this and other concerns related to medication
handling with [the practitioner]”.
asserted concern by senior staff at the hospital about a pattern of incidents
involving Pethidine a memo dated 20 July 2011
was sent to all staff reminding
them of their responsibilities when handling S8 drugs.
the earlier hours of 21 July 2011 the practitioner requested the transfer of 5
ampoules of Pethidine 100mg from the drug cupboard
in a ward to the Emergency
Department claiming that the Emergency Department had run out of 100mg ampoules.
The transfer was witnessed
by an Endorsed Enrolled Nurse who became concerned
when she observed the transfer was recorded “on a page in the ED Register
after a section of unused pages”. (Internal Audit Report at [37]).
After the Endorsed Enrolled Nurse reported her concerns
to her Manager it was
discovered that the 5 ampoules transferred to the Emergency Department could not
be located (Internal Audit
Report at [38]).
an incident asserted to have occurred on 29 July 2011 the practitioner was
advised that she would no longer be rostered as “the
charge’ hospital” practitioner, and she was not to hold the S8 and
S4 keys. Further, the practitioner was
advised she could only administer S8 and
S4 medications as the second checking nurse. The practitioner was asserted to
when advised of these decisions. She left work, visited her general
practitioner, and obtained a WorkCover certificate (Internal
Audit Report at
[27]-[29]).
3 August 2011 the practitioner was interviewed by Ms Wendy Atkins, Senior
Investigator, Internal Audit, Health Reform Transitional
Organisation Southern,
(“Ms Atkins”) and Ms Rosemary Garthwaite (“Ms
Garthwaite”). Ms Garthwaite is the Director
of Nursing and Midwifery,
Murrumbidgee and Southern Local Health Districts (“MLHD”). Ms
Atkins and Ms Garthwaite met
the practitioner to discuss a number of incidents
involving S8 drugs. The practitioner denied any involvement with these
10 August 2011 the practitioner attended a second interview with Ms Atkins and
Ms Garthwaite. A total of 27 separate incidents
spanning the period 15 April
2011 until 2 August 2011 were discussed. The practitioner denied responsibility
for the incidents involving
Pethidine, and later in the interview, asserted that
she had been coerced into taking Pethidine for a client of the methadone program
at the hospital (Exhibit B, Tab 32 p 38). Later in the interview the
practitioner recanted this evidence, and told the investigators
she had taken
Pethidine on a number of occasions for her own personal use, that she had forged
the signature of other nurses, had
falsified the register, and had substituted 5
ampoules of Pethidine 100mgs with the drug Stemetil, and also substituted 5
of Pethidine 50mg with the drug Buscopan.
16 August 2011 the practitioner was suspended from duty on base pay and
requested to show cause why her employment should not be
terminated.
practitioner saw her general practitioner, Dr Marion Magee (“Dr
Magee”) in August 2011 when the practitioner reported
being stressed at
work. She was diagnosed at that time as suffering an adjustment disorder. Dr
Magee referred the practitioner
to Ms Lourene Liebenberg, Counsellor on 2 August
September 2009 Dr Magee referred the practitioner to Country Wide Psychology.
In her referring letter Dr Magee recorded “She
needs some help, dealing
with dysfunctional parenting relationship with her father”. The referring
letter did not refer to
the practitioner’s self-administration of
Pethidine, although her general practitioner knew of this at the time of
19 September 2001 Dr Magee wrote a letter to “Anthony” (there is no
surname or address noted on the letter). Dr Magee
practitioner first name] came in today, and admitted she has been using about
60mg* (12 of the 5mg tablets) a day.
It is not safe to just come off it suddenly, and it is recommended that she
come down by one quarter of the dose per week.
Let me know if you are not happy to supervise this
12 October 2011 the practitioner was advised that, at its meeting held on 6
October 2011, the Council imposed seven conditions
on the practitioner’s
registration. Condition 1 proscribed the practitioner from possessing,
checking, administering, handling
or dispensing a drug of addiction (S8 drugs)
as well as prescribed restricted substance (S4D drug or S4D derivatives).
2 required that the practitioner must only practise as a nurse under
“the indirect or direct supervision of another registered
nurse who does
not have conditions on practice. The supervisor must be on site and working in
close proximity within a ward or unit
with the registrant and is able to oversee
the care provided by the Practitioner”.
18 October 2011 Mr Ken Thomson, Pharmaceutical Advisor, Inspections and
Investigations, Pharmaceutical Services, Clinical Safety,
Quality and Governance
Branch (“Mr Thompson”) interviewed the practitioner via the
telephone. Mr Thomson, at page 3
of his report, noted that the practitioner
told him that “She commenced the diversion and self-administration of
in April 2011...”. He further recorded “she admitted
substitution and label swapping in theatres, but in her state she
thought she
would be able to ‘sort it out’ before theatres were used
again”. At the conclusion of the interview
the practitioner agreed she
would voluntarily sign a withdrawal of her S8 drug authority. The practitioner
signed the authority
which was forwarded to her on 4 November 2011 and returned
it to Pharmaceutical Services.
23 November 2011 Dr Magee wrote to the HCCC. She explained that she had been
treating the practitioner since 26 November 2010.
She also explained that the
practitioner had admitted to her in August 2011 that she had been taking
Pethidine from the hospital,
and recorded that the practitioner had agreed to
undergo a home detoxification program with the support of her husband and
Dr Magee also recorded “She has been regular in her attendance,
compliant and brave in facing painful emotional issues”.
Dr Magee noted
that the practitioner was attending a psychologist, “Judy Bilkey”
regularly. The doctor opined that
the practitioner “continues to suffer
from Depression, although she is improving, and has developed Panic
practitioner was charged by the Police with a number of offences. On 20
December 2011, in the Local Court at Deniliquin, the
practitioner pleaded guilty
to 15 counts of “steal property as a servant” under s 40 and s
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) (“the
”). The Presiding
Magistrate found each of the convictions proved and sentenced the practitioner
for each offence to enter
into a good behaviour bond for a period of 3 years
pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
practitioner was also ordered to pay a fine of $200 and Court costs of $81.00
for each matter.
Documents before the Tribunal
earlier noted, no documents were filed by the practitioner, or on her
HCCC relied on four volumes of documents which we admitted as exhibits (Exhibits
B, D, E and F) and an Amended Complaint (Exhibit
C). The HCCC also relied on a
statement of Ms Jaimee Dinihan, solicitor witnessed by Ms Brianna Butt,
solicitor and dated 24 June
2013 (Exhibit A).
following issues required determination by the Tribunal:
were the five
complaints relied on by the HCCC proved to the relevant civil standard based on
the particulars pleaded, or some combination
sufficient evidence before us to be satisfied
at the date of the hearing
that the practitioner has an impairment as asserted in the particulars in
Amended Complaint Four;
if the Tribunal
is satisfied that the complaint of professional misconduct is proved, should the
Tribunal find that if the practitioner
was registered it would have cancelled
her registration; and
practitioner be ordered to pay the HCCC’s costs, or is there some
“disentitling” or like conduct which
would make departure from the
usual or traditional rule appropriate.
(a) the object and guiding principle in NSW
of the National Law sets out the objectives and guiding principles of the law
in respect of the national registration scheme.
of the National Law
sets out the objectives and guiding principle to be applied by a Tribunal in New
South Wales hearing an inquiry
and, if appropriate to do so, when making
protective orders. The relevant parts of
, for the purposes of this hearing,
are as follows:
(2) The objectives of the national registration and accreditation scheme
(a) to provide for the protection of the public by ensuring that only health
practitioners who are suitably trained and qualified
to practise in a competent
and ethical manner are registered; and
(e) to facilitate access to services provided by health practitioners in
accordance with the public interest; and .......
(3) The guiding principles of the national registration and accreditation
scheme are as follows--
(a) the scheme is to operate in a transparent, accountable, efficient,
effective and fair way;
(c) restrictions on the practice of a health profession are to be imposed
under the scheme only if it is necessary to ensure health
services are provided
safely and are of an appropriate quality.
, which has particular relevance in the circumstances of this matter, provides
as follows:
In the exercise of functions under a NSW provision, the protection of the
health and safety of the public must be the paramount consideration.
is relevant at this point the Tribunal points out that protective orders made at
the end of a hearing are not intended to punish
the practitioner, but to protect
the public (see
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1980) 104 CLR
(b) the burden and standard of proof
Notwithstanding
that the practitioner failed to file material, or to appear at the hearing, the
onus or burden of proof remains that
of the HCCC. It is not in dispute that the
Tribunal may, subject to procedural fairness considerations, conduct an inquiry
absence of the practitioner concerned (see s 167C (3) of the National
Law). It is well established, due to the protective nature
the practitioner and the public, that the standard
of proof, is on the balance
of probabilities but to the level of satisfaction described by the High Court in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
peer review report
discussing the individual complaints we propose to refer, in addition to the
material in respect of which we have made factual
findings under the heading
“Background”, to the expert peer review reports prepared by Ms
Michelle Parker (“Ms
Parker’s reports (Exhibit B, Tab 14 and 15) are unsigned and undated. In
order to properly understand Ms Parker’s
reports it is necessary to refer
to the material supplied to her by the HCCC. In a letter dated 15 February 2012
Ms Lovaine Inman,
on behalf of the HCCC, advised the practitioner had admitted
during the interview which took place on 10 August 2012 to twelve incidents.
These incidents are set out, but without any reference to the dates on which
they are alleged to have occurred, or to any particular
patient. Prior to Ms
Parker providing a supplementary report at the request of the HCCC she was asked
by letter dated 24 March 2012
from Ms Suzanne McNeill, on behalf of the HCCC, to
comment on the practitioner’s conduct in respect of named patient
as Patient 5 and a second patient who is described as Patient 7. She
was further asked to comment on the practitioner’s admission
that she had
substituted 5 ampoules of Pethidine 100mg with the drug Stemetil and substituted
5 ampoules of the drug Pethidine 50mg
with the drug Buscopan. Ms Parker was
requested to “advise for whom she substituted these drugs, whether they
were administered
and what the likely clinical outcomes would have been for the
is necessary before discussing Ms Parker’s first and supplementary reports
that we make some general comments. First, Ms
Parker’s first report
comments on the practitioner’s conduct in respect of 15 patients who are
named by surname only
and by an identification number (e.g. Patient 1). The
Schedule to the Complaint refers to only six patients who are identified by
given names and alphabetical identification in the Complaint (e.g. Patient A).
There is a further difficulty because Ms Parker’s
first report refers to
Patient 5 as “S...” (Patient C in the Schedule to the Complaint)
while in her supplementary report
Patient 5 is referred to as “J...”
(Patient A in the Schedule to the Compliant). While the Complaint
particularises
specific dates on which the practitioner is alleged to have
either misappropriated Pethidine, substituted Buscopan or Stemetil for
Pethidine, falsified the register or forged signatures, Ms Parker’s report
and the letters of instructions provided to her
do not specify any dates. These
discrepancies and omissions lead to Ms Brus, counsel for the HCCC, conceding she
was unable to reconcile
the events particularised in the Complaint and Ms
Parker’s expert reports. The Tribunal experienced the same
difficulty.
have done our best to reconcile the six patients referred to in the Complaint,
with the 15 or 16 patients referred to in the expert’s
Accordingly, we now only refer to Ms Parker’s evidence in respect of those
patients she has identified as Patients
1 (Patient F in the Complaint schedule),
Patient 2 (Patient B in the Complaint Schedule, although we note some doubt as
the practitioner
in her interviews with the hospital authorities and the police
refers to two patients with the surname D.....), Patient 3 (Patient
Complaint schedule), Patient 4 (Patient D in the Complaint schedule), Patient 5
in the first report (Patient C in the Complaint
schedule), Patient 5 in the
supplementary report (Patient A in the Complaint Schedule). We have thus
disregarded those portions
of the report which refer to Patients 6, 7, 8, 9,10,
11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 of the first report and Patient 7 in the second report
they do not feature in the Schedule to the Complaint.
Ms Parker’s first report she comments on the conduct of the practitioner
in respect of a patient “AUID 7822156 –
M.....” (Patient 1).
As noted above this patient is Patient F in the Schedule to the complaint.
Accordingly we will in these
reasons refer to the patient named as Patient 1 in
the report as Patient F. We will follow a similar procedure for each of the
patients. Ms Parker opines the nurse’s conduct in respect of
Patient F fell significantly below that which would be reasonably
expected of a
practitioner with the same experience as the practitioner. The
practitioner’s conduct was noted to invite Ms
Parker’s strong
criticism. Ms Parker found the practitioner:
failed to comply
with policy because she did not have a second person listen to a phone order
from a doctor;
attempted to
give medication intravenously when it was ordered to be given by intramuscular
route of administration;
misappropriated
at least 2 ampoules of Pethidine which were recorded as administered to the
patient; and
signatures in both the register and the medication chart.
Parker opined “the potential consequences of the 75mg of IV Pethidine
given instead of IM could have resulted in respiratory
depression, hypercapnia,
hypoxia, decreased level of consciousness, and potentially cardiac arrest and
death. She also commented
on the adverse effects likely to have been
experienced by Patient F not receiving medications as prescribed, and the likely
effect if he had received substitute medications (Buscopan or
prochlorperazine [Stemetil]). In respect of the latter, Ms Parker
administration of Stemetil could have caused “extra-pyramidal effects
including muscle spasm and ocular-giric crisis”.
Parker next expressed her views in respect of a patient described as Patient 2.
It appears this patient
identical to the patient described in the
Schedule to the complaint as Patient B. In recording this qualification we note
the practitioner
in her police interview pointed out there are two patients with
the surname D, namely Ms R D and Ms J D.
Parker also noted that the practitioner’s conduct fell significantly below
that reasonably expected of a practitioner of
the practitioner’s training
and experience, and her conduct invited Ms Parker’s strong criticism. In
summary, Ms Parker
found the practitioner failed to document the patient’s
records, failed to have the phone order for Pethidine witnessed, falsified
Es’ (referred to as Nurse I in the Schedule to the Complaint) signature in
the Emergency Department records, and that the
practitioner misappropriated at
least one ampoule of Pethidine for her own use. Ms Parker repeated her comments
effects on this patient of not having received the medication
prescribed, or the likely clinical effect if Buscopan or Stemetil was
substituted for Pethidine in identical terms to her comments in respect of
respect of Patient 3 (Patient E) Ms Parker again opined the practitioner’s
conduct fell significantly below that reasonably
expected of a practitioner of
the practitioner’s training and experience. She concluded the
practitioner had misappropriated
2 ampoules of Pethidine for her own use, and
had fabricated the evidence to disguise the theft. She additionally concluded,
evidence with which she was supplied, the practitioner had falsified the
medication register and forged Nurse 1’s signature.
Ms Parker again
repeated her opinion of the effect on the patient of the practitioner’s
conduct in identical terms to that
in respect of Patients B and F, but qualified
her opinion in respect of the failure to administer Pethidine noting that
another practitioner
identified the patient as having received
commenting on the practitioner’s conduct purportedly associated with
Patient 4 (Patient D), Ms Parker made identical comments
to those in respect of
Patient F, B and E but noted there was no adverse effect on Patient 4 as he/she
did not present at the hospital
on that date.
dealing with the practitioner’s conduct in respect of Patient 5 (first
report) (Patient C), Ms Parker repeated her earlier
comments about the
practitioner’s conduct in respect of misappropriating 1 ampoule of
Pethidine 100mgs, falsifying the medication
records and forging “RN
S’s signature”. However, we note that RN S is not a nurse referred
to in the Schedule to
the Complaint. Ms Parker explained she was unable to
express an opinion on the evidence with which she was provided as to
there was an adverse result to the patient”.
her supplementary report, as a result of a request to comment on “Patient
5... J...” (Patient A), Ms Parker again made
identical comments about the
practitioner’s conduct in respect of her failure to get a second person to
listen to a phone order
from a doctor, and “possibly fabricating the first
telephone order for Pethidine”, misappropriating “1 ampoule
Pethidine 100mg for her own use on?” (the date is unspecified in the
report) and her actions provoking anxiety in RN S.
(Again we note RN S’s
name does not appear in the Schedule to the Complaint).
respect of Patient A Ms Parker opined that there did not appear to be any
adverse effect as the result of the practitioner’s
conduct because a
further telephone order was obtained for morphine which was administered to the
The Complaints
(a) allegation that the practitioner has been convicted of offences within
the meaning of s144 of the National Law. (Complaint
144 (a) provides as follows:
The following complaints may be
made about a registered health practitioner--
(a) A complaint the practitioner has, either in this jurisdiction or
elsewhere, been convicted of or made the subject of a criminal
finding for an
complaints relied on by the HCCC are directed to specific provisions of the
National Law. The first complaint focuses on the
criminal convictions of the
practitioner. The particulars relied on in respect of this complaint repeat the
criminal charges to which
the practitioner pleaded guilty at the Deniliquin
Local Court. This complaint, as drafted, refers to the practitioner being
of offences within
the meaning
[our emphasis] of section
144 of the National Law”.
explained in
HCCC v Cieslak
[2013] NSWNMT 5
– [112], s 144
does not define the meaning of “convicted of criminal offences”, but
rather lists the matters which
may be the subject of a complaint.
of the National Law which deals with matters which demonstrate
unsuitability for registration provides at
(1) A National Board may decide an individual is not a
suitable person to hold general registration in a health profession if--
(b) having regard to the individual's criminal history to the extent that is
relevant to the individual's practice of the profession,
the individual is not,
in the Board's opinion, an appropriate person to practise the profession or it
is not in the public interest
for the individual to practise the profession;
discern the gravamen of the complaint is directed to this provision of the
National Law. The Certificate of Conviction being Tab
29 of Exhibit
“B” provides conclusive proof that the practitioner was found guilty
of the fifteen counts of stealing
particularised in respect of Complaint
Tribunal is satisfied that each particular under Complaint One is established to
the requisite civil standard.
consequence of our finding is directly relevant to Complaint Two. We note that
the particulars in respect of Complaint Two sub-paragraphs
1 and 2 repeat the
particulars in respect of Complaint One. Our finding is also relevant to
Complaint Six which we discuss later
in these reasons.
(b) unsatisfactory professional conduct (Complaint Two)
Two asserts the practitioner “is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct under section139B of the National Law”.
The unsatisfactory
conduct asserted essentially repeats the language of s139B (1)(a) and (1)(l) of
the National Law. Those sections
provide as follows:
(1) "Unsatisfactory
professional conduct"
of a registered health practitioner includes each of
the following—
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of the practitioner's
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or
experience.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner's profession.
particulars relied on, as earlier noted, include those relied on in respect of
Complaint One. We repeat our findings in respect
of those particulars. Thus are
satisfied to the requisite civil standard that particulars 1 and 2 of Complaint
2 are established.
additional particulars in respect of Complaint Two are detailed comprising some
15 paragraphs with numerous sub-paragraphs covering
events from 15 April 2011 to
24 June 2011.
National Law requires that the Tribunal in its reasons “set out any
findings on material questions of fact” (s167F
(2)(a)) and that we
“refer to any evidence or other material on which the findings were
based” (s167F (2) (b)). The Tribunal
is conscious of the comments of
Basten JA in
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99
when his Honour explained the manner in which a complaint is drafted may
result in a practitioner failing to understand just what
assertions made against
him or her are proved, unless the Tribunal makes findings in respect of the
particulars proved, and whether
or not those particulars, or a combination of
them, constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct, and/or professional
misconduct.
the best we can on the evidence before us, and noting the difficulty which Ms
Brus conceded in reconciling events pleaded in
the particulars with the peer
reviewers’ report, we are satisfied on the documentary evidence the
following findings can be
Tribunal first considers Particular 3 of Complaint Two. Particular 3 sets out
incidents which occurred on 15 April 2011 while
the practitioner was on duty at
the hospital and asserts:
two occasions of
forging the signature of one nurse
making a false
entry into the register for Patient A noting “vial broken” (it is
asserted this entry was made in contravention
of Section 6.2.2. of the
Medication Handling in NSW Public Hospitals Policy (“the policy”)
and Cl 177 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
regulation”).
3 sub-paragraph (a) refers to the practitioner forging, on two occasions, the
signature of Nurse L (named as Nurse G in
the Schedule to the
complaint).
G provided a statement dated 10 August 2011. She asserts in her statement that
two entries in the register on 15 April 2011,
which purport to be her signature,
are not her signature. The Tribunal accepts the practitioner has made
concessions at various
times she forged the signatures of other nurses.
Accepting as we do the unchallenged evidence of Nurse G, and noting it is not
any other person forged Nurse G’s signature, we draw the
inference it was the practitioner who forged the signature of Nurse
satisfied particular 3 (a) is established.
3 sub-paragraph (b) alleges a false entry in the register on 15 April 2011.
This incident is the subject of a concession
by the practitioner in her police
interview (Ex B Tab 32 p 25-26). Based on that evidence, we are satisfied this
particular is established.
4 alleges two matters in respect of the register maintained at the hospital
(sub-paragraphs (a) and (b)). It is alleged
the nurse failed to make an entry
in respect of a broken vial of Pethidine, and that she crossed out a balance on
two occasions in
respect of Pethidine contrary to the policy and regulation.
These events are all alleged to have occurred on 25 June 2011.
Exhibit B Tab 28 is a copy of the regulation. The regulation proscribes the
making of any entry into a record or register that
a person knows to be false,
or to the making of any alterations, obliterations or cancellations in the
register except to correct
were unable, by lack of relevant dates in Ms Parker’s reports, to
correlate any of the information in her reports relevant
to these particulars.
However, in her police interview (Exhibit B Tab 32 page 21) the practitioner was
questioned about the entries
in the register and her conduct on that day. She
conceded she had drawn up two vials of Pethidine, and kept one for herself.
practitioner also confirmed that she had falsified the register or crossed
out the balance on two occasions. The Tribunal is satisfied
this particular is
established on the practitioner’s own evidence.
5, which contains three separate assertions in sub-paragraphs (a)-(c), asserts
false entries in the register in respect
of the administration of Pethidine to
Patient B, and two incidents of forging the signature of Nurse H (RN P) (twice
on register
and once on Patient B’s medication chart). Ms Parker refers
to incidents involving Patient B.
Tribunal was not directed to any evidence which substantiates these allegations.
The material in the Exhibits before us is inconsistent.
Ms Parker’s
report does not contain dates relative to Patient B. She refers to Patient
B’s records being witnessed
by Nurse 1. However, the investigation report
(Exhibit B Tab 4 page 18) refers to the practitioner’s signature being
by Nurse 1 on 15 July 2011. The same report refers to Pethidine
administered to Patient B on 30 June 2011. On that date the
practitioner’s
signature appeared with a signature purporting to be that
of an agency nurse, RN P (Nurse H) (Exhibit B Tab 4 page 20). Nurse H provided
statement dated 2 September 2011 in which she said the signatures were not her
her police interview the practitioner stated she was unable to recollect the
incidents in relation to the register on 30 June 2011.
In her interview with Ms
Atkins and Ms Garthwaite on 10 August 2011 the practitioner was asked a number
of questions in which it
was put to her that she had forged her
colleagues’ signatures. At page 51 of the transcript the practitioner was
signature twice, denied forging RN L’s signature (Nurse
G), and also
denied forging Nurse H’s signature (transcript page 56).
the state of the evidence before us we are not satisfied that the particulars
5(a), (b) and (c) are proved to the appropriate evidentiary
6 contains two allegations in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) relating to forgeries
of Nurse H’s signature in the register
for Patient C and that she made
false entries into the register for the administration of 75mg of pethidine and
the discarding of
25mg of pethidine in contravention of the regulations. In her
police interview (Exhibit B Tab 32 p 18-20) the practitioner admitted
incidents as pleaded. The Tribunal finds the practitioner’s concession is
corroborated by the statement of Nurse H and
the register. The particulars in 6
sub-paragraph (a) and sub-paragraph (b) are established.
7 contains four allegations relating to events on 2 July 2011 involving Patient
D and E. The allegations are, in summary,
that the practitioner made a false
entry in the register for the discarding of 100mg of pethidine, forged the
signature of Nurse
I in the register in respect of an entry for Patient D (once)
and later on the same day again forged the nurse’s signature.
asserted the practitioner made two false entries in the register in respect of
the administration of Pethidine to Patient
E and the discarding of
allegations, insofar as they relate to the falsification of the register, can be
disposed of shortly. The practitioner in her
police interview when questioned
true” (Exhibit B
Tab 32 p 18).
to the forging of Nurse I’s signature (Particular 7(b) and (c)) the
practitioner also readily conceded her forgery (Exhibit
B Tab 32 p 20). Her
concession is corroborated by Nurse I’s statement. The Tribunal accepts
the particulars of paragraph
7 are established in their entirety.
8 contains six sub-paragraphs (a) to (f) relating to events on 6 July 2011
involving Patient B and Nurse H (RN P). In
summary, the first two particulars
relate allegations that the practitioner made a false entry in the medical
records of Patient
B in contravention of the regulation, and that the
practitioner forged Nurse H’s signature in Patient B’s records.
Sub-paragraphs
(c) (d) (e) and (f) alleged respectively that the practitioner,
contrary to the policy and the regulation, made a false entry in
the register in
respect of 100mg Pethidine for Patient B, forged Nurse’s H’s
signature in the register for Patient B,
made a false entry in Patient B’s
medication chart, and forged Nurse H’s signature in Patient B’s
medication chart.
noted earlier when discussing Ms Parker’s reports, it does not appear she
addressed matters pleaded in particular 8 as her
report refers to Nurse I being
the practitioner who signature was forged in respect of Patient B’s
records, not Nurse H as
alleged in this particular.
without specific guidance as to where we might find relevant evidence to support
this particular, the Tribunal turned to the
police report and the interview of
10 August 2011 with Ms Atkins and Ms Garthwaite as the most reliable first hand
evidence. We
also took into account the statement provided by Nurse
the latter part of her interview with Ms Atkins and Ms Garthwaite, when the
practitioner finally admitted she had been involved
in taking Pethidine for her
own use, and not that of a client of the methadone program, the practitioner was
questioned about a number
of signatures, but she was not asked about this
particular date.
her police interview the practitioner was asked about events on a range of dates
between 29 June, 30 June and 6 July 2011 all in
relation to Patient B. Although
she was questioned about administering Pethidine, and taking second and
subsequent dose for her
own use, the practitioner made no concessions saying she
was “unable to recall” (Exhibit B, Tab 32 p 17).
her statement dated 2 September 2011 Nurse H confirmed the signature in the
register for 6 July 2011 for “100mgs amps Ward
Ed” for Patient B
her signature. However, in respect of other entries purporting to
be her signature, she stated “The signatures appearing
in the patient
notes for the person witnessing administration are not my signature and I have
not signed the standing order medication
H’s evidence appears to us to be the only reliable evidence on this topic.
Her statement (paragraph 6) relates to a patient,
Ms S M. We note Ms M’s
name does not appear in the schedule to the complaint. Paragraph 7 of
Nurse’s H’s statement
relates to a signature on 1 July 2011 (not 6
July as pleaded in the particular) and refers, not to Patient B, but rather
C. In paragraph 9 of her statement Nurse H confirms she witnessed the
register in respect of Patient B but in answer to a question
respect of the same patient some 40 to 50 minutes earlier than the first entry
Nurse H explains that “No,
the signatures appearing in the patient notes
for the person witnessing administration are not my signature and I have not
the standing order medication chart”. The Tribunal finds, based on
that evidence, which is not challenged, that the particulars
in Particular 8 (a)
(b) (e) and (f) are established. In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal
accepts and prefers the evidence
of Nurse H to that of the practitioner. The
Tribunal is not satisfied, having regard to Nurse’s H’s statement,
sub-paragraphs (c) and (d) are established.
9 alleges the practitioner, between 27 June 2011 and 14 July 2011 while she was
on duty at the hospital, substituted 10
ampoules of 100mg Pethidine from the
Emergency Department drug safe with ten ampoules of Buscopan, and made a false
statement being
an incident report that she had found the ampoules of Pethidine
broken in their boxes.
at this stage of her interview with Ms Atkins and Ms Garthwaite the practitioner
had not admitted the Pethidine taken by
her was for her own use, but rather
asserted it was for a methadone patient, at page 42 of the transcript (Exhibit B
Tab 32) she
described in detail how she drew up Pethidine from the ampoules into
a syringe (at p 42 and page 53). Later in her interview she
explained that the
replaced ampoules had contained Pethidine. Unfortunately, the interviewers did
not put to the practitioner a
date or date range in which it was asserted she
substituted Buscopan for Pethidine.
her police interview (Ex B Tab 32 p35) the practitioner admitted, on an
unspecified date, she had replaced smashed boxes of Pethidine
with Stemetil.
She did admit earlier in this interview that, on 14 July 2011, she had
misappropriated 10 ampoules of Pethidine.
She stated she had replaced the empty
Pethidine bottles and smashed the bottles to make it look as though they had
been broken in
delivery. She further explained that she and another staff
member “went and did an early morning count of all the drugs”.
confirmed other staff members and the nurse unit manager, Ms F H, had attended.
(p9-10). The Tribunal notes the allegation
that she had substituted Buscopan
for Pethidine was not put to the practitioner by the police officers.
Notwithstanding
the deficiencies in the evidence as to dates on which events occurred, the
Tribunal is satisfied from the practitioner’s
own evidence that on or
safe, drew up the Pethidine
in the ampoules and replaced the empty Pethidine
bottles with other ampoules. We draw the inference from the
practitioner’s
evidence to Ms Atkins and Ms Garthwaite, and the police,
that the substituted bottles she admitted placing in the box contained Buscopan.
Thus we are satisfied that Particular 9(a) is established.
9 (b) asserts the practitioner “made a false statement in the AIMS
Incident report”. The incident report is
found in Exhibit D Tab 15. The
report is a report prepared, not by the practitioner, but rather by Ms F H. Ms
F H refers in the
body of the report to finding the broken ampoules. The report
does not mention any statement made the practitioner. It contains
the following
statement “the staff who had done the previous check ... were adamant that
the boxes were not wet at the time
of the count”. This evidence does not
support the facts alleged in the particular. The Tribunal is not satisfied this
has been established to the requisite standard.
10 asserts that on or about 15 April 2011 the practitioner substituted five
ampoules of 100mg Pethidine from the Emergency
Department drug safe with five
ampoules of Stemetil in the course of which she removed the Stemetil labels and
attached the Pethidine
have already referred to the practitioner’s concession to the police that
on an unspecified date she substituted Stemetil
for Pethidine (Exhibit B Tab 32
p 35). At her second interview with Ms Atkins and Ms Garthwaite the
practitioner conceded she had
replaced the Pethidine in the theatre with
Stemetil (Exhibit D Tab 2 p 61).
police facts sheet notes that. on 15 July 2011, when a check was conducted of
the drugs in the operating theatre of the hospital,
it was discovered that 5
ampoules of Pethidine in one box contained two different batch numbers and
different expiry dates. The
police asserted as facts relied in the criminal
proceedings that the practitioner had taken the 5 ampoules of Pethidine for her
personal use and substituted Pethidine with ampoules of Stemetil
“after replacing the Stemetil labels with labels from the
Tribunal notes that the transcript of evidence before the Local Court at
Deniliquin, when the practitioner was legally represented,
reveals no challenge
was made to any matter in the Fact Sheet relied on by the police, and the
practitioner pleaded guilty to each
of the charges brought against her, albeit
that each charge is framed as a count of stealing.
the Tribunal was not directed to any evidence to demonstrate the nurse
substituted Stemetil for Pethidine on a particular date,
the Tribunal is
satisfied having regard to the concessions of the practitioner to the hospital
authorities, Mr Thompson, and her
statements to the Police, that the substance
of this particular is established.
11 asserts that on 15 and 16 July 2011 the practitioner made false entries into
the register in contravention of the policy
and the regulation.
the course of her interview with the Police the practitioner was asked about
entries in the register on 15 July 2011 in respect
of Patient B. The nurse
conceded there were three entries in the register. She conceded she had
“taken the second lot”
(of 75mg and 25mg) (Exhibit B Tab 32 p13-14).
In her first report Ms Parker refers to Patient B, and that the practitioner
the register. Unfortunately, because of a lack of reference to a date
in Ms Parker’s report, we cannot be confident that her
comments relate to
these particular days.
doing the best we can on the material to which we were directed by counsel for
the HCCC, and our own review of the evidence,
the Tribunal is satisfied it is
likely that the practitioner did falsify the register on the date alleged. In
reaching this finding
we are conscious that no other person is asserted to have
forged signatures, and draw the inference that the only likely person to
done so is the practitioner. In drawing this inference we note the
practitioner’s concession that she had taken Pethidine
for her own use on
12 also relates to events on 15 July 2011. The particular contains four
sub-paragraphs (a) to (d). Particular (a) relates
to Patient B. We discern
this particular is identical with Particular 11 and we repeat our findings in
respect of that Particular.
Sub-paragraph
(b) asserts the nurse forged Nurse I’s signature on three occasions in the
register for Patient B. Again we note
that Ms Parker refers to the forging of
Nurse I’s signature in her report, but does not specify the date or dates
on which this occurred.
I provided a statement dated 9 August 2011. She denied signatures appearing in
the register on 2 July 2011 were her signature.
She accepted a signature in the
register on 15 July 2011 at 0135
her signature. However she noted
that the signatures at 0225 and a “discarded” entry at 0315 on that
date were not her
signature. Having regard to Nurse I’s undisputed
evidence, and the concessions made by the practitioner to the police to which
referred above, we are satisfied Particular 12 (b) is established to the
relevant civil standard.
I’s statement does not discuss the entries in Patient B’s medication
chart, nor are we aware of any other evidence
either from the practitioner or
Nurse I in respect of the matters asserted in Particulars 12(c) or (d). It
follows we are not satisfied
these sub-paragraphs of Particular 12 are
established.
13 relates to events of 21 July 2011 and contains four sub-paragraphs.
Sub-paragraph (a) asserts the practitioner made
a false entry in the register
for the transfer of five ampoules Pethidine 100mg to the Emergency Department
ward from the Middleton
Gorman Wing of the hospital. In a statement dated 15
August 2011 enrolled endorsed nurse Ms T D (Nurse J) confirmed she had
transferred
the asserted quantity of Pethidine from the Middleton Gorman Wing to
the Emergency Department ward with the practitioner and that
the signature
authorising or witnessing the transfer was her signature. Based on this
evidence we
find the paragraph (a) of Particular 13 as pleaded
established.
is appropriate we consider sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) together. Sub-paragraph
(b) asserts the practitioner made a false entry
in the register in the Emergency
Department ward at 0600 as counted and correct. Sub-paragraph (c) asserts the
practitioner forged
Nurse I’s signature on this entry. Nurse I in her
statement confirms that the signature on the register is not her signature.
Tribunal is satisfied, accepting as we do Nurse I’s unchallenged evidence,
and there being no suggestion or evidence that
any other person was involved
with the register at this time, that sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) are
established.
Sub-paragraph
(d) relates to the removal and destruction of four pages of the register. This
is asserted to be in contravention of
the policy and the regulation. Nurse
I’s statement provides the background to the matters pleaded in this
sub-paragraph.
She gives a detailed description of being asked to counter sign
the register by the practitioner for the transfer of the Pethidine
Middleton Gorman Wing, and how she noticed some blank pages of the register
appeared to be held together with a pink paper
clip (which was not a type of
clip used in the hospital). On removing the clip she noticed an entry for
Pethidine 100mg written
on one of the pages which had been clipped together.
She stated that, on observing her looking at that page, the practitioner leaned
over and said “ ‘No not that page this one’, which was the one
we had signed when we first arrived in the A &
her interview with the police the practitioner candidly admitted her actions.
She said (Exhibit B Tab 32 page 7):
...the drug register book I went
forward a page and wrote the pethidine count, because the real page was up to a
new page anyway,
so I just flipped a page forward, wrote out the transfer, and
we signed it, and then she left and I later went back and took them
ripped the page that I had written, like on the blank page, ripped it
evidence on this topic is clear and unequivocal. The Tribunal accepts this
sub-paragraph of the particular is proved having regard
to the evidence of Nurse
I and the practitioner’s own evidence on the topic.
14 asserts that, on or about 15 April 201, the practitioner substituted five
ampoules of Pethidine taken from the Emergency
Department drug safe with five
ampoules of Buscopan.
have earlier noted that the evidence supports a finding that the practitioner
substituted Buscopan for Pethidine on 14 July 2011.
However, we are unable to
identify evidence which supports the practitioner having substituted Buscopan
for Pethidine on 15 April
2011. Taking the evidence on this topic at its
highest, we note that when being questioned by Ms Atkins and Ms Garthwaite about
“10 Pethidine amps that were shattered” and how she got “the
narcotic out of the vial to take to the Methadone
person” the practitioner
replied “I did the same thing with the Buscopan vials but...” and
“I took the vials
out cracked them took the drug out and put the labels
and back and up...”. The following exchange then occurred between Ms
Atkin and the practitioner:
Ms Atkin: Oh so they were, so where did
you put the labels back onto the, what did you put then? Just take me through
that again?
Put the labels back onto ...so with the Buscopan you actually took
the vials of Pethidine out of the pack and put the Buscopan vials
shattered ... we’ve got the 10 broken rather than shattered, where did you
put the liquid, what I am grappling with
– are you saying that you did the
same as what you did with the Buscopan with the 10 that were broken with, how
did you get
the liquid out?
The practitioner:
I drew it up into a syringe.
Tribunal appreciates this questioning occurred towards the end of a very lengthy
interview with the practitioner, and at a point
where she steadfastly maintained
she had not taken Pethidine for self-administration. It is evident on the
nurse’s own evidence
at some point either on 14 July 2011, or on or about
15 April 2011, she substituted Buscopan for Pethidine. The Tribunal is
the substitution occurred but is unable to find that the substitution
occurred on the date as pleaded in Particular 14.
15 asserts that on or around 24 June 2011 at 2240 the practitioner made an
alteration to the balance in the register in
contravention of the policy and the
regulation. The relevant page of the register is found in Exhibit E Tab 19 p 1.
It shows an
entry at 2240 for Mr C B for 100mg of Pethidine and the total of the
drug being reduced from 15 to 14 (overwritten). Thereafter
a crossed out line
appears in the register but no further patient details, and the balances jump
from 14 to 12.
her police interview (Exhibit B, Tab 32 p 22) the practitioner acknowledged that
she thought she could see “my own handwriting,
that I did write 15, and
I’ve gone over it with a four, and that’s my initials”.
Having regard to the register
and the practitioner’s statement to the
police the Tribunal is satisfied this particular is
Discussion and findings –unsatisfactory
professional conduct
particulars which we have found proved in relation to Complaints One and Two in
combination establish that the practitioner’s
conduct did not demonstrate
the judgment she possessed met the judgment reasonably to be expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent
level of skill or expertise, and in fact fell
significantly below that standard.
reaching this conclusion the Tribunal accepted that Ms Parker’s two
reports were unequivocal in her condemnation of the practitioner’s
conduct. We accept her conclusions about the way in which the
practitioner’s conduct fell short of that reasonably expected
practitioner of this practitioner’s experience, and is conduct deserving
of significant criticism.
Tribunal notes the comments made by the Presiding Magistrate when sentencing the
practitioner. His Honour, in his sentencing
remarks, said:
been a difficult process coming to the appropriate penalty because in each case
you have carefully gone about a criminal
process to avoid detection for your own
ends. It is the opposite of many matters that come before the Court which
people put to
me that it is a spur of the moment decision. You applied a degree
of planning to what you did. They are objectively serious matter.
already indicated to you that the maximum jurisdictional limit that I have
available to me is five years gaol. It is a serious
breach of trust. Each one
is a serious breach of trust.
You were in the same position as any other professional and you breached the
confidence of the people that employed you, that trusted
you to act in the
responsible way to which you were employed to act.
In my view it is on a par with legal practitioners who defraud their
clients’ money. It is on a par with accountants who defraud
accountancy firm and with directors of companies. You are a professional
person, you breached that confidence.
concur with his Honour’s remarks. In summary, we find that the
practitioner:
highly experienced nurse placed in a position of significant responsibility as
“ ‘in charge’ hospital”;
deliberately
stole Pethidine from her employer for her own personal use;
her explanation to the police used Pethidine because it gave her a
the signatures of her professional colleagues on numerous occasions on the
register with total disregard of the policy and
regulations;
patient’s records in breach of the policy and regulation;
forging her professional colleagues’ signatures, including enrolled nurses
under her supervision, acted in complete disregard
for the detrimental, or
possible detrimental effect, on them; and
substituted
Buscopan and Stemetil for Pethidine with total disregard to the adverse
consequences of this action on any patient who
may receive those medications.
While it appears the practitioner smashed the Buscopan ampoules thus precluding
that drug being administered
in lieu of Pethidine, that does not appear to be
the case insofar as the substitution of Stemetil is concerned. This is of
significance when regard is had for Ms Parker’s comment about
the effect which Stemetil could have on a patient if unknowingly
administered.
(c) professional misconduct (Complaint Three)
The Law – professional misconduct
Complaint repeats the particulars in Complaint Two and notes those particulars
are “relied upon individually and cumulatively”.
We refer to our
earlier recording of the comments of Basten JA in
when a Complaint
is pleaded in this manner.
139E is in the following terms:
139E Meaning of "professional misconduct" [NSW]
For the purposes of this Law,
"professional misconduct"
registered health practitioner means--
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when
the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration.
to the introduction of the National Law the concept of professional misconduct
was discussed and its ramifications explained
by Kirby P (as his Honour then
Pillai v Messiter
1989 16 NSWLR 197.
In that case the NSW
Court of Appeal was dealing with an appeal from a decision of the Medical
Tribunal of NSW. The Medical Tribunal
had found a medical practitioner should
be removed from the register for “misconduct in a professional
sense” (the then
relevant statutory provision). At the time of the
hearing of the appeal against the Medical Tribunal’s decision a new
legislative
provision had been enacted dealing with “professional
misconduct”. The new provision was inapplicable to the appeal.
Honour explained, without deciding, that then new statutory test for
“professional misconduct” “may introduce
a wider class of
conduct than has hitherto been regarded as relevant”. However, Kirby P
went on to explain that the concept
of “misconduct” may include:
“gross negligence ....particularly if accompanied by indifference to, or
lack of concern
for, the welfare of the patient”.
Honour further explained at 200:
Departures from elementary and
generally accepted standards, of which a medical practitioner could scarcely be
heard to say that he
or she was ignorant could amount to professional
misconduct. But the statutory test is not met by mere professional incompetence
or by deficiencies in the practice of the profession. Something more is
required. It includes a deliberate departure from accepted
standards or such
serious negligence as, although not deliberate, to portray indifference and an
abuse of the privileges which accompany
registration as a medical practitioner
[citations omitted]
recent cases discussing unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct focus on the wording of the relevant statute
and have moved away from
“the language of moral obloquy” referred to in earlier decisions
with peers expressing their
views “in terms of strong criticism rather
than ‘strong reprobation’”. (see
Lucire v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99
; Donnelly v Health Care Complaints
Commission (NSW)
[2011] NSWSC 70
Discussion and
Findings – professional misconduct
noted by the Presiding Magistrate in the Deniliquin Local Court the criminal
charges admitted by the practitioner were regarded
by him, and us, as of an
extremely serious character analogous with a legal practitioner who has
defrauded a client.
are satisfied that the practitioner’s conduct as established in the
particulars we have found proved is of the most serious
nature. We refer to and
repeat our finding Two.
practitioner’s conduct demonstrated complete disregard of patient safety,
showed a pattern of deliberate deception which
continued until 10 August 2011
when she was confronted with her actions being recorded on CCTV footage. Her
conduct was also carried
on in complete disregard for its effect on the
professionals with whom she worked and their professional reputations.
evidence relied on before the Presiding Magistrate in mitigation on sentencing
for her offences was scant. This Tribunal acknowledges
that, in the police
interview, the practitioner did, after she conceded the majority of assertions
against her, express some remorse
for her actions. She said of her conduct
“It was stupid” (Exhibit B Tab 32 p27). She asserted that she had
administered Pethidine whilst working, or worked whilst under the
influence of that drug. She explained that, having completed night
“I would just have it at home in the morning, and then go to bed for the
day”. When asked why she continued “to
use” she explained
“it just gave me a good feeling”. Although not specifically pleaded
in the Complaint the Tribunal
notes that part of the practitioner’s
evidence to the police is inconsistent with statements she made to Mr Thompson.
Mr Thompson
records his conversation with the practitioner about the first time
she used Pethidine. (Ex B Tab p3 [3(f)]). He says, after referring
practitioner treating a patient with a badly broken collar bone who had been
prescribed Pethidine by phone order:
During the administration
process, everything but the discards were witnessed, so she self administered
one discard and pocketed whatever
she could for later on.
practitioner also conceded by falsifying another practitioner’s signature
she was falsely implicating that practitioner
in her activity (Exhibit B, Tab 32
have earlier set out the definition of professional misconduct as found in the
National Law. Notwithstanding the practitioner’s
evidence that she did
not work whilst drug affected we do not accept her evidence in its entirety on
that topic. Her conduct when
she did work on night duty in the Emergency
Department between April 2011 and August 2011 placed patients at risk. A
practitioner
of this practitioner’s experience must have been aware that a
patient may receive the Stemetil which she substituted for Pethidine,
a serious adverse reaction.
have earlier set out in respect of Complaint 2 our findings about the serious
nature of the practitioner’s deliberate and
knowing conduct. That conduct
includes breaches of the policy and the regulation. We are satisfied that the
particulars pleaded
in Complaint 1 and 2 found proved by us, when considered
together, amount to conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s registration and
constitute professional misconduct. Complaint Three
established.
(d) Impairment (Complaint Four)
Four asserts the nurse has an impairment. Impairment is defined in s 5 of the
National Law as follows:
"impairment"
, in relation to a
person, means the person has a physical or mental impairment, disability,
condition or disorder (including substance
abuse or dependence) that
detrimentally affects or is likely to detrimentally affect--
(a) for a registered health practitioner or an applicant for registration in
a health profession, the person's capacity to practise
the profession; or
(b) for a student, the student's capacity to undertake clinical training--
(i) as part of the approved program of study in which the student is
enrolled; or
(ii) arranged by an education provider.
Evidence in support of the impairment complaint
Complaint asserts the practitioner suffers from:
dependence/abuse
evidence relied on to support these claims is scant. Ms Judi Bilkey,
psychologist wrote a letter dated 25 November 2011. The
letter does not contain
an addressee, but simply commences with the salutation “Dear Sir”.
Given its date, and the reference
to a report from Ms Bilkey before the
Magistrate Budgen, we infer the report was prepared for the practitoner’s
hearing. She notes when she saw the practitioner on 22 September
2011 she assessed her as suffering from depression. Ms Bilkey’s
now almost two years old. It is not clear from Ms Bilkey’s letter whether
or not she is appropriately qualified
to make a clinical diagnosis. The
Tribunal, being mindful of the definition of impairment, is not satisfied that
her evidence before
us demonstrates that the practitioner continues to suffer
depression.
other medical evidence is a letter from the practitioner’s general
practitioner, Dr Magee, dated 23 November 2011. The
evidence of the
practitioner’s medical condition in that letter is brief. It is
summarised earlier in these reasons under
the heading “Background”.
The practitioner’s attendance on Dr Magee is recorded in her clinical
notes for 26 October
2011 where the doctor notes “(1) Panic attacks, very
hyped, not sleeping, and (2) started a wee gardening
Discussion and findings –
Magee’s correspondence is also now almost two years old, as are her
clinical notes. The Tribunal is conscious that these
reports pertain to a time
in the practitioner’s life when she was undergoing detoxification, and
facing serious criminal charges
with a potential gaol sentence. The Tribunal,
being mindful of the definition of impairment, is not satisfied that the
before us demonstrates, to the requisite civil standard, that the
practitioner continues to suffer depression and panic attacks or
that she now
has conditions which detrimentally affect her capacity to practise the
profession of nursing. Complaint Four is not
established.
completeness we take this opportunity to note that Complaint 5 is withdrawn in
the amended Complaint.
(e) Not suitable to hold registration
within the meaning of
(Complaint 6)
support of this complaint the HCCC repeat the particulars alleged in Complaints
One and Two.
of the National Law has been set out by us earlier in these reasons, as has
our reference to
of the National Law. There is no doubt that a complaint
may be made about a registered health practitioner under
(e) that he or she
is not a suitable person to hold registration. But, as earlier explained, that
provision does not define or provide
the meaning of the words “not
suitable to hold registration”.
appears to us two provisions of
(1) which section sets out the grounds on
which a National Board may refuse registration give meaning or efficacy to the
words relied
on in this complaint.
Section 55(1)
(a) has been earlier set out
by us. We discern that
(h) also has relevance that sub-section
(h) in the Board's opinion, the individual is for any
other reason--
(i) not a fit and proper person for general registration in the profession;
(ii) unable to practise the profession competently and safely.
The evidence
particulars relied on to support this complaint are twofold. First, it is
asserted the practitioner stole property while she worked
as a registered nurse
as particularised in Complaint One. Second, it is asserted that “the
underlying conduct which gave rise
to the convictions is admitted by the
practitioner as set out in the facts sheet which was before the Deniliquin Local
Court at the
time the practitioner was convicted”.
the Complaint document refers to the fact sheet as being annexed to the Amended
Complaint it is not attached to the document.
However, it forms part of the
evidence in Exhibit B at Tab 30.
and findings
Tribunal has earlier in these reasons recorded its satisfaction that the
particulars pleaded in respect of Complaint One are established.
We repeat our
agreement with the remarks of Magistrate Bugden on sentencing the practitioner.
The offences are serious offences
carrying a gaol term of up to five
as noted in our reasons in respect of Complaint Two, the facts in the police
Fact Sheet were not challenged by the practitioner
at the time of sentence. The
facts include the forging of signatures of other professionals employed at the
hospital in complete
disregard for the reputation of those practitioners. Of
more concern to the Tribunal however is the practitioner’s conduct
substituting Stemetil for Pethidine. That action demonstrated a flagrant
disregard for the welfare of patients in pain who could
receive that drug in
lieu of Pethidine, and the potential of the very serious consequence of a
patient suffering an adverse reaction
to Stemetil as explained by Ms Parker in
her first report.
combination of the stealing charges, the conduct set out in the fact sheet, and
the potential consequences of the conduct, in
our opinion prove that the
practitioner is not, as at the date of the hearing, a suitable person to hold
registration.
Protective orders
Tribunal determined that a “two stage” hearing as described in
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 363
mandated in the circumstances of this case where the practitioner failed to take
any part in the proceedings, and where she
had executed a statutory declaration
in which she declared she would not to seek registration in any State under the
National Law.
her submissions in respect of the orders the Tribunal could make, Ms Brus placed
emphasis on the paramount role of maintaining
standards in the nursing
profession, the deterrent effect of any order made, and the encouragement of
high professional standards
to maintain the confidence of the public. Very
properly, she also referred to the need to protect the public from the risk of
practitioner repeating her earlier conduct, although we discern less weight
was placed on that aspect given the evidence of the statutory
declaration and
the fact the practitioner has let her registration lapse. But as Ms Brus
pointed out, the practitioner is a young
woman who, with time, maturity, and
insight into her appalling conduct in respect of the drug substitution, may wish
to seek re-instatement
in the future.
support of these submissions Ms Brus drew our attention to the comments of
Barrett JA (with whom Macfarlan JA and Tobias AJA agreed)
in the NSW Court of
Lee v Health Care Complaints Commission [2012]NSWCA 80.
his Honour explained the rationale behind the protective jurisdiction exercised
by health professional tribunals in making
protective orders: His Honour said
Essential to a proper assessment of a tribunal's
discretionary judgment in a disciplinary jurisdiction in accordance with these
is a clear understanding of the nature of the jurisdiction and an
appreciation of the purpose of orders made in exercise of it. These
matters were
explained by Basten JA in
Director-General, Department of Ageing, Disability
and Home Care v Lambert
[2009] NSWCA 102
(2009) 74 NSWLR 523
Honour made several important points:
1. The specific purpose for which orders are made is protective in the public
interest and is not punitive with respect to the individual.
2. That is not to deny that such orders may be punitive in effect and that
punitive effects may be relevant in formulating a protective
3. The punitive effects may be directly relevant to the need for protection
so that, in a particular case, there may be a factual
finding that the harrowing
experience of disciplinary proceedings, together with the real threat of loss of
a livelihood, may have
opened the eyes of the individual concerned to the
seriousness of his or her conduct so as to diminish significantly the likelihood
of its repetition and to produce a level of insight into his or her own
character or misconduct which did not previously exist.
support of both Complaint Six, and the making of an order requiring AHPRA to
note that, if the practitioner had been registered
at the date of the hearing,
the Tribunal would have cancelled her registration, Ms Brus emphasised the
practitioner’s conduct
in lying, and continuing to lie, until threatened
to exposure by being captured by the CCTV footage installed at the hospital.
emphasised that the practitioner was prepared to place in jeopardy the lives
and well-being of patients.
Brus submitted that the issue of deterrence is particularly relevant in cases
involving an infraction of the requirements of S4
and the improper and
illegal use of drugs listed in those schedules. She submitted this Tribunal
should make it clear such conduct
will not be condoned, and send a strong signal
that conduct such as that engaged in by the practitioner will not be tolerated.
support of this submission Ms Brus relied on the comments of the Court of
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408.
Brus also referred to the trust which patients repose in practitioners by
reference to
Richter v Walton
(unreported
NSW Court of Appeal 15
July 1993). In the case Priestley JA at pages 8 and 9 referred to the trust
which a patient places in a doctor.
His Honour said “Even in regard to
the most commonplace medical matters the trust a patient places in a doctor is
considerable”.
Ms Brus described the practitioner’s
substitution of Stemetil and Buscopan as an abuse of that trust. We
are satisfied that the orders sought in respect of the register by the HCCC are
appropriate orders.
turn then to consider the question of a period of time before the practitioner
may again apply for re-registration. In considering
this question the Tribunal
balanced the seriousness of the practitioner’s conduct with matters such
as her age, the limited
evidence of her emotional difficulties at about the time
of the occurrences, and the fact with maturity, insight and reflection the
practitioner may fully acknowledge her conduct and seek to again pursue her
profession. In conducting this exercise we have regard
to the comments of Kirby
P (as his Honour then was) in
Law Society v Foreman
and which comments
have been referred to in other health professional decisions (see
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Cahill [2013] NSWPT 4
at 90). His Honour explained
that a practitioner may with time, by his or her conduct some time after an
offence, redeem him or herself,
and that the practitioner’s skills in
those circumstances should not be lost to the profession or the public.
Tribunal concluded, balancing the factors discussed above, that a period of two
years should elapse before the practitioner can
again apply to be re-registered.
However, given the serious nature of the Tribunal’s findings, and the
matter which would require
assessment on review, it is our view, at this point
in time, that the appropriate review body is the Tribunal not the
noted at the commencement of these reasons, the HCCC submitted the
“usual” rule in respect of costs in disciplinary
proceedings should
apply, and the practitioner be ordered to pay the HCCC’s costs of and
incidental to the proceedings.
Costs – relevant law
power to award costs under the National Law is found in Schedule 5D Cl. 13 (1).
That provision reposes a
in the Tribunal to award costs in
respect of an inquiry or an appeal.
principles to be applied in determining whether to award costs pursuant to a
statutory power such as found in the National Law
are well established. They
are set out in a number of leading cases and are summarised comprehensively in
the judgment of Kirby
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
. In summary:
normally in
disciplinary proceedings, as in other civil litigation, costs should follow the
event unless the circumstances of the
case require, in the exercise of
discretion, not to do so (see
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77).
position is frequently referred to as “the usual rule” or
“traditional rule” in respect of costs;
an award of
costs is to compensate, in the form of a partial indemnity, the person in whose
favour it is made. It is not to punish
the person ordered to pay costs;
the onus is
normally on the “losing” or unsuccessful party to establish any
departure from the “usual” rule;
the discretion
to depart from the “usual” rule is unfettered, but must be exercised
judicially (see
Oshlack; Williams v Lever
(1974) 2 NSWLR 91
generally the
presumption the “usual” rule applies will only be displaced where
there has been some sort of disentitling
conduct on the part of the successful
Oshlack; Arian v Nguyen
[2001] NSWCA 5
Tribunal accepts that the HCCC properly brought these proceedings, and provided
evidence to satisfy the Tribunal that four of
the five of the complaints alleged
were proved. Prima facie, in these circumstances it could be thought
appropriate that the practitioner
be ordered to pay the HCCC’s
Tribunal is mindful of several relevant matters which require consideration in
this matter. First, the practitioner pleaded guilty
to the criminal proceedings
brought against her. Second, on 4 November 2011 she voluntarily surrendered her
authority. Third, she instructed the Association to write to the HCCC on 27
February 2013 in the following terms:
Ms Bard requests that the
Commission consider not proceeding to a hearing in this matter if she
voluntarily surrenders her registration
with AHPRA and provides the Commission
with a statutory declaration confirming that she will not seek registration as a
nurse or enrolment as an Enrolled Nurse in any jurisdiction.
Ms Bard is concerned, despite making admissions to the substantive complaint,
that she may incur a costs order if this matter proceeds
to hearing. She has
not worked as a registered nurse since August/September 2011 and she has no
intention of returning to nursing
in the future.
We request that you consider the proposal at your earliest convenience in
order to avoid any unnecessary preparation in this matter.
HCCC initially responded to the Association’s letter on 6 March 2013 and
relevantly said:
The commission is prepared to consider your
client’s request should she decide to surrender her registration and make
statutory declaration.
receiving that communication from the HCCC the practitioner executed a Statutory
Declaration on 15 March 2013 in which she relevantly
hereby request that the Australian Health Practitioner Registration Authority
remove my name from the Register of Nurses pursuant
to s137 of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW).
3. I undertake not to seek registration or enrolment as a nurse in any
4. I undertake not to practice nursing in any jurisdiction
HCCC, by letter dated 15 April 2013 advised the Association it proposed to
continue with the Complaint. In respect of the practitioner’s
concern about costs the HCCC said:
The Commission understands that
your client is concerned with cost minimisation and no longer wants to work as a
nurse, however, the
costs incurred will be signficantly affected by: the extent
of your client’s admission; and her position in relation to the
which the Commission will subject should be made in the event that the complaint
is proved ie a disqualification order under
s149C(4)(a) and (b) of the National
noted earlier in these reasons, the Association advised the HCCC on 11 June 2013
that they did not have instructions to act on
behalf of the practitioner in the
proceedings.
Tribunal finds that the practitioner did take steps that sought, if fully
implemented, to have had the same effect as the orders
the HCCC now seeks, and
which would have been protective of the public and minimised the parties’
costs (and the Tribunal’s
time and resources).
Tribunal acknowledges and appreciates the HCCC’s statutory role in
protecting the public. We are cognisant that, notwithstanding
practitioner’s execution of a Statutory Declaration, she could with time
and changed circumstances decide to re-apply for
registration at which time the
conditions imposed on her registration under s150 of the National Law would
remain recorded on the
register. Thus, she would have to satisfy the National
Board of her fitness, at that time, to be registered.
the National Board determined to refuse registration, it would be necessary for
the practitioner to appeal under s175 of the National
Law against that decision.
Accordingly, it is obvious the National Law itself contains a number of
provisions, or checks and balances,
which appropriately applied, would serve to
protect the public if the former practitioner was not, at the relevant time,
to practise as a health practitioner.
Tribunal is further cognisant that disciplinary proceedings are not to punish
the practitioner, but have a number of well established
purposes. As well as
the primary consideration, protection of the public, an important consideration
is the deterrent effect of
orders made to provide a timely reminder to
practitioners of the consequences of a breach or breaches of the National Law.
protective orders maintain the high standards of the professions
including the nursing and midwifery profession. Unless the HCCC
had proceeded
with the complaint those consequential or other effects of successful
proceedings would be lost.
the exercise of our discretion in considering this costs application, we found
the discussion of the Medical Tribunal of New South
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Rolleston
[2013] NSWMT 12
on this issue to be
the proceedings, advised the
HCCC he would not be defending the proceedings, and
in documents tendered at a directions hearing the practitioner indicated he had
no intention of practising in the future. After reviewing a number of decisions
where practitioners had admitted the complaints
against them, including
decisions of this Tribunal, the Medical Tribunal found the practitioner had done
all that could be reasonably
expected of him to finalise the proceedings in an
expeditious manner. The Medical Tribunal ordered each party pay their own costs
of the proceedings.
facts in this case are distinguishable in some respects to those in
While initially the practitioner, through the Association, did
all she could do at that stage to bring the proceedings to an end,
she did not
ultimately concede all or any of the complaints made against her in the
Complaint notwithstanding this issue was highlighted
in the HCCC’s letter
of 15 April 2013.
all relevant considerations we are satisfied in the circumstances of this case
that the practitioner’s conduct in
signing the Statutory Declaration is a
relevant factor to depart from the usual rule. However, given the other
considerations we
have referred to above in respect of protective orders, we are
satisfied the appropriate order is that the practitioner be ordered
to pay fifty
per cent of the HCCC’s costs as agreed, or failing agreement, as
determined by the Tribunal.
IS NOTED by the NSW Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal (“the Tribunal”)
that if Kahli Michelle Bard (“the practitioner”)
was registered at
the date of the hearing on the register of practitioners maintained by the
Australian Health Practitioner Agency
(“AHPRA”) in conjunction with
the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia (“the Board”), it would
have ordered
that her registration be cancelled.
to s149C (4) (c) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
86a (“the National Law”) the Tribunal requests that AHPRA record
that, if the practitioner had been registered at
the date of the hearing, the
Tribunal would have cancelled her registration.
A period of two (2) years from the date of these orders shall elapse before the
practitioner may again apply under s163 of the National
re-instatement to the register.
to any application under s163 (1) (a1) of the National Law the appropriate
review body for the purposes of Order 3 of these
orders is the
practitioner shall pay fifty (50) per cent the costs of Health Care Complaints
Commission (“the HCCC”) of and incidental
to the proceedings as
agreed, and failing agreement, as determined by the Tribunal.
to Schedule 5D Cl7 (1)(b) the names of the patients and nurses appearing in the
Schedule to the Amended Complaint shall not
be published.
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM
Chairperson
Nurse Member
Ms K Sherwood
Nurse Member
Ms M Knibb.
Annexure “A”
AMENDED COMPLAINT
IN THE NURSING AND MIDWIFERYTRIBUNAL NO. Of
CONSTITUTED UNDER
165 OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW
In the matter of Kahli Michelle Bard
formerly registered under
Health Practitioner
National Law
Health Care Complaints Commission
of Level 13, 323
Castlereagh Street, Sydney NSW, having consulted with the
Medical Council of
New South Wales
in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law
the National
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Ms Kahli Michelle Bard (“the practitioner”) who was formerly
a registered nurse under the
National Law
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been convicted of offences within the meaning of section 144 of the
National Law.
Background for Complaint One
On 11 January
2007 the practitioner was first registered as a registered nurse in NSW. At all
relevant times between 16 August 2010
and 10 August 2011, the practitioner was a
registered nurse working at Deniliquin Hospital (
the Hospital
On 20 December 2011, the practitioner pleaded guilty to fifteen counts
of stealing property as a clerk/servant contrary to
section 156
On 20 December 2011, the practitioner was convicted
of the fifteen offences referred to above at Deniliquin Local Court. The
practitioner
was: ordered to enter into a good behaviour bond for 3 years; fined
$200 per offence; and ordered to pay $81 court costs per offence.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
20 December 2011 at Deniliquin Local Court, the practitioner was convicted of
fifteen criminal offences being that:
(a) on 15 April 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 100 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(b) on 15 April 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 500 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(c) on 15 April 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 250 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(d) on 21 April 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 100 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(e) on 6 June 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 200 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(f) on 25 June 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 100 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(g) on 30 June 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 100 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(h) on 1 July 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 100 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(i) on 2 July 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 100 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(j) on 2 July 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 200 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(k) on 6 July 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 100 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(l) on 27 June 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 1 gram of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(m) on 16 July 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 200 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(n) on 15 July 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 100 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
(o) on 21 July 2011 she stole property from the Hospital, namely 500 mg of
pethidine, being a clerk/servant of the Hospital, contrary
section 156
Is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of nursing is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience;
in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice
of nursing.
Background for Complaint Two
background for Complaint One is repeated.
On 3 August 2011 the
practitioner participated in an internal fact-finding interview in relation to
five incidents involving pethidine
at the Hospital. On 10 August 2011 the
practitioner participated in a second internal fact-finding interview in
relation to twenty
seven incidents involving pethidine at the Hospital.
On 16 August 2011 the practitioner was suspended from duty at the Hospital
and requested to show cause why her employment should not
be terminated.
On 6 October 2011, the Nursing and Midwifery Council (Council) imposed
conditions on the pra ctitioner’s registration pursuant
which were varied on 3 April 2012. The conditions include both
practice and health conditions.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
practitioner was convicted of fifteen offences of stealing drugs as a servant of
the Hospital on 20 December 2011 as set out in
Complaint One.
of the offences referred to at Particular 1 above was committed in the course of
practice as a registered nurse and while on
duty as a registered nurse at the
15 April 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital
(a) forged the signature of Nurse G on two occasions at 2310 in the Drugs of
Addiction Register “Drug: Pethidine 100 mg Amps.
Ward: Emergency
Department (
(b) made a false entry in the Drugs of Addiction Register “Drug: Pethidine
100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” at 2300 for Patient
A by noting “vial
broken” in contravention of section 6.2.2 of the Medication Handling in
NSW Public Hospitals Policy
Medication Handling Policy
) and clause 177
Poisons and Therapeutics Goods Regulation
25 June 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital
(a) failed to make an entry on a separate line in the ED Drugs of Addiction
Register “Drug: Pethidine 100 mg Amps. Ward: ED”
at 0625 for the
broken vial entry in contravention of section 6.2.2 of the Medication Handling
Policy and clause 177 of the PTG Regulation;
(b) crossed out a balance on two occasions in the ED Drugs of Addiction Register
“Drug: Pethidine 100 mg Amps. Ward: ED”
at 0625 in contravention of
section 6.2.2 of the Medication Handling Policy and clause 177 of the PTG
Regulation.
30 June 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital
(a) made false entries in the Drugs of Addiction Register “Drug: Pethidine
100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” at 2250 for administration
of 150 mg of pethidine
to Patient B and discarding 50 mg of pethidine, in contravention of section
6.2.2 of the Medication Handling
Policy and clause 177 of the PTG
Regulation;
(b) forged the signature of Nurse H on the Drugs of Addiction Register
“Drug: Pethidine 100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” on two
occasions at 2250 for
(c) forged the signature of Nurse H on Patient B’s medication chart on one
occasion at 2250.
1 July 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital
(a) forged the signature of Nurse H on two occasions in the Drugs of Addiction
Register “Drug: Pethidine 50 mg Amps. Ward:
ED” at 0030 for Patient
(b) made false entries in the Drugs of Addiction Register “Drug: Pethidine
50 mg Amps. Ward: ED” at 0030 for administration
of 75 mg of pethidine to
Patient C and discarding of 25 mg of pethidine, in contravention of section
6.2.2 of the Medication Handling
Policy and clause 177 of the PTG
Regulation,
2 July 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital
(a) made a false entry in the Drugs of Addiction Register “Drug: Pethidine
50 mg Amps. Ward: ED” at 0445 for discarding
of 100 mg pethidine in
contravention of section 6.2.2 of the Medication Handling Policy and clause 177
of the PTG Regulation;
(b) forged the signature of Nurse I in the Drugs of Addiction Register
“Drug: Pethidine 50 mg Amps. Ward: ED” at 0445
for Patient
(c) forged the signature of Nurse I in the Drugs of Addiction Register
“Drug: Pethidine 100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” at 0310;
(d) made two false entries in the Drugs of Addiction Register “Drug:
Pethidine 100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” at 0310 in contravention
of section 6.2.2
of the Medication Handling Policy and clause 177 of the PTG Regulation
(i) administration of 0 mg to Patient E;
(ii) discarding 100 mg of pethidine.
6 July 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital
(a) made a false entry in Patient B’s ED medical records in contravention
of clause 177 of the PTG Regulation;
(b) forged Nurse H’s signature in Patient B’s ED medical
(c) made a false entry in the Drugs of Addiction Register “Drug: Pethidine
100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” in contravention of
section 6.2.2 of the Medication
Handling Policy and clause 177 of the PTG Regulation on one occasion for Patient
(d) forged Nurse H’s signature in the Drugs of Addiction Register
“Drug: Pethidine 100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” on one
occasion for Patient
(e) made a false entry in Patient B’s ED medication chart for Patient B in
contravention of clause 177 of the PTG Regulation;
(f) forged Nurse H’s signature in patient B’s medication
27 June 2011 and 14 July 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital
(a) substituted ten ampoules of 100 mg of pethidine from the ED drug safe with
ten ampoules of buscopan;
(b) made a false statement in the AIMS Incident Detail report (1101855-20),
namely, that she found two packets of five ampoules of
100 mg of pethidine
broken in their boxes and the boxes were damp.
or about 15 April 2011 while the nurse was on duty at the Hospital she
substituted five ampoules of 100 mg of pethidine from the
ED drug safe with five
ampoules of stemetil in the course of which she removed the stemetil labels and
attached the pethidine labels.
15 and 16 July 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital she made
false entries in the Drugs of Addiction Register
“Drug: Pethidine 100 mg
Amps. Ward: ED” in contravention of section 6.2.2 of the Medication Policy
and clause 177 of
the PTG Regulation.
15 July 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital
(a) made false entries in the Drugs of Addiction Register “Drug: Pethidine
100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” for Patient B at 0315
in contravention of section
6.2.2 of the Medication Handling Policy and clause 177 of the PTG
Regulation;
(b) forged Nurse I’s signature on three occasions in the Drugs of
Addiction Register “Drug: Pethidine 100 mg Amps. Ward:
Patient B at 0315;
(c) made a false entry on Patient B’s medication chart for administration
of pethidine 100 mg in contravention of clause 177
of the PTG Regulation;
(d) forged Nurse I’s signature on Patient B’s medication chart for
administration of pethidine.
21 July 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital
(a) made a false entry in the Drugs of Addiction Register “Drug: Pethidine
100 mg Amps. Ward: Middleton Gorman Wing (
)” at 0600 for
transfer of five ampoules of 100 mg of pethidine to the ED ward in contravention
of section 6.2.2 of the Medication
Handling Policy and clause 177 of the PTG
Regulation;
(b) made a false entry in the Drugs of Addiction Register “Drug: Pethidine
100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” at 0600 stating “C
+ C” (counted and
correct) in contravention of section 6.2.2 of the Medication Handling Policy and
clause 177 of the PTG Regulation;
(c) forged Nurse J’s signature in the Drugs of Addiction Register
“Drug: Pethidine 100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” at 0600
at the “C +
(d) removed and destroyed four pages from the Drugs of Addiction Register
“Drug: Pethidine 100 mg Amps. Ward: ED” in
contravention of section
6.2.2 of the Medication Handling Policy and clause 177 of the PTG
Regulation.
or about 15 April 2011 while the practitioner was on duty at the Hospital she
substituted five ampoules of 50 mg of pethidine taken
from the ED drug safe with
five ampoules of buscopan.
or around 24 June 2011 at 2240 the practitioner made an alteration to the
balance in the Drugs of Addiction Register “Drug:
Pethidine 100 mg Amps.
Ward: ED” in contravention of section 6.2.2 of the Medication Handling
Policy and clause 177 of the
PTG Regulation.
COMPLAINT THREE
Is guilty of professional misconduct under section 139E of the
in that the practitioner has:
in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration,
in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the
instances are considered together, amount
to conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify the suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration
Background for Complaint Three
background for Complaint Two is repeated.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
The particulars of Complaint Two are repeated and relied upon individually
and cumulatively.
COMPLAINT FOUR
Has an impairment within the meaning of section 5 of the National Law, being
a physical or mental impairment, disability, condition
or disorder (including
substance abuse or dependence) that detrimentally affects or is likely to
detrimentally affect the practitioner’s
capacity to practice the
profession of nursing.
Background for Complaint Four
background for Complaints One and Two is repeated.
PARTICULARS FOR COMPLAINT FOUR
nurse suffers from:
(a) depressive disorder;
(b) pethidine dependence/abuse;
(c) panic disorder.
COMPLAINT SIX
Is not a suitable person to hold registration as a nurse within the meaning
of section 144 of the National Law.
Background for Complaint
The background for Complaints One and Two is
PARTICULARS FOR COMPLAINT SIX
15 April 2011 and 21 July 2011, the practitioner stole property from the
Hospital while she was working as a registered nurse
as particularised in
Complaint One above.
underlying conduct which gave rise to the convictions is admitted by the
practitioner as set out in the facts sheet which was
before Deniliquin Local
Court at the time the practitioner was convicted. The facts sheet is attached to
this Notice and marked with
the letter “A”.
..................................................
_______________________________
Director of Proceedings
Health Care Complaints
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (556 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter