URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDRGC/2005/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v E [2005] NSWDRGC 1 (6 April 2005)
of New South Wales
[2005] NSWDRGC 1
FILE NUMBER(S) :
His Honour Senior Judge Roger Dive at 1
CATCHWORDS:
Meaning of Eligible Person :- – whether offence of wielding a knife
in a public place is an offence involving “violent
the “elements of the offence” test does not determine the issue
– the particular conduct
of the offender examined.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Drug Court Act 1998
“offence involving violent
S 11E(1)(a)
Summary Offences Act 1988
CASES CITED:
Chandler v The Director of Public Prosecutors
[2000] NSWCA 125
Rance [1999] NSW Dg Ct 2;
Director of Public Prosecutors v Allan Ebsworth and
[2001] NSWCCA 318
R v Butcher
[1986] VicRp 4
[1986] VR 43
DATES OF HEARING:
6 April 2005
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
6 April 2005
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES:
R. Ranken, Director of Public Prosecutions
I. Rodgers, Legal Aid
1 Mr Sam E has been referred to the Drug Court on
fourteen charges, most of which relate to driving offences. The issue before the
Court is whether Mr E is an eligible person under
given there is also a charge of wielding a knife in a public
place, an offence under section 11E(1)(a) of the
Summary Offences Act
2 The offence in question occurred on 10 July 2004. Mr E
pleaded guilty to the charge when before Liverpool Local Court, and on 3
November 2004 was dealt with by the imposition of a ten month
suspended sentence. He has breached that bond by virtue of further offences, and
so has now been called up for sentence on the breach
of bond matter. That
call-up has been referred to the Drug Court, together with the new offences. So
Mr E has not only been charged
with an offence under
Section 11E
, he has pleaded
guilty, been convicted, and then has had his sentence for the offence imposed
and then suspended.
3 Eligibility for a Drug Court program is defined in
Drug Court Act
Section 5(2)(b)
provides that a person
is not an eligible person if the person is charged with
“an offence
involving violent conduct or sexual assault.”
The Court of Criminal
Appeal has made previous decisions that assist this Court in determining what
“violent conduct”
4 In the matter of
Chandler v The Director of Public Prosecutors
[2000] NSWCA 125
Hodgson, Chief Judge in Equity, gave the leading opinion. Justice Hodgson
referred to the second reading speech for the
Drug Court Act
given in the Legislative Assembly on 27 October 1998, and that second reading
speech included the following statement;
“The Drug Court programme will deal only with offenders who commit
certain categories of offences. These offences will be mainly
non-violent theft
offences. Those offenders who commit sexual offences and offences involving
violent conduct will not be eligible.
The types of offences that will be
included are break, enter and steal, fraud and forgery offences, offences
involving stealing from
a person or unarmed robberies, provided there is no
violence, possession and use of prohibited drugs, or dealing in quantities of
prohibited drugs below the indictable limit.”
5 At paragraph 37 his Honour said;
“...in my opinion, the use of the word ‘charged’ in
points very strongly to it being the elements of the charge which are
significant, not the particular conduct. That view was expressed
in an earlier
decision of Judge Murrell, Senior Judge of the Drug Court in
[1999] NSW Dg Ct 2.”
6 Justice Hodgson
also referred to dictionary definitions of violence and violence and said;
“40. Without quoting them, I think it is fair to say that relevantly
the dictionary definition suggests that violence generally
refers to the
application of rough, strong, physical
7 Justice Hodgson also agreed
with Judge Murrell in
Section 5(2)(b)
should be construed
quite strictly, as it removes a benefit which would otherwise accrue to an
8 The next relevant authority is the matter of the
of Public Prosecutors v Allan Ebsworth and Others
[2001] NSWCCA 318.
matter Justice Meagher gave the leading opinion. The case of
concerned a man who was charged with robbery whilst armed with an offensive
weapon. Mr Justice Meagher agreed with what Chief Judge
Hodgson had said in
Chandler in relation to an elements test, and went on to say;
“19. I agree with that construction of the section. In my view,
this Court should follow what was said in
connection.
20. In the present case, if one looks at the charge,
it is implicit as I have said from the verb, to rob and the accusation of an
offensive weapon, that violence was necessarily involved. Those two elements
together constitute violent conduct.”
21. Support for this
interpretation is found in the decision of the Victorian Supreme Court in
[1986] VicRp 4
[1986] VR 43
when that Court stated, “if threats are made
personally to intimidate or seeking to intimidate this is also in our opinion
violence.... both putting a person in fear or seeking to put a person in fear of
being ‘subjected to force’ has always
been accepted under the common
law as violence sufficient to render a contemporaneous larceny a
9 And continuing from paragraph 24;
“24. Accordingly, the charge of armed robbery armed with an offensive
weapon, in reference to the elements of the charge, constitutes
involving violent conduct.
25. Even if that test is wrong, and if
it were necessary to consider the particular conduct of the offender, the first
behaviour in this case necessarily constitutes violent
26. For the reasons given above, threatening to use
violence in the form of brandishing a baseball bat is sufficient to constitute
violent conduct.”
10 So essentially the situation is that the
decision in
agrees with
and again approves the
decision of the Drug Court in
11 In the light of those
authorities, for this court to decide whether Mr E is an eligible person under
, it is therefore appropriate to firstly look at the elements of the
offence of wielding a knife in a public place. Does that offence
have, as an
element, violent conduct?
12 Referring to the Butterworths
“Criminal Practice and Procedure”
, the authors thereof
suggest (at paragraph 27-71350) that the elements of the offence are:
1) the accused without reasonable excuse;
2) used a knife in the
presence of any person in a public place or school;
3) in a manner
which would be likely to cause a person a reasonable firmness present at the
scene to fear for his or her personal
No person of reasonable
firmness need actually be, or be likely to be, present at the scene. There is
also the reference to the statutory
13 Unlike the gravity of the robbery
offence considered in
the offence of wielding a knife in a
public place can be established without anyone who was there actually being
placed in fear,
or anyone of reasonable firmness actually being present, or
indeed anyone of reasonable firmness likely to be present at the scene.
the accused could have a reasonable excuse for using or carrying the knife in
the circumstances proscribed, and thereby
would not have committed an offence.
There is also a statutory defence provided in
, whereby the accused is
not guilty of the offence if he or she establishes that the act complained of
was done with lawful authority.
14 So an offence under Section 11E can
involve no actual fear being engendered, or no person of the requisite fortitude
being present.
Or there could be such a fear or potential fear, however the
accused is able to establish a reasonable excuse on the balance of probabilities
for his or her behaviour, and is therefore not guilty of any offence.
Further, there could be such fear or potential fear, however the defendant may
be not guilty of the offence as he or she is able
to establish a lawful
authority under
Section 12.
16 Accordingly, in my view the elements of
the charge test formulated in
and as approved in
does not necessary provide the complete answer to the issue
Drug Court Act
as a charge under Section 11E
Summary Offences Act
can be established without what would
generally be regarded as an element of violent conduct. I note that whilst such
a circumstance
cannot arise before the Drug Court, a charge under
Section 11E
could be dismissed when, what would be regarded as violent conduct has occurred,
but the accused has a reasonable excuse or lawful
authority for his or her
17 Therefore, in my view there is a need in this case to
consider the particular conduct of the offender, as was briefly raised at
paragraph 25 by Justice Meagher in
I note that a similar issue
arose before the Drug Court in the matter of
[2004] NSWDRGC 1
decision of Judge Orchiston, wherein the Court was considering a charge of
intimidation of a police officer.
18 Turning back to what Justice Meagher
His Honour referred to the elements of the charge and
“25. Even if that test is wrong, and if it were necessary to consider
the particular conduct of the offender, the first opponent’s
behaviour in
this case necessarily constitutes violent
19 I have formed a view that
there is a need in this case to consider the particular conduct of the offender,
and the facts sheet
“at 7.45pm on Saturday 10 June 2004 the accused, Sam E, was walking to
a bus stop in Hoxton Park while being armed with a number
of knives and scissors
when at the intersection of Cowpasture Road and Hoxton Park Road the accused has
hit motor vehicle ACE-90Z
with a knife causing a large scratch and dent to the
rear near-side panel of the motor vehicle. The accused has then proceeded to
another motor car with one of the knives. This has caused damage to the
passenger side front window. The damage was a large scratch
to the window. The
accused has then hit another motor vehicle with a pole. This caused damage to
the front passenger side window
in the form of a large scratch and damage to the
While this has occurred a number of witnesses have
to one of the victims who pointed out the accused to police. Police have then
approached the accused. Police have seen that the accused
was in possession of
one large butcher knife which was carried in his right hand, and a twenty
centimetre long knife in his left
hand. Police have announced their office and
drawn their service firearm and called on the accused to drop the knives he had
possession. The accused refused and retained possession of the knives.
Police again called on the accused to drop the knives and
he again refused.
Police have then used a one second burst of OC spray to the face of the accused.
Police have then again called
on the accused to drop the knives. The accused
then threw the knives on the ground and then he was
20 Mr Rodgers, appearing for Mr
E, has submitted that there is no actual violence to any person, and that whilst
there was malicious
damage to motor vehicles, no charges of assault on police,
or of resisting police, or of using a weapon to avoid apprehension were
and Mr Rodgers invited the Court to draw the conclusion that there is no
evidence of any fear, and indeed there was no actual
fear experienced by those
21 The Crown in reply suggests that, even applying the test I
have set out above, the Court cannot look at the facts in isolation
offence charged, and that in a dictionary definition of violence, the physical
force need not necessarily be upon a person.
22 Having considered all of
the relevant conduct of the defendant, in my view the conduct described in those
facts do constitute an
offence involving violent conduct being perpetrated by
the offender. He has firstly used a knife to damage motor vehicles. He has
caused members of the public to react to his behaviour by summonsing police. The
police on attending have confronted the accused
and called upon him to drop the
large butcher’s knife which was in his right hand, and the large knife in
his left hand. Police
have announced their office, drawn a firearm, and even
then the accused has refused to drop the knives. A second demand was also
refused, requiring the use of capsicum spray, before finally the knives were
thrown to the ground.
23 It is my opinion that the accused has been
charged with an offence involving violent conduct, and that he is therefore not
an eligible
person for a Drug Court program. The matters must be returned to the
Local Court.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (29.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter