URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/151.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Sideris (No 2) [2025] NSWCATOD 151; (11 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Sideris (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 151
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
11 November 2025
Decision Date:
11 November 2025
Occupational Division
Seiden SC DCJ, Deputy President
(1) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act), a hearing is dispensed
(2) Leave is granted under
Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
(NSW) for the Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales to withdraw the Application for Disciplinary Findings
and Orders filed
on 3 May 2024.
(3) Pursuant to s 55(1)(a)
of the NCAT Act, the proceedings are dismissed.
directions hearing on 12 November 2025 is vacated.
Catchwords:
OCCUPATIONS – Legal practitioners – Solicitors –
Complaints and discipline – Application for leave to withdraw
disciplinary
application under
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
(NSW) – Practitioner previously removed from Roll of Australian lawyers
– Utility – Termination of proceedings
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW)
Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
Cases Cited:
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v DRM
[2021] NSWCATOD
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v DWO
[2020] NSWCATOD
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Sideris (No 2)
NSWCATOD 121
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Sideris
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Sideris
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Sideris
NSWCATOD 26
Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v DBW
NSWCATOD 71
Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v Loukas (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATOD 91
Forest v Suzanne
[2022] NSWCATAP 188
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Coleman
[2025] NSWCATOD 78
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Grygiel (Termination Application)
[2020] NSWCATOD 53
(2011) 243 CLR 506
[2011] HCA 4
Jali Local Aboriginal Land Council v
[2025] NSWCATOD 57
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v Police Tribunal
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd v Ryde Local Council
(2005) 62 NSWLR 512
[2005] NSWCA 101
McKinnon v Secretary, Department of
(2006) 228 CLR 423
[2006] HCA 45
O'Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR
Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission (New South Wales) v Browning
(1947) 74 CLR 492
Procedural rulings
Council of the Law Society New South Wales (Applicant)
George Sideris
(Respondent)
Representation:
M P Nesbeth (Applicant)
Solicitors:
Hicksons Lawyers
(Applicant)
Respondent (self-represented)
File Number(s):
2024/00164688
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
3 May 2024, the Council of the Law Society of New South Wales (the Council)
filed an Application for Disciplinary Findings and
Orders, naming George Sideris
as the respondent (the respondent) and seeking a finding under s 297 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW)
(the Uniform Law) that he engaged in
professional misconduct.
application is the second disciplinary application brought by the Council
against the respondent. The first disciplinary application,
filed in June 2023,
resulted in the Tribunal finding that the respondent was guilty of professional
misconduct (
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Sideris
[2024] NSWCATOD 3)
and recommending that he be removed from the local roll of
lawyers maintained by the Supreme Court of New South Wales (
Council of the
Law Society of New South Wales v Sideris (No 2)
[2024] NSWCATOD 121).
Subsequent to that decision, the Court of Appeal ordered that the
respondent’s name be removed from the Roll of Australian
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Sideris
[2025] NSWCA
current proceedings were stayed pending the finalisation of the proceedings in
the Court of Appeal:
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v
[2025] NSWCATOD 26.
Council now seeks leave to withdraw the second disciplinary application and for
the proceedings to be terminated on the basis
that their continuation is not
warranted in the public interest under
Legal Profession Uniform
Law Application Act 2014
(NSW) (the Application
Termination of the proceedings
147 of the Application Act provides:
147 Early termination of proceedings before Tribunal
(1) Proceedings before the Tribunal with respect to a complaint cannot be
terminated, whether by withdrawal of the disciplinary application
or otherwise,
before the Tribunal makes its final decision about the complaint, without the
leave of the Tribunal.
(2) The Tribunal may give leave for the purposes of this section if it is
satisfied that continuation of the proceedings is not warranted
in the public
Determination
of what is in the public interest requires a “value judgment ... confined
only ‘in so far as the subject
matter and the scope and purpose of the
statutory enactments may enable ... legislature could have had in
O'Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210
at 216, citing
Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission (New South Wales) v Browning
(1947) 74 CLR 492 at 505.
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR 506
[2011] HCA 4
the High Court considered
the words “public interest” in connection with a contention that a
journalist had breached
a suppression order made by a trial Judge. French CJ
said (at [31]):
“... When used in a statute, the term derives its content from ‘the
subject matter and the scope and purpose’ of
the enactment in which it
appears. ...
... The application of a public interest criterion may require a balancing of
competing interests and ‘be very much a question
of fact and
McKinnon v Secretary, Department of Treasury
(2006) 228 CLR 423
[2006] HCA 45
the High Court said:
“It may readily be accepted that most questions about what is in
‘the public interest’ will require consideration
of a number of
competing arguments about, or features or ‘facets’ of, the public
objectives of the applicable statute inform which factors are material here. The
objectives of the Uniform Law are set out in
s 3, which relevantly
3 Objectives
The objectives of this Law are to promote the administration of justice and an
efficient and effective Australian legal profession,
(b) ensuring lawyers are competent and maintain high ethical and professional
standards in the provision of legal services; and
(c) enhancing the protection of clients of law practices and the protection of
the public generally; and
(e) promoting regulation of the legal profession that is efficient, effective,
targeted and proportionate; and
objectives are found in Chapter 5 of the Uniform Law. These objectives apply to
disciplinary proceedings under s 300. Section
260 states:
260 Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are—
(a) to provide a framework for the timely and effective resolution of disputes
or issues between clients and lawyers or law practices;
(b) to provide a scheme for the discipline of the Australian legal profession,
in the interests of the administration of justice
and for the protection of
clients of law practices and the public generally; and
(c) to monitor, promote and enforce the professional standards, competence and
honesty of the Australian legal profession.
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v DWO
[2020] NSWCATOD 123
), the Tribunal considered the purpose of disciplinary proceedings
and factors relevant to whether the continuation of the proceedings
public interest. At [36]-[37], the Tribunal said:
"36 The utility of the continuation of the proceedings is
relevant to the question of whether the continuation of the proceedings
the public interest (see
Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v
[2017] NSWCATOD 71
37 Disciplinary proceedings in relation to a legal
practitioner are pursued for a number of purposes, including the protection
the public from misconduct by the legal practitioner in question and from the
misconduct of other legal practitioners who might
conduct themselves in a
similar way. Such proceedings also seek to set, clarify and maintain the
appropriate standard of conduct
for legal practitioners and to denounce,
publically, misconduct, and, in doing so, maintain public confidence in the
legal profession."
said in the context of disciplinary proceedings in relation to a health
practitioner, the following is apposite. In
Prakash v Health Care Complaints
[2006] NSWCA 153
Basten JA explained:
“The purpose of any order made upon a finding that a complaint has been
proved, is said to be protective of the interests of
the public at large, but
more particularly patients or potential patients of the practitioner concerned.
However, the public interests
include, indirectly, the standing of the medical
profession and the maintenance of public confidence in the high standards of
practitioners. There is also an element of deterrence or, to put it more
positively, encouragement to other practitioners to recognise
the importance of
complying with professional standards and the risks of failing to do so.”
The parties’ submissions
applicant submitted that the continuation of the present proceedings is not in
the public interest for the following reasons:
"(a) The Respondent has already been found guilty of professional misconduct and
the Court of Appeal as determined that his name
should be removed from the Roll
of Australian lawyers maintained by the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
(b) The conduct giving rise to the Court of Appeal’s decision is similar
to the alleged conduct the subject of these proceedings.
Thus, the continuing of
the proceedings would serve as little additional deterrence to others.
(c) Any future application for readmission the Respondent may decide to make
would require a formal application process and appropriate
vetting. Accordingly,
the public interest would already be adequately protected.
(d) Continuation of these will do nothing significant to further achieve the
objectives of disciplinary proceedings.
(e) In the circumstances, continuation of the proceedings would not be
proportionate to the stated outcomes.
(f) The Tribunal’s and applicant’s resources could be directed to
more pressing matters."
respondent’s submissions dated 10 September 2025 and provided to the
Tribunal on 15 September 2025 appear to focus on why
the first disciplinary
proceedings were misconceived and should be reversed. They do not respond to the
issues raised in the present
application.
Consideration
purpose of disciplinary proceedings against legal practitioners includes
securing public confidence in the legal profession through
the protection of the
public and by deterring other practitioners from engaging in the same
misconduct:
at [37]. Any action taken in relation to alleged
misconduct is to be “efficient, effective, targeted and
proportionate”:
Uniform Law, s 3(e).
noted above, the utility of the proceedings is relevant to the question of
whether the continuation of the proceedings is in the
public interest: see
Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v DBW
[2017] NSWCATOD 71
no further protective purpose can be achieved by continuing the proceedings. The
respondent has already been subject to the
first disciplinary application; and
he has been removed from the Roll of Australian lawyers maintained by the
Supreme Court. There
is little more the Tribunal could do in the exercise of its
powers under s 302 of the Uniform Law to advance the objects of the Uniform
is no need for specific deterrence in this instance, as the respondent has
already been struck off the Roll. In terms of general
deterrence, continuing the
current proceedings would serve no additional protective purpose, as the conduct
the subject of the complaint
in the current proceedings is unique. To the extent
other practitioners need to be deterred from engaging in the same conduct, the
earlier proceedings provide adequate caution.
significant factor is whether it is in the public interest for the
Tribunal’s resources to be occupied by this matter.
Given the lack of
utility in continuing the current proceedings, the Tribunal’s resources
would be better served if they were
directed to other matters.
the absence of submissions from the respondent, it is nonetheless open to find
that termination of the proceedings would save him
time and costs.
balance, it is not in the public interest for the proceedings to continue,
having regard to the objectives of the Uniform Law.
Council is granted leave to withdraw the Application for Disciplinary Findings
and Orders filed 3 May 2024 and the proceedings
are terminated.
of abundant clarity, the proceedings will be dismissed under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act), which
concerns withdrawals.
Dispensing with a hearing
parties were directed to address in their written submissions whether the
Tribunal should make an order dispensing with a hearing
under s 50(2) of the
Council indicated it does not object to an order being made dispensing with a
hearing in relation to the withdrawal application.
respondent’s submissions dated 10 September 2025 do not address this
cases have considered what principles might be relevant to determining whether
to dispense with a hearing:
Jali Local Aboriginal Land Council v Anderson
[2025] NSWCATOD 57
Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v
Loukas (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATOD 91
weighing in favour of holding a hearing include the following:
(1) The Objects of the Tribunal, which include “to ensure that the
Tribunal is accountable and has processes that are open
and transparent; and to
promote public confidence in tribunal decision-making in the State and in the
conduct of tribunal members”:
NCAT Act, sub-ss 3(f) and (g).
(2) The importance of open justice:
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v Police
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd v
Ryde Local Council
(2005) 62 NSWLR 512
[2005] NSWCA 101
principles apply to the Tribunal:
Forest v Suzanne
[2022] NSWCATAP 188
(3) The starting position is that a hearing is required (unless it falls into
one of the specified exceptions) and that hearings
are open to the public
(unless otherwise ordered): NCAT Act, ss 49 and 50.
(4) In relation to legal disciplinary proceedings, hearings into allegations of
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct for the purposes
of the Uniform Law are to be open to the public, unless the Tribunal orders
otherwise: Uniform Law, s
301(2); NCAT Act, Sch 5, Div 4, cl 22(1).
the other hand, the factors that favour a hearing being dispensed with
(1) The Uniform Law and Application Act do not specify that a hearing must take
place, in such a case as this.
(2) The issues for determination in the withdrawal application are of narrow
compass and the parties have been given ample opportunity
to address them. The
Council’s submissions comprehensively address the matters the Tribunal
must take into account.
(3) The costs savings for the parties and conserving the resources of the
Tribunal, particularly in light of the lack of utility
of the underlying
proceedings.
afforded the parties an opportunity to make submissions and taken those
submissions into account, a hearing is dispensed
Constitution
of the Tribunal
parties were also directed to address the Tribunal on the preliminary issue of
how the Tribunal should be constituted for the
purposes of the present
application.
18 of Schedule 5 to the NCAT Act sets out how the Tribunal is to be constituted
when it is exercising functions under the Uniform
Law and Application Act. It
18 Division functions under legal profession legislation
(1) The Tribunal, when conducting proceedings initiated under the
Profession Uniform Law (NSW)
, section 300 in relation to a complaint, must
be constituted with Division members in accordance with whichever of the
constitutions the President determines as being appropriate for the
particular case—
(a) in the case of a complaint against a barrister—
(i) one member with a judicial qualification, one member with
a professional qualification who is a barrister and one general
(ii) 2 members with a professional qualification who are
barristers and one general member,
(b) in the case of a complaint against a solicitor—
(i) one member with a judicial qualification, one member with
a professional qualification who is a solicitor and one general
(ii) 2 members with a professional qualification who are
solicitors and one general member,
(c) in the case of a complaint against a respondent lawyer who
is neither a barrister nor a solicitor—any constitution specified
paragraph (a) or (b).
(2) The Tribunal, when exercising other Division functions for
the purposes of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW)
, including making ancillary or
interlocutory decisions of the Tribunal, must be constituted by 1 or more
Division members, at least
1 of whom has a judicial qualification or a
professional qualification.
18(1) applies when the Tribunal is “conducting proceedings initiated under
Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW)
, section 300 in relation to a
complaint”. Clause 18(2) applies when the Tribunal is “exercising
other Division functions
for the purposes of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Application Act 2014
Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW)
including making ancillary or interlocutory decisions”.
the underlying proceedings, being the second disciplinary application brought by
the Council against the respondent, were initiated
under s 300 of the Uniform
Law and cl 18(1) would unambiguously apply if the proceedings were to be heard
and finally determined.
the position is less clear for a withdrawal application made under s 147 of
the Application Act, in the context of proceedings
brought under s 300 of the
Uniform Law.
applicant submits that cl 18(2) applies to the withdrawal application. The
submission was put on the following basis:
"This is because the wording of clause 18(2) could reasonably be construed to
a. clause 18(1) applicable to proceedings initiated under section 300 of the
Uniform Law other than in circumstances where the Tribunal
is tasked with making
ancillary or interlocutory decisions in applications made under the Application
Act or Uniform Law; and
b. clause 18(2) applicable in circumstances, such as these, whether the Tribunal
is tasked with making an interlocutory decision
regarding an application made
under the Application Act."
Health Care Complaints Commission v Coleman
[2025] NSWCATOD 78
considered how the Tribunal should be constituted when terminating a
disciplinary inquiry on the withdrawal of an application
under cl 12, Sch 5D to
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
. While the
proceedings in that case were under different legislation, they relevantly
involved consideration of whether a withdrawal
application was "ancillary”
or “interlocutory” for the purposes of the NCAT Act. At [8] I
“... The terms ‘ancillary’ and ‘interlocutory’
take their meaning from the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act). An ancillary decision includes one that is preliminary to a
decision determining proceedings, and is apt to describe
an application to
terminate an inquiry; and an interlocutory decision includes a summary
dismissal: s 4 of the NCAT Act. I am satisfied
that I have authority to decide
this application.”
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v DRM
[2021] NSWCATOD 105
, Deputy President Boland ADCJ considered how the Tribunal should be
constituted when determining applications under s 147 of the
Application Act and
concluded that her Honour could hear the matter, as a single member having a
judicial qualification.
counter example is found in
, which was also an application to
withdraw the proceedings under s 147 of the Application Act. While that decision
does not touch
on the issue of the Tribunal’s constitution, I note that
the Tribunal was constituted by a panel of three, consistent with
cl 18(1) of
Sch 5 to the NCAT Act. The same approach was taken in
Council of the New
South Wales Bar Association v DBW
[2017] NSWCATOD 71.
the differing approaches of previous Tribunals, I am satisfied that a decision
concerning a withdrawal application under s
147 of the Application Act is an
ancillary decision. For such applications, then, the Tribunal can be constituted
by a single member
with a judicial qualification or a professional
qualification: NCAT Act, Sch 5, cl 18(2).
Tribunal orders:
(1) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act), a hearing is dispensed with.
(2) Leave is granted under
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Application Act 2014
(NSW) for the Council of the Law Society of New South
Wales to withdraw the Application for Disciplinary Findings and Orders filed
3 May 2024.
(3) Pursuant to s 55(1)(a) of the NCAT Act, the proceedings are dismissed.
(4) The directions hearing on 12 November 2025 is vacated.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (270 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter