URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/580.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alfaro v St Marys Gardens Aged Care Centre Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPIC 580; (28 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION OF MEMBER
Alfaro v St Marys Gardens Aged Care Centre Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPIC
Marga Alfaro
RESPONDENT:
St Marys Gardens Aged Care Centre Pty Ltd
Fiona Seaton
DATE OF DECISION:
28 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workers Compensation Act 1987
; claim for cost
of C5-C7 anterior decompression and fusion surgery; whether reasonably necessary
as a result of injury;
– the C5-C7 anterior decompression and
fusion surgery proposed is reasonably necessary medical treatment as a result of
on 7 May 2019 pursuant to
section 60.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
The Personal Injury Commission (Commission) determines:
C5-C7 anterior decompression and fusion surgery proposed by Dr Singh is
reasonably necessary medical treatment as a result of
injury on 7 May 2019
pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Commission orders:
respondent to pay the costs of the C5-C7 anterior decompression and fusion
surgery proposed by Dr Singh and ancillary costs at
the appropriate SIRA
gazetted rates.
A brief statement is attached setting out the Commission’s reasons
for the determination.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
applicant Ms Marga Alfaro was employed by the respondent as a General Services
Officer from June 2002 working on a part time basis.
She later took on the
additional role of a Cook. On 7 May 2019 she pressed the power button on the
gas/electric deep fryer to prepare
to cook the evening meal and suffered an
electric shock, falling backwards to the ground and landing heavily on the
concrete floor
against her back and right shoulder.
respondent issued a dispute notice under
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
on 26 May 2021 disputing
liability for weekly compensation, medical expenses and lump sum compensation
arising from neck, right shoulder,
thoracic spine, back, right leg, right heel
and primary psychological injuries. “Electric shock” remained
accepted. This
decision was maintained following internal review on 21 February
2022, and maintained and amended following internal review on
22 September
request for approval of C5-C6 and C6-C7 anterior cervical decompression and
fusion was made by Dr Bisham Singh, the applicant’s
treating specialist,
received by the respondent on 8 November 2022.
notice was issued on 29 January 2025 disputing C6-7 anterior cervical
decompression and fusion proposed by Dr Singh, although the
neck injury was now
accepted. The dispute was maintained following internal review on 19 June
applicant lodged an Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD) with the Personal
Injury Commission (Commission) on 7 July 2025 claiming
future medical or related
expenses for C5-C7 anterior decompression and fusion surgery proposed by Dr
Singh in the amount of $20,698.50
and ancillary medical expenses.
dispute was listed for conciliation conference and arbitration hearing on 1
October 2025.
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
parties agree the issue remaining in dispute is whether the C5-C7 anterior
decompression and fusion surgery proposed by Dr Singh
is reasonably necessary
medical treatment as a result of injury on 7 May 2019 pursuant to s 60 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
PROCEDURE BEFORE THE COMMISSION
parties appeared for conciliation conference and arbitration hearing on 1
October 2025 in Sydney. Ms Alfaro was present with her
husband Mr Alfaro. Mr
Jarryd Malouf of counsel appeared for the applicant instructed by Ms Nathalie
Ghneim, legal practitioner. Mr
Greg Young of counsel appeared for the respondent
instructed by Ms Imogen Mahoney, legal practitioner, and Mr Lean was also
conciliation the respondent objected to the admission of the applicant’s
Application to Lodge Additional Documents dated
26 September 2025 with the
further report of Dr Singh, treating spine surgeon.
respondent submitted it would be disadvantaged if the report were to be admitted
and there would be a lack of procedural fairness.
The applicant did not seek
leave at the preliminary conference on 6 August 2025 to put on additional
evidence. The applicant has
pleaded two level surgery at C5 to C7 and the amount
sought is $20,698.50. Dr Singh’s quote of 8 April 2020 is for single level
surgery at C6 to C7 in the amount of $20,698.50. The respondent’s
independent expert Dr Gambhir provides a report on 30 December
2024 regarding
only C6 to C7 surgery and he has not had the opportunity to consider two level
fusion surgery. If Dr Singh’s
latest report had been available earlier the
respondent could have requested Dr Gambhir’s opinion on two level
applicant submitted the request for surgery had been made many years previously.
Dr Singh is the applicant’s treating specialist and is not an
independent medical expert.
Dr Singh’s request for two level surgery
appears to have been made in March or April this year although that request is
in evidence. The respondent did not request a comment on two level surgery
at that time. Two level surgery is pleaded in the ARD
and the question was not
asked or raised by the respondent earlier. There is an estimate of fees for
surgery with the ARD dated 1
November 2022 for C5-C6 and C6-C7 anterior cervical
decompression and fusion in the amount of $13,071. The applicant conceded costs
of two level fusion were not with the ARD and undertook to provide an updated
consideration of counsel’s submissions I admitted the applicant’s
Application to Lodge Additional Documents
dated 26 September 2025 pursuant to r
67C(4) of the
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
(Rules). I was satisfied the
introduction of the document was necessary to facilitate the just, quick and
cost-effective resolution
of the real issue in the proceedings which is whether
the surgery proposed by Dr Singh is reasonably necessary as a result of the
applicant’s injury.
application was made no later than three working days before the
conciliation/arbitration in accordance with r 67C(1) of the Rules
respondent conceded, and is the one occasion only on which the applicant has
lodged additional documents. There is no requirement
in the Rules that a party
seek leave at a preliminary conference to put on additional evidence.
initial request for surgery was made in 2020. A request for two level fusion
surgery appears to have made at least earlier this
year and is pleaded in the
ARD filed on
7 July 2025. As Dr Gambhir does not support single level fusion
surgery at this time it would seem unlikely he would change his view
and support
two level fusion surgery. The prejudice to the applicant of a delay in her
proceedings, noting this is a request for
surgery, was not in my view outweighed
by potential prejudice or lack of procedural fairness to the respondent in the
circumstances.
am satisfied the parties to the dispute understand the nature of the application
and the legal implications of any assertion made
in the information supplied. I
have used my best endeavours in attempting to bring the parties to the dispute
to a settlement acceptable
to all of them. I am satisfied the parties have had
sufficient opportunity to explore settlement and that they have been unable to
reach an agreed resolution of the dispute.
Documentary evidence
following documents were in evidence before the Commission and considered in
making this determination:
(a) ARD and attached documents;
(b) Reply and attached documents, and
(c) applicant’s Application to Lodge Additional Documents dated 26
September 2025 and attached document (ALAD).
Oral evidence
application was made to adduce oral evidence.
Applicant’s
applicant relies on her statement signed on 8 October 2020 and three
supplementary statements.
her statement of 8 October 2020 the applicant describes commencing employment
with the respondent as a General Services Officer
part time in June 2022 working
35 hours a week, and when the Cook was unavailable she assumed their
role and carried out their duties on increased pay. She generally
days a week in the role of Cook and three days as a General Services
7 May 2019 she was preparing to cook the evening meal when she pressed the power
button on the gas/electric deep fryer and suffered
an electric shock. She fell
backwards to the ground and landed heavily on the concrete floor against her
back and right shoulder.
applicant sustained injuries to her right shoulder, neck, lower back, right leg
and right heel as well as a psychological injury
in the form of post-traumatic
stress disorder.
her cervical spine injury, the applicant continued to experience neck pain
following the injury. An X-ray was taken on 9
May 2019, physio was recommended,
the pain in her neck persisted and then became particularly debilitating.
was referred to Dr Manish Gupta, orthopaedic surgeon, who referred her for an
MRI on 12 August 2019. This showed stenosis and
disc bulging at multiple levels
on her neck. An ultrasound carried out at Nepean Hospital evidenced a bulging
disc at the C5/6 level
impinging on her nerve. Dr Gupta referred the applicant
to Dr Singh in August 2019.
Singh proposed physiotherapy for her neck symptoms and an injection, and he
referred the applicant to Dr Shawn Watson, neurologist.
Dr Watson carried out a
nerve conduction study and the applicant understands the results appeared
normal. Physiotherapy helped to
reduce pain in her right shoulder and neck.
November 2019 Dr Singh explained the applicant would likely require fusion and
decompression surgery to her neck and referred her
to Western Sydney Pain Clinic
for assessment. Dr Singh then recommended a guided injection to the C6/7 level
and reiterated if the
pain continued she would require neck surgery. The
applicant had the guided injection in January 2020. She noticed some initial
relief however it only lasted a few days. The pain became more severe.
25 March 2020 Dr Singh formally recommended the applicant undergo anterior
cervical decompression and fusion at C6/7 as she had
exhausted all conservative
treatment options. She wished to go ahead as she did not feel she could continue
to manage the severe
pain in her neck any longer. She cannot bear the thought of
living with the pain in her neck indefinitely.
pain in her neck and the right side of her body hinders her ability to complete
activities of daily living.
her supplementary statement of 4 March 2022 the applicant says she continued to
consult her general practitioner (GP) Dr Kulanayagam
and when he ceased working
at that practice she began consulting Dr Guillerma De Leon. Relevantly she says
her neck and lower back
had deteriorated causing chronic pain and disabilities.
returned to work on light duties in 2021 but she had persistent restrictions in
her right shoulder, neck and upper back. Her pain
woke her up at night. She
attended physiotherapy which slightly helped to reduce her symptoms. She had
treatment for a frozen right
shoulder, took pain medications and
anti-depressants. She continued to experience restricted range of movement and
pain including
in her neck. She struggles with daily living activities and
her supplementary statement of 14 March 2024 the applicant addresses the
treatment dispute regarding the fusion surgery proposed
by Dr Singh. The
applicant confirms she had no back or neck pain before the injury in 2019.
Singh’s view is the fusion at C6/7 is necessary in attempting to improve
her condition and quality of life, she has exhausted
many alternate treatment
methods with little relief from her ongoing pain and discomfort, the treatment
is appropriate and widely
accepted by practising spine surgeons, and the
alternative would be permanent functional incapacitation.
Khong is also supportive of the proposed treatment. His view is while there are
alternate options, given her ongoing pain those
methods are unlikely to bring
her long-term pain relief. A C6/7 fusion could be an appropriate treatment in
applicant feels she has exhausted all other treatment options and has no choice
but to have the surgery. Her constant pain and
discomfort has continued to
exacerbate her psychological condition and she constantly feels hopeless and
miserable. She is in immense
pain and she is prepared to try anything to reduce
her symptoms and restore some degree of quality of life.
her supplementary statement of 26 June 2025 the applicant disagrees with Dr
Gambhir’s opinion and she believes Dr Singh’s
report should be
considered as more reliable and accurate. Dr Khong continues to support the
proposed treatment as being reasonably
necessary. In his last report Dr Khong
noted alternate treatment options of a C6 and C7 perineural injection and in his
most recent
report he noted the applicant failed to see any improvements through
non-operative management.
applicant continues to be in immense pain and she is prepared to do anything to
reduce her symptoms and restore some degree of
quality of life, especially by
having the surgery recommended by Dr Singh and supported by Dr Khong. She just
wants to get this surgery
done so she can alleviate the pain she is suffering
from in an attempt to recover and move on with her life.
Khong, independent neurosurgeon
Khong reports on 19 July 2023 the applicant has non-verifiable radicular
complaints related to her cervical and lumbar spine. She
musculoligamentous strain of the cervical spine and also degenerative disc
disease at C5/6 and C6/7 with foraminal stenosis
at both levels. She likely
experienced an exacerbation of these previously asymptomatic degenerative
changes in her cervical spine.
The effects of the injury have not ceased.
need for a C6/7 anterior cervical decompression and fusion was directly caused
by the applicant’s workplace injury. Dr Khong’s
opinion is she may
benefit from having sequential right C5/6 and C6/7 perineural injections. If
both injections significantly help
with her pain then fusion at one or both of
these levels would be appropriate in his view.
Alternatives
including analgesia, physiotherapy and steroid injections are unlikely to bring
her long-term pain relief given the applicant
has had pain for over four years.
The cost of a single level fusion is approximately $10,000.
there is evidence that the applicant’s pain is related to C6 +/- C7 neural
compression, a fusion would be accepted as appropriate
and likely to be
effective. Surgery on her cervical spine may reduce some of her right sided neck
and arm symptoms.
28 May 2025 Dr Khong reports the applicant returns with persistent midline and
right sided paraspinal neck pain radiating down
the right arm. Surgery is likely
to result in some improvement in her right sided neck and arm pain.
Khong recommends a C5/6 and C6/7 anterior cervical discectomy and fusion.
applicant recalls two weeks of improvement in her symptoms after the right C7
perineural injection and her MRI demonstrates right
sided C5/6 foraminal
stenosis and likely right C6/7 foraminal stenosis. It is now six years since her
injury and she has failed non-operative
management. She does not want further
steroid injections.
this stage a C5/6 and C6/7 anterior cervical discectomy and fusion is reasonably
necessary in Dr Khong’s opinion. She will
not improve without
Dr Mohammed Assem, independent rehabilitation
19 August 2020 Dr Assem reports relevantly that the applicant sustained a soft
tissue injury to the cervical spine and continued
to have neck pain and
was loss of sensation in the C7 dermatomal distribution although there was no
concordant evidence on radiological imaging of
nerve root impingement.
underlying degenerative cervical disease pathology has been rendered
symptomatic. There was moderate cervical canal stenosis at
C5-6 consistent with
the symptoms reported.
Assem’s opinion is the applicant would benefit from ongoing physiotherapy
to reduce neck pain and she has declined to proceed
with the proposed anterior
cervical decompression and fusion. The surgery may be necessary if there is
unrelenting pain or a progressive
neurological deficit. Dr Assem assesses 6%
whole person impairment of the cervical spine.
his supplementary report of 9 September 2021 Dr Assem comments on Dr
Keller’s opinion about the injury and its effects.
Chow, independent psychiatrist
25 May 2020 Dr Chow takes a history including of ongoing neck and arm pain which
has not changed over time. Her ongoing neck pain
radiates to the right arm and
is worse than the shoulder and back pain.
Chow diagnoses post-traumatic stress disorder and adjustment disorder as a
result of the work injuries. He assesses 19% whole person
impairment.
Chow’s report of 23 December 2021 includes that the applicant has
deteriorated further and is now suffering from major depressive
Dr Bisham Singh, treating spine surgeon
20 September 2020 Dr Singh provides an unequivocal diagnosis of an injury to the
cervical spine clearly seen on imaging, confirmed
by diagnostic injection and
related to the workplace incident. She has a disc injury and bulging at
treatment she is likely to have ongoing symptoms, she has structural pathology
in the cervical spine and has failed treatment
by non-operative means. The
surgical option of decompression and fusion is reasonably necessary. A surgical
fee estimate was provided
at gazetted rates.
Singh reports on 4 August 2023 the applicant has ongoing pain down her arm and
has evidence of disc bulging at C5-6 and C6-7 giving
rise to foraminal stenosis
on the right.
was temporary relief during the anaesthetic phase by an injection in her
cervical spine but her pain has now returned and he
recommends she consider
surgery as a more durable solution.
whether he considers the fusion at C6-7 to be reasonably necessary medical
treatment, Dr Singh notes she has had disabling symptoms
for several months
which have not responded to medication, and injections have only given her
short-term relief. The MRI scan of
the cervical spine reveals a structural
pathology with compression of the neurological elements and therefore surgery is
necessary and appropriate. The alternative is to accept pain
management and permanent functional incapacitation. The cost is commensurate
with the gazetted rates.
treatment is effective as it will decompress the neurological elements in the
cervical spine and stabilise the injured motion
segments from C5 to C7 in Dr
Singh’s opinion. This is an appropriate method of treatment and accepted
by practising spine surgeons.
5 March 2025 Dr Singh reports to Dr De Leon that he recommended anterior
cervical decompression and fusion from C5 to C7 for nerve
compression resulting
in pain and weakness in the right arm two and a half years ago.
CT scan of the cervical spine reports similar findings as before with severe
stenosis in the cervical spine on the right side at
C5/6 and bilateral stenosis
at C6/7. The applicant has not been getting better without surgical treatment.
surgery should be decompression in the cervical spine and this should be along
with a stabilisation of range of motion segments
from C5-C7. Dr Singh was to
send a request to the insurer.
Singh provides a review on 15 April 2025 in follow-up with the applicant. There
had been no response to the request made for surgery
in early March, and it was
not approved two and a half years ago. The symptoms have become worse.
Singh provides a further report on 12 September 2025. He still believes the
proposed C6-C7 anterior cervical decompression surgery
is reasonably necessary.
applicant still has neck and arm pain with pins and needles going to the right
hand. She has weakness of the right triceps and
diminished sensation in the
right C6 and C7 dermatomes. A recent CT scan again shows severe stenosis at C5/6
and bilateral stenosis
at C6/7. The aim of surgery is to decompress the nerves
thereby improving her neck and arm pain, also allowing her to have some recovery
of motor function.
has exhausted all recommended conservative treatment options available having
trialled bed rest, physiotherapy, medication, hot
packs, ultrasound, massage and
previous spinal injections.
Dr Sathiyapal Kulanayagam, treating
general practitioner
Kulanayagam’s report of 20 September 2020 with respect to the
applicant’s cervical spine includes that on 8 May 2019
she had neck pain
after the electrocution and the pain continued. She had seen the orthopaedic
surgeon and had a CT scan of the cervical
Kulanayagam believed the applicant needed extensive physiotherapy, gym-based
exercises and hydrotherapy. She must be referred to
an orthopaedic surgeon after
at least 10 sessions of physiotherapy and gym-based exercises to consider any
surgical options.
Ms Kaelin Moodley, treating
physiotherapist
Moodley reports on 25 July 2019 the applicant initially presented with upper
thoracic pain, cervical pain and altered sensation
into the arm. The cervical
pain continues to persist.
Discharge Summary Nepean
applicant was discharged from Nepean Hospital on 15 August 2019 having presented
with right sided headache and paraesthesia/numbness
of upper limbs on a
background of recent occupational injury (electrocution and fall onto back) with
resulting C5/C6 foraminal stenosis
without nerve root compression or canal
Radiology reports
reports concerning the applicant’s cervical spine include a CT scan on
1 September 2021 that concludes right foraminal stenosis potentially
compressing the right C6 nerve root and multilevel low-grade
facet joint
arthropathy throughout the cervical spine.
CT scan of 26 October 2021 concludes moderate right-sided foraminal stenosis of
C5/6 level with potential impingement of right
C6 nerve root.
CT scan of 31 December 2024 comments on multi-level cervical spondylosis similar
to previous reports, with the changes appearing
most advanced at C5/6 where
there is severe right foraminal stenosis with potential impingement of the
exiting right C6 nerve root.
At C6/7 there is bilateral foraminal stenosis,
mild-moderate on the right and mild on the left.
clinical records of NSW Spine Specialists, The Healthy Body Company, Rouse Hill
Medical Imaging, Joslyn Stanley, psychologist,
and Ropes Crossing Medical Centre
are with the ARD.
Rouse Hill Medical Imaging MRI cervical spine report of 1 September 2022
concludes minor disc degenerative changes at C6/7 with
impingement of bilateral
C7 exiting nerves and at C5/6, with possible irritation of the right C6 exiting
nerve and no high-grade
canal stenosis.
Workers Compensation
Commission Certificate of Determination
applicant’s earlier proceedings were discontinued by way of a Certificate
of Determination – Consent Orders on 9 February
2021, and it was noted the
respondent was to pay the applicant voluntary weekly compensation from 12 April
2020 to date and continuing.
Respondent’s evidence
Notification of Injury/Illness
respondent’s Notification of Injury is dated 7 May
Accident/incident form
incident on 7 May 2019 is described in the Accident/Incident Form with the
location of injury shown as arm and hand with pins
Dispute notices
respondent relies on s 78 notices issued on 26 May 2021, 5 December 2022 and
29 January 2025, and internal review outcome notices of 1 February 2022, 22
September 2023 and 19 June 2025.
Medical reports
reports with the reply include an X-ray cervical spine of 30 December 2014 that
finds satisfactory cervical alignment, normal
outline of the neural exit
foramina and no significant degenerative change.
CT scan report of 25 May 2015 includes the impression of mild C5/6-disc disease
with minimal broad based disc bulge and minimal
right foraminal narrowing at
that level, with no other significant abnormality.
Khaga refers the applicant to Dr Al-Khawaja on 2 June 2015 for opinion and
management including for cervical disc disease and left
neck pain with referred
arm pain, with disc prolapse at C5/6 and radicular pain at C5/6
distribution.
Jahan refers the applicant to Greater West Physiotherapy & Health Centre on
21 August 2015 for opinion and management of cervical C5-6 degenerative
Khaga carried out a team care arrangement review on 28 December 2015 with one of
the goals met being to improve function including
of cervical disc disease.
Khaga’s GP Management Plans between 28 September 2015 and 22 February 2017
include as one of the goals met being to improve
function including of cervical
disc disease.
Kulanayagam refers the applicant to Nepean Hospital on 21 October 2018 for
opinion and management of chest discomfort and burning
sensation for one week,
weakness in the right arm, tingling as well as numbness and also neck pain.
Examination is unremarkable and
she needs further assessment.
Phillip Brown, independent psychiatrist, provides a report to the respondent on
17 December 2019 regarding the psychological aspects of her claim, not
relevant to these proceedings.
applicant’s current symptoms included very severe pain at the back of her
neck and down the right leg. She also has pain
at the right side of her neck and
the pain has been there since the accident and has got worse and worse. The
right sided-neck pain
radiates down the right arm at the ulnar side and goes to
the middle finger.
Brown reports on 4 May 2021 regarding the applicant’s claim for permanent
impairment.
comments and opinions in his report include that the applicant is for the major
part malingering her physical symptoms and their
cause all remained
applicant reports her main physical problem is the pain in her right neck. Dr
Brown opines that the applicant should have whatever
surgical treatment is
necessary to alleviate her organic pain, as for as long as she has organic pain
needing such surgical alleviation
then she is likely to present with some form
of adjustment disorder.
Brown concludes the applicant has no ongoing psychological condition due to the
work-related injury on 7 May 2019 and this has
been the situation for a
prolonged time.
Dr Andrew Keller, independent occupational
17 February 2020 Dr Keller reports the applicant’s presenting complaint is
constant right sided neck pain radiating to the
right shoulder. Dr
Keller’s opinion is there are no objective findings that any injuries
presented that day that can be attributed
to the subject work incident.
Dr Keller’s opinion her current physical presentation is clearly
inconsistent and exaggerated. There is no objective evidence
of ongoing physical
injuries that require further treatment.
20 January 2021 Dr Keller reports the applicant’s presenting complaint is
constant neck pain that radiates to the right shoulder,
worst at night and
better with activity. On examination Dr Keller relevantly found inconsistent
restriction of motion in the cervical
Keller is unaware of any research that links electric shocks with cervical disc
injuries and he is not convinced there is any objective
evidence of injury to
the cervical spine, lumbar spine or shoulders.
to the MRI of the cervical spine on 12 August 2019, Dr Keller’s opinion is
the findings are consistent with age-appropriate
degenerative changes, of which
there is similar evidence on her lumbar spine scan. There is no evidence the
applicant suffered any
acute cervical spine injury as a result of the work
was inconsistent restriction of motion in the neck, shoulder, back and
inconsistent weakness in the applicant’s ankles.
Dr Keller’s opinion
is the physical findings are inconsistent and not explained by the reported work
Keller does not agree with Dr Assem’s impairment assessment of the
cervical spine on careful consideration of the history
of the incident, the
investigation findings and the injuries that can be assessed.
Keller provides a supplementary report on 6 May 2021.
to expand on his opinion as to why the shock itself did not injure the worker,
Dr Keller says there was a brief exposure to
a 240V shock. No local burns or
cardiac symptoms were reported or investigated, and the only other expected
condition would be muscular
pain from sudden contraction which would be
temporary, lasting for a few days only, and from which there would be a full
with or without treatment.
whether the fall itself injured the applicant or aggravated any asymptomatic or
symptomatic degenerative condition, Dr Keller
says it is possible to suffer
muscle, ligament and bone injuries from falls. He notes the applicant appears to
have reported neck
pain going to the left arm and investigations were requested
the day following the incident. It is possible a fall could temporarily
exacerbate degenerative changes in the spine with resolution of symptoms
expected within a few weeks only.
the clinical records of Ropes Crossing including the applicant’s
complaints prior to 7 May 2019 relevantly regarding
her neck, Dr Keller comments
there is a long history of neck complaints radiating to her arms that predates
her reported injury and
required prior investigations and specialist referral.
In his opinion the subject incident has not caused her any lasting restrictions
or treatment needs, and her symptoms can be attributed to her prior degenerative
conditions.
Keller confirms the applicant’s presentation was inconsistent and no
objective findings of lasting physical injuries from
the reported incident were
Dr Shanu Gambhir, independent neurosurgeon and spine
30 December 2024 Dr Gambhir reports the applicant’s current symptoms
appear to be a combination of neck pain and some right
arm radiculopathy and
right shoulder pathology.
Dr Gambhir’s review of the MRI cervical spine the nerve compression in
2022 was not severe.
applicant has had these symptoms for around two years now and in Dr
Gambhir’s opinion spinal surgery is unlikely to provide
her with any
significant improvement and he would not recommend surgery at this stage.
applicant could be managed conservatively with pain relief on a needs-basis. She
may continue with physiotherapy if it provides
relief and she could perform
review with a new MRI of
the cervical spine and right shoulder pathology.
Gambhir confirms the applicant had pre-existing degenerative changes in her
cervical spine which were essentially asymptomatic
before the injury. Since the
incident at work where she was thrown heavily to the ground from the
electrocution he believes that
had rendered the degenerative changes
symptomatic, and her symptoms continue.
applicant was consistent in her clinical presentation and Dr Gambhir did not
find any abnormal illness behaviour or attempts to
exaggerate her
symptomatology. He diagnoses neck pain and right arm radicular
radiculopathy.
the C6/7 anterior cervical decompression and fusion proposed by Dr Singh,
Gambhir’s opinion is that her symptoms have been stable for the last two
years and her last MRI in 2022 did not show severe
nerve compression, so that
overall he does not believe the surgery will provide her with significant
symptoms relief. If her symptoms
were to worsen, correlated well with repeat
MRI, then surgery could be considered.
Gambhir agrees with Dr Khong that the applicant should be managed conservatively
at this stage.
Clinical records Nepean Hospital
5 April 2011 the applicant is referred to Nepean Hospital for physiotherapy by
Dr Dang, presenting with right shoulder pain, paraesthesia
in fingers, right
sided face and neck pain starting the day before, and right arm pain starting in
the hand and radiating upward.
cervical spine X-ray of 29 March 2011 concludes there is minimal degeneration of
the mid facet joints bilaterally.
Applicant’s
submissions
applicant made oral submissions which have been recorded and form part of the
Commission’s record. These are summarised
is no longer in dispute as Dr Gambhir makes clear.
applicant’s statement evidence sets out the treatment she has undergone
including consultations with a GP, physiotherapy,
consultation with the psychologist and a pain management specialist and
injections to her neck which provided
initial relief that lasted a few days, and
hydrotherapy.
applicant submits there have been considerable attempts to resource conservative
measures and nothing else is offered by Dr Gambhir.
The applicant wants to have
the surgery because she has been told that it will help her. She has constant
immense pain and discomfort.
She has exhausted all other options and she
constantly feels hopeless and miserable. She has had the risks explained to her
considered that she maintains she requires the fusion surgery. That
remains the case in 2025.
Singh provides an initial quote for one level fusion and then a separate quote
for both levels C5-C6 and C6-C7 on 1 November 2022
which appears to have left
off anaesthetist fees.
Singh diagnoses a disc injury and bulging at C6/7, disagreeing with the opinion
Dr Keller at that time that there is no injury. Dr Singh says there
clearly is on the imaging and confirmed by a diagnostic injection
related to the
workplace incident.
Gambhir upon whom the respondent now relies, says it is not severe enough to
warrant surgery.
Singh identifies nerve compression on the scans and he says her pain and
function will improve with the surgery. Without surgery
she is likely to have
permanent functional restriction and ongoing pain.
Singh refers to anterior decompression and fusion at C5/6 in this report.
Dr Singh’s 2023 report he identifies C5 to C7 that need to be stabilised
and says the applicant has not responded to conservative
measures. MRIs have
confirmed it, surgery is reasonably necessary and appropriate and the
alternative is to accept pain management
and permanent functional
incapacitation. The cost is within gazetted rates and treatment is effective as
it will decompress in neurological
elements in the cervical spine and stabilise
the injured motion segments C5 to C7. It is an appropriate method of treatment
by practising spine surgeons.
is echoed in his next report almost two years later. The updated CT scan has
similar findings with severe stenosis. The applicant
has not been getting better
without surgical treatment. Dr Singh maintains his view that the surgery is
reasonably necessary.
his report of September 2025 Dr Singh who has been reviewing the applicant for
five years says her symptoms have become worse.
he is specifically asked about C6 to C7 he recommends surgery at C5 to C7, which
he has previously recommended.
Singh has provided five years’ worth of assessment and treatment
recommendations that have been constantly ignored. The result
is the applicant
has got worse and he has had absolutely no reason to change his opinion about
the surgery being reasonably necessary.
Singh refers to the CT scans of the cervical spine of September 2021 and
December 2024.
Kulanayagam confirms in 2020 there has been a great deal of conservative
treatment but she must be referred to an orthopaedic surgeon
to keep an eye on
things and consider any surgical options.
Khong identifies the applicant’s significant symptoms. In relation to the
issue to be determined he says the prognosis is
poor without surgery and with
surgery the applicant is likely to have some improvement in her right sided neck
and arm pain.
has been six years since her injury and she complains of persistent neck and
right sided arm pain. Conservative treatment has failed.
Dr Khong recommends a
C5/6 and C6/7 anterior cervical discectomy and fusion, which is of course what
Dr Singh has also recommended.
She will not improve without surgery.
Singh, the applicant’s treating orthopaedic and spine surgeon who has been
seeing the applicant for five years, and Dr Khong
are saying the same thing.
There is no other alternative recommended. They agree the surgery is reasonably
necessary and the applicant
says she wants to have it done.
there is no part that
would be of concern as the surgery is appropriate, available and there is no
issue foreseen about costs.
applicant does not have to prove there definitely will be an improvement but
actual potential effectiveness and Dr Singh and Dr
Khong certainly go well
beyond that and say that it will.
Gambhir does not really take issue with any of the matters in
except for effectiveness. In short Dr Gambhir says the compression
is not that severe and so the applicant should not have surgery.
He does not say
how he comes to that conclusion or why he says it is not too severe.
Gambhir says the applicant should stick to conservative measures however they
have not been helpful in the past so why would they
be now? He does not offer
any alternatives.
the context of the applicant’s history and the opinions of Dr Khong and Dr
Singh the applicant’s submission is Dr Gambhir’s
unpersuasive on depriving the applicant of the surgery, and on the basis the
compression is not severe enough which significantly
undermines what the
applicant is going through.
that reason the opinions of Dr Singh and Dr Khong should be preferred and the
orders sought should be made.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent made oral submissions which have been recorded and form part of the
Commission’s record. These are summarised
Gambhir’s opinion is the basis on which the respondent disputes the need
for surgery.
basis of Dr Gambhir’s opinion is what we know objectively as well as what
he finds on clinical examination.
his clinical examination of the applicant’s cervical spine Dr Gambhir
notes mild restriction in range of motion due to pain,
neurological examination
of the upper limbs revealed normal tone bilaterally and power was 5 out of 5
bilaterally and sensation was
normal and symmetrically bilaterally.
clinical examination forms part of Dr Gambhir’s opinion.
other aspect is Dr Gambhir was provided with a number of materials listed in his
report that includes the two 2021 CT scans of
the cervical spine and the 2022
MRI and X-ray of the cervical spine which Dr Gambhir refers to specifically and
bases his opinion
respondent is not raising the issue of injury or whether the injury may well
have resolved by now. Dr Gambhir confirms the symptoms
Gambhir is asked about C6/7 anterior cervical decompression and fusion so we at
least know what his opinion is relating to that.
By extension the respondent can
say that opinion also relates to the level above because of the logic and the
basis of Dr Gambhir’s
relation to his clinical findings Dr Gambhir says on his review of the MRI
cervical spine the nerve compression was not severe.
The applicant has had
symptoms for around two years and in his opinion spinal surgery is unlikely to
provide her with any significant
improvement and therefore at this stage he
would not recommend spinal surgery.
her symptoms do get worse in the future she will need review with a new MRI of
the cervical spine and right shoulder pathology.
Gambhir does not recommend surgery at this stage and she could be managed
conservatively with pain relief on a needs-basis and
she could continue with
physiotherapy if it provides relief.
applicant says there is not much more the applicant can do in terms of
conservative treatment. It is true she has done physiotherapy
and she has had
pain management but what she has not done is have a repeat MRI.
has had a CT scan and the respondent submits there has not been much change. In
fact the CT scans do not expressly say that there
is nerve compression. The very
Dr Singh wants to release is pressure on the nerves but the scans do
not show it. We do not know why there has not been a repeat MRI.
Gambhir says based on the radiology we have, in other words what we know
objectively, surgery is not warranted.
question is what else can be done conservatively before having the surgery and
that is an MRI scan, or something else that can
be done through Medicare like a
nerve conduction study. That is what Dr Singh suggested back in 2019 and 2020
which we know because
the applicant refers to it.
applicant was referred to Dr Watson, a neurologist, who arranged a nerve
conduction study. Her statement evidence is that she
had a nerve conduction
study and to the best of her recollection the results appeared normal. The
respondent accepts that since that
time the applicant has gotten worse.
nerve conduction study might confirm there is the radiculopathy Dr Singh assumes
because there is nothing objective to show it.
respondent’s submission is the clinical findings of Dr Singh and Dr Khong
have nothing objective to support them. The applicant
says she is worse, that is
what she said subjectively and there is a focus on C6/7, and now on both levels
with C5/6 as well, but
again we should look at the CT scans.
September 2021 CT scan shows at C5/6 reduced disc height, disc osteophyte
complex resulting in mild to moderate right foraminal
stenosis, or narrowing of
the canal, which can sometimes put pressure on the nerves. There is no disc
protrusion at C6/7 and yet
at this stage Dr Singh wants to operate. The
conclusion is that the CT scan does show right foraminal stenosis potentially
compressing
the right C6 nerve root. This is not actual but potential, not
probable, not definite but potentially compressing the right C6 nerve
again. At this stage there is nothing at the level below.
October 2021 CT scan shows at C5/6 there is mild posterior disc bulging with
moderate right and mild left sided foraminal stenosis.
At C6/7 there is mild
posterior disc bulging without notable central canal or foraminal stenosis.
conclusion is moderate right sided foraminal stenosis at C5/6 with potential
impingement of right C6 nerve root. Again it is potential
impingement which is
not confirmed. The recommendation is for an MRI study to be performed.
MRI is then performed, referred to by the doctors including Dr Gambhir.
is another CT scan in December 2024 with a clinical history of ongoing neck pain
with radiculopathy and it is compared with
September 2023 and October 2021 CT
scans and describes again potential nerve root impingement at C6 on the right
and possibly at
comment is that there is multi-level cervical spondylosis similar to previous
reports and the changes appear most advanced at
C5/6. There is reference again
to potential not actual impingement. There is nothing actually confirmed
objectively.
Gambhir was not satisfied objectively so it boils down to clinical judgement.
applicant says Dr Singh should be accepted as he has seen the applicant over
five years. The respondent’s submission is
that Dr Singh says the scans
say far more than what they actually showed.
August 2023 Dr Singh says the MRI scan of the cervical spine reveals a
structural pathology with compression of neurological elements.
do not have an updated MRI scan. The respondent’s submission is Dr Singh
is almost flying blind in the sense that he does
not know what an MRI scan would
show now, and we do not even know what a nerve conduction study says, contrary
to Dr Singh’s
own practice of arranging one, so there would be objective
evidence of neurological compression.
there was objective evidence Dr Gambhir would perhaps change his mind. At this
stage he is saying quite sensibly that it is not
the time to have this
Khong suffers the same difficulty. In his first report Dr Khong sees some
radiology but he does not refer to what Dr Singh is assuming
which is nerve root
compression.
Khong’s clinical examination of the applicant’s cervical spine
includes it is normal with sagittal and coronal balance.
There is nothing really
there on clinical examination.
Khong’s report of May this year offers little assistance. His examination
is very similar to his previous examination and
there does not seem to be
objective clinical signs of nerve compression in the respondent’s
submission.
weight should be placed on Dr Khong’s report in the respondent’s
submission.
Dr Singh has not done in terms of further conservative measures is to confirm
with objective testing what he assumes, and for
that reason you would accept Dr
Gambhir’s cautious and measured opinion. This can and should be a
reasonable alternative at
this stage.
Applicant’s
submissions in reply
applicant submits that there is nerve involvement and that any concerns about
that would be immediately alleviated because the
respondent’s own doctor
says there is.
it is interesting to look at the scans we are not doctors and every single
doctor in this case says there is compression. Dr
Gambhir himself says there is
compression and radicular radiculopathy and nothing more needs to be shown.
5 March 2025 Dr Singh reports on neck pain and radiculopathy and he never says
there is no compression and radiculopathy. He has
looked at the scans and his
opinion should therefore be given more weight.
are not doctors. The respondent submits Dr Singh has assumed some things but the
applicant submits that is not a fair submission.
He has looked at the MRI and he
has not just relied on reports. As a medical doctor he has formed a view there
is compression, as
has every other doctor, and he says the surgery is reasonably
necessary. He has looked at the evidence as has Dr Khong.
respondent has identified one further treatment that could be obtained and that
say if there is something else available
it does not mean that is fatal to the claim. Dr Singh already has an MRI from
three years
ago and he says the surgery is reasonably necessary.
respondent also submits that objective evidence of compression is needed. MRIs
do not present objective evidence. They are the
best evidence in terms of
radiology but they do not prove anything objectively. In any event that would be
completely unnecessary
as every single doctor says there is nerve
involvement.
is nothing that suggests the surgery is not reasonably
FINDINGS AND REASONS
Is the C5-C7 anterior decompression and fusion surgery proposed by Dr
Singh reasonably necessary medical treatment as a result of
injury on 7 May
60 of the 1987 Act provides for the payment by an employer of the cost of any
reasonably necessary medical or related expenses
received by a worker as the
result of an injury in addition to any other compensation payable under the
legal test when determining whether proposed treatment is reasonably necessary
as a result of a workplace injury was considered
by Roche DP in
“Reasonably necessary does not mean ‘absolutely
necessary’ (
at [154]). If something is
‘necessary’, in the sense of indispensable, it will be
‘reasonably necessary’.
That is because reasonably necessary is a
lesser requirement than ‘necessary’. Depending on the circumstances,
of different treatments may qualify as ‘reasonably
necessary’ and a worker only has to establish that the treatment claimed
is one of those treatments. A worker certainly does not have to establish that
the treatment is ‘reasonable and necessary’,
significantly more demanding test that many insurers and doctors
Roche DP cites the decision of Burke CCJ in
approval. While the essential question remains whether the treatment is
reasonably necessary, the following are useful heads
consideration:
(a) the appropriateness of the particular
(b) the availability of alternative treatment, and
its potential effectiveness;
(c) the cost of the treatment;
(d) the actual or potential effectiveness of the
treatment, and
(e) the acceptance by medical experts of the treatment as being appropriate and
likely to be
necessary medical or related treatment as a result of an injury must be assessed
on a case by case basis, with the Commission
exercising “prudence, sound
judgment and good
Singh first recommended the applicant consider anterior cervical decompression
and fusion at C6/7 in February 2020 and requested
approval for the surgery on 8
April 2020.
Dr Singh says in October 2022 that over the last two years her
pathology at C5/6 had also worsened and surgery was reasonably necessary.
request for surgery with an estimate of fees for C5/6 and C6/7 surgery was made
on 1 November 2022.
respondent submits and I accept the reports of the CT scans of the
applicant’s cervical spine in 2021 and 2024 refer only
to potential
impingement of the C6 nerve root.
applicant’s symptoms are objectively confirmed however by the 2022 MRI of
the cervical spine that concludes “[m]inor
disc degenerative changes at
C6/C7 with impingement of bilateral C7 exiting nerves and at C5/C6, with
possible irritation of the
right C6 exiting
Khong initially recommended conservative treatment, however in 2025 he notes
persistent pain and recommends the proposed surgery.
Singh and Dr Khong are satisfied including on the basis of the 2022 MRI that the
proposed surgery is reasonably necessary and I
accept their opinion.
respondent refers to Dr Gambhir’s clinical examination of the applicant
that forms part of his opinion. Dr Gambhir’s
examination of the applicant
revealed mild restriction in range of motion due to pain. Dr Gambhir makes a
diagnosis of neck pain
and right arm radicular radiculopathy, and the work
related aggravation remains causative of her current condition.
Dr Gambhir agrees the applicant has neck pain and right arm radicular
radiculopathy, the nerve compression shown in the 2022
MRI is not severe in his
opinion and overall the surgery will not provide the applicant with significant
symptom relief.
December 2024 Dr Gambhir describes the applicant as having had her current
symptoms for around two years, although she reported
ongoing symptoms involving
her neck since the time of the injury in 2019.
do not accept on a consideration of the evidence that the applicant has only had
her current symptoms for around two years at the
time of Dr Gambhir’s
report although they may have worsened in that period.
applicant’s statement evidence is that she had difficulty managing severe
pain in her neck in 2020. After some initial pain
relief from the guided
injection in January 2020 the pain became more severe. By 2022 her neck
condition had deteriorated causing
chronic pain and disabilities. In 2024 the
applicant feels she had exhausted all other treatment options and she has no
to have the surgery. She is in immense pain.
from Dr Keller’s opinion, there is no evidence the applicant has been
other than consistent in her clinical presentation.
I accept the
applicant’s evidence that she has experienced severe neck pain.
Gambhir proposes the applicant could be managed conservatively with pain relief
and physiotherapy, and if her symptoms were to
worsen a repeat MRI should be
undertaken before surgery could be considered.
applicant’s evidence is that physiotherapy only slightly helped to reduce
her symptoms, she has taken pain medication and
her symptoms have worsened.
Gambhir agreed with Dr Khong that the applicant should be managed conservatively
however Dr Khong subsequently changed his opinion,
supporting the recommended
am not persuaded by Dr Gambhir’s opinion that further conservative
treatment should be undertaken before the recommended surgery
is carried out as
conservative treatment over many years has failed to improve the
applicant’s symptoms.
applicant has had X-rays and CT scans of the cervical spine as well as MRIs in
2019 and 2022.
do not agree with the respondent’s submission that a repeat MRI is
required as part of conservative treatment before contemplating
accept the submission made by the applicant that the availability of other
treatment is not fatal to determining whether
the proposed surgery is reasonably
prefer Dr Singh’s opinion in this case. Dr Singh as the applicant’s
treating surgeon has examined her over several years
and in that time arranged
investigations, attempted conservative treatment and he provides a well-reasoned
opinion that the proposed
surgery is reasonably necessary. Dr Khong supports Dr
Singh’s recommendation.
applicant submits that of the matters considered in
Dr Gambhir only really takes issue with the question of effectiveness. A review
of each of the matters considered in those cases
supports a finding that the
surgery proposed by Dr Singh is reasonably necessary as a result of the work
related injury.
Appropriateness of the particular
Dr Singh’s opinion the proposed treatment is effective as it will
decompress the neurological elements in the applicant’s
cervical spine and
stabilise the injured motion segments from C5 to C7, and it is an appropriate
method of treatment. This will allow
the applicant to have some recovery of
motor function.
Khong recommends a C5/6 and C6/7 anterior cervical discectomy and fusion as it
is likely to result in some improvement in the applicant’s
right sided
neck and arm pain. He notes the improvement in the applicant’s symptoms
after the right C7 perineural injection.
Gambhir’s opinion is that as the applicant’s symptoms have been
stable for the last two years and the MRI in 2022 did
not show severe nerve
compression, overall he does not believe the surgery will provide the applicant
with significant symptoms relief
and surgery could be considered if her symptoms
were to worsen correlated with a repeat MRI. I am not persuaded by this opinion
discussed above.
Availability of alternative treatment, and
its potential effectiveness
Kulanayagam suggests in 2020 that after at least 10 sessions of physiotherapy
and gym based exercises surgical options ought to
be considered. The applicant
notes in 2022 she attended physiotherapy which slightly helped to reduce her
symptoms, and in 2024 she
refers to Dr Singh’s view that she has exhausted
many alternate treatment methods with little relief from ongoing pain and
discomfort.
December 2024 Dr Gambhir agrees with Dr Khong that the applicant should be
managed conservatively at this stage, with pain relief
on a needs-basis and
continuing with physiotherapy if it provides relief and home-based exercises.
The applicant’s statement
evidence suggests physiotherapy has provided
little relief and she has tried pain medication.
Khong’s opinion changed by May 2025. Alternatives including analgesia,
physiotherapy and steroid injections are unlikely
to bring long term relief
given the period over which the applicant has experienced pain. In Dr
Khong’s opinion the applicant
has failed non-operative management.
Singh notes the applicant has exhausted all recommended conservative treatment
options available having trialled bed rest, physiotherapy,
medication, hot
packs, ultrasound, massage and spinal injections. Dr Singh says the alternative
is to accept pain management and
permanent functional incapacitation.
Cost of the treatment
Gambhir does not refer to the cost of the proposed surgery. Dr Khong suggests
the cost of a single level fusion is approximately
Singh confusingly provides two fee estimates, the first of $20,698.50 for C6-C7
anterior cervical decompression and fusion plus
in-patient rehabilitation
following discharge from hospital, and the second for $13,071 for C5-C6, C6-C7
anterior cervical decompression
and fusion plus in-patient rehabilitation
following discharge from hospital. Dr Singh confirms however the cost is
commensurate with
the gazetted rates.
Actual or potential
effectiveness of the treatment
Singh’s view is the surgery by decompressing the nerves will improve the
applicant’s neck and arm pain and allow her
to have some recovery of motor
Dr Khong’s opinion at this stage a C5/6 and C6/7 anterior cervical
discectomy and fusion is reasonably necessary. She will
not improve without
Gambhir accepts that if the applicant’s symptoms were to worsen surgery
could be considered, but at this stage overall he
does not believe the surgery
will provide her with significant symptoms relief.
have not accepted Dr Gambhir’s opinion on the severity or duration of the
applicant’s symptoms as discussed above.
Acceptance by
medical experts of the treatment as being appropriate and likely to be
Assem’s opinion in 2020 was that the surgery may be necessary if there was
unrelenting pain or progressive neurological deficit.
The evidence establishes
the applicant has experienced unrelenting pain.
Singh comments that the surgery is accepted as appropriate by practising spine
surgeons. Dr Khong recommends the surgery.
Gambhir says surgery could be considered if the applicant’s symptoms were
to worsen correlated well with repeat MRI. I am
not persuaded the
applicant’s current symptoms are relatively recent and are not
medical evidence supports that the proposed surgery is accepted as appropriate
and likely to be effective, although in Dr Gambhir’s
opinion further
conservative treatment ought to be pursued first which I have not accepted in
the circumstances of this case.
the respondent to be liable for the costs of the proposed treatment the
applicant must establish the accepted injury materially
contributes to the need
for that treatment.
There is no
dispute the accepted injury materially contributes to the need for the proposed
applicant has discharged her onus to establish on balance the C5-C7 anterior
decompression and fusion surgery proposed by Dr Singh
is reasonably necessary
medical treatment as a result of her injury on 7 May
C5-C7 anterior decompression and fusion surgery proposed by Dr Singh is
reasonably necessary medical treatment as a result of
injury on 7 May 2019
pursuant to s 60 of the 1987 Act.
will be an order that the respondent is to pay the costs of the C5-C7 anterior
decompression and fusion surgery proposed by
Dr Singh and ancillary costs at the
appropriate SIRA gazetted
Diab v NRMA Limited
[2014] NSWWCCPD 72
Rose v Health
[1986] NSWCC 2
(1986) 2 NSWCCR 32
[2014] NSWWCCPD
Murphy v Allity
Management Qt Services Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWWCCPD 49
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.28 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter