URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/71.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Investment Management Group Hotels Resources Pty Ltd v Barrow [2025] NSWPICPD 71; (13 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Investment Management Group Hotels Resources Pty Ltd v Barrow
NSWPICPD 71
Investment Management Group Hotels Resources Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT:
Thomas Ernest Barrow
Hospitality Industry Insurance Limited
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W7243/25
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
13 October 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
to appeal the interlocutory decision of the Member pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 19 August 2025 is
matter is remitted to the same Member of the Commission for determination of the
outstanding matters in dispute.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – relationship between the Workers Compensation
Guidelines and
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
University of New South Wales v Lee
[2021] NSWPICPD 4
considered and applied – no error in not dealing with a
submission that was never put –
Metwally v University of Wollongong
[1985] HCA 28 applied – it is not permissible to read words into the
legislation –
Taylor v The Owners - Strata Plan No 11564
applied – adequacy of reasons –
Sarian v Elton
[2011] NSWCA
Beale v Government Insurance Office (NSW)
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
18 September 2025
REPRESENTATION:
Mr B Jones, counsel
BBW Lawyers
Respondent:
Mr B Necovski
LHD Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Barrow v Investment Management Group Hotels Resources Pty Ltd
(W7243/25, 19 August 2025)
Ms K Garner
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
19 August 2025
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Thomas Barrow (the respondent) suffered an injury to his left knee on 10
December 2023 in the course of his employment with Investment
Management Group
Hotels Resources Pty Ltd (the appellant). The respondent claimed compensation
and was paid weekly payments and treatment
20 July 2024 the respondent’s treating orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Robert
Molnar, requested approval from the appellant to perform
a left total knee
replacement.
appellant issued a Notice pursuant to s 78 of the
Workplace Injury Management
and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) dated 1 October 2024,
denying ongoing liability for the injury, including the proposed surgery, on the
basis of the
opinion of Dr Raymond Wallace, orthopaedic surgeon. Dr Wallace
was engaged by the appellant as an independent medical expert to advise
liability for the injury. Dr Wallace determined that the respondent’s
injury was an aggravation of pre-existing tricompartmental
osteoarthritis, but
that the aggravation had ceased six weeks after the injury, so that the
respondent’s symptoms and ongoing
treatment were no longer referrable to
the injury at work. The respondent requested a review of the appellant’s
decision pursuant
to s 287A of the 1998 Act and provided a report dated 27 May
2025 from Dr Charles New, orthopaedic surgeon, an independent medical
qualified by the respondent. The appellant maintained its denial of liability in
a further Notice issued on 16 June 2025.
The reasons expressed for maintaining
the denial were that:
“[The appellant] has carefully
considered the opinion of Dr Charles H New in the above medical report which
contrasts the opinion
of evidence outlined in the declinature dated 1 October
2024. [The appellant] prefers the evidence we have relied upon in our notice,
however, recognises that given the inconsistencies in opinion between
independent medical examiners further information is required
to determine the
outcome of your request for internal
appellant identified the further information it required as a full record of the
respondent’s treating doctor’s clinical
records and for the
respondent to attend Dr Wallace on 9 July 2025 for a further assessment. On 26
June 2025, the respondent’s
legal representative wrote to the appellant,
advising that as the respondent was not in receipt of weekly payments of
compensation,
he was not required to attend a further examination by Dr
respondent commenced proceedings in the Personal Injury Commission (the
Commission) on 26 June 2025, claiming weekly payments
and treatment expenses.
The dispute was allocated to a Member of the Commission for conciliation and
arbitration. At a preliminary
conference on 29 July 2025, the Member issued a
Direction for the parties to provide written submissions as to whether the
was required to attend the further medico-legal examination.
appellant lodged its submissions on 31 July 2025, seeking an order that the
respondent comply with the request for a further examination,
or an order
suspending the right to recover compensation, and a determination that the
report of Dr New was inadmissible because
the appellant was prejudiced by the
respondent’s refusal to attend an examination by Dr Wallace.
respondent lodged its submissions on 6 August 2025, disputing that there was a
statutory basis for the exclusion of the report
of Dr New, asserting that the
orders sought by the appellant were
ultra vires
and were contrary to the
objectives of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
Member issued a Certificate of Determination on 19 August 2025 in which she
found in favour of the respondent in respect of the
orders sought by the
appellant appeals the Member’s determination.
52(3) of the 2020 Act provides:
“(3) If the Commission
is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection
with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and
enabling legislation without holding any conference or formal
a review of the documents in evidence and the submissions made, I formed the
view that further submissions were required
and in the circumstances that the
Member’s determination was an interlocutory determination, a formal
hearing was the appropriate
course in the circumstances. The hearing took place
on 18 September 2025 and both parties made further oral submissions.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
decision of the Member was an interlocutory decision. Section 352(3A) of the
1998 Act provides that:
“There is no appeal under this section
against an interlocutory decision except with the leave of the Commission. The
is not to grant leave unless of the opinion that determining the
appeal is necessary or desirable for the proper and effective determination
the dispute.”
appellant submits that it is necessary and desirable that the Commission
determine the appeal at this interlocutory stage. The
appellant provides a brief
background to the dispute and asserts that there is the prospect that if the
appeal is successful, then
the respondent would be required to submit to the
proposed medical examination, following which the entire dispute may resolve,
is a factor that strongly favours the granting of leave. The appellant
adds that, if leave was not granted, the matter would proceed
which would result
in severe prejudice to it in the defence of the claim. The appellant says that
this is because the Member did
not rule the report of Dr New as inadmissible and
the appellant has not had the opportunity for the issues raised by Dr New to be
considered by Dr Wallace in circumstances where Dr Wallace’s assessment
was conducted almost a year before.
appellant adds that the appeal involves an important issue in relation to the
operation of s 119(1) of the 1998 Act and the Member’s
finding, which
it says is contrary to the 1998 Act and the Workers Compensation Guidelines (the
Guidelines) and raises serious implications
which have the potential to impact
almost all workers compensation claims.
appellant submits that it is therefore in the interests of justice that leave to
appeal the Member’s determination be granted.
respondent submits that leave to appeal ought not to be granted and asserts that
the appellant’s submissions fail to demonstrate
that a determination of
the appeal is necessary for the proper and effective administration of the
dispute because the whole of the
matter is prevented from being determined as a
result of this appeal being lodged.
respondent contends that it would be more efficient for the Member to determine
the whole dispute before an appeal, if warranted,
was brought and a
determination at this stage would be contrary to the informality and efficiency
required by the workers compensation
legislation. The respondent says that the
appeal and submissions made could not persuade the Commission to grant leave, in
circumstances
(a) the appeal has resulted in significant delay and further costs;
(b) the appeal is contrary to the proper and effective determination of the
dispute, and
(c) the appeal is based upon a misapprehension of the law and its context.
Consideration
352(3A) of the 1998 Act precludes the granting of leave to appeal an
interlocutory decision unless the Commission is of
the opinion that determining
the appeal is “necessary or desirable for the proper and effective
determination of the dispute”.
leave is not granted, the remaining issues will proceed to be determined, and a
Certificate of Determination will be issued before
the appellant can appeal the
decision. This would involve significant delay in the resolution of a
preliminary issue, which, if the
appeal was successful, would render the further
proceedings unnecessary. I note that the delay in the matter is minimal, given
the appeal, which was lodged on 4 September 2025, has been expedited. I
have also weighed the factors in favour of granting leave
against the public
interest in the finality of litigation.
those matters into account, I find that the reasons for granting leave outweigh
the factors that measure against doing so and
I grant leave pursuant to s
352(3A) of the 1998 Act for the appellant to appeal the interlocutory
THE EVIDENCE
The correspondence
Notice issued pursuant to s 78 of the 1998 Act disputing liability for the
respondent’s injury was dated 1 October
The Notice advised
“You do not present with symptoms or a medical condition
that renders you with any total or partial incapacity as a result of
a workplace
injury. As there is no partial or total incapacity as a result of a workplace
injury, you do not have an entitlement
to weekly payments of compensation under
Workers Compensation Act 1987
“Any ongoing or further medical or related treatment, hospital
treatment and/or rehabilitation services as defined under
reasonably necessary as a result of a workplace injury as required by
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Notice referred to the contents of a Certificate of Capacity provided by the
respondent’s treating general practitioner,
Dr Ahmad Afiq Bin Rhazif, an
MRI scan dated 19 June 2024, and a report dated 20 July 2024 from Dr Robert
Molnar, orthopaedic surgeon
(the respondent’s treating specialist),
requesting approval for surgery.
appellant advised that Dr Raymond Wallace, independent medical examiner,
provided a report dated 13 September 2024 in which he
opined that the
respondent’s work-related knee injury, which was a temporary aggravation
of a pre-existing degenerative tricompartmental
osteoarthritis, had resolved
within 6 weeks of the injury. The appellant advised that, on the basis of Dr
Wallace’s opinion,
the respondent’s claim for weekly payments of
compensation and treatment expenses was declined.
2 June 2025, the respondent’s legal representative sought a review
pursuant to s 287A of the 1998 Act of the decision to
decline liability for the
injury, attaching the report of Dr Charles New, orthopaedic surgeon and
advising that if the claim was
not accepted within 14 days, the respondent would
commence proceedings in the
Commission.
16 June 2025, the appellant issued a further (review) Notice pursuant to s 78
and s 287A of the 1998 Act.
appellant advised that liability for the respondent’s injury was declined.
The appellant again referred to the evidence
of the Certificate of Capacity
provided by Dr Afiq Bin Rhazif, the MRI scan dated 19 June 2024, and the
report dated 20 July 2024
from Dr Molnar. The appellant summarised the evidence
provided by Dr Wallace and that of Dr New.
appellant advised:
“[The appellant] has carefully considered
the opinion of Dr Charles H New in the above medical report which contrasts the
of evidence outlined in the declinature dated 1 October 2024. [The
appellant] prefers the evidence we have relied upon in our notice,
recognises that given the inconsistencies in opinion between independent medical
examiners further information is required
to determine the outcome of your
request for internal review. As such, we require:
respondent’s] full medical record which has been requested from nominated
treating doctor, Dr Shiraj Athambawa on 16 June
Attendance at an
in person independent medical examination with Dr Raymond Wallace on 9 July 2025
at 3:15pm ... .
Upon receipt of
the above information [the respondent] will conduct a further review of your
application for a request of internal
10 April 2025, the appellant (employer) wrote to the respondent, noting that
liability for the injury had been denied and his claim
was closed on 2 December
2024. The appellant advised that the modified duties the respondent had been
performing since the injury
were no longer viable as it was causing the
appellant financial hardship, and as the claim was closed, the appellant
required the
respondent to provide a clearance to return to his pre-injury
The report of Dr Robert Molnar
26 June 2024, Dr Molnar reported to the respondent’s general practitioner
following a review of the
respondent.
He referred to the
injury at work, noting that prior to the injury the respondent had no difficulty
in performing his duties and
that following the injury, he developed immediate
swelling, pain and restricted range of movement together with intermittent
of the knee, causing him to have to sit to perform his duties which were
basically confined to washing dishes. Dr Molnar performed
a clinical examination
and reviewed the radiological findings, including the MRI scan. He
“In discussing with [the respondent], I suspect that the
loose bodies are new and likely the cause of his current disability.
unfortunately the treatment for his condition will be knee replacement surgery.
While I understand the patient had some
degree [of] pre-existing knee arthritis,
he was still able to cope with his normal activities of daily living and perform
heavy manual
duties at work without difficulty. I have explained to [the
respondent] that I feel that the work-related injury is at least related
aggravation of his pre-existing condition and proceeding with knee replacement
would be appropriate.”
The report of Dr Raymond Wallace
Wallace provided a report directed to the appellant dated 13 September
He recorded that he had been
provided with documents for review which included a letter of instruction from
the appellant, a Certificate
of Capacity issued by Dr Shiraj Athambawa dated 29
July 2024 and a surgery request form from Dr Molnar.
Wallace recorded the respondent’s work history, noting that the respondent
had been performing the same role on a full-time
basis since 2009, which
involved serving customers, moving cartons of beer, packing fridges and
unpacking and breaking down pallets.
Dr Wallace referred to the injury on
10 December 2023 and described the mechanism of injury, causing immediate left
knee pain. Dr
Wallace said that the respondent experienced persisting left knee
pain and reported the injury to the appellant the day after the
Dr Wallace noted that the respondent sought treatment from Wellington
Hospital but was not seen by medical staff, so he attended
his treating doctor,
Dr Athambawa, who referred him for physiotherapy and provided him with a knee
brace. Dr Wallace further noted
that the respondent was provided with
hydrotherapy in June 2024 and was referred to Dr Molnar, who recommended
operative treatment.
Dr Wallace said that the respondent was continuing
hydrotherapy once per week and was using Panadeine Forte analgesia.
Wallace recorded that the respondent denied any prior left knee injuries
although had previously suffered episodic left knee pain
that did not require
treatment. He said that the respondent reported an overall improvement in the
left knee symptoms since the injury.
He said, however, that the respondent still
complained of stiffness, intermittent mild swelling, aching pain globally, worse
walking more than 200 metres and at night, which was relieved by wearing a
brace or lying down, and taking medication. Dr Wallace
said that the respondent
had experienced one episode of the knee locking but not giving way.
Wallace reported that the respondent continued to work on part-time light
duties. He described the respondent’s duties and
the respondent’s
ongoing difficulties in daily activities.
Wallace advised that the radiological investigations were not provided to him
but noted the findings of the x-rays and the MRI
scan recorded by Dr
Wallace diagnosed the respondent as suffering a minor temporary aggravation of
pre-existing tricompartmental osteoarthritis of
the left knee, which had
resolved within six weeks of the injury. He opined that the mechanism of injury
was not consistent with
causing any significant left knee pathology and the
pathology evident in the radiological investigations as described by Dr Molnar
was consistent with severe pre-existing degenerative tricompartmental
osteoarthritis of the joint, aggravated by his “concurrent
of morbid obesity. He opined that the respondent’s current presentation
was due to the pre-existing condition
and that the respondent’s employment
was not a substantial contributing factor to the left knee condition.
Wallace expressed the opinion that the respondent did not require any further
treatment or medical review for any work-related
condition of the left knee, the
work injury had resolved, and the respondent did not require a left total knee
replacement for any
work-related condition. He advised that the respondent was
not fit to undergo the surgery because of his current body weight. He
that the respondent may need the surgery at some stage in the future for
treatment of his pre-existing condition.
Wallace considered that the respondent had “no current incapacity as a
result of any work-related condition of the left
The report of Dr Charles New
New provided a report dated 27 May
He took a history that the
respondent had worked for the appellant for 12 years on a full-time basis as a
bottle shop attendant.
He described the nature of the work as
“heavy.” He recorded the circumstances surrounding the
respondent’s left
knee injury and the onset of symptoms on 10 December
2023, with pain worsening on the following day. Dr New noted the treatment
to the respondent, the findings in the MRI scan and the past history of
arthritic discomfort in the knee. He further noted that,
following the injury,
the respondent developed severe pain affecting his daily activities and his
ability to walk. He observed that
Dr Molnar considered that at some stage, the
respondent would require a total knee replacement, but that in the meantime the
was undertaking hydrotherapy and was taking minor analgesia.
New said that the respondent ceased work for the appellant two weeks prior to
the consultation because the appellant advised they
had no more work available
to him. He assessed the respondent’s ability to lift weights as limited to
5 to 8 kilograms if conveniently
positioned and noted the effect of pain on his
ability to walk, which was limited to five hundred metres, difficulties rising
a sitting position and limitations of one hour when sitting and standing.
Dr New noted that the pain also affected the respondent’s
social life and
his ability to drive and observed that the respondent walked with an antalgic
gait and wore a brace on his knee.
New said that the respondent did suffer a work-related injury which rendered him
unable to work to his full capacity. He observed
that the respondent had no
restrictions on his ability to perform his duties prior to the injury, despite
having tricompartmental
osteoarthritis of the knee, which had caused only minor
intermittent discomfort prior to the work injury. He considered that the
respondent’s employment was a substantial contributing factor to the
New opined that the respondent currently had no capacity for his pre-injury
duties and was totally unfit for the type of work for
which he was trained or
experienced and had no capacity for work on the open labour market. He
considered that the respondent would
need a total knee replacement, which was
reasonably necessary treatment, but would first need to undergo substantial
medical review
and preferably lose weight, given that he weighed
142 kilograms.
New noted that prior to the injury, the respondent worked without restrictions
despite the pre-existing osteoarthritis and did
not previously wear a knee brace
or suffer more than minor pain. He was of the view that the respondent’s
employment materially
contributed to the respondent’s presentation.
New advised that he had read the report of Dr Wallace and acknowledged that
Dr Wallace was entitled to his opinion. He further
acknowledged that the
respondent did have pre-existing tricompartmental osteoarthritis but noted that
the respondent reported only
minor pain prior to the injury together with the
fact that the respondent previously did not require a brace and worked without
restriction.
He further noted that the respondent was morbidly obese. He agreed
with Dr Molnar in respect of the findings on the MRI scan, and
agreed that the
respondent’s presentation was consistent with the mechanism of injury and
the proposed surgery was reasonably
New concluded that, in the non-operative state, the respondent’s prognosis
was poor and observed that the respondent would
require dietary weight loss and
rehabilitation following the surgery.
THE LEGISLATION AND GUIDELINES
119 of the 1998 Act relevantly
Medical examination of workers
at direction of employer
(cf former s 129)
(1) A worker who has given notice of an injury must, if so required by
the employer, submit himself or herself for examination by
practitioner, provided and paid by the employer.
(2) A worker receiving weekly payments of compensation under this Act
must, if so required by the employer, from time to time submit
herself for examination by a medical practitioner, provided and paid by the
(3) If a worker refuses to submit himself or herself for any
examination under this section or in any way obstructs the
examination—
(a) the worker’s right to recover compensation under this Act
with respect to the injury, or
(b) the worker’s right to the weekly payments,
is suspended until the examination has taken place.
(4) A worker must not be required to submit himself or herself for
examination by a medical practitioner under this section otherwise
accordance with the Workers Compensation Guidelines or at more frequent
intervals than may be prescribed by the Workers Compensation
Guidelines.
7 of the Guidelines relevantly provides:
Independent medical examinations and reports
An independent medical examination (IME) is an assessment conducted by an
appropriately qualified and experienced medical practitioner
to help resolve an
issue in injury or claims management.
An insurer may direct a worker who has given notice of an injury or is
receiving weekly payments of compensation to attend an IME.
Section 119(4) of the 1998 Act allows the Guidelines to specify the
requirements for arranging independent medical examinations.
The mandatory obligations for insurers when they require a worker to attend
an IME are outlined below.
7.1 Reason for referral
Referral for an IME is appropriate when information from the treating medical
practitioner(s) is inadequate, unavailable or inconsistent,
and the referrer is
unable to resolve the problem directly with the practitioners.
Evidence of contact (or multiple attempts to contact) to try to resolve these
issues with the nominated treating practitioner must
be documented on the claim
An IME is appropriate where the information required relates to:
diagnosis of an
injury reported by the worker
determining the
contribution of work incidents, duties and/or practices to the injury
whether the need
for treatment results from the worker’s injury and is reasonably necessary
recommendations
and/or need for treatment
capacity for
pre-injury duties and hours
the likelihood
of and timeframe for recovery
capacity for
other work/duties (descriptions of such duties are to be provided to the
independent medical examiner)
what past and/or
ongoing incapacity results from the injury
capabilities and any activities that must be avoided
The reason for
the referral must be documented on the claim file.
An insurer may also refer a worker for an independent medical examination for
the purpose of obtaining an assessment of permanent
injury (injuries before
01/01/2002) or permanent impairment (injuries on and after 01/01/2002) resulting
from the injury.
7.5 Notification to the worker
All referrals for IMEs are to be arranged at reasonable times and dates, and
with adequate notification given to the worker.
The worker must be advised in writing at least 10 working days before the
examination takes place. Additional notice should be considered
rural/regional workers.
If a shorter time is required because of exceptional and unavoidable
circumstances (for example a need to consider an urgent request
for treatment),
the reduced timeframe must be agreed to by all parties.
The written advice to the worker must include:
the specific
reason for the examination
an explanation
of why information from the treating medical practitioner(s) or author of the
assessment report to the insurer’s
enquiry was inadequate, inconsistent or
unavailable
7.6 Further independent medical examinations
Subsequent IMEs must meet the reasons for referral for an independent medical
examination and can only be conducted in the following
situations:
employer/insurer has evidence that the worker’s injury has significantly
changed or resolved, or
employer/insurer has a request for, or evidence of, a material change or need
for material change in the manner or type of treatment,
the worker makes
a claim for permanent impairment or work injury damages, or
requests a review after receiving a notice (issued under section 78 of the 1998
Act) and includes additional medical information
that the employer/insurer is
asked to consider, or
the last IME was
unable to be completed, or
it has been at
least six months since the last IME required by the employer/insurer, or
the referrer can
provide significant reasoning for the need for a referral in a shorter
timeframe. This reasoning must be documented
in the claim file and provided in
the written advice to the worker regarding the referral.
IMEs must be with the same independent medical examiner unless:
that examiner
has ceased to practise (permanently or temporarily)
the specialty
required to assess the injury has changed
they no longer
practise in a location convenient to the worker, or
both parties
agree that a different medical practitioner is required.
Unreasonable request
The insurer must consider whether the requirement to attend an IME is
reasonable in the circumstances.
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
Member provided a summary of the background of the dispute. She also provided a
summary of the submissions made by both parties.
She identified the issue
requiring determination as:
“... whether [the Commission]
should grant the [appellant’s] request and issue a direction compelling
the [respondent]
to undergo a further in-person examination with independent
medical expert, Dr Raymond Wallace on 16 September (or an earlier time
by the [appellant]).”
Member set out s 71(1), s 105(1) and s 119(1)–(4) of the 1998 Act and the
relevant matters listed in 7.6 of the Guidelines.
Member said that the respondent had not failed to comply with s 119(1) because
he had submitted to one examination by Dr Wallace,
after which Dr Wallace
provided a report. The Member added that the respondent had not failed to comply
with s 119(2) of the 1998
Act by not attending a further examination conducted
by Dr Wallace because he was not in receipt of weekly payments since the
denied liability in October 2024.
Member observed that s 119(4) of the 1998 Act provides that a worker must not be
required to undergo a medical examination under
s 119 otherwise than in
accordance with the Guidelines or at more frequent intervals prescribed by the
Guidelines. The Member noted
that the Guidelines provide for a further
examination in circumstances where the worker requests a review of a decision
liability for the claim and includes in the request additional medical
information for consideration by the employer or insurer.
Member said that the respondent relied upon a medical report from Dr New, an
independent medical examiner dated 27 May 2025. The
Member referred to the
Notice issued by the appellant pursuant to s 287A of the 1998 Act, in which the
appellant sought a further
medical examination of the respondent because of
inconsistencies between the opinions of Dr Wallace and Dr New.
Member referred to the authority of
University of New South Wales v
in which Snell DP
“... the Guidelines control the manner of operation
of s 119. I accept the respondent’s submission that the Guidelines
‘regulate the circumstances in which a worker may be required to submit to
a medical examination at the direction of the
employer’.”
Member said that she was not satisfied that the Guidelines impose an obligation
on a worker to undergo a medical examination otherwise
than in accordance with s
119 of the 1998 Act. She said that s 119(3) provides for the consequences that
flow from a worker’s
refusal to attend a medical examination, which are
that the worker’s right to recover compensation or weekly payments is
until such examination takes place. The Member pointed out that the
section does not provide a statutory power to direct the worker
to attend the
examination and no such statutory power exists.
Member observed that the report of Dr New was relevant to the respondent’s
claim and that it was open to obtain a supplementary
report from Dr Wallace
addressing Dr New’s opinion.
Member concluded that:
“Having regard to the facts and
circumstances of this case as well as the legislation and the practices that the
follows, for the above reasons, I am not satisfied that it is
appropriate to issue a direction compelling the [respondent] to undergo
further in-person examination with independent medical expert, Dr Raymond
Further, I am not satisfied that it is appropriate to order that the
[respondent’s] right to recover compensation pursuant to
s 119(3) of the
1998 Act is suspended until such time as a further examination with Dr Wallace
is completed.”
Member further concluded that she was not satisfied that there were grounds to
exclude the report of Dr New on the basis that
it was inadmissible. The Member
declined to consider the weight that should be afforded to the report of Dr New
at that stage of
the proceedings.
Certificate of Determination issued on 19 August 2025
“The Commission determines:
[appellant’s] application for a direction that the [respondent] attend a
further examination with Dr Wallace on 16 September
2023 [sic, 2025] is
[appellant’s] application for an order that the [respondent’s] right
to recover compensation pursuant to
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
is suspended until such time as
a further examination with Dr Wallace is completed is declined.
[appellant’s] application that the report of Dr New be ruled inadmissible
is declined.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant raises the following grounds of appeal:
(a) Ground One: The Member committed an error of law by her interpretation of
s 119 of the 1998 Act;
(b) Ground Two: The Member’s reasons were inadequate such that she failed
to exercise her statutory function, which is a jurisdictional
(c) Ground Three: The Member failed to respond to a clearly articulated argument
raised by the appellant, which was a denial of procedure
(sic, procedural)
fairness and jurisdictional error.
SUBMISSIONS ON THE APPEAL
following summary of submissions includes written submissions in the appeal and
the oral submissions made at the hearing of the
As to Ground One
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the Member’s determination that the respondent did not
fail to comply with s 119(1) because he had submitted
to an examination by Dr
Wallace. The appellant submits that the Member was in error to find that s
119(1) only required the respondent
to submit on one occasion. The appellant
asserts that it was erroneous to limit s 119(1) in that manner.
appellant further refers to the Member’s reasoning that she was not
satisfied that the Guidelines place an obligation on
the worker to attend a
medical examination otherwise than in accordance with s 119 of the 1998 Act and
that s 119(4) specifically
provides that the Guidelines regulate the
requirements for examinations and their frequency “under this
section”, which
was s 119 of the 1998 Act. The appellant asserts that it
appears that the Member was giving primacy to s 119 and that she considered
the terms of the section provided no basis under the Guidelines for the
appellant to have the respondent reassessed by Dr Wallace.
appellant submits that this is a misstatement as to how s 119 operates in
conjunction with the Guidelines. The appellant sets
out s 119(1), s 119(4) and
7.6 of the Guidelines and says that the only limitation on s 119(1) is s 119(4),
which requires that the
worker cannot be obligated to undergo a medical
examination “otherwise than in accordance with” the Guidelines. The
says that the applicable Part of the Guidelines is 7.6 and submits
that the “reasons for referral” is a reference to
Part 7.1, which
provides the circumstances in which it is reasonable that an employer or insurer
arrange an independent medical examination,
as defined in the introduction to
appellant refers to the decision in
, in which Snell DP said that the
Guidelines control the manner of operation of s 119.
appellant submits that the dispute before the Commission raises issues
pertaining to the respondent’s capacity for work
and the need for
treatment, so that the further assessment complies with the Guidelines because
the previous assessment was more
than 6 months prior to this assessment (Part
7.6), and an assessment and report were necessary in order to address those
issues (Part
7.1). The appellant asserts that when s 119(1) is read
together with the Part 7.6 of the Guidelines and, applying
reasons for referral are satisfied, the worker is a required to attend a further
assessment and in the event of a failure
to attend, s 119 provides for the
consequences.
appellant says that the Member’s construction of s 119(1) unjustifiably
requires the words “must ... submit himself
or herself for only one
medical examination by a medical practitioner ...” to be read into the
section, contrary to the High
Court authority of
Taylor v The Owners
– Strata Plan No
The appellant submits
that such a construction would make Part 7.6 of the Guidelines otiose, which is
an outcome that should be avoided.
The appellant says that s 119 in its
entirety, together with the Guidelines, contemplates a further independent
medical examination,
precisely as in this case where the respondent relied upon
new information in a report from an independent medical examiner in support
his application for a review of the appellant’s decision to decline the
claim. The appellant contends that the balance between
requiring the respondent
to attend a medical examination, and multiple unnecessary examinations is
achieved by meeting the necessary
preconditions provided for in the Guidelines
and not by limiting the power to a single assessment.
appellant asserts that if the Member’s construction was correct, it would
lead to undesirable consequences, such as where
there is a need for assessment
from multiple specialists from various specialties. The appellant says that that
requirement would
be prohibited if the Member’s construction was
appellant submits that the Member’s observation that “the Guidelines
operate to confer an obligation on a worker to
submit to an examination by a
medical practitioner otherwise than in accordance with s 119 of the 1998
is contrary to the
binding authority of
. The appellant says that the Guidelines outline
how s 119 is to operate, and do not mean that a worker must submit to an
examination
“otherwise than in accordance with s
The appellant
asserts that those were the terms used by the Member which points to the Member
having applied the wrong test and the
Member thus committed an error of
appellant sought to clarify that the appeal concerns the operative effect of s
119(1) of the 1998 Act, specifically whether, in
the context of the Guidelines,
the section contemplates only one assessment. The appellant submits that it is
erroneous to read the
section as providing that, once the assessment under the
section has occurred, the section has no more work to do. The appellant
that s 119 operates with reference to the Guidelines, which clearly provide for
further assessments, including in the circumstances
of this case. The appellant
submits that the appeal is not about the power to compel the respondent to
attend the assessment.
appellant points to its submissions made to the Member and concedes that it
requested an order to attend a further medical assessment
be made, but what it
is actually seeking is for the respondent to comply with the request for a
further examination and if that does
not occur, then the worker’s
entitlements should be stayed by not listing the matter for conciliation and
arbitration until
there is compliance.
appellant concedes that s 119(2) does not apply and this case is not a case that
falls within s 71 of the 1998 Act. The appellant
confirms that it relies on s
119(1) and the implications that follow a failure to attend the medical
examination contained in s 119(3).
The appellant submits that there is no
limitation in the terms or scope of s 119. The appellant refers to the
Member’s conclusion
that the respondent attended one medical examination
with Dr Wallace, so he had not failed to comply with s 119(1) and submits that
the Member clearly was of the view that the section had the effect of requiring
one consultation only. The appellant says that on
a plain reading of the section
and taking into account the Guidelines, that conclusion was impermissible.
appellant indicates that Part 7.6 requires the subsequent referral to meet the
reasons, which are undoubtedly the reasons provided
in Part 7.1, which protect
against unduly burdensome examinations, and once the reasons for referral are
satisfied, Part 7.6 also
requires that independent medical examination can only
occur in the prescribed situations. The appellant says that the prescribed
situation that the evidence shows that the worker’s injury has
“significantly changed or resolved” arguably applies
to this case
because of the passage of time, but in any case the situation applies where
“the worker requests a review after
receiving a notice (issued under s 78
of the Act) and includes additional medical information that the
employer/insurer is asked
to consider.”
appellant submits that the report of Dr New dated 27 May 2025 is new evidence.
The appellant describes the decision pursuant to
s 287A of the 1998 Act dated 16
June 2025 as a review decision that included a term that the respondent be
re-assessed by Dr Wallace,
which never eventuated. The appellant asserts
that it is impermissible to read into s 119(1) the limitation of there being
assessment. The appellant says that the Member erred in interpreting
the subsection as she did.
appellant asserts that the decision made in the review of the s 78 Notice was
contingent upon and qualified by a subsequent report
of Dr Wallace, and the
decision would be reconsidered upon receipt of the report. The appellant asserts
there was nothing else that
the appellant could do because of the timeframe for
the examination to occur.
appellant refers to the provision in Part 7.6 that a re-assessment is
permissible if it had been at least six months since the
first assessment.
appellant further refers to the Member’s reasons at paragraph [21], in
which the Member quoted the provision in Part 7.6
that allows for a further
examination where there is new evidence provided when seeking a review under s
287A. The appellant reiterates
that the Guidelines control the operation of s
119, the Guidelines contemplated further medical assessments, and it was
erroneous for the Member to conclude that s 119(1) allowed for
only one medical assessment.
appellant referred to the Member’s observation that she was not satisfied
that the Guidelines conferred an obligation to
submit to an examination
otherwise than in accordance with s 119 of the 1998 Act. The appellant accepted
that observation but says
that it remains that s 119(1) does not limit the
number of examinations that can take place.
appellant describes s 119(1) as “the power”, and the alternate power
lies in s 119(2), which does not apply in this
case. The appellant says that the
consequence of a failure to comply is set out in s 119(3) and the power is
limited by s 119(4)
and by the limitations imposed in the Guidelines. The
appellant asserts that the Guidelines do not limit the medical examinations
only one examination.
appellant submits that proceedings were commenced, but had not commenced when
the respondent sought a review under s 287A. The
appellant asserts that there is
no authority, reason or principle to say that a worker is under no obligation to
comply with a request
once liability is denied. The appellant says that such a
proposition does not follow when the Guidelines permit an assessment when
is a review under s 287A after liability has been denied. The appellant adds
that the respondent’s proposition that the
opportunity to have the worker
re-examined must be pursued before liability is denied has no basis in
legislation and does not sit
with the fact that the requirement for a decision
to be made is subject to time limits.
appellant refers to Part 7.6 and the requirement that the information from the
treating practitioner is inadequate, unavailable
or inconsistent. The appellant
says that the claim involves a claim for weekly payments and a work capacity
decision. The appellant
asserts that it is entirely inappropriate to confine the
evidence to what the treating specialist has to say because the treating
specialist’s role is different to that of an independent medical expert,
and there is a distinction between issues arising
from the legislation and
comments limited to medical matters. The appellant says that the report of Dr
Molnar does not deal with
issues arising from the Act (presumably the 1987 Act),
such as the respondent’s capacity to earn and matters relevant to the
application of s 32A of the 1987 Act. The appellant asserts that it is always
appropriate to have those matters considered (or reconsidered)
by a medico-legal
appellant submits that the information from the treating medical practitioners
is inadequate because comment on those matters
is not the role of the treating
specialist. The appellant says that a treating specialist may well be qualified
to comment on whether
medical expenses are reasonably necessary but in respect
of weekly payments or a work capacity decision, it is inadequate to obtain
opinion from a treating doctor when there may be a suite of information that is
not made available to that treatment provider.
appellant also submits that there was an inconsistency in the evidence, which
was sufficient to enable a further examination by
Dr Wallace. The appellant says
that there is commentary about ongoing symptoms, the respondent’s
disability and in relation
to causation that the treating doctor provides that
is different to Dr Wallace’s observations which is an inconsistency that
cannot be resolved and so it is not inappropriate to re-refer the respondent to
Dr Wallace. The appellant submits that the opinions
[without reference to whose
opinions] are diametrically opposed.
appellant submits that the matters to be addressed include the diagnosis of
injury, the necessary treatment, the capacity for
pre-injury duties, and the
description of suitable duties, so that the reasons for referral are satisfied
and it is appropriate to
request a re-examination by Dr Wallace. The appellant
concedes that Dr Wallace has dealt with those matters, however, says that there
is new information which needs to be addressed, such as Dr New’s evidence
that the respondent was totally unfit for work.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent asserts that the arguments raised by the appellant in the appeal are
at complete odds to “how the matter was
argued at the preliminary
conference”, when the appellant sought an order to compel the respondent
to attend a further assessment
by Dr Wallace. The respondent says that the
appeal raises an issue in respect of s 119 of the 1998 Act. The respondent cites
Metwally v University of
as authority to
say that the appellant is bound by the conduct of his case and that it is not
open for the appellant to raise new
issues in the appeal.
respondent submits that the Guidelines provide a basis upon which a medical
assessment can be made, but they do not supersede
s 119. The respondent adds
that the appellant has omitted important matters referred to in the Guidelines,
such as in Part 7.1, which
says that a referral is appropriate when information
from the treating medical practitioners is inadequate, unavailable or
inconsistent
and the person making the referral is unable to resolve the issue
directly with the practitioners. The respondent contends that the
referral in
these proceedings does not satisfy those requirements, and in fact, the
appellant failed to follow the Guidelines so
that it is not entitled to a
further assessment.
respondent points out that the referral for medical assessment was sought for
the sole purpose of Dr Wallace considering the opinion
of Dr New, which was not
a proper basis for the referral. The respondent says that the referral has
nothing to do with the treating
medical evidence, which was a requirement in the
Guidelines.
respondent asserts that the appellant’s reliance upon Part 7.6 is flawed.
He submits that there might be a circumstance
in which a further medical
assessment is sought before making a decision, however, this is not such a
circumstance. The respondent
submits that the appellant reviewed the s 78 Notice
and the Notice was upheld. The respondent asserts that, once that decision is
made, the opportunity for a further medical assessment ceases. The respondent
refers to the covering letter dated 16 June 2025 directed
to the respondent that
informed him that the review of the decision to decline liability had been
completed and the decision was
confirmed. The respondent says that the position
might be different if the review decision is pending or subsequent medical
might influence the decision, but those were not the circumstances of
this case, where a denial had already been made.
respondent adds that the manner in which the Notice was framed was not
consistent with the submission that a referral could be
conducted where six
months had elapsed. The respondent says that the Notice expressed a concluded
view while also asking the respondent
to attend another assessment. The
respondent refers to s 71(1) of the 1998 Act, which requires the respondent
to fully co-operate
with the insurer liable for the claim, and s 71(3),
which provides that the duty in s 71 to co-operate only applies until the
proceedings
are commenced. The respondent asserts that he was under no
obligation to comply with the appellant’s request once the appellant
disputed liability for the claim and it is uncontroversial that the claim was
denied. The respondent adds that proceedings in the
Commission had already
respondent contends that there was no breach of s 119(1) because the subsection
does not contemplate a further assessment and
he had already been assessed by
Dr Wallace when he gave notice of his injury. The respondent says that
s 119(2) provides for a worker
to be re-examined from time to time, but
that only applies to a worker who is in receipt of weekly payments, and the
respondent’s
weekly payments ceased in October 2024.
respondent submits that, in the proceedings before the Member, the appellant
sought an order from the Member compelling the respondent
to attend a
re-examination. The respondent asserts that the argument put to the Member was
substantially different to the issues
raised in the appeal.
respondent concludes that, while there is an opportunity to seek a further
assessment when a review of a decision to decline liability
is sought, the
opportunity must be taken before the decision to decline liability is upheld.
respondent submits that it is clear that the Member was asked to determine
whether she could compel the respondent to attend the
medical appointment. The
respondent says that the decision must be considered in the context of the issue
raised before her. The
respondent says that the arguments on appeal have
substantially expanded the matters that he says probably ought to have been run
before the Member. The respondent indicates that even in the submissions on
appeal, the appellant seeks a direction that the respondent
is to attend a
medical examination. The respondent says that the case on appeal has shifted to
the question of whether there was
an inadequacy in the evidence, which would
provide a basis for a referral for further medical examination.
respondent submits that in any event, s 119(4) provides that a worker must not
be required to submit to a medical examination
otherwise than in accordance with
the Guidelines. The respondent asserts that the Guidelines, therefore, are the
central basis of
the dispute. The respondent refers to Part 7.1 of the
Guidelines and points out that the referral is appropriate where the information
from the treating medical practitioner is inadequate, unavailable or
inconsistent. The respondent emphasises that the information
must be from a
treating doctor, and the referrer must be unable to resolve the problem directly
with practitioners.
respondent says that there is no evidence at all about any attempt to resolve
the problem. The respondent adds that none of the
reasons set out in Part 7.1
are satisfied.
respondent submits that the appellant is now relying upon the
“inadequacy” of the information, when the review Notice
pursuant to s 287A of the 1998 Act only referred to “inconsistency”
in the opinions between Dr Wallace and Dr
New, which was the basis for the
referral. The respondent asserts that, in circumstances where Dr Wallace advised
that he did not
need to review the respondent again, it is unclear what
inconsistency required a physical assessment by Dr Wallace in order for Dr
Wallace to address that inconsistency.
respondent submits that it would be sufficient for Dr Wallace to address the
issues by providing his opinion on the basis of the
documentary evidence.
respondent says that Part 7.1 is the pre-requisite for a further referral and
must be satisfied. The respondent asserts that on
the basis of the evidence
before the Commission and the reasons put forward by the appellant, Part 7.1
cannot be satisfied.
respondent contends that, even if the reasons were satisfied, the referral can
only proceed in the situations listed in Part 7.6,
and submits that none of
those situations fit the reason put forward by the appellant to the
respondent.
respondent notes that the appellant advised that it was operating under strict
time frames and that was the reason for denying
the claim. The respondent refers
to and quotes from the decision of
Mateus v Zodune Pty Ltd t/as Tempo
Cleaning Services
Roche DP observed:
“a decision by an insurer to dispute a
claim for compensation should not be made lightly or without proper and careful
consideration
of the factual
legal issues
(emphasis in
respondent asserts that the matters referred to in Part 7.1 have already been
addressed by Dr Wallace. The respondent says that
the reason for the referral
was not documented on the claims file, the letter directed to the respondent
dated 16 June 2025 did not
provide any explanation as to why the examination was
required, and it was clear, at least in the Member’s mind, that the reason
for the examination was to address the inconsistency between the opinion of Dr
New and that of Dr Wallace. The respondent observes
that it is unclear what
other reason the appellant may have had for arranging the further examination,
but if there was some inadequacy,
it was matter for the appellant to try to
resolve that issue with the doctor.
respondent submits that the operation of s 119(1) is limited to one assessment
because the section is predicated upon the giving
of notice of injury. The
respondent says that the appellant can then arrange further assessments pursuant
to s 119(2), but only if
the respondent is in receipt of weekly payments, so
that if the respondent is not receiving weekly compensation, then there is no
power to compel the respondent to attend an examination. The respondent adds
that the request for the respondent to attend a further
medical examination was
wholly inconsistent with the legislation and with the Guidelines.
As to Ground Two
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the decision of Snell DP in
BGV v Waverley
Snell DP referred to and quoted from the authorities of
Government Insurance Office
RRR Corporation Pty Ltd
respect of the duty to give reasons. The appellant also quotes from
Director of Public
Prosecutions
and refers to
the observations by Kirk J in
Snell DP in
Absolute Aquarium Products Pty Ltd v
and Parker SC ADP in
Yarrawonga & Border Golf Club Ltd
v Williamson
appellant submits that the Member concluded that s 119(1) permits only one
assessment but failed to provide any reasons for that
conclusion, or how that
conclusion was consistent with the Guidelines, particularly Part 7.6. The
appellant asserts that there is
an inconsistency between the Member’s
conclusion and the further assessment criteria provided for in Part 7.6 of the
Guidelines.
The appellant observes that the task of statutory construction is to
avoid any inconsistencies.
appellant points to the Member’s reasoning at [27], where she referred to
“the facts and circumstances of this case
as well as the legislation and
the practices that the Commission follows”, and submits that it was not
clear what “practices”
the Member relied upon. The appellant adds
that the Member’s observation that “it was not appropriate to issue
a direction
compelling the [respondent] to undergo a further assessment”
suggested that s 119(1) of the 1998 Act did not “operate
in the absolute
manner the Member indicated.” The appellant says that if s 119(1) only
allowed for one assessment, once the
assessment took place it was not open to
the Member to issue such a direction. The appellant asserts that this is a
further example
of the inadequacy of the Member’s reasons.
appellant points to the Member’s reference to having given regard to
“the facts and circumstances of this
and queries what
those facts and circumstances were. The appellant acknowledges that the
Member’s reasons should not be read
with an eye finely tuned to error but
submits that a review of the Member’s reasons discloses that the Member
did not provide
any basis upon which that conclusion was reached and did not
identify the “facts and circumstances”. The appellant adds
Member also referred to the “practices” that the Commission follows,
without identifying those factors or circumstances
or what practices supported
her conclusion that she was not satisfied that it was appropriate to issue a
direction compelling the
respondent to attend a re-assessment by Dr Wallace. The
appellant submits that the “practices” are to follow the legislation
and the Guidelines.
appellant submits that while there is no power to compel a worker to attend a
medical examination, that is not the point. It submits
that the point is that
there are no reasons why the Member reached her conclusion in respect of s
119(1). The appellant refers to
the respondent’s reliance on
Primo Concrete Pty Ltd
appellant asserts that the reasons are always material to the outcome because
they assist the party to understand how a conclusion
was reached and in this
case, the issue was how s 119(1) operated, which was clearly relevant.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent contends that the Member’s reasons were correct and
appropriate. The respondent refers to the Member’s
reasoning that she was
not willing to compel him to attend an appointment and submits that her reasons
were clear, in that there
is no power to compel a worker to attend an
appointment at the request of the insurer/employer. The respondent asserts that
unclear what other reasons the Member could have given for refusing to
compel the respondent to do so in the circumstances where
the legislation and
the Commission’s practices do not provide for it. The respondent says that
it was not appropriate for the
Member to make such an order.
respondent submits that, even if the reasons were deficient, that did not
constitute a material error. The respondent refers to
determined that the Member’s failure to consider evidence was not a
material error and thus no error was established.
The respondent asserts that
the Member’s reasons were sufficient, and the ultimate determination was
correct, however, even
if the reasons were not sufficient it was immaterial to
the outcome.
As to Ground Three
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the failure to address an argument that was properly
raised amounts to a denial of procedural fairness
and constitutes jurisdictional
error, citing various authorities in support of that
submission.
appellant submits that it was always the appellant’s case that there is a
power to have the benefit of more than one medical
assessment, and the case was
clearly run on the basis that a further medical examination was permitted. The
appellant says that the
issue is important as it relates to the effects of s 119
of the 1998 Act and it is not a new issue. The appellant contends that it
not be aware that an argument has not been addressed until the decision is made
appellant submits that the Commission is required to engage in a fact-finding
process and reach a conclusion as to which medical
opinions are preferred. The
appellant says that without the medical examination, the appellant cannot meet
the respondent’s
appellant says that it does not seek an order that the respondent attend the
medical examination but seeks to have the matter
remitted to a member for
further determination.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent asserts that this ground of appeal is unmeritorious. He contends that
the argument put to the Member was not “clearly
articulated”. The
respondent asserts that the argument as to how s 119 operates was not the
argument put to the Member. The
respondent contends that the argument put to the
Member was that the Commission had jurisdiction to “compel” him to
an appointment with Dr Wallace, when there was no statutory power to do
so. The respondent points to the appellant’s concession
to the Member that
there was no statutory power to direct him to attend a medical appointment,
failing which his entitlement to recover
compensation was suspended.
respondent contends that the order sought did not exist and was
, the appellant’s argument was not clearly articulated and there
was no basis for the relief sought. The respondent concludes
Member’s response and reasoning were appropriate.
Appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant responded to the respondent’s submissions. The appellant refers
to the respondent’s suggestion that the
case now advanced by the appellant
was not argued before the Member and submits that if that is the case, it seeks
leave to raise
and argue the case. The appellant asserts that there can be no
prejudice to the respondent and the interpretation of s 119(1) is
appellant asserts that the respondent mischaracterises its submissions. The
appellant refers to its submissions made that:
(a) the Guidelines provide for the appellant to be permitted to arrange a
further medical examination;
(b) the appellant should be entitled to have the respondent medically examined
and the Guidelines are unequivocal as to the circumstances
in which an
examination is required;
(c) section 119(1) provides that the worker must submit to an
examination;
(d) section 119(1) should not be read down to allow only one
examination,
(e) section 119(4) indicates that the respondent may be required to submit
himself to an examination at intervals prescribed by the
Guidelines.
The appellant submits that the same point can be taken against the respondent in
that some of the matters raised by the respondent
in the appeal hearing were not
relied on in resisting the appellant’s case at first instance.
appellant asserts that, in any event, I would be satisfied that there was error
in the interpretation of s 119 and that error
is sufficient to require the
matter to be remitted for re-determination. The appellant adds that Part 7.1
provides examples and is
not an exhaustive absolute list of reasons.
appellant refers to the “new information” required and points out
that Dr Wallace referred to the respondent’s
work capacity and took the
history that the respondent was working on a part-time basis 3 hours per night,
7 days per week washing
crockery but Dr New recorded that the respondent was not
working, and was wearing a brace on his knee, which were relevant criteria
assessing work capacity.
THE RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant seeks to have the Member’s Certificate of Determination set
aside and the matter remitted to the Member to be
determined according to law.
The respondent seeks to have the appeal dismissed.
CONSIDERATION
respondent protests that the matters raised by the appellant in the appeal were
not the subject of submissions to the Member.
The appellant’s submissions
to the Member were that:
(a) it was conceded that there was no statutory power for the Member to order
that the respondent (the applicant below) attend a
medical examination;
(b) the respondent did not fully cooperate with the insurer and thus contravened
subs (2) and (4) of s 119;
(c) to not allow the appellant a further in-person review with Dr Wallace would
be in direct contravention of the Guidelines and,
by extension, s 119 of the
(d) the respondent provided no adequate reason for non-attendance at the
appointment with Dr Wallace;
(e) the appellant was not seeking to ‘delay’ the proceedings by
requesting a further examination by Dr Wallace;
(f) it should be entitled to have the respondent re-examined by Dr Wallace;
(g) it would be prejudiced if the report of Dr New was admitted into evidence
without giving Dr Wallace the opportunity to examine
the respondent and comment
on the evidence provided in the request for review, and
(h) it would be prejudiced by proceeding without the further evidence sought.
Notice issued pursuant to s 287A of the 1998 Act indicated that the appellant
relied upon the provision in Part 7.1 of the Guidelines
that the reason for the
medical assessment was that there were inconsistencies in the opinions of the
independent medical examiners,
in circumstances where the respondent included
additional medical evidence in the internal review (Part 7.6 of the Guidelines).
the oral hearing of the appeal, the appellant sought to expand on its submission
that medical evidence was “inconsistent”
by also relying on the
assertion that the medical evidence was “inadequate.” It is not
appropriate to seek to raise a
new issue on appeal without first seeking leave
to do so. It is even less appropriate to raise a new issue in proceedings at the
eleventh hour without giving prior notice of that intention and after written
submissions had been filed by each party. Section 352(5)
of the 1998 Act
provides that an appeal is limited to the identification of error of fact, law
or discretion and to the correction
of any such error. The appellant is bound by
the conduct of its case and Member cannot be said to have erred by not dealing
a submission that was never put to
addition, the appellant made oral submissions asserting that an independent
medical assessor is better placed than a treating doctor
to comment on such
matters as incapacity and matters addressing s 32A of the 1987 Act. Those
submissions are rejected and leave to
raise that argument is refused.
respondent complains that the appeal raises an issue in respect of s 119 of the
1998 Act which was not argued before the Member.
The Member did in fact deal
with s 119 in the process of determining whether and in what circumstances the
respondent was required
to attend Dr Wallace for a further examination. The
respondent has had the opportunity to reply to the appellant’s
submissions.
I am of the view that the matters raised in both parties’
submissions are germane to the Member’s conclusion that she
satisfied that the Guidelines confer an obligation on a worker to attend for
examination by a medical practitioner otherwise
than in accordance with s 119 of
the 1998 Act, and that the Guidelines operate to regulate the requirements for
and frequency of
examinations under s
that basis, the parties’ submissions in respect of s 119 are taken into
account for the purpose of determining whether the
Member erred in her
interpretation of s 119 of the 1998 Act (Ground One of the
Ground One: The Member committed an error of law by her
interpretation of s 119 of the 1998 Act
appellant asserts error on the part of the Member in respect of her conclusion
that subs (1) of s 119 is limited to attendance
on one occasion only.
Section 119(1) requires that a worker who gives notice of an injury must attend
for medical examination if
required by the employer. Subsection (2) provides for
examinations “from time to time” where the worker is in receipt
weekly payments and subs (4) prohibits a requirement to attend where the
examination is otherwise than in accordance with the
Guidelines. The Guidelines
impose requirements for the examinations and mandatory obligations on the
insurer. I agree with Snell
DP’s observation in
Guidelines “regulate the circumstances in which a worker may be required
to submit to a medical examination at the
direction of an
(1) does not talk about “from time to time” or “further”
examinations. The subsection must be read
in its context, which includes
subsections (2) and (4) and the reasons and circumstances provided for in the
Guidelines. On a plain
reading of subs (1), it simply requires the worker to
attend for examination when a claim for compensation is made. It does not
contemplate
multiple medical assessments, as asserted by the appellant, and as
submitted by the respondent, if it were to be interpreted as the
asserts, then (at least) subs (2) would have no work to do. In order to accept
the appellant’s submission that s
119(1) permits further assessments,
it would be necessary to read additional words into the section, which is
impermissible.
I reject the
appellant’s submission.
appellant submits that the Member appears to have given “primacy” to
s 119 and appears to have considered that the
terms of the section provided no
basis under the Guidelines for the appellant to have the respondent reassessed.
The Member’s
reasoning was as follows:
satisfied that the Guidelines operate to confer an obligation on a worker to
submit to an examination by a medical
practitioner otherwise than in accordance
with s 119 of the 1998 Act. To the contrary, s 119(4) of the 1998 Act,
specifically provides
that the Guidelines operate to regulate the requirements
for and frequency of examinations ‘under this section’, namely
of the 1998 Act.”
Member’s reasoning discloses no error. She was clearly cognisant of how
the Guidelines operated to control the manner of
operation of s 119, as observed
appellant submits that the dispute raises issues as to the respondent’s
capacity for work and need for treatment, and the
further assessment was
required because it had been more than six months since the respondent was
previously assessed by Dr Wallace,
thus complying with Part 7.6 of the
Guidelines. Again, this was not a substantive submission made to the Member. The
appellant submitted
to the Member that it had been over a year since the
respondent was examined by Dr Wallace but did not extrapolate further or make
any reference to the Guidelines as to why that was relevant. Nor did it feature
as a reason in the Notice issued pursuant to s 287A
of the 1998 Act. Part 7.5 of
the Guidelines requires that the worker must be advised in writing of the
referral and the specific
reason for the examination.
any event, s 119(4) provides that a worker must not be required to submit
himself or herself for examination by a medical practitioner
under section 119
otherwise than in accordance with the Guidelines. The appellant correctly
concedes that Part 7.6 of the Guidelines
requires the subsequent referral to
meet the reasons for referral set out in Part 7.1. Compliance with the
Guidelines is mandatory.
The reason for referral to an independent medical
examiner in Part 7.1 is that:
“Referral for an IME is
appropriate when information from the treating medical practitioner(s) is
inadequate, unavailable or
inconsistent, and the referrer is unable to resolve
the problem directly with the practitioners.”
reason for the further referral put forward by the appellant was that the
evidence provided by Dr New was inconsistent with that
of Dr Wallace. That does
not constitute an inconsistency with the information from the treating medical
practitioner, or for that
matter any inadequacy or unavailability of the
treating practitioner’s information. The treating general
practitioner’s
clinical notes were annexed to the appellant’s reply,
together with Certificates of Capacity issued by Dr Shiraj Attambawa.
informative report by Dr Molnar dated 26 June 2024 directed to the
respondent’s general practitioner as well as the request
by Dr Molnar for
approval to perform the surgery were also in evidence in the ARD and thus were
clearly available.
the oral hearing, I asked the appellant to identify where the purported
inconsistency had been explained to the respondent, noting
that Part 7.5 of the
Guidelines requires that the worker must be advised in writing of the referral
“The written advice to the worker must include:
the specific
reason for the examination
an explanation
of why information from the treating medical practitioner(s) or author of the
assessment report to the insurer’s
enquiry was inadequate, inconsistent or
unavailable.”
appellant pointed to the letter directed to the respondent dated 16 June 2025,
in which it advised the respondent that the medical
examination was necessary
because of the inconsistency between the opinions of the two independent medical
appellant has not identified where the Guidelines provide that a further
assessment is permitted in circumstances where the opinions
of two independent
medical examiners differ. While the circumstances set out in Part 7.6 identify
that an examination may take place
if a worker submits new medical evidence in
an application for review under s 287A of the 1998 Act, the reasons set out
in Part 7.1
must also be satisfied. The reason for the re-assessment does not
fall within the ambit of Part 7.1 and the required information
listed in Part
7.1 has already been addressed by Dr Wallace. Dr Wallace formed the view that
the respondent had recovered from the
effects of the injury, any incapacity
suffered by the respondent was not attributable to the injury and further
medical assessment
was not required. It is difficult to understand what
additional information Dr Wallace could provide following an in-person medical
examination that could not be cured by the appellant simply requesting Dr
Wallace to provide a supplementary report in response to
the opinion of
summary, it is apparent from the above that the request for re-examination did
not comply with the Guidelines, resulting in the
request falling foul of s
119(4). Section 119(4) provides that a worker must not be required to submit
himself or herself for examination
by a medical practitioner under that section
otherwise than in accordance with the Guidelines. The reason for the referral
further examination is not provided for in Part 7.1 of the Guidelines
(that is, that Dr New’s evidence was inconsistent with
Wallace). The referral is therefore prohibited by s 119(4) of the 1998 Act. The
Member concluded that she did not consider
it appropriate to direct the
respondent to attend the examination and that it was not appropriate to suspend
the respondent’s
entitlement to compensation. She arrived at those
conclusions by giving consideration to s 119 and the Guidelines and (correctly)
determining that the appellant had not complied with s 119 and the
Guidelines.
was no error in that approach, and this ground of appeal fails.
Ground Two: The Member’s reasons were inadequate such
that she failed to exercise her statutory function, which is a jurisdictional
appellant submits that the Member failed to give any reasons for concluding that
s 119(1) of the 1998 Act only permitted one assessment
or how that
conclusion accorded with the Guidelines and asserts that the Member’s
conclusion was inconsistent with the criteria
listed in Part 7.6 of the
Guidelines.
appellant points to the Member’s reasoning at [27] where she
“Having regard to the facts and circumstances of
this case as well as the legislation and the practices that the Commission
follows, for the above reasons, I am not satisfied that it is appropriate to
issue a direction compelling the [respondent] to undergo
a further in-person
examination with independent medical expert, Dr Raymond Wallace.”
appellant adds that the Member’s conclusion that it was not appropriate to
direct the respondent to attend the medical examination
was inconsistent with
the Member’s determination that s 119(1) only allowed for one examination.
The appellant says that the
Member did not provide any basis upon which that
conclusion was reached and did not identify the “facts and
circumstances”
or the “practices” of the Commission. The
appellant asserts that whether the Member did or did not have the power to
compel the respondent to attend the examination is not the point and asserts
that the Member failed to provide reasons for her conclusion
in respect of s
do not accept that there was any inconsistency between the Member’s
conclusion that s 119(1) only allowed for one examination
determination that it was not appropriate to issue a direction that the
respondent attend the examination. The Member clearly
declined to issue such a
direction to attend a further examination (a final determination that the
appellant does not cavil with)
because s 119(1) did not provide for a further
respondent asserts that the Member’s reasons were sufficient, and the
ultimate determination was correct, however, even
if the reasons were not
sufficient it was immaterial to the outcome, relying on
authority for that proposition.
appellant submits that the reasons are always material to the outcome.
have determined in Ground One of this appeal that the Member was correct to
conclude that s 119(1) did not provide for further medical
examinations and that
the appellant’s reason for referral for a medical examination did not
comply with s 119(4) of the 1998
Act and the Guidelines. The reasons provided by
the Member in support of her determination about s 119 were sufficient to
the Member’s ultimate conclusion that it was not appropriate for
her to issue the directions sought by the appellant.
appellant refers to the Member’s reasoning in which the Member referred to
the “facts and circumstances” of
the case, the legislation and the
“practices” that the Commission follows and asserts that it was
unclear as to what
“practices” the Member was referring. The facts
and circumstances of this case, together with the applicable legislation
more than adequately set out by the Member in her reasons. At [29] of her
reasons, the Member observed that Dr Wallace could
provide a supplementary
report addressing the matters raised by Dr New, which was a submission made by
the respondent and is common
practice in the Commission. I note there is no
evidence from Dr Wallace as to any impediment to that process.
its oral and written submissions, the appellant observed that the Member had no
power to make the order sought, which was to direct
the respondent to attend the
medical examination and the Member found accordingly. Even if the Member’s
reasoning was deficient,
it is unclear how that deficiency sits with an
allegation of error on the part of the Member in declining to make the order
In those circumstances any insufficiency in her reasons could not be
material to the outcome and is not sufficient to disturb the
final determination.
is always necessary to read a primary decision-maker's decision
Meagher JA considered the purpose of providing reasons and said that when
considering a challenge to the adequacy of reasons, it
must be remembered that
the decision must be read as a whole and that reasons need not be lengthy or
JA added that the absence of sufficient reasons often leads to “a real
sense of grievance that a party does not know
or understand why the decision was
Member’s reasons, when considered as a whole, were in my view sufficient
to discharge her duty and promote a proper understanding
of why she reached her
conclusions. I do not consider that the reasons were so deficient that a party
could not understand why the
decision was made. This appeal ground is
Ground Three: The Member failed to respond to a clearly
articulated argument raised by the appellant, which was a denial of procedure
(sic, procedural) fairness and jurisdictional error
appellant asserts that the Member’s failure to provide adequate reasons
caused her to fail to grapple with the submissions
made by the appellant about
how it contends s 119 operates because of her failure to provide adequate
appellant says that its case was that there is a “power” to have a
further assessment and that a further medical assessment
was permissible in this
case. It submits that without the further medical examination it cannot meet the
respondent’s case.
respondent contends that the order sought (that the respondent attend the
medical examination) could not be made and was
ultra vires
appellant’s argument was not clearly articulated and there was no basis
for the relief sought. The respondent concludes
that the Member’s response
and reasoning were appropriate.
appellant refers to its submissions raised, summarised at [115] above. The
appellant does not identify which of those submissions
were not dealt with by
the Member. The Member considered:
(a) the application of the Guidelines and the circumstances in which a further
referral can take place;
(b) whether the appellant was entitled to have the respondent medically
re-examined;
(c) whether s 119(1) provided a vehicle for a further examination or
whether it permitted only one examination, and
(d) the application of s 119(4) not this case.
the absence of any indication as to a particular submission that was not
addressed, the ground of appeal must fail.
appellant has failed to establish error on the part of the Member, and the
appeal is dismissed. In the circumstances of this case,
the appellant is not
entitled to have the respondent re-examined by Dr Wallace.
appeal was interlocutory in nature, and the substantive rights and liabilities
of the parties are yet to be determined. It is
therefore necessary for the
dispute be remitted and I consider it appropriate that the remittal is back to
the same Member for further
determination.
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 19 August 2025 is
matter is remitted to the same Member of the Commission for determination of the
outstanding matters in dispute.
Elizabeth Wood
Deputy President
13 October 2025
Reply to Application to Resolve
a Dispute (reply), p 8.
Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD), pp
Dr Wallace’s
report, p 10, ARD, p 22.
Investment Management Group Hotels Resources Pty Ltd
(W7243/25, 19 August
2025) (reasons), [13].
[2021] NSWPICPD 4
Reasons, [24].
Appellant’s written submissions,
[2007] NSWWCCPD 227
NSWPICPD 2.
(1997) 48 NSWLR
21 NSWLR 725.
[2009] NSWCA
[2022] NSWCA
[2024] NSWSC
[2024] NSWPICPD
[2021] NSWPICPD
[2025] NSWPICPD 62
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
AAI Ltd t/as GIO as agent for the Nominal Defendant v McGiffen
[2016] NSWCA 229
Ali v AAI Ltd
[2016] NSWCA 110
Rodger v De
[2015] NSWCA 211
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Cervantes
[2012] NSWCA 244.
Appellant’s submissions to the Member, 31 July 2025,
Appellant’s
submissions to the Member, 31 July 2025,
Appellant’s
submissions to the Member, 31 July 2025,
Appellant’s
submissions to the Member, 31 July 2025,
Appellant’s
submissions to the Member, 31 July 2025,
[2011] NSWCA 123
per Whealy JA,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.74 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter