URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/845.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Christoforidis v AAI Limited t/as GIO [2025] NSWPICMP 845; (3 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
Christoforidis v AAI Limited t/as GIO [2025] NSWPICMP 845
Albertina Christoforidis
AAI Limited t/as GIO
REVIEW PANEL
Hugh Macken
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Ankur Gupta
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Matthew Jones
DATE OF DECISION:
3 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
of medical assessment; chronic post-traumatic stress disorder in partial
remission; prior and current relationship deterioration;
prior medication
prescription; requirement for airlift to hospital; post-accident physical
difficulty; effects of treatment; inconsistencies
between recollection and
medical record; likely diagnosis of chronic post-traumatic stress disorder,
impartial remission; psychiatric
impairment rating; pre-accident use of
antidepressants;
– Review Panel assessed 8% whole person
impairment (WPI).
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Panel revokes the certificate of Medical Assessor Alexey Sidorov dated
September 2024 and issues a new certificate.
following injuries were caused by the motor vehicle accident and give rise to a
permanent impairment of 8%.
post-traumatic stress disorder in partial
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
Christoforidis (the claimant) a 68-year-old woman who was injured in a motor
vehicle accident on 10 April 2013. There has
been a protracted history in
respect to medical assessments addressing the issue of the degree of whole
person impairment suffered
by the claimant and caused by the motor vehicle
accident. The insurer has not conceded the claimant’s injuries exceed 10%
person impairment. This process culminated in the claimant being examined
by Medical Assessor Alex Sidorov who examined the claimant
on 27 August 2024 and
a certificate dated 10 September 2024 determined that the claimant suffered
psychological injuries which gave
rise to a permanent impairment of 6%.
claimant sought a review of this certificate and in a decision dated 19 November
2024 President’s delegate Stephanie Wigan
decided that there is a
reasonable court suspect that the medical assessment was incorrect in a material
respect the matter which
then referred to this Medical Review Panel.
Panel convened on 22 July 2024 and noted that there was an absence of treating
and clinical material relating to the claimant
since 2018. The Panel determined
that it was appropriate for the Panel to direct the claimant to obtain updated
treating notes from
the claimant’s treating general practitioner (GP) and
upload this material. This material has now been uploaded to the portal
considered by the Panel.
14F of Schedule 1 of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
Act) provides that the new review provisions apply in relation to a decision of
a new decision-maker. A “new decision
maker” is defined in cl 14A
(1) of the Schedule 1 of the PIC Act. As the medical assessment, the subject of
the review, was
made on or after 1 March 2021, the new review provisions
new review provision provides that a Review Panel consists of two Medical
Assessors and a Member assigned by the Motor Accidents
Division of the Personal
Injury Commission (Commission).
5 of the PIC Act enables the Commission to make rules with respect to its
practice and procedure including proceedings before
a Panel reviewing a decision
of a Medical Assessor.
127 to 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (PIC Rules) are made
pursuant to Part 5 of the PIC Act. A Review Panel
determines how it conducts and
determines the proceedings and may determine the matter solely based on the
written application.
review of the medical assessment is by way of a new assessment of all the
matters with which the medical assessment is
EXAMINATION
Panel examination took place on 7 October 2025 via audio-visual link through the
MS Teams platform. Present were Medical Assessors Ankur Gupta and Matthew
Jones, both psychiatrists. The claimant was situated in
her solicitor’s
office in Elizabeth Street, Sydney and Medical Assessors Gupta and Jones were in
their respective rooms.
CONSENT AND CONFIDENTIALITY
claimant was provided the routine cautions with respect to the purpose of the
assessment, the non-confidential nature of the assessment,
and the fact that the
Medical Assessors could not provide treatment advice. She indicated she
understood these cautions and proceeded
with the assessment voluntarily.
INTRODUCTION
claimant is a 68-year-old woman who normally lives in Penrith in her marital
lives there with her husband,
Phillip, who is retired, but she said has a habit of helping other people. She
reported that he is
very handy and was previously a diesel mechanic, worked in
refrigeration, and also has worked on fishing trawlers.
claimant is not currently working and she receives part of the old age pension
through Centrelink. She commented that her husband
earns too much for her to
receive the full pension. She previously worked as a teacher’s aide, up
until 13 years ago. She worked
with children with special needs in mainstream
schools. She worked in this capacity for 25 to 30 years.
claimant and her husband have three children: a 45-year-old male who lives in
Queensland and has two children, a 41-year-old female
who lives in Kellyville
and has three children, and a 39-year-old female who lives in Glenmore Park who
had three children, however
a three year old died about two years ago, after
“a hospital mishap.” She had a virus and passed away. She reported
all of her surviving grandchildren are well and range in age from 18 down
to five months.
claimant reported she sees her grandchildren “not that often.” She
said she used to see some of her grandchildren
more often, however one of her
daughters has not been coming over because of having a young baby. She said that
she tends to stay
at home. The claimant has visited a couple of times, however.
She said she does not feel comfortable going there often due to still
emotions related to the death of the other granddaughter. She has some contact
with her other children about every two weeks,
even if this is by phone.
asked the claimant about her relationship with her children, and she referred to
it being “not very good.” She said
that they tend to prefer their
father over her and the reason for this, she provided, was that they get help
from him. She said the
only thing she does for her children is cook special
meals if they want it. She said even her grandchildren will tend to go to their
grandfather. She said that he spoils them by buying them things and taking them
to them. The claimant reported she does not get asked
to do such things with her
grandchildren and she said it is, “like [she] is invisible.” She
alluded to a challenging
marriage in that she has been, “told all the time
[she is] always wrong”, by her husband, Phillip.
claimant reported she married her husband in 1979 and therefore has been married
for 46 years or so. She described she and her
husband as having “no
relationship.” They sleep in separate rooms and her husband does not talk
to her. She said that
if he does talk to her he asks her why she has not done
this thing, or that thing, or vacuumed, for example. She said that she cooked
him dinner the night before the assessment, however he had already eaten. She
described herself as “lucky to get a lift to
the station.” She went
on to say that he lives a separate life and as far as she is aware he has no
other romantic relationships.
Panel asked the claimant why she was still married given the way she spoke of
the quality of the marriage, and she said that she
has a roof over her head and
then asked “where [is she] going to go”. She reported that she has
“nothing to back
[her] up.” She said that she would like to leave
but she does not know how to go about it. She said several times that she
thought about packing her bags and taking off.
Panel asked the claimant when the difficulties in the marriage started and she
responded, “Just after the accident.”
She said this was due to her
not being able to be in a car with him because she would have panic attacks. She
said this is especially
when the car she is in is next to a truck. She said her
husband has great pleasure sitting beside trucks just to see her have an
response. When the Panel questioned this, as it indicated, more so, something
state of the relationship, she
said, “It just happened overnight” and “it was fine
before.” She said that
they “used to go out and everything”,
however “now there is nothing.” The Panel asked what changed and she
said that her husband keeps telling her that the accident was her fault even
though she was not driving. He tells her it is her fault
for how things are. She
reiterated that, “He wasn’t like that before.” She said she
did not understand the whole
claimant spontaneously added early in the assessment that she “see[s] the
accident” and has “flashbacks of the
accident.” The Panel
decided to follow this line of enquiry and asked her what she meant by
flashbacks and she said that even
the night before the assessment when there was
a low flying helicopter she had a panic attack. She said she gets hot and sweaty
was unable to cope. She said it “freaks [her] out.” She referred
to it being similar to the MASH television program when
helicopters would come
in low. On further enquiry about the nature of her flashbacks, she said they are
of “having the truck
beside.” She said she sees it from her own
point of view. She reported she has these flashbacks every couple of weeks and
occurs when she lies down at nighttime. She also said it happens when she is
driving, for example, if she is driving and a truck
is next to her, she needs to
get away quickly.
claimant was somewhat unsure of the medication she was taking but said she takes
six tablets in the morning and five tablets at
night. She believes she takes two
medications for diabetes, one for cholesterol and she cannot remember the other
ones apart from
a tablet for depression which the Panel confirmed was
Venlafaxine 150mg. As an aside, the claimant reported that her “doctor
went on holidays.” She said she has no current clinical contact with
Panel asked if the claimant had seen any psychologists since the accident and
she said that she did in the early stages, about
twice a week and then every
week. She said this was a female and the Panel confirmed that it was a Ms
Panel asked about having seen any psychiatrists and she reported that her doctor
sent her to one psychiatrist, however she did
not go back. She said the
psychiatrist contacted the doctor and then the claimant was not contacted again.
She said this psychiatrist
was in North Richmond and she saw her soon after the
PSYCHIATRIC HISTORY
claimant reported that she had previously taken no psychiatric medications. She
said she had had one or two visits of counselling
due to “things that
happened at school.” On further enquiry she reported that there was
another teacher’s aide
who was picking on her. She went to see the
counsellor because she wanted to make sure that what she was doing about the
was correct.
claimant denied any psychiatric admissions, taking psychiatric medications
before, or any experience of mental health problems,
including any postnatal
depression, panic, anxiety or depression. She reiterated, “No, no.”
She denied any family history
of mental health problems.
OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT
date of the accident was 9 April 2013, over 12 years prior to the current
assessment. The claimant reported that she and her husband
were on the New
England Highway, driving behind a truck and the truck driver put on its brakes.
Phillip put on the brakes in their
vehicle. She said then Phillip went to
overtake the truck, was overtaking it at high speed, got up to the cabin of the
then the truck driver veered the truck to the right and clipped the
back of their vehicle. Their vehicle went in front of the truck,
then careered
over an embankment and rolled a few times. She said the truck driver “took
off” and when police finally
caught up with him he told the police that he
“thought they were dead.”
the time of the accident, the claimant stayed in the car and said that she had a
head injury. She said the ambulance arrived and
she was airlifted to John Hunter
Hospital and was there for a few days. She said that they were in a panel van
and it was just her
and her husband in the vehicle. She said what she thinks
saved them was that the panel van was loaded down with tools. She said the
morning after the accident her son attended the accident scene and picked up
what he could find. She said that in the commotion she
had been speared by a
wooden post. She said her main physical injuries were to her head.
Panel asked about any legal or court consequences from the accident and she said
all she knows is that the truck driver lost his
job. She said her husband also
incurred injuries on the side of his body when the car rolled from side-to-side.
claimant reported that, at first, she thought she had had no loss of
consciousness but when she looks back she thinks she did.
She remembers during
the time of the accident she had this desire to kill the truck driver. She said
she was very angry and was asking
herself why it happened. She said she was
later told by police that the truck driver was on drugs and “had his
HISTORY OF SYMPTOMS AND TREATMENT FOLLOWING THE
claimant reported she had head trauma and was cut on her head. She also reported
she has problems with her right side and she
is in constant pain and there are a
lot of things that she is unable to lift. She reported she struggles doing
normal chores and,
instead of half an hour, a task will take her a day. She
reported she cannot do what she used to do, for example she previously would
ballroom dancing. She referred to herself as being very unsteady on her feet.
She said she used to be on the road a fair bit travelling
and she would do
things with her grandchildren. She said she used to do a lot of sewing, knitting
and “heavy gardening.”
She said it takes her weeks to do gardening
now. She reported she used to enjoy going out to the shops and “doing
things.” She explained this as that she used to like to look at
the shops and browse. She said it has been so long since she
has gone to the
shops like that, she “can’t remember.”
claimant reported she also liked “catching up with people”, however
she said she does not drive much now, but said
she would “love to.”
When asked why she does not drive much she said she is “a bit cautious of
being in a car.”
She said she does not want to have another accident and
she gets nervous when trucks are around. She said however she needs to drive
times and said that she will “close [her] eyes most of the time”,
presumably when she is a passenger.
Panel asked the claimant where she does drive, and she said she will drive to
the shops every week, do her “local groceries”
and then come home.
When asked when she last drove to Queensland she said she could not remember,
but estimated it was about five
Panel confirmed that the claimant had a driver’s licence and she said she
had just renewed it. She reported she has her
own car, however Phillip drives it
all the time, despite having his own car. She said this was another way of
keeping her home so
that she does not go anywhere. She described him as “a
control freak.” She said he “did not like [her] going out.”
When asked why the claimant thought her husband was “a control
freak” she questioned whether it was his upbringing or
his Mediterranean
Green upbringing. She said she thinks he has a belief that women should be kept
in the kitchen, like his mother.
The Panel noted that this was somewhat
constitutional with respect to her husband and pointed this out to the claimant
who then said
that she noticed that it “got stronger after the
accident.” She offered as an explanation that he may have “hit
head or whatever.” She went on to describe some of his behaviours, for
example if she has been out, he asks where she has
been, how long she has been
there and then asks why she has to have a cup of tea. She then added that he
does not really talk to
her much at all.
Panel asked the claimant about any friendships, and she said that she had a lot
of friends “but they have gone”. She
said she has not caught up with
them and she does not go and see them. She does go down the road and talk to one
of her neighbours
and they “discuss stuff.”
Panel asked why it was that the claimant could not go dancing, within her
physical capacity, and she said she “just couldn’t
do it.” She
said she is scared of falling. She reported she has had a couple of falls, the
cause of which she said was unknown.
She said it is like someone is behind her
and pushes her. She is standing up one minute and then down the next and likened
being “a puff of wind or something.” She reported she had some
significant falls, including one which resulted in her
ending up in hospital,
and another one where she was sitting down and fell backwards. She was in her
rose garden at the time. She
said when she has the experience of “a
pretend wind blowing”, she feels the need to hold something. The Panel
that she does not drink alcohol or take any recreational drugs. She
commented that she only has “tea or water.” She reported
can be unsteady on her feet at any time and it limits her dancing abilities and
interferes with her gardening. She said
she used to go horse riding and wants
“to get back on a horse”, however her daughter (who has horses) will
not let her.
claimant reported she is not sure why her arm is not working well. She said that
she has pain from the wound on her head, down
her neck, through her shoulder and
down her arm. She said nighttime is the worst and she finds there are times when
she cannot sleep,
for example the night before the assessment. She will go to
pick up something but has no strength. She said she cannot open a bottle
needs help with this. Indicating her frustration, she said “you come and
spend a day in my body.”
Panel asked the claimant if she was still experiencing nightmares and she said
she is however they are not as often as before
and perhaps occur once every two
CURRENT FUNCTIONING
claimant reported that her injuries do not interfere with her ability to shower
and dress, however there is some problem with
going to the toilet because of
limitations with reaching. Domestically, she will cook, vacuum and mop, but said
she gets into trouble
from Phillip if the quality or frequency of cleaning is
not sufficient. She said she is unable to cook a lot of the meals that she
previously did as she cannot undertake the stirring motion needed. She struggles
with lifting pots and struggles with cleaning the
Panel asked the claimant how she passes time during the day, and she said she
does “not a lot.” She will lie down
just to rest her body and said
that her head makes her feel tired. She reported she does not watch television
during the day. She
no longer sleeps in the daytime but for a period was
sleeping up to two hours a day, a few years ago. She said she just does not
to anymore. She reported she will often toss and turn at night and will watch
the sunrise then get-up at 9.00am or 8.00am and
“that’s it.”
She will walk around the yard, talk to the birds and feed the birds. She said
her grandson has two
Panel asked what the claimant does when she lies down, and she said she used to
try and read a book, however she has had one book
going for the last three
years. She said she is three-quarters of the way through. She reads for a while
and then cannot do anymore.
She said that reading drains her and her head hurts.
She does do word finding puzzles from the newspaper. She gets stressed about
reading and is not sure why or what she gets stressed about. Spontaneously, she
said she “can’t follow patterns.”
She said she wants to knit
and was previously a knitter but needs a pattern to knit and cannot do this
spontaneously. She said she
wants to read recipes because she wants to make
things. She previously would knit things for her grandchildren but has not
since the accident.
Panel asked, given she was a teacher’s aide for 25 to 30 years, whether
she had tried any of this employment since the accident
and she said that she
had a friend who asked her to, however after the accident she could not. This
was not long after the accident.
She then said she has not made any efforts
since then. She reported that she has been out of the industry for so long and
“everything’s
changed.” She said that if the curricula had not
changed, “Yes, [she] would be working.” She wants to work and
thought about other jobs but cannot think what she would do. She said however
that she is limited by her tiredness, her sore
arm and her head.
claimant repeated that she has not considered work since the accident and the
main reason for this was “the pain.”
She said she would have
problems walking around a high school. She also said that some of the children
she looked after were violent
and she would need to restrain them. She said that
her not working is related to her physical impairment and if she were physically
capable, she would be working.
claimant still cooks and likes to cook Greek food. She said some recipes she has
to look up and some she can remember. She reported
she can follow recipes but it
takes her a while, but she gets there in the end.
asked what treatment she thought she still required, the claimant reported she
“had quite a bit.” She said she cannot
think of anything she needs
at the moment. She said she currently uses a lot of heat packs and has been on
tablets for pain and other
problems including Lyrica in the past. She said she
has not seen any pain specialists, nor has she had any operations on her
claimant reported her frustration about the CTP process taking so long. The
Panel commented that she has been previously assessed
on a number of occasions
including by a Panel, and she was still unable to provide reasons why the case
was still going. She said
she wants to get it over and done with and she is
tired of it. She said she does not know why she is still involved.
INCONSISTENCIES
Panel attempted to address some of the obvious inconsistencies in the
claimant’s reported narrative. The Panel first referred
to some notations
in her GP record written by
Dr Catherine Bailey. Before the Panel had a
chance to talk about what details there were, the claimant stated, “Oh
God, yeah.”
She went on to say, “She put down the wrong
things” and said that Dr Bailey had “done it with other
She said she “doesn’t listen.”
Panel decided to be more specific for the sake of understanding what the
claimant was saying with respect to her pre-accident
status and we noted Dr
Bailey’s record on
7 January 2013, “Still not great things with
the girls. Both are engaged and didn’t tell her about it. Very stressed
her husband who sounds horrible with restricting access to money
etc.” The claimant referred to her first statement about Dr
Bailey writing
down wrong things.
Panel went on to point out the note on 29 March 2012 where the claimant had been
very stressed. There was a K-10 assessment tool
done with a score of 42 out of
50 (indicating severe psychological distress). There is a note that a mental
health care plan for
depression was created and a prescription was written for
Venlafaxine 37.5mg to be taken daily. The note included, “Very down
– states has had two suicide attempts of late. No one talks to her at home
– girls don’t talk to her, her husband
does not talk to her.”
The claimant, when presented with this information, said that this was
“not before the accident”
then added that Dr Bailey
“wasn’t listening” and reiterated that these problems were
only after the accident. She
said she had never been prescribed Effexor before
the accident. She said she had never overdosed before. When the Panel pointed
that these were unusual things for a GP to either fabricate or make errors
of these records and
stated that she may have seen a counsellor or taken medications “to do
with school”, referring to
the problems she was having.
was no reconciliation between the medical record, just prior to the accident,
and the claimant’ report, in fact, she reiterated
the assertion that none
of this had occurred before the accident.
claimant confirmed her history with supplementary questions from the second
Medical Assessor asking about the quality of her relationships.
The claimant
reported that previously they were home more together, they were living in the
same bedroom, and they had an intimate
relationship. She estimated that they
separated bedrooms about two years after the accident. She went on to say that
she and her
husband went on The Ghan and stayed in Darwin with a niece. She said
she and her husband underwent “a full experience.”
She said she
enjoyed the trip, and this was a year and a half before the assessment. She went
with Phillip, his brother and her sister-in-law.
She said they had meals
together on the train and when in Darwin ate together with the niece. She said
however in Darwin Phillip
met up with a friend and stayed with him and the
claimant stayed with people whom she met on the train, just people she met
MENTAL STATE EXAMINATION
claimant was a Caucasian woman who appeared consistent with her stated age. Her
speech was essentially normal in rate, volume
and tone and there was no evidence
of formal thought disorder or delusional thought processes. She denied any
thoughts of self-harm
or thoughts of harm to others. She described her mood in
dysphoric terms. Her affect (expressed emotion) was quite reactive, congruent
and appropriate. She ultimately appeared to the Medical Assessors to be
essentially euthymic (of normal mood). She was engaging,
freely talking about
the difficulties in her marriage and, even with enthusiasm, giving travel
suggestions to the Medical Assessors.
There was no evidence of perceptual
abnormalities consistent with psychosis. Her cognition, insight and judgement
appeared intact
in the context of the assessment. Rapport was very good, and the
claimant spoke openly and freely.
a little over one hour into the assessment, the claimant reported that she was
tired and requested a five-minute break. Ultimately,
the assessment lasted about
90 minutes.
Panel noted significantly inconsistencies in the claimant’s reported
history. Of most note were her minimising or poor recall
of the marital
difficulties prior to the accident and what appeared to be a stark denial of
details in the medical record, including
a history of overdose and problems with
the marriage and family stressors. The Panel accepted that with the lengthy
passage of time
since the accident and multiple assessments and medico-legal
circumstance over the last 12 years or more, this would in some way
mitigate the
vagaries. Taking into account all factors, including the lengthy medical record
and previous assessments of the claimant,
and her presentation at assessment,
the Panel considered that there was likely no active psychiatric diagnosis in
the period leading
up to the accident, however there had been some emotional
symptoms, having been prescribed an antidepressant not long before the
having a referral to a psychologist and having had a K-10 self-report score of
42 in the months preceding the accident.
Taking all this into account, even if
there was a diagnosis, there was likely no whole person impairment.
respect to since the accident, the claimant likely had a diagnosis of chronic
post-traumatic stress disorder, in partial remission.
This is not controversial
and is consistent with having had experienced a severe accident, and multiple
previous assessments of the
respect to ongoing treatment, the claimant is taking antidepressant medications
and not seeing any practitioners. Given the passage
of time and her report of
her functioning, her condition has stabilised and she is unlikely to change in
her level of permanent impairment
in the upcoming 12 months.
current whole person impairment score is calculated in the table
Degree of Permanent Impairment
Psychiatric diagnoses
1. Chronic Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in partial remission.
Psychiatric treatment description
Ongoing antidepressants
No ongoing psychological therapy
Reason for Decision
Care and Personal Hygiene
Minor deficit attributable to the normal variation in the general
population.
The claimant reported she is independent with respect to her self-care and
personal hygiene. She continues to cook and perform domestic
tasks within her
physical capabilities. There were no gross signs of neglect observed at
assessment.
and Recreational Activities
Mild impairment
The claimant reported she was able to go on The Ghan with her husband and
others one and a half years before the assessment. She was
able to socialise
whilst on that trip. She reported she will visit a neighbour and chat. She
reported she will visit her children
or grandchildren on occasion. She reported
she would like to go dancing, however she has physical limitations. She reported
much less active with respect to her solo activities such as gardening.
Some of this is due to physical limitations. There appear
to be limitations in
her social interaction with her husband and her children and grandchildren and
that some of these difficulties
predated the accident. Taking into account all
of the information, and the inherent inconsistencies in The claimant’
narrative, the Panel came to the conclusion that there was a class 2,
mild impairment in this category.
Mild impairment
The claimant reported she maintains a driver’s licence and is able to
drive but tends to only drive locally. She reported the
last time she drove to
Queensland to visit family was about five years ago. She was able to travel on a
tour on The Ghan, in the
company of her husband and siblings-in-law. Her
reported function is consistent with a class 2, mild impairment.
Functioning
Mild impairment
There appears to have been pre-existing dysfunction in The claimant’
marriage and relationships with her children and friends
(although this was
denied by The claimant but clearly recorded in the GP record). The claimant
reported that she has drifted from
multiple friendships. Although The claimant
referred to living a somewhat separate life from her husband, there has not been
marital separation. There appear to be elements of domestic violence
such as coercive control that appear to have been present prior
to the motor
vehicle accident. Utilising clinical judgement overall, there is a class 2, mild
impairment.
Concentration,
Persistence and Pace
Moderate impairment
Although The claimant concentrated quite well for the assessment, which had
a duration of approximately ninety minutes, she reported
she has been struggling
to finish a book over the last couple years, and she spontaneously remarked that
she is unable to follow
knitting patterns. She can follow a recipe, however
slower than previously. Although she did not describe a day-to-day lifestyle
that had much in the way of cognitive demand, utilising clinical judgement,
there is likely a class 3, moderate impairment present.
6. Adaptation
Mild impairment
The claimant reported that she would readily be returning to
teacher’s aide work, if she did not have physical limitations and
had not been out of the workforce for so long (referring to the fact that the
various curricula would likely have altered).
The Panel concluded that she would
likely be able to work in a teacher’s aide position but not more than half
her previous
functioning (consistent with the PIRS with an assessment of less
than twenty hours per week).
List classes in ascending order: 1 2 2 2 3 3
Median Class Value: 2
Aggregate Score: 13
% Whole Person Impairment: 7%
= Percentage Whole Person Impairment
Apportionment
claimant reported she is taking an antidepressant medication (this agent was
prescribed prior to the motor vehicle accident).
The Panel accepted that there
were pre-existing emotional symptoms, but they would likely have not satisfied
diagnostic criteria
for a recognised psychiatric illness under DSM 5. There was
therefore no adjustment for
pre-exiting impairment.
Pre-existing/subsequent impairment
there has been the passage of over 12 years since the accident, the Panel did
not consider there was any subsequent injury
or condition that justified any
adjustment for subsequent impairment.
Panel noted that the claimant was taking an increased dose of antidepressants
currently compared to prior to the motor vehicle
accident. It is likely that
this is having some treatment effect, although mild given the claimant’s
report of ongoing symptoms
and minimal change in symptoms or functioning. An
overall 1% treatment effect is justified, in the Panel’s opinion.
Panel assesses the degree of whole person impairment of the claimant at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (519 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter