URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1339.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
State of New South Wales v Mustapha (Final) [2025] NSWSC 1339 (13 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
State of New South Wales v Mustapha (Final)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1339
Hearing Date(s):
3 November 2025 and 4 November 2025
Date of Orders:
13 November 2025
Decision Date:
13 November 2025
(1) Pursuant to
Terrorism (High Risk Offenders) Act 2017
(NSW) (the Act), I order that the
defendant be subject to an Extended Supervision Order for a period of one year
from today.
(2) Pursuant to s 29(1) of the Act, I
direct the defendant to comply with the conditions set out in the Schedule to
these orders
for the period of the Extended Supervision Order specified in order
Catchwords:
HIGH RISK OFFENDERS –
Terrorism (High Risk Offenders) Act 2017
– application for extended supervision order – final hearing –
whether defendant high risk terrorist offender
– convicted NSW terrorism
activity offender – statutory preconditions – jurisdiction –
unacceptable risk
test – expert evidence – other relevant material
– autism spectrum disorder diagnosis – demonstrated belief
violent jihad – risk-increasing effect of order – primary risk of
general violence – untested in community –
risk unacceptable –
discretion – extended supervision order made – period of 1 year
– significantly less
restrictive conditions imposed – if I had more
time, I would have written a shorter letter – Mark Twain – Blaise
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (High Risk Offenders) Act 2006
Criminal Code (Cth),
Part 5.3, Divs 101, 102, 103, ss 100.1, 101.1-2, 101.4-6, 102.2-8, 103.1-2,
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW), Sch 4 Dictionary
Justice Legislation
Amendment Act (No 2) 2018
Supreme Court Act 1970
Terrorism (High Risk Offenders) Act 2017
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[1938] HCA 34
Cameron v Cole
(1944) 68 CLR 571
[1944] HCA 5
Chamberlain v The Queen
(1983) 153 CLR 514
[1983] HCA 13
State of New South Wales v Kable (2013) 252 CLR 118;
State of Queensland v Mr Stradford (a pseudonym)
[2025] HCA 3
Re Macks; Ex parte Saint
(2000) 204 CLR 158
[2000] HCA 62
v The Queen
(1991) 172 CLR 378
[1991] HCA 27
Shepherd v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
State of New South Wales v Mustapha (Preliminary)
[2025] NSWSC 926
State of New South Wales v Mustapha
[2022] NSWSC 87
295 A Crim R 296
State of New South Wales v Naaman (No 2)
[2018] NSWCA 328
(2018) 276 A Crim R 30
State of NSW v Hunt (Final)
[2020] NSWSC 1005
Principal judgment
State of New South Wales (Plaintiff)
Mejid Mustapha (Defendant)
Representation:
G Wright SC with A Zheng
E Kerkyasharian with FK
Solicitors:
Crown Solicitor’s Office (Plaintiff)
Aid NSW (Defendant)
File Number(s):
2025/00190864
Publication Restriction:
plaintiff seeks a further extended supervision order (ESO) be imposed on the
defendant pursuant to the
Terrorism (High Risk Offenders) Act 2017
(the Act). The defendant has been subject to supervision under the Act, or been
in custody, since his release from prison in
December 2021. He believes in
violent extremism. While he has committed a number of offences, including
violent offences, he has
never been convicted of a serious terrorism offence.
His risk of doing so is difficult to predict. The primary question that arises
on this application is whether that risk is unacceptable.
Procedural history
summons filed on 16 May 2025, the plaintiff seeks by way of final relief an
order pursuant to
(6) of the Act that the defendant be
subject to an ESO for a period of three years from the date of the order. The
plaintiff seeks
a further order pursuant to
of the Act directing the
defendant to comply with the conditions set out in the Schedule to the summons
for the period of the ESO.
The making of the order is opposed by the defendant.
The background to the making of the application is set out below.
7 August 2018, following events at Parramatta Police Station that day, the
defendant was charged with the offences of assaulting
a law enforcement officer
(not police) and inflicting actual bodily harm; damaging property; two counts of
intimidating a police
officer in the execution of their duty; and three counts
of resisting an officer in execution of their duty (which the plaintiff
describes as “the index offences”).
14 December 2018, following his pleas of guilty in the Local Court, the
defendant was sentenced to an aggregate term of imprisonment
of 3 years and 4
months, commencing 8 August 2018, with a non-parole period of 2 years and 1
month. The non-parole period expired
on 7 September 2020 and the full term
expired on 7 December 2021. The defendant was not released to parole.
7 September 2021, the plaintiff commenced proceedings in this Court seeking
orders under the Act in respect of the defendant. On
14 February 2022, following
the imposition of three interim detention orders, her Honour N Adams J
imposed an ESO for a period of
3 years from that date in respect of the
defendant. The ESO was due to expire at the conclusion of 13 February 2025.
27 July 2023, while subject to his ESO, the defendant was arrested and charged
with a number of offences committed the previous
day. The defendant pleaded
guilty to the offences of assault occasioning actual bodily harm; armed with
intent to commit an indictable
offence; threatening a person to stop them from
providing information to the police; and failing to comply with the ESO. On 18
2023, the defendant was sentenced in the Local Court to 12 months
imprisonment, commencing 27 July 2023, with a non-parole period
of 6 months. The
non-parole period expired on 26 January 2024 and the full term expired on 26
July 2024. In the period the defendant
was in custody for these offences, his
ESO was suspended.
the currency of the ESO, as extended, the plaintiff applied for a further ESO.
On 14 August 2025, Wright J made interim orders
under the Act that the defendant
be subject to an interim supervision order (ISO) for a period of 28 days,
commencing 15 August 2025,
and directing that he comply with certain conditions:
State of New South Wales v Mustapha (Preliminary)
[2025] NSWSC 926.
orders were made together with orders appointing two qualified psychiatrists or
registered psychologists (or some combination
of these) to conduct separate
examinations of the defendant and to furnish reports to the Court, and directing
the defendant to attend
those examinations. Ancillary relief restricting access
to the Court’s file, which was not opposed by the defendant, was also
11 September 2025, McNaughton J, by consent, made an order that the defendant be
subject to an ISO for a period of 28 days commencing
12 September 2025. That ISO
was due to expire on 9 October 2025. On 7 October 2025, Yehia J, by consent,
made an order that the defendant
be subject to an ISO for a period of 28 days
commencing 9 October 2025. That ISO was due to expire on 5 November 2025.
4 November 2025, at the conclusion of the hearing of this matter and on
reserving my decision, I made a further ISO for a period
of 10 days, which is
due to expire at the end of 14 November 2025. The maximum period by which I
could extend the defendant’s
supervision was 3 months from the expiry of
his ESO: see
of the Act. On reflection, it is arguable that the maximum
extension was up to and including 13 November 2025. This is discussed
The statutory scheme
objects of the Act are set out in
3 Objects of Act
(1) The primary object of this Act is to provide for the
extended supervision and continuing detention of certain offenders posing
unacceptable risk of committing serious terrorism offences so as to ensure the
safety and protection of the community.
(2) Another object of this Act is to encourage these offenders
to undertake rehabilitation.
are dealt with in Part 2 of the Act. An application may be brought by the State
of New South Wales as provided for by Division
2.3 of the Act. The requirements
for bringing an application overlap to a significant extent with the
preconditions to making an
ESO as discussed below.
Court may make an ESO under the Act in respect of an “eligible
offender”. An eligible offender is defined in s 7 as
a person who is aged
18 years or older and is serving (or is continuing to be supervised or detained
under the Act after serving)
a sentence of imprisonment for a NSW indictable
offence. A NSW indictable offence is defined in s 4(1) of the Act as an offence
against a law of the State for which proceedings may be taken on indictment
(whether or not proceedings for the offence may also
be taken otherwise than on
indictment).
application must be made within the last 12 months of an offender’s
custody or supervision, and must be supported by documentation
addressing the
matters in s 25(3), including a report assessing the likelihood of the
offender committing a serious terrorism offence:
s 23(2) and (3). These
requirements are met in this case.
20 of the Act sets out the requirements for the exercise of power by this Court
to make an ESO:
20 Supreme Court may make extended supervision orders against
eligible offenders if unacceptable risk
The Supreme Court may make an order for the supervision in the community of an
eligible offender (called an
extended supervision order
(a) the offender is in custody or under supervision (or was in
custody or under supervision at the time the original application
for the order
was filed)—
(i) while serving a sentence of imprisonment for a NSW
indictable offence, or
(ii) under an existing interim supervision order, extended
supervision order, interim detention order or continuing detention order,
(iii) (Repealed)
(iv) (Repealed)
(b) an application for the order is made in accordance with
this Part, and
(c) the Supreme Court is satisfied that the offender is any of
the following—
(i) a convicted NSW terrorist offender,
(ii) a convicted NSW underlying terrorism offender,
(iii) a convicted NSW terrorism activity offender, and
(d) the Supreme Court is satisfied to a high degree of
probability that the offender poses an unacceptable risk of committing a
terrorism offence if not kept under supervision under the order.
Court is not required to determine that the risk of an eligible offender
committing a serious terrorism offence is more likely
than not in order to
determine that there is an unacceptable risk of the offender committing such an
offence: s 21.
is plain from the terms of s 20 that the exercise of the power to make an ESO is
discretionary. If the preconditions for the making
of an ESO are established it
will be necessary to consider if, in the exercise of my discretion, an order
should be made.
is no issue that the application has been made in accordance with Part 2 of
the Act, satisfying s 20(b).
respect to s 20(c), the plaintiff relies on the defendant’s status as a
convicted NSW terrorism activity offender within
the meaning of s 20(c)(iii). A
convicted terrorist activity offender is defined in s 10 as follows:
10 Convicted NSW terrorism activity offender
(1) In this Act, an eligible offender is a
NSW terrorism activity offender
if the offender is serving (or is
continuing to be supervised or detained under this Act after serving) a sentence
of imprisonment
for a NSW indictable offence (the
) and any of the following apply in respect of the
(a) the offender has at any time been subject to a control order,
(b) the offender has at any time been a member of a terrorist
organisation,
(c) the offender—
(i) is making or has previously made any statement (or is carrying
out or has previously carried out any activity) advocating support
terrorist act or violent extremism, or
(ii) has or previously had any personal or business association or
other affiliation with any person, group of persons or organisation
was advocating support for any terrorist act or violent extremism.
(1A) Without limiting subsection (1) (c)—
(a) advocating support for a terrorist act or violent extremism
includes (but is not limited to) any of the following—
(i) making a pledge of loyalty to a person, group of persons or
organisation, or an ideology, that supports terrorist acts or violent
(ii) using or displaying images or symbols associated with a
person, group of persons or organisation, or an ideology, that supports
terrorist acts or violent extremism,
(iii) making a threat of violence of a kind that is promoted by
a person, group of persons or organisation, or an ideology, that
terrorist acts or violent extremism, and
(b) an association or other affiliation with a person, group of
persons or organisation includes (but is not limited to) any of
(i) networking or communicating with the person, group of
persons or organisation,
(ii) using social media sites or any other websites to
communicate with the person, group of persons or organisation.
(2) Subsection (1) (b) and (c) apply regardless of whether or
not the eligible offender has been convicted of an offence for the
concerned (whether in Australia or elsewhere).
(3) In this section—
terrorist organisation
has the same meaning as it has in
Division 102 of Part 5.3 of the Commonwealth Criminal Code.
was not in contest that the defendant has displayed images or symbols and has
made threats of violence within s 10(1)(c) as read
with the extended
definition in s 10(1A). I am, as a result, satisfied that the defendant is
a “convicted NSW terrorism activity
offender”. Section 20(c) has
been established.
leads to a preliminary question as to whether s 20(a) is satisfied, and,
relatedly, the jurisdiction of the Court to make an
preliminary issue with respect to jurisdiction
is a question as to whether I have jurisdiction to make the order sought. The
issue was not raised at the hearing. After the
hearing, the Court advised the
parties of the potential issue and requested assistance. Each party filed a
short submission. Both
parties accept that I have jurisdiction, though on
different bases. There is reason to doubt both positions but not the ultimate
conclusion. The issue arises in the context of the validity of the ISO made by
Wright J. It is accepted by the parties that, if the
ESO made by N Adams J
expired before Wright J made his order, then Wright J did not have jurisdiction
to make the ISO. On 14 August
2025, Wright J ordered that the defendant be
subject to an ISO “commencing from the expiration of the defendant’s
[ESO] on 15 August 2025 for a period of 28 days”.
the time the ESO was imposed by N Adams J it was due to expire at the conclusion
of 13 February 2025. As discussed above, however,
the defendant served a
non-parole period of 6 months commencing 27 July 2023 and expiring 26 January
2024. The ESO was, as a result,
suspended for the “period” during
which the defendant was in lawful custody: s 26(6), (7). The length of that
is, however, in issue between the parties.
26 of the Act provides, relevantly:
26 Term of extended supervision order
(6) An extended supervision order expires at the end
(a) such period (not exceeding 3 years from the day on which it
commences) as is specified in the order, or
(b) if the order is suspended for any period, the period
specified in paragraph (a) plus each period during which the order is
(7) An eligible offender’s obligations under an extended
supervision order are suspended while the offender is in lawful
custody, whether
under this or any other Act or law.
5 provides:
5 Offender in lawful custody
In this Act, an eligible offender in lawful custody includes, where used in
relation to an eligible offender who is subject to an
extended supervision order
or interim supervision order, the offender being in lawful custody during a
period for which the offender
is on remand for any offence.
plaintiff submits the effect of s 26(7) is that the ESO was suspended for the
“actual period of time during which the defendant
was in custody”,
being the number of days, not months. The plaintiff calculates that the ESO was
suspended for 184 days and,
as a result, the defendant’s ESO was extended
until 15 August 2025. Accordingly, the plaintiff contends that Wright J had
to make the ISO and this Court has jurisdiction to make a further
ESO prior to the expiry of the current ISO.
defendant disputes the plaintiff’s assertion that the “period”
of suspension should be calculated by reference
to days, rather than months. The
defendant describes the number of days as an “incident of the operation of
the sentencing
order imposed, and not the period for which he was in lawful
custody”. The defendant emphasises that he was ordered to serve
non-parole period of 6 months. The defendant says that “month” is
defined in the dictionary to the
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) to mean
“a calendar month”. A “calendar month” is defined to
...a period commencing at the beginning of a day of one of the 12 named months
and ending—
(a) immediately before the beginning of the corresponding day
of the next named month, or
(b) if there is no such corresponding day, at the end of the
next named month.
defendant submits that there is nothing in sentencing law, nor the Act, which
suggests this definition does not apply. Consequently,
the defendant submits
that the ESO was extended for a period of 6 months and came to an end on 13
August 2025.
defendant nonetheless concedes that I have jurisdiction to make the ESO. It is
the defendant’s position that the requirements
concerning the timing of
the application brought by the plaintiff do not, of themselves, preclude the
Court from making an ESO under
the Act. The defendant contends that the wording
has the effect that the jurisdiction of the Court to make an ESO will be
met if he was under the supervision of an ESO, and within
the last 12 months of
supervision, at the time the application was filed.
provides (emphasis added):
20 Supreme Court may make extended supervision orders against
eligible offenders if unacceptable risk
The Supreme Court may make an order for the supervision in the community of an
eligible offender (called an
extended supervision order
(a) the offender is in custody or under supervision (or was in
custody or under supervision at the time the original application
for the order
was filed)—
(ii) under an existing interim supervision order, extended
supervision order, interim detention order or continuing detention order,
words “(or was in custody or under supervision at the time the original
application for the order was filed)” were
inserted in
the enactment of the
Justice Legislation Amendment Act (No 2) 2018
The explanatory note accompanying the amendment to the Act described it as
providing that an ESO “can be made in respect
of an eligible offender who
was in custody or under supervision at the time the application for the order
was filed, but has since
ceased to be in custody or under supervision.” It
is not clear, however, that that objective was achieved due to the requirement
in s 20 that the ESO be imposed in respect of an “eligible
offender”, together with the definition of an ESO in s 4 being
“order for the supervision of an eligible offender ...”. Section 7
of the Act defines an “eligible offender”
as a person under
continuous detention or supervision:
In this Act, an
eligible offender
is a person who
(b) serving, or is continuing to be supervised or detained under this Act after
serving, a sentence of imprisonment for a NSW indictable
the words inserted into s 20(1)(a) can operate to give effect to the intention
of the legislative amendment where an offender
is no longer in custody or under
supervision and thus is not, by definition, an “eligible offender”,
is not clear.
the event, the matter was not fully argued and both parties accept that I have
the power to make an ESO.
am in any event satisfied, albeit for different reasons, that I do have the
power to make the order sought. The Supreme Court is
a superior court of record
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW)) and its decisions are
valid unless and until they are set aside on appeal, even if they are made in
excess of jurisdiction.
As Rich J said in
Cameron v Cole
[1944] HCA 5
(1944) 68 CLR
[1944] HCA 5 (Latham
CJ agreeing):
“It is settled by the highest authority that the decision of a superior
court, even if in excess of jurisdiction, is at the
worst voidable, and is valid
unless and until it is set aside.”
Ex parte Saint
(2000) 204 CLR 158
[2000] HCA 62
(Gleeson CJ),
State of New South Wales v Kable
252 CLR 118;
[2013] HCA 26
(French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and
Keane JJ) and, more recently,
State of Queensland v Mr Stradford (a
[2025] HCA 3
(2025) 99 ALJR 396.
Thus, the order made by Wright
J, even if made without jurisdiction, remains in force with the result that the
defendant remains
an eligible offender and I have power to make the order.
Separately,
the defendant submits that while I have power to make the order sought, given
that (on the defendant’s construction)
Wright J did not have jurisdiction
to make the ISO, the Court ought revoke the existing ISO pursuant to
of the Act.
provides a power to vary or revoke an existing order. While there is no
express limitation on that power, it will most commonly
be exercised where there
has been some change in circumstances since the original order was made. It may
be doubted that the power
would extend to revoke an order on the grounds that it
was not validly made. Certainly, I am not prepared to use the power to, in
effect, rule that an order made by another judge of this Court (and thus made at
the same level of the judicial hierarchy) was made
without jurisdiction. There
are more appropriate remedies if this is the outcome sought.
other issue arises as to whether the application has been properly brought, or
whether the statutory preconditions to making an
ESO have otherwise been
satisfied. Consequently I may make an ESO subject to satisfaction of the
unacceptable risk test in s 20(d).
The unacceptable risk
real contest in the present matter concerns s 20(d). Am I “satisfied
to a high degree of probability that the offender poses
an unacceptable risk of
committing a serious terrorism offence if not kept under supervision under the
order”. There are a
number of components to this test. At the centre of
the test, however, is the question of the risk of the defendant committing
serious terrorism offence”.
determination to be made for the purposes of s 20 must be made in
accordance with
of the Act. I am required to either make the order or
dismiss the application:
In making the determination, “the
safety of the community must be the paramount consideration”. I am
required to consider
the various matters set out in
and put to one
side any intention on the part of the defendant to leave New South Wales.
term “serious terrorism offence” is defined in s 4 of the Act as an
offence contrary to Part 5.3 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) for which the
maximum penalty is 7 or more years of imprisonment. Part 5.3 of the
is headed “Terrorism” and contains a number of such
offences in Division 101 (“Terrorism”), Division 102
(“Terrorist Organisations”) and Division 103 (“Financing
Terrorism”). Those offences generally rely on a
(potential or actual)
“terrorist act”. There are some offences that do not pick up the
definition of terrorist act, in
particular those which relate to
“terrorist organisations” in Subdivision B of Division 102 where the
terrorist organisation
is one which is specified by the regulations, rather than
one falling within the general part of the definition, being an
“organisation
that is directly or indirectly engaged in, preparing,
planning, assisting in or fostering the doing of a terrorist act”. The
plaintiff did not rely on any risk with respect to an offence relating to a
particular prescribed organisation. Consequently, the
definition of a
“terrorist act” is central to this application.
“terrorist act” is defined in s 100.1 as:
(1) In this Part:
terrorist act
means an action or threat of action where:
(a) the action falls within subsection (2) and does not
fall within subsection (3); and
(b) the action is done or the threat is made with the intention
of advancing a political, religious or ideological cause; and
(c) the action is done or the threat is made with the intention
(i) coercing, or influencing by intimidation, the government of
the Commonwealth or a State, Territory or foreign country, or of
State, Territory or foreign country; or
(ii) intimidating the public or a section of the public.
Elements of the definition of
terrorist act
(2) Action falls within this subsection if it:
(a) causes serious harm that is physical harm to a person;
(b) causes serious damage to property; or
(c) causes a person’s death; or
(d) endangers a person’s life, other than the life of the
person taking the action; or
(e) creates a serious risk to the health or safety of the
public or a section of the public; or
(f) seriously interferes with, seriously disrupts, or destroys,
an electronic system including, but not limited to:
(i) an information system; or
(ii) a telecommunications system; or
(iii) a financial system; or
(iv) a system used for the delivery of essential government
services; or
(v) a system used for, or by, an essential public utility;
(vi) a system used for, or by, a transport system.
(3) Action falls within this subsection if it:
(a) is advocacy, protest, dissent or industrial action; and
(b) is not intended:
(i) to cause serious harm that is physical harm to a person;
(ii) to cause a person’s death; or
(iii) to endanger the life of a person, other than the person
taking the action; or
(iv) to create a serious risk to the health or safety of the
public or a section of the public.
offences in Division 101-103 of Part 5.3 deal with:
(1) Offences related to terrorist acts, including engaging in a terrorist act
(s 101.1), providing or receiving training connected
with terrorist acts
(s 101.2), possessing things connected with terrorist acts (s 101.4),
collecting or making documents likely to
facilitate terrorist acts (s 101.5),
and acts done in preparation for, or planning, terrorist acts (s 101.6).
(2) Offences related to terrorist organisations, including membership,
recruiting, training, collecting or receiving funds, providing
support and
associating with a terrorist organisation (ss 102.2-8).
(3) Offences related to financing terrorism and financing a terrorist, including
by intentionally providing, making available or
collecting funds and being
reckless as to whether the funds will be used to facilitate or engage in a
terrorist act (ss 103.1-2).
An issue with respect to the application of the test
State of New
South Wales v Naaman (No 2)
[2018] NSWCA 328
(2018) 276 A Crim R 30
Naaman (No 2)
) at [29]. Despite that guidance, an issue arose on the
application. The defendant submitted that for a threat to form the basis of
offence relying on the definition in s 100.1, the threat must result in one of
the consequences in s 100.1(2).
defendant’s argument draws attention to the fact that in the definition of
“terrorist act”, paragraph (a) refers
to “the action”,
while paragraphs (b) and (c) refer to “the action ... or the
threat”. The defendant submitted
that the “action”, which may
be a threat of action, must satisfy s 100.1(2). While that reading is
understandable, I
do not accept it is the correct reading of the provision.
word “action” where it appears in s 100.1(1)(a) does not appear
in isolation. It appears under the chapeau “terrorist
act means an action
or threat of action where ...”. Thus, where s 100.1(2) requires the
“action” to have a particular
quality, where a threat is concerned,
it is the action the subject of the threat that must have that quality.
Admittedly, this requires,
in the context of a threat, for s 100.1(2) to be
read as if the action, if it occurred, would do one of those things. This does
overly strain the text. Conversely, to read the provision as the defendant
contends would give a very limited role to threatened
actions. The defendant
submitted that there was still scope for threated actions on his interpretation.
The type of threat that would
fall within the section, as postulated by the
defendant, would be a threat such as holding a knife to someone standing on a
edge leading to them falling off. The holding of the knife in that
situation is, however, likely to itself be an action which causes
serious harm:
Royall v The Queen
(1991) 172 CLR 378
[1991] HCA 27.
argument is also contrary to
Naaman (No 2)
. While this aspect did not
form part of the dispositive reasoning, not only would I hesitate to depart from
what was said, but it
accords with my own view. In
Naaman (No 2)
Court noted (at [33]) that s 100.1(1)(a) did not “squarely [pick] up
both action and threat of action”. Their Honours
then observed (at [34])
that “[a]lthough par (a) does not refer to ‘threat of action’,
it defines the parameters
of ‘action’, whether actual or
threatened”. Their Honours further observed, consistently with what I have
above, that such a construction “allows the application of subss (2)
and (3) in every case” while the alternative would
limit the application
of subss (2) and (3).
above conclusion does not, however, mean that there is no distinction to be made
between actions and threats for the purposes
of the test in s 20(d). While the
plaintiff’s submissions at times lacked clarity, I understood the
plaintiff to accept that
the relative seriousness of any “serious
terrorism offence” the defendant might commit, a matter necessarily
the consequences of such an offence, will be relevant in determining
whether the risk is unacceptable. In this context, a risk that
the defendant
might commit a serious terrorism offence by making a threat will, generally
speaking, be less concerning than a risk
that the defendant will commit an
offence that in fact has one of the consequences set out in s 100.1(2).
Consistently with this,
the Court in
Naaman (No 2)
observed (at [29](4))
that “it will be relevant to the assessment of that risk to consider both
the likelihood of the offence
being committed, and the relative seriousness of
the offending conduct”.
thus proceed to apply the test in the manner explained in
Naaman (No 2)
particularly at [29].
The evidence
before me was a joint statement of agreed facts filed 6 August 2025 and a joint
supplementary statement of agreed facts filed
31 October 2025.
Anna Farrar and Dr Katie Seidler furnished reports to the Court in accordance
with the orders made by Wright J on 14 August 2025.
At the hearing, both experts
gave concurrent evidence and were cross-examined.
plaintiff relies on the affidavits of Aleksandra Jez sworn 15 May 2025, 27 June
2025, 4 August 2025 and 17 October 2025, the affidavits
of Jonathan
Hamilton-Foster sworn 22 April 2025 and 10 October 2025, the affidavit of
Katrina Czerkies affirmed 5 June 2025 and the
affidavit of Heather Jackson sworn
10 June 2025, together with the associated annexures and exhibits. The material
tendered by the
plaintiff includes, most relevantly: the reports of Drs Farrar
and Seidler; the risk assessment report (RAR) of Ms Ahu Kocak dated
April 2025, which the plaintiff relied on pursuant to s 23(3)(b) of the
Act; the RAR of Dr Tamara Sweller dated 8 April 2025,
which the plaintiff did
not rely on pursuant to s 23(3)(b) but which was accepted as being a report
relevant to s 25(3)(b) of the
Act; and the subject matter expert reports of
Dr Rodger Shanahan.
defendant relies on the affidavit of Joseph Harding affirmed 28 July 2025, the
affidavits of Marie Iskander affirmed 28 July 2025,
28 October 2025 and again on
28 October 2025, and the affidavit of Elizabeth Tsitsos affirmed 24 October
2025, together with the
associated annexures and exhibits. The material tendered
by the defendant includes, most relevantly, the subject matter expert report
Professor Mehmet Ӧzalp dated 27 October 2025.
total, six lever arch folders of material were tendered. The regrettable length
of these reasons reflects that quantity of material,
the significant contest
between the parties and the limited time in which to prepare the judgment. This
last factor recalls the observation
commonly, but it seems wrongly, attributed
to Mark Twain, that “If I had more time, I would have written a shorter
Apparently Blaise Pascal is more likely to be the source.
Factual background
following is summarised from the joint statement of agreed facts and the joint
supplementary statement of agreed facts.
The defendant’s
personal history
defendant is a 38-year-old man born in Sydney. He was raised by his aunt and
uncle, whom he understood to be his biological parents
until the age of 14. He
has one half-sister who lives in Lebanon. The defendant attended primary school
and high school until year
8 or 9. He recounts his academic functioning as poor,
with significant challenges in comprehension, attention, hyperactivity,
restlessness
and language. On leaving school, he became employed in plumbing and
cement rendering, and later worked as a courier, but was unable
to maintain
long-term employment.
defendant said that while he was growing up, he travelled regularly to Lebanon
with his family. His last trip to Lebanon was
in 2014, prior to his passport
being confiscated. In 2015, the defendant travelled to Türkiye, where he
was imprisoned by Türkish
authorities for approximately four weeks on
suspicion of violating the border into Syria. The defendant was interviewed by
Federal Police upon his return. He was not charged with any offence
but his passport was confiscated. He told police that he had
travelled to
Türkiye for humanitarian purposes to assist with the influx of Syrian
than a two-year marriage at the age of 21, the defendant has not had any
significant relationships and is presently single.
The defendant reported
feeling depressed after his divorce and was treated with antidepressant
medication for three months, after
which he self-discontinued the medication. He
had a subsequent period of increased drug and alcohol use, including using
cannabis, and abusing prescription medications, including Tramadol,
Valium and Xanax. He has attributed his increasing substance
psychological pain, confusion, and escalating paranoia. He has also reported
experimenting with amphetamines, crystal
methamphetamines, “acid”
and ecstasy.
defendant has reported experiences of trauma and racism during his life. These
were summarised in the agreed facts as follows:
“9. ... he disclosed to Dr Seidler memories of going for
walks as a child with his aunt, who wears a head scarf, and being
‘cockroaches’ by people in the area, as well as being told to
‘go back to your country’.
10. The defendant reported having been exposed to the scene of
two deaths at age 18. The defendant reported that the two men, who
were friends
of his maternal uncle, had been shot and the defendant encountered them after
walking onto the street. The defendant
indicated that he had a close
relationship with one of the men and experienced some insomnia and panic attacks
for a short time after
the incident.
11. In 2014, the defendant’s aunt’s brother was
reportedly captured by Islamic State whilst being involved in the Army.
defendant reports that he and his aunt travelled to Lebanon to try and advocate
for his uncle’s release, but that his uncle
was killed by Islamic State.
He describes this as having been a significant loss for him, as he was
particularly close to this uncle,
having spent a great deal of time with him
during his formative years.” (footnotes omitted)
The defendant’s diagnoses
defendant was recently assessed as meeting the criteria for Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD) Level 1 (requiring support) with accompanying
intellectual
impairment. In her report to the Court, Dr Farrar likewise opined that the
defendant meets the criteria for ASD, together
with Antisocial Personality
Disorder, Generalised Anxiety Disorder, Substance Use Disorders (alcohol,
cannabis, cocaine, amphetamines,
buprenorphine, benzodiazepines, Tramadol and
steroids) in remission, with features of Borderline Personality Disorder.
Sweller reported that the defendant’s ASD diagnosis manifests through
various behaviours and difficulties
“i. Inflexibility of behaviour that significantly
interferes with his functioning in social, occupational, and legal contexts.
ii. Difficulty switching activities.
iii. Poor organisation and planning.
iv. Difficulty initiating social interactions and social
v. Poorly integrated verbal and nonverbal communication and
difficulties with reciprocal communication.
vi. Difficulty developing and maintaining relationships.
vii. Difficulty adjusting behaviour to fit the social
viii. Preoccupation with restricted interests such as violence,
religion, and video games.
ix. Difficulties with change.
x. Inflexible adherence to routines.
xi. Rigid thinking patterns.”
Farrar considered that the defendant’s presentation and history are
inconsistent with diagnoses of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD)
and Psychotic Disorder. This was contrary to the opinion expressed by Ms Kocak
in her RAR that the defendant presents
with unspecified ADHD and unspecified
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorder. Ms Kocak described the
defendant as presenting
with symptoms of “significant paranoia”,
which he sometimes describes as “wigging out”, including
pre-occupation
with particular concepts such as the “Jinn”,
suspicions of “black magic” or “evil eye” attacks
seeking Ruqyah (spiritual cleansing). In this regard, Dr Seidler considered the
defendant has struggled with paranoid ideation
at times, with concerns noted
that such ideation extends to a delusional degree, although he has always denied
any symptoms of psychosis.
respect to his cognitive functioning, Dr Farrar formed the view that the
defendant does not have an intellectual disability,
while Dr Sweller observed
that there has been inconsistent reporting of the results of cognitive
functioning testing, with the results
being reported as both “borderline
to low average range” and “low average to average range”. Dr
Sweller noted
the defendant’s verbal skills had been measured as
“very low” with the result that he requires support when managing
verbal tasks or when provided with verbal instructions.
observed above, the defendant has never committed a terrorist offence.
defendant’s criminal history comprises traffic offences, drug offences,
resist/assault police type offences and assaults.
In 2007, the defendant was
charged with one count of assault officer in execution of duty, which was
dismissed without conviction
by the Local Court. In 2010, the defendant was
convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily harm for punching a security
at a bar. He was sentenced to a two-year good behaviour bond. Between
2012 and 2018, the defendant was convicted of possess (or
attempting to possess)
a restricted prescribed substance, possess equipment for administering
prohibited drugs, driving with a suspended
licence and two counts of possess
prohibited drug.
5 March 2018, the defendant committed the offence of recklessly inflicting
grievous bodily harm. He attended the victim’s
and spoke to the victim outside. When the victim turned to return to his
residence, the defendant, without
warning, struck him to the left side of the
face from behind, knocking him to his hands and knees. The defendant then kicked
victim in the head, knocking him backwards and causing his head to hit the
concrete. The defendant was arrested on 6 April 2018 and
released to bail. In
the course of the arrest, police seized an iPhone belonging to the defendant.
Police later undertook a Cellebrite
extraction of the phone and took photographs
7 August 2018, whilst on bail in relation to the above offence, the defendant
was arrested for breaching his bail conditions and
was conveyed to Parramatta
Police Station where he committed the index offences. The conduct the subject of
the index offences is
summarised in the agreed facts as follows:
“20. Upon arrival at Parramatta Police Station, the
defendant was asked to remove his hooded jumper from his head by officers.
defendant then became agitated and aggressive, and yelled at an officer in
Arabic ‘my dick in you and your mum’s
a cunt’, and, in
English, ‘you Indian cunt, I’ll knock you out’. The defendant
then gestured to the officer
and, without warning, raised his right hand and
punched the victim with a closed fist to the right side of the face, knocking
back. The officer suffered swelling, soft tissue damage, and bruising to the
right side of his face.
21. Following a ‘violent struggle’ between the
defendant and other officers present, the defendant was handcuffed and
inside a cell in the charge room. The defendant then made the following threats
towards a Senior Constable present:
I’ll fuck you up you copper dog cunt, if this was Lebanon I
would use my AK and shoot you, your family, everyone you know. You’re
gonna [sic] die copper when I get out of here, you’re dead. I’m
going to remember your face and hunt you down. You’re
fucked now,
I’m going to get you when I get out of here.
22. He then turned towards another Constable and said:
[H]ey, you with the tattoos, I’m going to remember your face and
when I get out I am going to cut your fucking head off, cunt.
You are going to
be on Australia’s first ISIS video.
23. The defendant also head butted, and spat on, the cell
door.” (footnotes omitted, emphasis in original)
discussed above, the defendant pleaded guilty in the Local Court to the index
offences. He was sentenced to an aggregate term of
imprisonment of 3 years and 4
months with a non-parole period of 2 years and 1 month. In sentencing the
defendant, Magistrate Still
remarked that the offences were
“serious”, though some of the offences were far worse than others.
His Honour expressed
guarded views about the defendant’s expression of
remorse and stressed the need for psychological treatment. His Honour accepted
that the defendant was “sorry for what he has done” and that the
relative insignificance of the injury occasioned was
a mitigating factor.
the defendant has been subject to orders under the Act, he has been convicted of
the following further offences, as set out
in the agreed facts:
13 December 2021 – assault occasioning actual bodily harm (H
37. On 13 December 2021, whilst in custody at the Metropolitan
Remand and Reception Centre (MRRC) pursuant to an IDO, the defendant
involved in a physical altercation with other inmates, during which the
defendant was alleged to have thrown two punches to
another inmate’s head,
causing that inmate to fall backwards onto the pavement.
38. On 20 June 2022, following a guilty plea, the defendant was
convicted of the offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm
and sentenced
to a 12-month Community Correction Order.
26 July 2023 – assault occasioning actual bodily harm, armed with
intent to commit indictable offence, threaten harm to prevent
information to
police, failure to comply with ESO (H 167686201)
39. On 26 July 2023, whilst subject to his current ESO, the
defendant attended his workplace and approached a colleague whilst
operating a
pallet rider. The defendant stated, ‘I heard you were talking shit about
me’, and when the victim did not
respond, the defendant punched the victim
with a closed fist, hitting the victim’s right cheek bone/jaw area. The
the punch made the victim fall to the ground on his back, and hit the
back of his head on the concrete with force.
40. When other colleagues who had witnessed the incident took
the victim out of the warehouse, the defendant continued to attempt
the victim and said to the victim and witnesses ‘get back to work,
don’t fucking say anything’. The defendant
was holding a Stanley
knife by his leg, flicking the blade up and down, and stated ‘if anyone
snitches, I’m going to
kill you and your families’.
41. On 27 July 2023, the defendant was charged and arrested
42. On 18 October 2023, following a guilty plea, the defendant
was sentenced before Parramatta Local Court to 12 months imprisonment,
commencing 27 July 2023 and expiring 26 July 2024, with a non-parole period of 6
months.” (emphasis in original, footnote omitted)
Other relevant background
agreed facts, the parties highlighted the following as relevant to an assessment
of the defendant’s
(1) Material located on the defendant’s phones and hard drive. As
discussed above, police seized the defendant’s iPhone
on his arrest on 6
April 2018 and later undertook a Cellebrite extraction, and took photographs of,
the iPhone. On 7 August 2018,
police seized the defendant’s Nokia phone
and later undertook a Cellebrite extraction of the phone. Police also seized a
hard drive from the defendant’s home on 10 August 2018, which was
later subject to a digital preview examination.
(2) On 22 July 2019, the defendant wrote a letter to the judge presiding over
his then ongoing criminal case in respect of the reckless
grievous bodily harm
offence, a copy of which went to the Governor of Parklea Correctional Centre.
The letter included the following
references:
(a) “We disbelieve in your laws”;
(b) Called the intended recipients “murderers” due to
Australia’s perceived involvement in the “war on Islam”
referring to the conflicts in Iraq/Syria (with reference to specific towns);
(c) Referred to inmates in custody charged with murder as
“brothers”;
(d) “Tawagheet of 2day” and “murtadeen” (which are
likely references to “taghut” meaning “tyrant
manmade laws”
“mujahideen” meaning “Islamist fighters, or those who
undertake armed jihad”
(e) Indicated that he rejects democracy, and referenced the nasheed (or
devotional song) “Clashing of the swords”.
(3) In September 2019, Corrective Services photographed the defendant’s
body. He had tattoos which included the word “Jehad”
and an AK-47
machine gun.
(4) On 24 October 2019, the defendant was designated a National Security
Interest inmate.
(5) On 9 March 2020, the defendant’s cell was searched. The defendant
became verbally aggressive about the manner in which
his religious books were
handled, and then became physically aggressive in the course of being restrained
after failing to comply
with directions. The defendant made statements to a
Muslim searching officer, including that “you’ve got to choose your
side, you chose your side, you can’t be Muslim and do that”. When
the defendant was restrained by Correctives Services
officers, he said:
“I’m going to fuck your mum you fucken dog”; “you
traitor cunt”; “you call
yourself a Muslim you’re a fucken
murtad” (apparently an apostate). The defendant made violent threats,
including “I’m
going to put holes in you”; “I’m
going to fucken kill you” and “I am going to cut your throats and
rape your mothers”. During the search, graffiti on the cell wall was
identified, including a picture of what appeared to be
a machine gun, with the
word “Klashiknove” (sic) written underneath and the abbreviation
“NSI” with the words
“National Security Interest”
written in small letters underneath.
(6) On 24 November 2022, police attended the defendant’s residence and
recorded an interaction with him on body worn video.
During the interaction, the
defendant made various comments in relation to the attack of the Charlie Hebdo
magazine in Paris, expressed
religious views about Muslims who give their
allegiance to anything other than Allah, and said he would “smash”
if they insulted the Prophet. With respect to his compliance on the ESO,
he said he was doing his “best” and further
“We hold, we hold these beliefs and at the end of the day, like I said to
youse, I’m on this covenant and um, and we
as Muslims are very true people
and we try our best to abide by the covenant, you know so. I think youse have
nothing to be worried
are very like, when we say we stick to a covenant we, we proper you know,
understand what I’m saying? So, so I don’t think there’s
nothing to be worried about. Yeah, other than that,
it’s just my beliefs
(7) On 3 August 2023, following his arrest, police executed a search warrant
at the defendant’s address. A mobile phone belonging
to the defendant was
seized, along with what was described as an “orange box cutter/Stanley
materials are discussed in greater detail below in the context of the reports of
Dr Shanahan.
Unacceptable risk
My approach to the evidence
is apparent, the matter has a history involving the making of a number of orders
under the Act. In the course of making those
orders, numerous reports have been
prepared by suitably qualified experts. Those reports were authored having
regard to primary materials
made available to the authors, prior expert reports
where appropriate, and in some cases interviews conducted with the defendant.
Of the material tendered, the reports of Drs Seidler and Farrar are most
relevant. Each of those experts had regard to both their
interviews with the
defendant, and documentary material in terms of both primary material and expert
reports. Additionally, the RAR
of Dr Sweller was the subject of some focus, the
defendant placing particular reliance on it. I also took the view that the RAR
Ms Kocak and the subject matter expert reports of Dr Shanahan and Professor
Ӧzalp were particularly relevant. The statute of
course requires me to
have regard to a range of material. While I have had regard to the matters in
s 25(3) of the Act, my approach
has been informed by the extent to which I
was taken to materials by the parties, noting the adversarial context in which
the determination
is made and the limited time available to me to make my
Dr Katie Seidler
7 October 2025, Dr Seidler, a clinical and forensic psychologist, furnished a
report to the Court.
She assessed
the defendant for the purposes of the report on 18 September 2025. Dr Seidler
had previously assessed the defendant
as a court appointed expert in relation to
the first application for an ESO. Her report of 21 January 2022 was also
respect to the defendant’s compliance, Dr Seidler noted that the defendant
had reoffended in a violent manner while under
the ESO, and had been subject to
a further period of imprisonment, extending the ESO by 6 months. However, Dr
Seidler described the
defendant’s reoffending behaviour as having
“nothing to do with terrorism or violent extremism risk” but as
“reflective
of impulsivity, affective dysregulation, distorted thinking,
poor consequential reasoning, egocentricity and a lack of empathy, all
may also be relevant to acts of violent
extremism”.
Other than this
offence, she described the defendant as otherwise being compliant with the
conditions of his ESO, cooperative with
authorities and seemingly anxious about
possible breaches of the ESO.
terms of the effect of the ESO, Dr Seidler noted that it had not had any
tangible impact on addressing or reducing the risk factors
relevant to the
defendant’s future risk of violent extremism, which was likely to continue
to be the case with respect to any
future ESOs imposed. She described the
primary benefit of the ESO as being access to ongoing intervention and
professional support,
which was limited by the defendant’s refusal to
engage with psychologists. Dr Seidler noted the ESO had some “risk
influence” for the defendant in the sense that it had enhanced
his grievance and further cemented his alienation from the mainstream
As a result, Dr Seidler
considered there to be a question as to the “future utility” of an
ESO, and how long the defendant
could be reasonably subject to an ESO,
“especially if it only continues to serve his sense of grievance, anger
and resentment”.
Seidler noted the defendant has likewise expressed resentment at his inability
to contact “like minded” people deemed
non-associations for him as a
result of their national security interest. As a result, without the
restrictions of the ESO, Dr Seidler
opined that it “seems likely”
that the defendant would “connect with others who hold extremist views and
who support
violence, in addition to possibly accessing such content
To this end, Dr
Seidler concluded that the ESO has had a containing or restricting influence by
limiting the defendant’s access
to peers and online media which may
influence and expose him to extremist ideology.
Seidler did not re-apply risk assessment tools in her report. Having previously
assessed the defendant’s risk using the Violence
Risk Scale (VRS) and
Violent Extremism Risk Assessment – Version 2 Revised (VERA-2R) tools in
2022, Dr Seidler took the view
that the defendant’s risk remained
Seidler had, in 2022, reported that the defendant was, overall,
“considered to pose a moderate risk of engaging in a future
act of violent
extremism” and that it was “possible that this may approach the
threshold to be considered a serious terrorism
offence”. Read in context,
I understand this to mean that such an act may reach the particular threshold
required. Even so,
Dr Seidler’s opinion reads as a bare possibility. When
asked to assess the defendant’s level of risk, Dr Seidler again
term “moderate” but in the context of a “moderate risk of
engaging in a future act of violent
extremism”,
not the risk
of a serious terrorism offence. She did postulate that if the defendant were to
disengage he “would be vulnerable
to the influence of others who hold
extremist ideologies and who encourage [the defendant] to become involved in an
organised act
of terrorist violence as a means of gaining acceptance, belonging,
meaning and identity. She said that such an act is likely to be
directed at
someone in a position of authority or a symbolism of authority that he considers
oppressive, unjust and/or
Dr Seidler’s report for the purpose of these proceedings, she noted that
the defendant had been subject to intensive case
management while on the ESO,
the conditions of which she described as “arduous and
restrictive”.
defendant had made some gains while subject to the ESO, however he was yet to
establish a prosocial routine, although he blamed
the conditions placed on him
by the ESO for this. Dr Seidler discussed with the defendant his engagement in
psychological services
while on the ESO, the defendant confirming he had engaged
in the Proactive Assessment and Intervention Service (PRAXIS) program.
evidence is the defendant has engaged in some 70 sessions. He disengaged on 28
July 2025 and told Dr Seidler he would never consult
with a psychologist through
the program again. This was the result of his belief that the confidentiality of
the sessions was breached
by Ms Kocak providing a RAR to the plaintiff when she
had previously engaged with the defendant in the PRAXIS program.
Seidler pointed to a range of risk factors, including the defendant’s
“violent ideology, history of violence, expressions
of support for violent
extremism, alienation from national identity, desire for associations with
others who have an extremist ideology,
persistent grievance and a past history
of accessing extremist content
With respect to
his past behaviour, Dr Seidler noted the defendant had never formally aligned
with a terrorist organisation; never
been involved in planning or preparing for
an act of violent extremism; never identified a particular target for a
terrorist offence;
and never expressed an intention to engage in such an act.
However, the defendant had indicated that he would likely engage in an
violence in support of his religious ideology if someone disrespected the
Prophet or threatened his religion.
Ultimately,
Dr Seidler concluded that the defendant presented “a risk of future
violent extremism”,
was less than that of general violent offending. She
“Given the extant risks in this case, consistent with my previous
assessment, it is my opinion that
a future act of violent extremism cannot be
ruled out as a possibility in this case
. Further, it is possible that any
such act could approach the level of severity as outlined in the Act as
constituting a serious
terrorism offence. This could include
physical violence that may cause serious injury or death to another
However, in my view, it is more likely that should this risk be expressed in the
the most likely scenario would be [the defendant] expressing support
for a terrorist organisation, becoming involved in a terrorist
organisation,
engaging in an activity to support such an action (e.g., fund raising) or
influencing others to be involved in such
action through preaching
unlikely that [the defendant] has the resources (personally, socially or
intellectually) to plan or organise a terrorist act
himself but he would be
vulnerable to the influence of others and may be encouraged to become involved
through such connections or
influences.” (emphasis added)
I understand the use of the expression “could approach” the level of
a serious terrorism offence to mean could
meet that level. In understanding the
defendant’s risk, Dr Seidler explained that the best predictor of future
behaviour is
a person’s recent past behaviour, a significant feature of
this case being that the defendant has not been convicted of a serious
Seidler indicated the defendant had little to no insight into relapse prevention
or strategies to avoid future offending and had
little commitment to avoiding
such conduct, other than wanting to avoid reincarceration and a further ESO. She
also indicated he
had “few protective factors” which were
noting his family had
exerted little controlling influence over his past behaviour.
Seidler considered that if the Court was minded to impose a further ESO, it
would be done with a view to containment and control
rather than for the
purposes of rehabilitation or change. In that case, a longer ESO would be most
appropriate, given the likelihood
that a further ESO would need to be considered
at the expiry of any ESO imposed, regardless of its period. However, with
to the potential negative impact of an ESO, Dr Seidler
“ .... the ESO has had some risk increasing influence for [the defendant]
in the sense that it has enhanced his grievance and
further cemented his
alienation from the mainstream community associated with anger and aggression
towards authorities and national
identity. Further to this, the ESO has done
little to actively reduce the violent extremism specific risks in this case and
is unlikely
to do so in the future, even if it is extended. This raises the
question on the future utility of such an Order and how long [the
defendant] can
be reasonably subject to such an Order, especially if it only continues to serve
his sense of grievance, anger and
resentment.”
Dr Anna Farrar
8 October 2025, Dr Farrar, a forensic psychiatrist, furnished a report to the
Court. She assessed the defendant for the purposes
of the report on 11 September
Farrar administered the VERA-2R tool to assess the defendant’s risk of
violent extremism. Dr Farrar assessed the defendant
as having a “high
loading” of risk indicators relating to his Beliefs, Attitudes and
Ideology, a “moderate loading”
of risk factors associated with
Social Context or Intention and a “moderate loading” of risk factors
associated with
History, Action and Capacity. Dr Farrar summarised the
defendant’s risk factors and risk indicators as
“[The defendant] had a high loading of VERA-2R Risk Indicators relating to
his Beliefs, Attitudes and Ideology, including his
commitment to an ideology
that justifies the use of violence, his multiple perceived grievances and
perceived injustices, his dehumanization
of targets associated with injustice,
his rejection of democratic society and values, his expressed emotion in
response to perceived
injustice, his hostility towards national identity and his
lack of empathy and understanding for those outside his group. [The defendant]
had repeatedly indicated that he did not want to change his beliefs and
ideology. His beliefs, attitudes and ideology are likely
at least partially
perpetuated by his Autistic Spectrum Disorder and Antisocial Personality
Disorder due to his tendency to attribute
blame onto others, perceive that he is
being mistreated, use violence as a means to achieve goals, his rigid thinking
preoccupation with religion and his rejection of rules and social
He had a moderate loading of VERA-2R risk factors associated with Social Context
or Intention. He had a history of being a seeker
and user (possessor) of violent
extremist materials. He identified general targets including the Australian
government. He had previous
intention to commit acts of violent extremism however he expressed a willingness
to die for a cause or belief and strong anti-government sentiments. He may be
susceptible to indoctrination due to his Autistic Spectrum
Disorder and the
salience of his religious beliefs in his life.
He had a moderate loading of VERA-2R risk factors associated with History,
Action and Capacity. He had a history of some early exposure
to pro-violence
militant ideology. He had previous criminal violence. He had some informal
weapons use and had undergone some ideological
training. He had travelled to
Syria. He had some organisation skills.
His Commitment and Motivation was more difficult to assess, particularly as he
had not been charged or convicted of a terrorism offence,
but he appeared to be
most motivated by perceived religious obligation, moral obligation/moral
superiority and search for meaning
and significance in life and also party by
criminal opportunism and group belonging.
He had additional VERA-2R risk indicators relating to his contact with juvenile
justice system and his non-violent offending, his
non-compliance with conditions
or supervision, his perceived problematic upbringing, his problems with school
Farrar in scoring the VERA-2R category “Seeker, user or developer of
violent extremism materials” had regard to evidence
that the defendant
had, between 2022 and 2024 (whilst on the ESO) “searched material related
to organised crime, Islamic and
Koran guidance, Gaza and Rashid Rida (an Islamic
extremist)”.
His interest
in Rashid Rida also contributed to his rating with respect to his
“Susceptibility to influence, control, indoctrination”.
hearing, it was accepted that Rashid Rida is not an Islamic extremist. It is not
clear whether Dr Farrar’s assessment
was impacted or at least
significantly impacted by her having been misled in this regard. The evidence is
that the defendant has
been compliant with the ESO. He certainly searched for
extremist material prior to the ESO being imposed. It is likely he will do
again if not subject to a further order.
Farrar considered the defendant had limited protective or risk mitigating
indicators, which included his previous participation
in programs against
violent extremism, support from government agencies (whilst under the ESO) and
possible support from family members
for non-violence. She also considered that
his risk of violent extremism may be mitigated or reduced by his expressed
intention not
to commit a terrorism or violent offence, his prosocial intentions
(to find employment and a wife), his lack of previous convictions
for terrorism
offences, deficits in his functioning associated with his ASD and Anxiety
Disorder which reduce his social and public
interactions, and his predominant
compliance with his supervision.
Ultimately,
Dr Farrar assessed the defendant’s risk of committing a “terrorism
offence/violent extremism” as
“moderate”.
face, this assessment does not distinguish between a serious terrorism offence
and engagement in violent extremism. Later
in her report, Dr Farrar indicated
that the defendant “does pose a risk of committing a serious terrorism
by reference to
the definition with which she was provided, if not subject to an ESO. Notably,
however, the level of this risk was
not indicated.
Farrar opined that the defendant’s most likely risk scenario would involve
him engaging in a terrorist act (either an action
or threat) to coerce a
government or intimidate the
“... engaging in a terrorist act that is an action or threat made with the
intention of advancing a political, religious or
ideological cause and the
action is done or the threat is made with the intention of coercing, or
influencing by intimidation, the
government of the Commonwealth or a State,
Territory or foreign country, or part of a State, Territory or Foreign Country;
or intimidating
the public or a section of the public.”
Farrar explained the defendant’s risk scenario on the basis of the
“Although [the defendant] had not been charged with a terrorism offence,
he has a history of making verbal and written threats
towards government
agencies and personnel including towards a police officers in 2018 and 2023 and
in a letter to the Governor of
Parklea Correctional Centre, intelligence
officers and the judge presiding over his criminal case in 2019. In my opinion,
[the defendant]
continues to hold views that are extremist and anti-government
with a rejection of the Australian legal system and he feels that
his views are
justified on religious grounds and that his supervision order is unjust. He is
prone to reactive aggression at times
of increased stress, grievances or
disruption due to his psychiatric conditions. ...”
Farrar considered the following risk scenarios also apply to the
“Another risk scenario involves [the defendant] possessing things
connected with terrorist acts, collecting or making documents
facilitate terrorist acts, membership of a terrorist organisation or recruiting
for a terrorist organisation due to his
strong extremist beliefs, salience of
religion in his life and his desire to preach or spread the message of Islam. He
has a history
of accessing violent extremism materials online and associating
with persons who have held or are thought to hold extremist beliefs.
Autistic Spectrum Disorder may make him more vulnerable to being coerced or
forced into joining an extremist group.”
Farrar did not provide an opinion on the appropriate length of an ESO but noted
that most of the defendant’s psychiatric
conditions would be considered
“chronic” and that treatment, including offending-specific treatment
programs, may or
may not be effective in reducing his risk. She considered that
while the conditions sought under the ESO “are necessary to
the defendant’s risk, they could “conversely increase his risk by
increasing his frustration and
Tamara Sweller
Sweller provided a RAR dated 8 April 2025 in anticipation of the present
application. Dr Sweller was subsequently contacted to
review some supplementary
material but was unavailable. This led to the plaintiff engaging Ms Kocak to
obtain a RAR.
Sweller’s assessment does not support the making of an ESO.
Unsurprisingly, her opinion was relied on by the defendant. She
was called to
give evidence in accordance with the defendant’s request and leave was
given to the plaintiff to cross-examine
Sweller observed with respect to the defendant’s
“60. [The defendant] ascribes to the Salafi school of
thought. Throughout his ESO, he has asserted his rigid interpretation
which includes the conditional justification of the use of violence. He
consistently noted that others who identify as
Muslim but who do not agree with
this interpretation, as not ‘real’ Muslims However, he has indicated
that whilst he
rejects democracy and man-made laws, he has ‘entered an
agreement in this country’ in relation to abiding by Australian
defendant] suggested that there are no other self-identified Muslims or
countries that share his values and beliefs.
61. [The defendant] appears to have difficulty accepting
alternative perspectives. He noted that whist (sic) he was open to seeking
advice from an Imam, he would only accept advice that is consistent with what he
already believes.”
Sweller stated that, at “times when he is emotionally dysregulated, [the
defendant] appears to speak at length about the
justification for the use of
violence within Islam”.
She went on to note, however, that during PRAXIS sessions, when he had presented
in this manner, he had “been assessed to be
at no imminent risk of
perpetrating violence”. A consistent theme of Dr Sweller’s evidence
was that while the defendant
had made “verbally aggressive statements that
include language and content relevant to the terrorism context”, such
consistently occurs at times when he is emotionally
dysregulated and experiences a lack of control”. Dr Sweller observed that
on the evidence of the Offender Integrated Management System (OIMS) case notes
and PRAXIS progress notes, the defendant presented
in a “calmer more
regulated manner overall” subsequent to his release in January 2024. She
noted the defendant’s
report that his ASD diagnosis had assisted him in
understanding his own behaviour.
Sweller observed that the defendant’s use of violence in the past has been
reactive rather than instrumental. She observed
that conduct the defendant had
engaged in which could be assessed as “falling within the terrorism
context” appeared
“to be dependent on his emotional state and
capacity to manage emotions at the
Dr Sweller’s
opinion in this regard is consistent with the opinion of Ms Filipa Abreu, who
prepared the RAR in the previous
proceedings, that future violence, should it
occur, was likely to be the result of a lack of emotional regulation and poor
interpersonal
functioning rather than an intended act of violent extremism,
politically motivated violence, or terrorism activity.
Sweller opined that the defendant’s primary risk relates to his use of
ordinary violence as opposed to terrorism-related
violence. With respect to
various risk scenarios, she first considered the risk of him engaging in
behaviour that would be considered
an act of terrorism. She noted his past
statements “could appear concerning” with respect to the potential
that he might
engage in terrorism related behaviour, but said these statements
needed to be understood in the context of his situation at the time
statements were made and in the context of his ASD diagnosis. In this regard,
she observed that when emotionally regulated, the
defendant had expressed an
understanding of the differing belief systems of others and, in particular, that
while he might not accept
or support another person’s beliefs, he would
not engage in harmful behaviour towards that person on this basis. She observed
that when statements supportive of violence based on intolerance have been made
by the defendant, they have been made at the time
of dysregulation. She
described this as “‘venting’ as opposed to expressing his
intent to act”. At such times,
according to Dr Sweller, the
defendant’s intent would not be to advance a political, religious or
ideological cause, even if
he might subsequently rely on a religious context to
provide a “post-hoc justification for his
behaviour”.
opined that threats in this context would “in all likelihood ... not
reflect realistic or specific plans/intent”
but would rather reflect his
emotional dysregulation in the context of his particular
Dr Sweller opined that
the defendant’s risk of actual violence, as opposed to making threats of
violence, would manifest in
a scenario involving “emotionally reactive
violence as opposed to instrumental violence with the aim of furthering an
ideological
not expressly stated, Dr Sweller appeared to distinguish between the
defendant’s statements which on their face supported
a cause or ideology,
and an intention to actually advance that ideology. As I would understand her
report and her evidence, when
the defendant has in the past made statements
supportive of religious extremism, one could not infer any intention to advance
cause in the context of his functioning, including his ASD and immediate
dysregulation. In essence, it is likely the defendant’s
statements simply
express his belief as to what should occur in response to a particular
second risk category considered by Dr Sweller was the risk of the defendant
preaching and thereby inciting others to act. Dr Sweller
was of the view that
this risk scenario was more likely to eventuate than the defendant directly
engaging in a serious terrorism
offence. She was, however, of the opinion that
the defendant’s preaching would not “appear to have intent to incite
others to engage in terrorism related offending”. While she acknowledged
that his behaviour might be interpreted as inciting
others, as I understand her
evidence, his intention would be limited to sharing his belief
Sharing a belief in
religiously justified violence falls short of inciting an act of terrorism.
Sweller also considered the potential effect of a further ESO, expressing the
view that there were both potential positive and
counterproductive effects referred to by Dr Sweller included the prospect an ESO
might promote the defendant’s sense
of grievance and result in increased
hostility towards authority. Significantly, she noted that the potential
positive outcomes of
an ESO were not directly related to risk management for a
serious terrorism offence, but to the defendant’s ongoing vulnerabilities
relating to general
criminality.
to providing her report, Dr Sweller was provided with additional material in
October 2025 comprising the affidavit of Mr
Hamilton-Foster sworn 22 April 2025,
the report of Dr Shanahan dated 23 April 2025, updating OIMS notes and
additional documents
provided by
Dr Sweller confirmed at
the hearing that she had not read the 2025 report of Dr Seidler nor the report
of Dr Farrar (noting her report
references the earlier report of Dr Seidler).
She also confirmed that when she initially prepared her report, she had not had
to OIMS notes postdating 3 April 2025. Nor, it should be observed, had
she had the benefit of interviewing the defendant, he having
refused to engage
with her. The additional material she had considered did not cause her to change
any opinions expressed in her
report. In cross-examination by the plaintiff, Dr
Sweller accepted that despite her view that past threats made by the defendant
in a dysregulated state were not accompanied by an associated intent, the
defendant was not at these times incapable of forming such
an intent and he
could, consequently, make threats expressing a genuine intention in the
Dr Sweller qualified
this, stating, “I just think that’s much less likely, given
everything that I know from the
materials”.
Sweller accepted that the defendant had, on numerous occasions, said that he
would, based on his ideology, respond violently in
various situations. Dr
Sweller observed that these statements, given the hypothetical nature of the
questions, reflected his ideology
but not necessarily his intended
acknowledged that there was, nonetheless, a possibility he would act on his
ideology. Her answer in this regard was more
in the nature of not being able to
rule out the possibility, it being a possible future event, with her opining
that it was “not
Sweller accepted that the defendant had, prior to August 2018, engaged in
various activities such as posting material online and
making threats in the
context of his arrest, demonstrative of his support for Islamic State. Dr
Sweller said she gave less weight
to those matters due to the passage of time
and the defendant’s engagement with psychological services in the
meantime. Those
services, it should be noted, target disengagement not
deradicalisation. Dr Sweller confirmed that research had shown disengagement
be more effective than deradicalisation. She also observed that in terms of his
actual behaviour, the defendant engages appropriately
with people in authority
and there is nothing to suggest he would act on his ideology. While the issue
was not raised with Dr Sweller,
this last answer might be qualified if it is
accepted that the purpose of the defendant’s travel to Türkiye was an
to cross into Syria in order to engage with Islamic State. I will return
to this issue in due course.
Sweller confirmed that while, as part of his ideology, the defendant supports
the use of violence in certain situations such as
when the Prophet is insulted,
when asked as to what he would actually do in those situations, he did not
confirm that he would in
fact act, on at least one occasion stating he did not
know what he would do.
Sweller addressed the risk of the defendant raising funds for a terrorist
organisation but said she did not believe he had the
organisational capacity to
do so. She said simply managing his own finances was a challenge for
She was additionally of
the view that his communication skills and other deficits were such that he did
not have the capacity to
intentionally influence
Ultimately,
Dr Sweller accepted that there were certain scenarios in which the defendant
might be more likely to commit a serious
terrorism offence, were he not subject
to an ESO, but that there was no way of assessing that risk. That conclusion was
in the context of Dr Sweller’s opinion that there was no valid
or reliable assessment tool to do so. In this regard, she noted
that while she
had used the VERA-2R tool as a prompt, she did not attempt to use it to rate
risk based on the literature regarding
its limitations in assessing risk.
Sweller went on to state that her assessment assumed the defendant would have
support in the community, including something called
the “engagement and
support program”, but that, having not interviewed him, she did not know
whether he would in fact
agree to engage in that, or presumably other programs.
She was of the opinion that the defendant may be more willing to engage in
community based services rather than services offered under an ESO as a result
of his hostility towards government and authority.
She could not express an
opinion as to his likelihood of engaging in private psychology sessions.
Ms Ahu Kocak
Kocak provided a RAR dated 30 April 2025 in anticipation of the present
application. The defendant did not consent to participate
in an interview for
the purposes of the report. As a result, Ms Kocak relied on the documentary
records provided to her.
Drs Seidler and Farrar, Ms Kocak described the defendant as being
“primarily compliant with his
conditions”,
“appears to exhibit a conscious effort to abide by and understand”
In this regard, Ms
Kocak noted the defendant’s convictions arising from the 27 July 2023
charges while subject to the ESO.
She described the defendant attributing the
offences to him “wigging out on
issues, the “cunt [inferentially, the victim] ... being
his frustration
with his ESO conditions, and a build-up of emotions. Ms Kocak also noted the
three offences incurred by the defendant
in custody while he served his
non-parole period, namely, entering other cells, assaulting and fighting.
respect to the defendant’s progress while subject to the ESO, Ms Kocak
described the defendant as attempting to adhere
to strict interpretations of
Islam in making decisions around employment, socialisation and engagement with
services under the ESO,
including by refusing to obtain a driver’s licence
or to take psychiatric medication. She described difficulty with social
interactions and the defendant’s reliance on public transport as limiting
his ability to secure employment. On the other hand,
she reported the defendant
had been “consistently engaged” with his case worker and
often using the service
to vent frustrations or distress, which she considered assisted with the
defendant’s de-escalation
process. Ms Kocak noted that the defendant had,
however, disengaged from the service in 2023, and that he had expressed an
to disengage if he were to receive a further ESO. She also described
his responsivity to the service as limited as a result of his
cognitive rigidity
and limited insight, with he at least on one occasion referring to PRAXIS as
“the enemy”.
Drs Seidler, Farrar and Sweller, Ms Kocak opined that the ESO served to
“aggravate [the defendant]’s perception of
religious discrimination,
unfair or unjust treatment and government
oppression”.
In a similar
vein, it was Ms Kocak’s view that fear of non-compliance with the
conditions of his ESO appeared to cause the
defendant “anger outbursts and
Kocak applied the Violence Risk Appraisal Guide – Revised (VRAG-R) tool to
assess the defendant’s risk of future ordinary
violence. She found that he
fell into “Risk Bin 8 (out of
with 60 percent of
offenders in that risk “bin” reoffending violently within five
years. She also administered the Terrorist
Radicalization Assessment Protocol
(TRAP-18) to assess the defendant’s risk of “lone actor”
terrorist attacks or
targeted extremist violence. He was assessed as having two
out of eight dynamic indicators, being “fixation” and
“identification”,
and seven out of eight “distal”
indicators: “personal grievance and moral outrage; framed by an ideology;
to affiliate with an extremist or other group; thwarting of occupational
goals; mental disorder and criminal
concluded that the results of the TRAP-18 indicated the defendant requires
active case management and monitoring.
Kocak also administered the VERA-2R. She assessed the defendant as having a
“high loading” of risk indicators relating
to his Beliefs, Attitudes
and Ideology, a “low-moderate loading” of risk factors associated
with Social Context and Intention
and a “moderate loading” of risk
factors associated with History, Action and Capacity. She considered that the
demonstrated few robust protective factors against future violence,
noting those that were present “appear conditional, situational,
vulnerable to deterioration under emotional stress of perceived abandonment,
persecution or
injustice”.
Kocak described the defendant’s “largely open and transparent”
attitudes and views towards violent extremism
and religiously motivated
violence, primarily his support of violent Jihad or the justification of the use
of violence within Islam.
As I have said, the defendant’s views in this
respect are uncontroversial on this application.
Kocak described the defendant’s neurodivergent traits as particularly
evident in his absorption into religious doctrines
and extremist materials and
considered that his pattern of hyper-focussed interests has led to
“intense preoccupation”
with certain Salafist interpretations of
Islam, which he “rigidly repeats without nuanced
comprehension”.
regard, Ms Kocak said:
“[The defendant] often volunteers extremist rhetoric – including
glorifications of Jihad and martyrdom – in a scripted,
ritualistic manner.
Critically, such utterances may occur without full reflective understanding or
immediate operational intent,
complicating or overestimating risk assessments
that rely heavily on verbal expressions of attitudes and verbal expressions.
... Repeated exposure to violent extremist materials, coupled with his cognitive
vulnerabilities, further reinforces cognitive rehearsal
of violent ideation.
Although lacking clear intention to operationalise these narratives into action,
such repeated preoccupation
increases the entrenchment of grievance-based
identity and the emotional salience of retaliatory violence, heightening the
impulsive acts during emotionally dysregulated states. ...”
Kocak emphasised that the defendant’s primary risk lies in
“impulsive interpersonal violence” which is “triggered
perceived threats, paranoia, personal grievances, or emotional
dysregulation” rather than “ideologically orchestrated
aggression”.
She noted a
“consistent lack of evidence of operational planning, target
identification, or strategic mobilisation toward an
actual act of
terrorism”.
distinguished between the defendant’s views, which she noted “may
never change” and his risk of committing
an act of terrorism, violent
extremism or other unlawful behaviour, on the basis of the necessary intention
Kocak ultimately concluded, having regard to the defendant’s risk
formulation, that he does pose a risk of committing a serious
terrorism offence
if not subject to an ESO and/or continuing detention order. She opined that the
defendant’s “risk relates
predominantly to emotionally reactive,
grievance-driven, ideologically justified violence rather than premeditated,
sophisticated
but that his
vulnerabilities nonetheless “create specific risks” that could
amount to the commission of a serious terrorism
respect to the defendant’s risk scenarios, Ms Kocak considered that if the
defendant were to engage in violence, it would
most likely be interpersonal
violence or aggression to resolve disagreements about his values, rather than a
large-scale attack.
She also considered that he had the potential to move abroad
to support or join a political or Jihadist movement, but that this was
likely in the absence of a passport. She described four possible risk scenarios,
should the defendant commit a serious
terrorism offence, and their respective
likelihoods as
(1) The defendant’s likelihood of committing an offence contrary to s
101.1 (engaging in a terrorist act) is moderate to high.
There is a risk a
personal confrontation or event will provoke him to commit a violent,
retaliatory or reactive act, framed ideologically
as a defence of his faith and
advancement of his perceived religious obligation and principles.
(2) The defendant’s likelihood of committing an offence contrary to s
101.4 (possessing things connected with terrorist acts)
is moderate to high.
Given his history and vulnerability to preoccupation with fixed interests, there
is a risk that the defendant
will, without supervision, seek to possess or share
materials intended to glorify, inspire or prepare for Jihadist violence.
(3) The defendant’s likelihood of committing an offence contrary to s
102.3 (being a member of a terrorist organisation) is
moderate. With ongoing
isolation and emotional instability, there is a risk the defendant could connect
with extremist peers via
online networks, or present with sustained ideological
allegiance to Islamic State through online expressions without formal
recruitment.
(4) The defendant’s likelihood of committing an offence contrary to s
102.7 (providing support to a terrorist organisation)
is moderate. The defendant
may express support for Islamic State objectives or verbally encourage actions
that bolster Islamic State’s
ideological aims even without formal
affiliation, including urging others to commit violence through verbal
encouragement or ideological
Dr Rodger Shanahan
Shanahan, a subject matter expert, prepared three reports in respect of this
matter dated 27 May 2021, 12 March 2025 and 23 April
2025. Dr Shanahan was asked
to provide his opinion on a volume of material in respect of the defendant,
including statements made
his initial report, which had been prepared for the previous proceedings under
the Act, Dr Shanahan identified the following content
contained in photographs
of the defendant’s iPhone, which had been seized in 2018 following the
commission of the index
“a) Contact names which may have relevance to violent
b) Materials produced by Islamic State’s al-Ajnad media,
and jihadi nasheeds;
c) Messages recommending that the defendant follow (online)
people with connections to individuals associated with violent extremism;
d) References to Telegram channels for individuals who have
expressed support for violent extremist views in the past, or with
suggestive of violent extremism” (footnotes omitted)
respect to the Cellebrite extraction of the Nokia phone, Dr Shanahan identified
two audio files as Islamic State nasheeds which
were produced by Islamic
State’s al-Ajnad media group. Dr Shanahan opined that both the nasheeds
were “closely associated
with the violent, Salafist-Jihadist ideology
espoused by Islamic State”, with one talking about “beheading the
Likewise, Dr
Shanahan opined that some of the social media material which had been captured
from Facebook and Instagram accounts
apparently operated by the defendant in
2018, was associated with violent extremism.
Shanahan opined that the threat made by the defendant to behead a police officer
in the course of the index offending was “consistent
with the type of act
that Islamic State (or ISIS) called on its followers to
undertake”.
Dr Shanahan
also considered the letter written by the defendant to a judge as
“consistent with the ideological view that there
is a war on Islam and its
followers, which is a fundamental argument espoused by jihadist groups such as
al-Qa’ida and Islamic
relation to the defendant’s tattoos, Dr Shanahan said that that the AK-47
weapon is a mainstay of jihadist groups around
the world, and opined that
“jehad/jihad in this context could reasonably be understood to mean a
religious obligation to undertake
armed action against designated enemies of
his report dated 12 March 2025 prepared for the present application, Dr Shanahan
opined that the statements made by the defendant,
as recorded in OIMS Case Notes
and PRAXIS case notes post-dating 14 February 2022, demonstrated he had a view
of violent jihad within
Islam which was consistent with the interpretation held
by radical Islamist terrorist groups such as Islamic State and Al-Qa’ida.
Likewise, his rejection of man-made laws, his statements in relation to
non-Muslims, and his statements in relation to homosexuality
were consistent
with the stances advocated by Islamic State and Al-Qa’ida. In his report
dated 23 April 2025, Dr Shanahan identified
the statements made by the defendant
on 24 November 2022 as conveying support for terrorist acts or violent
extremism, and indicated
that they were consistent with views expressed by
Al-Qa’ida and Islamic State in relation to government and man-made
Shanahan’s reports are consistent with other evidence as to the
defendant’s beliefs about violent extremism and religiously
violence but, in my view, do not go further to resolve the question of the
defendant’s risk of actually committing
a serious terrorism
Professor Mehmet Ӧzalp
Ӧzalp, an Islamic scholar and theologian, prepared an expert report in
respect of this matter dated 27 October 2025
which was relied on by the defence.
In it, he explained key Islamic concepts as relevant to the present matter.
Ӧzalp described Salafism as a Sunni reform movement that calls on Muslims
to emulate the “pious
predecessors”,
normally understood to be the first three generations of Muslims (the immediate
followers “Companions” of the
Prophet Muhammad, and the two
generations of scholars who followed the
Companions).
Salafi Muslims
selectively follow the views of later Islamic scholars such as Ibn Taymiyya and
Muhammad Abdul-Wahhab. Professor Ӧzalp
described Abdul-Wahhab as a scholar
known for justifying violence towards people who do not accept his purest
interpretations of
Islam, in that he would excommunicate them and say it was
lawful to shed their blood. The followers of Abdul-Wahhab, the Wahhabis,
declared outside the fold of Islam by mainstream Muslim scholars and as a result
began to refer to themselves as Salafis.
Ӧzalp said that the Arabic word “jihad” means to
“struggle” or “strive” and applies
to any effort exerted
by anyone. Jihad is a broad concept; it does not mean “holy war” and
cannot properly be restricted
to military campaigns or acts of
Jihad has three
distinct components: inner struggle, social and religious activism, and military
Ӧzalp said that, according to mainstream interpretations of the
Qur’an, violence is justified in two respects:
maintaining order and
enforcing the law, and taking part in warfare. He said that jihadist Salafists
represent an extremist offshoot
of the broader Salafi movement and are often
influenced by or aligned with jihadist groups like Al-Qa’ida, Islamic
similar organisations that frame violent struggle as a religious duty
incumbent on all Muslims. These movements prioritise armed
struggle as the
central expression of Islam and broaden the concept of “takfir”
(excommunication)
rebellion against Muslim rulers and violence against Muslim civilians.
Consideration
Beliefs and actions
Seidler said of the
“114. [The defendant] maintains a strong religious faith
and it is evident that this is something in his life that provides
meaning, happiness and a sense of security and identity. [The defendant]
maintains the fervent practice of his Islamic religion,
he identifies strongly
and solely as a Muslim and he has a fixed and rigid viewpoint that the teachings
of the Qur’an and the
word of Allah are the only legitimate sources of
guidance and Law. To this end, [the defendant] does not support democracy, he
not participate in the actions of a democracy, he does not condone man-made
Laws and he refuses to demonstrate any flexibility in
this regard.
115. [The defendant]’s ideological views are extremist in
nature and he does not consider there is a legitimate place for
Government or society. Further to this, [the defendant] believes in violence,
both in general terms and with respect to
jihad, which he considers a religious
obligation as part of his faith. To this end, [the defendant] is supportive of
Islamic State
and other such organisations and he condones the use of violence
for religious ends.”
defendant is entitled to hold these views. He is, of course, not entitled to act
on these views. Relevantly for present purposes,
he is not entitled to act on
his views in a manner that would amount to a serious terrorism offence. What
makes this case difficult
is assessing risk largely based on the
defendant’s belief system. That he holds such beliefs is worrying. But
what is the evidence
as to the risk he will act on his beliefs? It was common
ground that, despite the defendant having maintained his belief system for
years, he has not committed a serious terrorism offence. I have not been
provided with any statistical material as to the relationship
between holding
extremist views and acting on them. That programs dealing with violent
extremism focus on disengagement (it being
more effective than
deradicalisation),
confirm that simply holding extremist beliefs does not, of itself, mean a person
will act on those beliefs.
Nonetheless,
Dr Seidler confirmed in her evidence the salience of risk factors for violent
extremism for assessing the risk of the
commission of a serious terrorism
offence. Further, both Drs Seidler and Farrar confirmed that their assessments
of the defendant’s
risk were not based solely on his extremist beliefs,
but were determined with regard to a range of factors, including the various
considerations indicated by the VERA-2R. The limitations of the VERA-2R were
acknowledged. Dr Sweller was clear (and unchallenged)
in her evidence that there
is no “validated, reliable risk assessment tool within the terrorism
space”. Nonetheless,
Drs Seidler and Farrar maintained that the VERA-2R
was capable of being used to assist in the assessment of risk.
is at least some evidence of the defendant expressing his beliefs, and indeed
going further and stating his intention to act
based on those beliefs, but then
not following through with that action. The defendant told a police officer on
10 July 2025 that
he would not be legally represented at the ESO hearing as his
beliefs clash with those of his lawyers. He said he would not want
to stand or call the judge “your Honour” because he does not accept
the appointment of judges or the government.
Despite this, he was represented at
the hearing (and needless to say his lawyers acted decorously). Significantly,
perhaps, the defendant’s
rejection of legal representation was referred to
by Dr Farrar in giving the defendant a “high score” in relation to
the rejection of democratic society and values component of the VERA-2R risk
assessment tool. That the defendant did not follow through
on his beliefs on one
occasion does not, of course, mean that he will not do so on another. It does
confirm that it is not inevitable.
weight that can be given to the fact that the defendant has not committed a
serious terrorism offence is limited by the reality
that the defendant has
either been in custody or under supervision since 2018. It is difficult to know
what this means with respect
to the defendant’s risk if he were not
subject to an ESO.
considering the defendant’s risk if he were not subject to supervision, it
is relevant to have regard to any insights or
progress he has made while under
the ESO. Since being on the ESO, the defendant has engaged in some 70 PRAXIS
sessions. The extent
to which these have assisted him, if at all, remain
unclear. Ms Abreu in her RAR indicated that at the point of disengagement the
defendant “was beginning to show growing awareness of his own thinking
patterns, emotions and how his behaviour affects others”
started to develop some skills in perspective-taking, recognising emotions, and
considering viewpoints that differed
Ms Abreu observed
that such gains as had been made “remain underdeveloped and
inconsistent”.
Dr Seidler accepted that the defendant had made progress as a result of his
engagement with psychological services, in her view
this reduced his risk only
with respect to his general offending. Dr Seidler’s view was that there
was no treatment program
or intervention that would significantly reduce the
defendant’s risk of future violent extremism. Despite this view, it does
seem that significant in his progress is the defendant’s ASD diagnosis
which has given him an improved understanding of himself.
Drs Seidler and Farrar were taken to the “covenant” apparently made
by the defendant with his solicitor not to offend.
Dr Farrar regarded this as a
significant protective factor in that it would preclude the commission of a
serious terrorism offence,
albeit other factors may lead to him offending. On
the other hand, Dr Seidler was unable to comment on the religious significance
of the covenant, nor its strength with respect to a commitment not to act with
violence. It seems the “covenant” may
have some, perhaps
significant, role in reducing the defendant’s risk. It is, however,
difficult to assess that impact.
Past behaviour and future
respect to assessing risk, Dr Seidler referred on a number of occasions to past
behaviour being the best predictor of future
behaviour. The consistent view of
the experts is that the defendant’s past behaviour indicates a risk of the
defendant engaging
in general – that is, not terrorism – related
violence. The risk with which I am concerned, however, is associated with
serious terrorism offence. The fact that the defendant has not previously
committed a serious terrorism offence must be given significant
weight, given
the relevance of past behaviour as a predictive factor. It is also, in this
context, helpful to consider the terrorism
component to the defendant’s
past offending and other behaviour.
relation to the August 2018 offences, the defendant made threats to law
enforcement officers that are, on their face, troubling.
Dr Shanahan described
at least one of these threats as “consistent with the type of act that
Islamic State (or ISIS) called
on its followers to undertake”. The
consistent evidence given by Drs Sweller, Seidler and Farrar, however, is that
the defendant
was, at the time of the offences, likely dysregulated, and that
the threat was reflective of his reactive emotional state. It is
unsurprising
that, in a dysregulated state, he would be vociferous in his expression of his
ideology. On the evidence, however, I
could not find that the threat evinced any
actual intention to carry out the threatened action. Dr Seidler made clear, and
agreed, that while the defendant might believe that violence is
justified in certain circumstances, such as when the Prophet is insulted,
“we have no demonstration that he’s prepared to do
letter to the judge (also received by the Governor of the Correctional Centre
and intelligence officers) while undoubtedly more
considered than the threats
made to the law enforcement officers, was not suggested to be a serious
terrorism offence. The letter
was headed “we disbelieve in your laws
– a letter to the
While the letter
makes the defendant’s ideology clear, there is nothing in the letter
indicating the defendant intended to
himself act on that ideology. Dr Farrar
gave evidence that given the defendant’s difficulty with abstract
thinking, what he
says may be more in the nature of a “rigid
rather than a
reflection of his actual belief, raising a question as to whether he would act
on his word.
more difficult question is raised by the defendant’s travel to
Türkiye in 2015. There is no issue the defendant travelled
and, within Türkiye, to a town on the border of Syria called Gaziantep.
Gaziantep was, according to Dr Shanahan,
“one of the hubs in Southern
Turkey from which Jihadist fighters were able to be smuggled into Syria to join
groups including
Islamic State”: see
State of New South Wales v
[2022] NSWSC 87
(2022) 295 A Crim R 296
. The defendant
has at no stage accepted that he travelled to the location for that purpose. His
explanation for his presence in the
particular location was that he had
travelled there to engage in humanitarian work. The defendant submitted that,
given the nature
of the allegation, I would apply the Briginshaw standard
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[1938] HCA 34)
before drawing
any adverse inference against the defendant in relation to this evidence. The
standard of proof to be applied is satisfaction
to a high degree of probability
with respect to the ultimate question of whether the defendant poses the
relevant unacceptable risk.
I do not regard it as appropriate to apply a
standard of proof to individual facts any more than I would do so in a criminal
based on circumstantial evidence where the particular fact cannot be
described as “an indispensable basis for an inference
Shepherd v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
[1990] HCA 56 (Mason
Chamberlain v The Queen
(1983) 153 CLR 514
[1983] HCA 13.
evidence of the defendant’s travel to Türkiye forms part of a mosaic
of evidence relied on by the plaintiff. It cannot
be viewed in isolation from
the evidence of the defendant’s beliefs. The defendant had certainly
adopted a fundamentalist ideology
by the time of the searches conducted in 2018.
Closer in time to the defendant’s return from Türkiye on 21 September
is evidence that he was seen in a car with Amin Elmir on 28 November 2015.
Mr Elmir was later convicted of an offence against s 119.4(1)
Criminal Code
committed between about 23 April and 19 June 2016. The
offence involved Mr Elmir committing acts in Türkiye in preparation for
incursion into Syria for the purpose of engaging in hostile activities. While
the offence of which Mr Elmir was convicted is not
a terrorism offence it is the
location of his offending and its connection with the defendant’s ideology
which is presently
significant. While little more is known of the connection
between the defendant and Mr Elmir, their presence together in a vehicle
not speak of a chance encounter. Given the proximity of the meeting to the
defendant’s return to Australia and Mr Elmir’s
subsequent travel, an
inference is available the meeting was related to that later travel. It is
difficult, however, to know what
light this sheds on any assistance the
defendant may have provided Mr Elmir or the nature of the defendant’s
prior travel.
Ultimately, the most that can be said is that the evidence in
relation to the defendant’s travel may cast some doubt on the
that the defendant has not in the past acted on his beliefs.
if it were to be accepted that the defendant, motivated by fundamentalist
ideology, travelled to Türkiye intending to cross
into Syria, his
particular objective in doing so remains unknown. While it may have been with
the intention of committing a terrorist
act or other offence within Division 101
Criminal Code
, a conclusion cannot be reached in this regard. His
travel is unlikely to have been related to a financing offence within Division
Criminal Code
. The most likely possibility would be that the
defendant did so with at least an intention of providing support for Islamic
within the meaning of s 102.7.
result of this analysis is that, even if the defendant’s travel was
fuelled by a belief in violent extremism, while it may
inform a risk of the
defendant committing a serious terrorism offence, it remains difficult to draw
any conclusions with respect
to the consequences, or at least the direct
consequences, of any serious terrorism offence that may be committed by the
based on his past behaviour.
The extent to which the
defendant poses a risk of committing a serious terrorism offence
defendant’s belief in violent jihad, his possession of extremist
materials, and relatedly, his online activity, unsurprisingly
caused Dr Farrar
to say the fact the defendant had not committed a serious terrorism offence did
not mean there was no threat of
him doing so. But an unacceptable risk is not
satisfied by any threat. It is necessary in the context of the above discussion
consider both the extent of the risk and how that risk, should it be
realised, is likely to manifest.
observed above, Dr Farrar said that the defendant “does pose a risk of
committing a serious terrorism
by reference to
the definition provided to her, if not subject to an ESO. Notably, however, the
level of this risk was not indicated.
respect to the extent of the defendant’s risk, Dr Seidler’s opinion
was that “a future act of violent extremism
cannot be ruled out as a
possibility”
and that it
was “possible that any such act could approach the
of a serious
terrorism offence. While elsewhere in her report, Dr Seidler referred to the
risk of the defendant committing an act
of violent extremism as
“moderate” the likelihood that this would rise to a serious
terrorism offence remains unclear.
Sweller’s opinion was at odds with the opinions of the other experts. Dr
Sweller was, from my vantage point, an impressive
witness. I would, however, say
the same of Drs Farrar and Seidler. When the evidence of Drs Farrar and Seidler
as to the defendant’s
risk of committing a “serious terrorism
offence” is isolated from their opinions with respect to an act of violent
it may be that there is little difference between their opinions and
that of Dr Sweller.
matter that causes me to pause before accepting the defendant does not pose a
relevant risk if not subject to an ESO is that the
defendant’s behaviour
has undoubtedly been affected by the fact he has been on an order with stringent
conditions, or in custody,
since 2018. In this regard, Dr Sweller acknowledged
that she could not predict what course the defendant would take if he were not
the subject of an ESO. This was, at least in part, the result of her not having
had the opportunity to interview the defendant due
to his refusal.
Kocak found, consistently with the other experts, that the defendant’s
“risk relates predominantly to emotionally reactive,
grievance-driven,
ideologically justified violence rather than premeditated, sophisticated
terrorist acts”
acknowledging this to be his primary risk, she found that the defendant’s
vulnerabilities “create specific risks”
that could amount to the
commission of a serious terrorism offence. The language of “could”
suggests, similarly to Dr
Seidler, and perhaps Dr Farrar, that the risk is in
the realm of bare possibility. She did, however, additionally say that the
of the TRAP-18 indicate the defendant requires active case management
and monitoring. While expressing the opinion the defendant
commit a serious terrorism offence, Ms Kocak rated the defendant as being at a
moderate to high risk of committing
specific serious terrorism offences. Her
opinion in this regard is discussed further below.
addition to Drs Farrar, Seidler and Sweller and Ms Kocak, I have had regard to
earlier reports including that of Dr Dayalan and
Ms Abreu. I regard the more
recent reports as being of greatest relevance.
The nature of any
risk that may materialise
must be acknowledged that the defendant’s primary risk is, as discussed
above, in relation to general offending. Further,
to the extent that the
defendant may commit a reactive offence, perhaps of a similar nature to the 2018
offences, but which rises
to the level of a serious terrorism offence, an ESO
will likely do nothing to prevent it, subject only to any rehabilitative effect
it may have. In this regard, at least Dr Seidler was doubtful that an ESO would
have any rehabilitative effect. Putting to one side
the potential rehabilitative
effect of an ESO, it is difficult to see how the defendant could be at an
unacceptable risk if not placed
on an ESO, if the risk would not be mitigated by
that order. Further, a reactive offence will, by its nature, not involve
and at least to the extent of similarity with the 2018 offences, is
unlikely to involve a weapon. (I accept in this regard that the
defendant in
2023 used a box cutter to reinforce his threat, although it was not used any
further in the commission of the offences.)
To the extent that an offence may be
of a similar nature to a letter written by the defendant containing threats,
while such conduct,
accompanied by the necessary intent, may amount to a serious
terrorism offence, the product of the risk and the consequences would
such as to justify the making of an ESO.
Seidler’s view was the most likely manifestation of the defendant’s
risk of committing a serious terrorism offence
would be him expressing support
for a terrorist organisation, becoming involved in a terrorist organisation,
engaging in acts to
support a terrorist organisation or influencing others to be
involved in a terrorist act through preaching. Dr Seidler thought it
the defendant would have the capacity to plan or organise a terrorist act
himself but that he would be “vulnerable
to the influence of
Dr Seidler was of
the view that, “without the restrictions of the ESO, it seems likely that
[the defendant] would connect with
others who hold extremist views and who
support violence, in addition to possibly accessing such content
Farrar regarded the most likely manifestation of the defendant’s risk
would involve him engaging in conduct such as making
threats, either verbally or
in writing, similar to his conduct in the past, but presumably with some
additional component elevating
the conduct to a serious terrorism offence. Dr
Farrar also considered there to be a likelihood of the defendant being in
of things connected with a terrorist act. On my understanding of her
evidence, this referred to a past terrorist act, rather than
a thing that might
facilitate a terrorist act for the purposes of an offence against s 101.4 of the
Criminal Code
(or similarly in relation to a document under s 101.5 of
Criminal Code
Kocak gave ratings to various risk scenarios. While it is not entirely clear in
context, the ratings appear to be with respect
to the likelihood that, in the
event the defendant did commit a serious terrorism offence, it would be of a
particular type. It will
be recalled that Ms Kocak’s opinion was that the
defendant “could” commit a serious terrorism offence. If he were
commit such an offence, Ms Kocak rated the risk of him committing an offence
contrary to s 101.1 (engaging in a terrorist act)
as being moderate to high. The
scenario postulated was one of reactive violence. There is reason to doubt that
the defendant in such
a situation would act with the requisite intent to make
the act a terrorist act given the evidence that such an offence would likely
committed while he is in a dysregulated state. There is also, as discussed
above, reason to doubt that an ESO would mitigate the
risk of such an offence.
Kocak rated the prospect of the defendant committing an offence contrary to s
101.4 (possessing things connected with terrorist
acts) as moderate to high.
Based on the defendant’s history, this was likely to manifest in him
possessing or sharing materials
intended to glorify, inspire or prepare for
Jihadist violence. Additionally, Ms Kocak found the likelihood of the defendant
an offence contrary to s 102.3 (being a member of a terrorist
organisation) or s 102.7 (providing support to a terrorist organisation)
be moderate. This would likely be the result of the defendant connecting with
extremist peers via online networks, or, even without
any formal affiliation,
urging others to commit violence through verbal encouragement or ideological
The risk increasing effect of an order
an ESO were to do nothing to reduce risk, the defendant would not pose an
unacceptable risk if he were not subject to an order.
Applying the same logic,
if the risk was cancelled out by the risk-increasing effect of an ESO, the test
would not be met. There
is a uniformity of opinion to the effect that the making
of an ESO will have a risk increasing effect. It will do so by adding to
defendant’s sense of grievance. It was not suggested that this increase in
risk effectively counterbalanced the risk if
no ESO was made, although,
understandably, there was no attempt to provide any quantification. Given the
defendant’s existing
attitudes and the possibility, and perhaps
inevitability, that he will be the subject of some treatment by an authority he
as unfair, he is likely to maintain his grievance against the State
irrespective of the making of the ESO. While it must be accepted
grievance may be exacerbated by the making of an ESO, given that this is just
one of the vicissitudes that may befall him,
I would not place great weight on
this consideration.
Conclusion on risk
must be accepted that, during the course of the ESO, the defendant has been
punctilious in abiding by its conditions, with the
exception of the offences
committed in 2023 which were not the result of any deliberation. He has
consequently demonstrated a capacity
to abide by the rules set for him despite
his ideology. On this logic, he will likely abide by the law including by not
offences contrary to Part 5.3 of the
Criminal Code
stage, however, it cannot be known whether the defendant’s compliance is
purely pragmatic in the context of his close
supervision under the ESO or
reflective of a deeper commitment not to act on his beliefs. Nor can it be known
whether, with increased
opportunity, he may be more willing to act on his
the low incidence of terrorism offences makes it statistically difficult to
predict the applicant’s risk, the statutory
task requires me to consider
it. What can be said is that while the defendant’s risk of committing a
serious terrorism offence
is not quantifiable, I do not understand the evidence
of Drs Seidler and Farrar to rate it as a possibility in the sense that anything
is possible. His risk of committing such an offence is clearly higher than it is
for the vast majority of the population.
common thread through the various experts is the defendant’s vulnerability
to influence. This vulnerability is capable of
being exploited. Any attempt to
forecast what the defendant might in fact do if he were not subject to an ESO is
largely foiled by
the absence of any recent history during which the defendant
has not been on an extremely restrictive order or in custody. The difficulty
such circumstances is that, despite the uncertainties that abound, given the
defendant’s beliefs, and the prospect of his
exploitation by others with
greater organisational capacity, the risk that he may engage in or facilitate an
act with dire consequences
if not supervised under an ESO, even if small, is
real. It is underscored by the absence of a settled routine in the community
close supervision. In the result I am ultimately satisfied to a high
degree of probability that the defendant poses an unacceptable
committing a serious terrorism offence if not kept under the supervision of an
risk that the defendant may be more likely to commit a general violent offence
if made subject to an ESO, while not relevant to
the test in s 20(d) of the Act,
is relevant to whether I should exercise my discretion to make an ESO.
the extent that either of Drs Farrar and Seidler considered the defendant
presented any imminent risk, it was limited to a context
in which he received a
setback. The granting of an ESO is the most obvious potential setback in the
immediate future. While that
could be avoided by not extending the ESO, as
discussed above, the prospect that the defendant will not at some time suffer
in the future seems unlikely.
is a further downside to the making of an ESO in that it may solidify the
defendant’s anti-authoritarian beliefs and,
consequently, his risk.
However, in circumstances where the evidence is that the defendant’s
beliefs are unlikely to charge
irrespective of external events, I would not
place weight on this factor.
is some uncertainty as to how the defendant will respond to being in the
community in the absence of an ESO, at least in the
This uncertainty might
be met by a continuous cycle of applications and orders. Dr Seidler’s view
was that, in the absence
of an ESO, the defendant will likely do what he says he
will do and maintain a routine, however he would also associate with
“like-minded”
persons. Relevantly, Dr Seider expressed the view that
the defendant’s risk was not likely to change, potentially resulting
ongoing ESOs, potentially for the rest of his life. The prospect of the
defendant being on a lifelong ESO is, in the context of
the uncertain assessment
of his risk, a relevant consideration in determining whether I would exercise my
discretion to impose an
is evidence that the defendant has himself sought out and obtained permission
under the ESO to engage in psychological treatment.
Given his distrust of
government services it appears to be the most likely manner in which he will
receive psychological services
in the future. It seems, however, that his
willingness, insight and motivation to engage oscillate. Given these matters it
that the absence of an ESO will not negatively impact the
defendant’s receipt of psychological services. In the absence of
would not, however, be known if the defendant was obtaining psychological
treatment and whether this was assisting him.
Seidler accepted that there was a danger of long term psychological damage to
the defendant as a result of him being under the
stress of an ESO over a long
period of time. In a context where there is, on her evidence, little or no
utility to a short ESO, this
is an important consideration. Quite apart from the
concern that the ESO, which is based on offences in relation to which the
has served his punishment, and which itself is not intended to be
punitive, will negatively impact the defendant, the community is
not well served
by such an impact on one of its members. That is particularly so if it should
manifest in violent behaviour, a risk
referred to by Dr Seidler.
defendant submitted I would not exercise my discretion to make the ESO. While
there is significance in some of the matters referred
to above, I am of the view
that, in the context of the risk and the uncharted territory entered by
declining to make an ESO, an ESO
should be made. I am of the view that many of
the concerns raised above can be met by appropriately stepping down the
imposed with the ESO.
29(1) of the Act provides that I may direct an eligible offender to comply with
such conditions as I consider appropriate,
before providing a non-exclusive list
of conditions that may be set. Section 29(1A) of the Act provides a set of
prescribed conditions
which must be imposed unless the Court orders
differently.
Crimes (High Risk Offenders) Act 2006
(NSW) is also framed as a
power to make orders the Court considers “appropriate”
that context, Hoeben CJ at CL in
State of NSW v Hunt
[2020] NSWSC 1005
“123 Pursuant to
of the Act, the Court has the
power to impose a condition that the Court considers ‘appropriate’.
In Wilde v State of
New South Wales
[2015] NSWCA 28
, the Court of Appeal stated
does not require that there be a specific demonstrated
link to the past offending which is the basis of the order made under the
Rather, the court must be satisfied, having regard to the scope, purpose and
objects of the Act, that it is appropriate to impose
a particular condition so
as to address the risk of future offending of the type which was the basis of
the order.’
124 In Lynn v State of New South Wales, the Court of Appeal
found that a balancing exercise was required so that the Court will
least intrusive conditions, consistent with its assessment of the risk posed by
the defendant and a further assessment
as to what conditions are likely to be
effective, with the interests of the defendant in liberty and privacy being
properly treated
as relevant considerations in ensuring that unjustifiable
conditions are not imposed.”
making of the ESO itself is a reflection of the need to give paramountcy to the
safety of the community:
While the primary object of the Act remains
community protection, and must be applied in the framing of the conditions,
in the present case, significant scope to provide for the further
object of rehabilitation:
The unusual nature of this case has the result
that my approach to the conditions may also be somewhat out of the ordinary. The
will be significantly less restrictive than was sought.
factors primarily lead to my approach. First, having regard to the discussion
above, I am of the view that the defendant is
very unlikely to commit a serious
terrorism offence while he is subject to an ESO. Second, is the fact that,
against the defendant
in the decision to make the ESO, he is essentially
untested in the community. It has only been since August of this year, when the
ISO was imposed, that the defendant has not been subject to a schedule of
movements. That he is presently untested supports the imposition
of a period of
time where his integration into the community can be tested. The third primary
factor is that there is strong evidence
that the defendant will comply with the
ESO. That is, based on the evidence of the defendant’s punctilious
commitment to complying
with the order to date, the additional conditions can be
framed on the basis of a presumption the defendant will comply. As a result,
conditions primarily directed to enforcement can be relaxed or dispensed with.
Additionally
informing my approach is that the defendant has made some progress through his
psychology sessions. His ASD diagnosis
remains recent. It appears that the
defendant has gained some insight into his functioning as a result of this
diagnosis. In this
regard, I note the potential benefits of an ESO as referred
to by Dr Sweller at [150] of her report.
formulating the conditions, I have had regard to the evidence including, in
particular, the Reintegration Management Report of
John Banton and the NSW
Police ESO Management Report of Jimmy Wang. The conditions I will impose do not
align with those reports.
They are, however, in my view appropriately adapted
for the circumstances of the case.
A: Supervision, Movements & Reporting. Having regard to the matters
discussed above, I would not impose the scheduling condition.
My reasons are
essentially the same as those of Wright J. I would otherwise impose the
conditions sought in Part A. These conditions
are fundamental to the ESO in
providing oversight of the defendant.
B: Vehicles. I will impose the conditions in Part B. These conditions assist in
supervising the defendant without being particularly
onerous on him.
Financial Oversight. The effect of the evidence of Drs Sweller, Farrar and
Seidler was that the defendant does not present a risk
of committing a serious
terrorism offence by himself providing finance. Nor does he have the skills to
raise money. He could, potentially,
be used by another to transfer funds. I
would impose condition 9, preventing him from transferring funds outside
Australia without
informing an Enforcement Officer. This is not an onerous
condition. I would not otherwise impose the conditions in
Electronic monitoring. This part proposes a single condition prescribed by
The presence of an electronic monitoring device is a very significant
intrusion on the defendant’s liberty. Having regard to
the unusual
features of this case, I do not regard it as justified. The defendant it seems
is likely to maintain a confined routine.
He is, further, likely to respond
honestly with respect to his movements.
E: Accommodation. This part provides conditions with respect to the
defendant’s residence, including a curfew. I will impose
conditions 11, 12
and 13, each of which are prescribed conditions. Conditions 11 and 12 are not
onerous or intrusive. Condition 13
does involve a level of intrusion but is
appropriate as part of the general supervision of the defendant. I would,
however, modify
the condition so that any visit is to be between the hours of
8am and 8pm. I will not impose condition 14 which seeks a curfew. There
nothing in the evidence to suggest the defendant poses a greater danger at
night. The defendant himself is likely to have a regular
schedule without the
need to impose one on him. I would also allow the defendant to have visitors at
his address and thus will not
impose condition 15. The defendant of course may
be asked about visitors by his Enforcement Officer and is expected to answer
in accordance with condition 3. Condition 16 in relation to entering
into leases, mortgages, or hire agreements, on balance, should
not be imposed.
The defendant is unlikely to hire a facility for a nefarious purpose on his own
account. While it is possible he
may be used by another, I consider this to be
unlikely with an ESO in place, and I would err on the side of keeping the
F: Place & Travel Restrictions. Condition 17 would allow an Enforcement
Officer to restrict the defendant going to certain
places. Limiting the
defendant in this way has the potential to reduce the risk of the
defendant’s exposure to persons who
may negatively influence him. I will
impose this condition but would expect it to be utilised judiciously. I would
also impose conditions
18 and 19 requiring the defendant to remain in NSW and
restricting his access to a passport. I do not regard condition 20 as
G: Search & Seizure. These conditions are necessary and appropriate as part
of the defendant’s supervision under the
H: Addictions. These conditions are generally appropriate with the exception of
those related specifically to alcohol. There
is no suggestion the defendant has
any issue with alcohol and it is, presumably, contrary to his beliefs. I will
remove the reference
to alcohol from conditions 24 and 27, and will not impose
conditions 25 and 26.
Weapons. These conditions are appropriate and I will impose them.
J: Psychological/Psychiatric Assessment, Counselling & Medical Treatment. I
regard these conditions as important in assisting
the defendant’s
integration into the community and will impose them.
K: Employment, Volunteering & Education. Condition 36 requiring the
defendant to keep his Enforcement Officer appraised of
his employment is
appropriate as part of his supervision. The particular risks in relation to
potential workplaces and education
in the Reintegration Management Report are
not, on the evidence of the experts, particular risks in this case. I will
modify condition
37 to allow the defendant to take up work, including volunteer
work, and educational courses and require him to notify his Enforcement
“if practicable before so engaging or otherwise at his next interview with
an Enforcement Officer.”
Communication, Internet use & Electronic Devices: Conditions 38 and 42 to
44 are appropriate having regard to the nature of the
defendant’s risk. I
do not regard conditions 39 to 41 as necessary having regard to the other
conditions that I will impose
including in particular condition 38 and the
evidence of his past compliance.
Associations. This set of conditions raises the most difficult question. As
discussed above, the defendant’s risk is most pronounced
in the area of
his associations and the potential for him to be subject to negative influence.
On the other hand, the defendant feels
the restrictions of the ESO most acutely
in its impact on his ability to find connections in the community. While the
defendant’s
position may not be entirely rational, that does not affect
the conviction with which it is held. As a result, his prospects of moving
forward will, it seems, be severely diminished by the imposition of these
conditions. The dilemma is resolved in my view by the observation
made: that the defendant, on the evidence, can be expected to abide by the
conditions of his ESO. In particular, conditions
in relation to his online
activity and conditions to follow in relation to not engaging in extremist
activity provide sufficient
protection. I will not impose these conditions.
N: Identity & Appearance. Condition 50 is appropriate. According to the NSW
Police ESO Management report, condition 51 is
sought to address a concern in
relation to the defendant obtaining a false identity. The condition is more
appropriately framed as
“The defendant must not possess or attempt to
possess any form of identification in a name other than Mejid Mustapha”.
Condition 52 allowing the Enforcement Officer to photograph the defendant for
identification purposes is not unduly onerous and will
be imposed. I will not
impose condition 53 given its limiting effect, the potential for uncertainty and
the power of the Enforcement
Officer to photograph the defendant if necessary.
While the ESO Management report suggests the condition is necessary to counter
the possibility the defendant changes his appearance to avoid detection, if the
defendant is willing to do something to his appearance
for the purpose of
avoiding being detected, presumably in some unlawful activity, this proposed
condition is unlikely to be effective.
O: Extremism. These conditions are, subject to one matter, appropriate and,
indeed, central to addressing the defendant’s
risk of committing a serious
terrorism offence. The one caveat is that, in its present form, condition 55(b)
goes beyond the concern
the defendant will commit a serious terrorism offence. I
will confine the condition to the relevant risk by deleting the words “for
reasons related to concerns regarding violence or”.
ease of understanding these reasons, the conditions as sought by the plaintiff
will be set out in a Schedule to the orders with
any deleted conditions or words
struck through and any words added underlined. It is expected that the defendant
will be provided
with a clean copy of the conditions and that they will be
carefully explained to him, including as to the extent of the relaxation
conditions and the reason for that relaxation.
accordance with my view that the ESO provides an opportunity the defendant has
not previously had to be tested in the community
with a greater level of
freedom, I would not impose an ESO of the length sought by the plaintiff. In my
view, one year will provide
the defendant sufficient time to prove himself. It
is hoped that the conditions and limited duration encourage him to do so.
ESO will commence on the day it is made, that being 13 November 2025. It will
(noting that the law does not generally deal in
part days) be due to expire at
the end of 12 November 2026.
make the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to
Terrorism (High Risk
Offenders) Act 2017
(NSW) (the Act), I order that the defendant be subject
to an Extended Supervision Order for a period of one year from today.
(2) Pursuant to s 29(1) of the Act, I direct the defendant to comply with the
conditions set out in the Schedule to these orders
for the period of the
Extended Supervision Order specified in order (1).
NSW v Mustapha CONDITIONS (132 KB, pdf)
MFI 1, Vol 3, pp 120-121
Exhibit C, Joint
Statement of Agreed Facts, pp
MFI 1, Volume 5, p 1532
MFI 1, Volume 5, p 1538
MFI 1, Volume 3, p
Exhibit A, p 40
Exhibit A, p
Exhibit A, p
Exhibit A, p 40
Exhibit A, p 45
Exhibit A, p 43
MFI 1, Volume 3, p
Exhibit A, p 5
Exhibit A, p 46
Exhibit A, pp
Exhibit A, p 46
Exhibit A, p 47
Exhibit A, p
Exhibit B, p
Exhibit B, p
Exhibit B, p
Exhibit B, p
Exhibit B, p
Exhibit B, p
Exhibit B, p
Exhibit B, p
MFI 1, Vol 3, p
MFI 1, Vol 3, p 119
MFI 1, Vol 3, p 134,
MFI 1, Vol 3, p
137, par (130).
3, p 137, par (130(i)).
1, Vol 3, p 138, par (131).
MFI 1, Vol 3, p 139, par
MFI 1, Vol 3, p 143,
MFI 1, Vol 3, p
Tcpt, 3 November
2025, p 19.
Tcpt, 3 November
2025, p 24(19).
November 2025, p 24
Tcpt, 3 November
2025, p 30(40)-(47).
November 2025, p 32(2).
Tcpt, 3 November 2025, p
45(30)-(40).
November 2025, p 46(2)-(6).
MFI 1, Volume 3, p 20.
1, Volume 3, p 20.
Volume 3, p 21.
Volume 3, p 21.
Volume 3, p 21.
Volume 3, p 22.
Volume 3, p 20 [53].
Volume 3, p 20 [53].
Volume 3, p 26.
Volume 3, p 26.
Volume 3, p 31.
Volume 3, p 35 [105].
Volume 3, p 35 [105] –
MFI 1, Volume 3, p 36
MFI 1, Volume 3, p 36
MFI 1, Volume 3, p 36
MFI 1, Volume 3, p 37
MFI 1, Volume 3, p
36-37 [111].
MFI 1, Volume
3, pp 37-38.
Joint Statement of Agreed Facts at
Exhibit C, Joint
Statement of Agreed Facts at
Exhibit C, Joint
Statement of Agreed Facts at
Exhibit C, Joint
Statement of Agreed Facts at
Exhibit C, Joint
Statement of Agreed Facts at
MFI 1, Volume 2, Tab
XXII, Annexure B, p 15.
1, Volume 2, Tab XXII, Annexure B, p
MFI 1, Volume 2, Tab
XXII, Annexure B, p 16.
1, Volume 2, Tab XXII, Annexure B, p
Exhibit A, p 39
([114]-[115]).
November 2025, p
41(36)-(50).
Exhibit B, p
Exhibit B, p
Tcpt, 3 November 2025, p
MFI 1, Volume 4, pp
Tcpt, 3 November
2025, p 75(39).
Exhibit B, p
Exhibit A, p 46
Exhibit A, p 46
MFI 1, Volume 3, p 37
Exhibit A, p 46
Exhibit A, p 40
Tcpt, 4 November
2025, p 111(37).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (532 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter