URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/146.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Deputy Secretary, Local Government, under delegation from the Secretary, Department of Planning, Housing and Infrastructure v Thaler; Thaler v Deputy Secretary, Local Government, under delegation from the Secretary, Department of Planning, Housing and Infrastructure [2025] NSWCATOD 146; (29 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Deputy Secretary, Local Government, under delegation from the Secretary,
Department of Planning, Housing and Infrastructure v Thaler;
Thaler v Deputy
Secretary, Local Government, under delegation from the Secretary, Department of
Planning, Housing and Infrastructure
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 146
Hearing Date(s):
21 October 2025
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Decision Date:
29 October 2025
Occupational Division
Coleman SC ADCJ, Principal Member
(1) The relief sought in order 1 of the application of Councillor Thaler
filed on 17 October 2025 is refused.
Catchwords:
OCCUPATIONS- local government councillor- whether Tribunal has jurisdiction
to grant interlocutory injunction restraining Secretary
from exercising power to
suspend councillor for misconduct- whether, if within jurisdiction,
interlocutory injunctive relief sought
by councillor should be granted
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Local Government Act
Supreme Court Act 1970
Cases Cited:
Alexander v Cambridge Credit Corp Ltd
(1985) 2 NSWLR 685
Bromfield (1957) State Reports (NSW) 24
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v
Lenah Game Meats Pty Limited
(2001) 208 CLR 119
[2001] HCA 63
Beacham Group
Ltd v Bristol Laboratories Pty Ltd
(1968) 118 CLR 618
Bridgetown/Greenbushes Friends of the Forest Inc v Department of
Conservation and Land Management
(1997) 18 WAR 102
Deputy Secretary, Local
Government, under delegation from the Secretary, Department of Planning, Housing
and Infrastructure v Thaler
[2025] NSWCATOD 88
Deputy Secretary, Local
Government , under delegation from the Secretary, Department of Planning,
Housing and Infrastructure v Thaler
[2025] NSWCATOD 142
Howes v Gosford Shire
(1962) NSWR 58
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v
[2025] HCA 5
99 ALJR 486
Moore v Inglis
(1979) 9 ALR 509
Ltd v Strong (No 2)
[2011] NSWCA 72
(2011) 80 NSWLR 445
Principal judgment
2025/00303280
Deputy Secretary, Local Government, under delegation from
the Secretary, Department of Planning, Housing and Infrastructure
(Applicant)
Councillor Andrew Thaler
(Respondent)
2025/00294190
Councillor Andrew Thaler
(Applicant)
Deputy Secretary, Local Government, under delegation from the
Secretary, Department of Planning, Housing and Infrastructure (Respondent)
Representation:
2025/00303280
A Searle (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Matthews (Depatment of Planning, Housing and Infrastructure) (Applicant)
Law (Respondent)
2025/00294190
(Applicant)
Solicitors:
XD Law (Applicant)
J Matthews (Depatment of
Planning, Housing and Infrastructure) (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00303280
2025/00294190
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
application filed 17 October 2025 Councillor Andrew Thaler (
sought orders against the Secretary/Delegate, Office of Local Government,
Department of DPHI (
the Secretary
) in the following
1 Pursuant to
sections 36(1)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), an urgent interlocutory
order restraining the Secretary or her delegate(s) from determining or taking
any further action in
relation to Councillor Thaler on the basis of the
Departmental report dated October 2025 until the final determination of the
in matters 2025/00294190 (the appeal proceedings), 2025/00239261 (the PIO
proceedings) and 2025/00303280 (the Question of Law proceedings);
2 An order dismissing matter 2025/00239261 (the PIO proceedings).
2A Alternatively, an order permanently staying the proceeding.
3 An order setting aside the disciplinary action determined
by the delegate of the secretary, Mr Whitworth, on 28 July 2025 and
from 4 August 2025 until 4 November 2025;
4 An order that the secretary pay the applicant’s
costs, pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
in the appeal proceedings, the PIO proceedings and the Question of Law
proceedings.”
Secretary opposed the granting of any of the relief sought by Cr Thaler.
21 October 2025 the Tribunal heard Cr Thaler’s application. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal reserved its decision
but indicated, for
reasons which will become apparent, that, whilst the determination of orders 2
and 3 sought by Cr Thaler raised
issues of complexity which required close
consideration, the Tribunal accepted the urgency of the determination of Cr
application for interlocutory injunctive relief (order 1). These
reasons are concerned only with that issue. The remaining issues
will be dealt
with in a subsequent decision. During the course of the hearing on 21 October
2025, by reason of the decision of the
Acting President, Judge Seiden SC
Deputy Secretary, Local Government under delegation the Secretary,
Department of Planning, Housing and Infrastructure v Thaler
[2025] NSWCATOD
, as both parties agreed, nothing remained to be considered with respect to
the Question of Law proceedings previously initiated by
background to the issue the subject of the present decision can be briefly, and
uncontroversially, recorded.
13 May 2025, in the exercise of powers conferred by the
Local Government
the Secretary suspended Cr Thaler from civic office for a period of
three months for misconduct. Cr Thaler appealed that decision
to the Tribunal.
His appeal was dismissed on 10 July 2025 (
Secretary, Local Government, under
delegation from the Secretary, Department of Planning Housing and Infrastructure
[2025] NSWCATOD 88).
28 July 2025, in reliance upon a report provided to the Secretary in draft form
on 29 May 2025 the Secretary found that the conduct
of Cr Thaler considered in
the report of 10 July 2025 constituted misconduct warranting suspension from
civic office. On 1 August
2025 Cr Thaler appealed against the suspension order
imposed by the Secretary, which commenced on 5 August 2025. The appeal has yet
to be heard. On 20 August 2025 the Tribunal refused to stay the suspension
order. The suspension order is due to expire on 4 November
18 September 2025 the Secretary provided to Cr Thaler a further draft
departmental report, and invited him to make submissions
in response to the
report within 10 days. On 7 October 2025, the Secretary having agreed to an
extension until that date, Cr Thaler
provided his submission in response to the
8 October 2025, the Acting Secretary informed Cr Thaler in writing that, in
reliance upon the final departmental report, she was
satisfied that Cr Thaler
had engaged in misconduct as defined in
Local Government
particulars of which were provided. The Undersecretary’s letter
informed Cr Thaler of the intention to take disciplinary action
and (g) of the
Local Government Act
by directing him to
apologise for misconduct in the manner specified in the order and suspending Cr
Thaler from civic office for
a period of three months. The
Undersecretary’s further invited Cr Thaler to make any submission in
response to the proposed
disciplinary action by 10.00 a.m. on 23 October
10 October 2025, Cr Thaler’s solicitor wrote to the Secretary requesting
that “you refrain from taking any proposed
disciplinary action”
against Mr Thaler in respect of the October report, “particularly,
suspending him from civic office,
until Mr Thaler’s appeal proceedings
pertaining to the second suspension matter are determined to finality in the
14 October 2025 the Secretary responded to Cr Thaler’s solicitor’s
request, advising that the Secretary was satisfied
that the action proposed in
relation to the matters outlined in the departmental report dated October 2025
was lawful and in accordance
with the requirements of the
Local Government
for reasons set out in the letter, which included that, if Cr Thaler is
successful in the second suspension appeal he may not be
disqualified from
holding civic office pursuant to
Local Government Act
Secretary confirmed her intention to make the proposed supervisory order. It is
not in issue that, after 30 October 2025, in
the absence of the Tribunal
restraining the Secretary from doing so, the proposed disciplinary action is
likely to be taken.
is not in issue that, if a further suspension order is made, Cr Thaler will have
been subject to three orders for suspension from
civic office for misconduct
within a five year period, thereby enlivening the operation of
Local Government Act
which relevantly provides that a person is
disqualified from holding civic
(a) an order for suspension from civic
office for misconduct is made (after the commencement of this subsection)
against a person
under this Act by the Departmental Chief Executive or the Civil
and Administrative Tribunal on a referral from the Departmental Chief
(b) it is the third or subsequent such
order that has been made against the person (including orders made before the
commencement
of this subsection),
the person is disqualified from holding civic office for
five years after the date the order takes effect.”
The Submissions of the Parties
Councillor Thaler’s Submissions
his written and oral submissions, Counsel for Cr Thaler succinctly articulated
the legal and factual basis of Cr Thaler’s
application for interlocutory
injunctive relief the case for the injunctive relief. It was submitted that,
unless the Secretary gave
an undertaking not to proceed on the disciplinary
process associated with the fourth report, or was otherwise restrained from
so, it is likely that Cr Thaler will be suspended from public office for a
third time, thereby triggering the operation of
Local Government
. The Tribunal accepts that this would occur prior to the appeal from Cr
Thaler’s second suspension and any further appeal processes
follow being determined.
regard to the Secretary’s letter of 14 October 2025 it is likely that the
Secretary will proceed with the disciplinary
process indicated on the 8th and
confirmed on 14th October 2025. The Secretary has not proffered an undertaking
not to proceed with
the foreshadowed disciplinary process. It is common ground
that, if the Secretary does so, that will be the third suspension from
office of Cr Thaler within the period referred to in
Government Act
. If the Secretary proceeds with the foreshadowed disciplinary
process on or after 30 October 2025, that will occur prior to the determination
of the balance of the present application and, depending upon its outcome, Cr
Thaler’s appeal from that decision. It will also
occur before the
determination of Cr Thaler’s appeal against the second suspension order,
and any subsequent appeal processes,
whether instigated by Cr Thaler or the
Secretary, being determined.
was submitted that if Cr Thaler is disqualified from civic office before the
appeal against the second suspension order is finalised,
success on appeal, and
success in the PIO proceedings will be rendered inutile, and the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal “frustrated”.
In oral submissions Counsel for Cr Thaler
agreed that, in substance it was asserted that refusal of the injunctive relief
by Cr Thaler would render nugatory the fruits of success in the second
suspension appeal and in the PIO proceedings.
was submitted, accurately at the time, that, if Cr Thaler had one or more of the
proposed, or original questions of law determined
in his favour, and/or
succeeded in his appeal against the second suspension order, it was
“unclear what substantive remedy,
if any, would be available to him or to
remedy the overturning of his democratic election”. As recorded earlier,
Judge Seiden’s
decision of 21 October 2025 rejecting Cr Thaler’s
application to refer questions of law to the Supreme Court pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
removes any need for consideration of that submission.
the submissions on behalf of the Secretary make clear, the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal to grant the injunctive relief sought by
Cr Thaler is disputed. In his
written and oral submissions, Cr Thaler’s Counsel identified the
relief was sought. The “guiding
principle” articulated in s 36 of the CAT Act was relied upon in that
context. With respect
to Counsel’s submissions, as its terms make clear, s
36 of the CAT Act does not assist Cr Thaler in relation to the jurisdiction
the Tribunal to grant the injunctive relief sought by him.
38(1) of the CAT Act, upon which Cr Thaler also relied, provides that “the
Tribunal may determine its own procedure
in relation to any matter for which
this Act or the procedural rules do not otherwise make provision” and
provides (38(2))
that the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence and is
to proceed (38(4)) with as little formality as the circumstances of
permit and according to “equity, good conscience and the substantial
merits of the case without regard to technicalities
or legal terms”. Cr
Thaler relied on the definition of “interlocutory decision” in s 4
of the CAT Act which (s
4(a)) includes “the granting of a stay or
adjournment”. Section 4 of the CAT Act empowers the Tribunal to do certain
things when its jurisdiction is enlivened. Whether s 4 and/or s 38 invest the
Tribunal with jurisdiction is less apparent.
Thaler submitted that the High Court has “recognised as a general
principle that it is prima facie vexatious and oppressive
to commence a second
or subsequent action if an action is already pending with respect to the matter
Moore v Inglis
(1979) 9 ALR 509)
”. That was submitted to
“at least by analogy” apply to “instigating this third and
further disciplinary action”
against Cr Thaler which was submitted to
constitute “not only doubling up on the facts relied upon but also
bypassing the orderly
conduct of the matters by the Tribunal”. Although
requiring consideration in the determination of the balance of Cr Thaler’s
application, the “pending matter” of relevance for present purposes
is the appeal against the second suspension order.
A further suspension order
would, for present purposes, be a new “matter”.
number of submissions with respect to asserted abuse of process, although
relevant to the determination of the remaining issues
raised in Cr
Thaler’s application of 17 October 2025, do not assume significance for
present purposes.
oral submissions, by reference to the submissions of the Secretary in reliance
Local Government Act
of the Act,
Counsel for Cr Thaler submitted that, if the Secretary was not restrained from
proceeding with the proposed disciplinary
orders, Cr Thaler’s
disqualification from office pursuant to
would be likely to lead to a
by-election resulting in another councillor being appointed to replace Cr
Thaler. It was submitted that,
in those circumstances, whether that appointment
would be nullified or set aside if Cr Thaler successfully challenged his second
suspension, or the likely third suspension, was unclear and provided further
support for granting the interlocutory relief sought
by him. Although there is
no evidence to support that contention, the Tribunal accepts that, in the
absence of a constraint on doing
so, if Cr Thaler is suspended for a third time,
thereby triggering his disqualification from holding civic office, there would
appear to be any impediment to the holding of a by-election. The Tribunal
accepts that, if that occurred, what would happen if Cr
Thaler ceased to be
disqualified is less than clear.
The Submissions of the
for the Secretary submitted that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction to grant the
interlocutory injunctive relief sought by Cr
Thaler. It was further submitted
that, if Cr Thaler was again suspended by the Secretary, any automatic
disqualification “can
and should be addressed” at that time by an
application for a stay under
Local Government Act
Secretary conceded that, if suspended for a third time prior to the resolution
of the appeal proceeding,
Local Government Act
to automatically disqualify him from civic office for five years. It was
submitted that Cr Thaler’s contention that
such disqualification would
render the proceedings inutile and that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal would
be frustrated was incorrect.
Secretary submitted that if, as is likely, a third suspension order is made, Cr
Thaler could appeal against such suspension order
to the Tribunal, and seek a
stay of the order which, if granted, would operate in accordance with
, which provides that:
Tribunal stays a decision for suspension of a councillor for misconduct that has
resulted or will result in disqualification
from civic office under
, the disqualification ceases to have effect or does not have that effect
(as the case requires) until such time as the appeal is
finally determined or
withdrawn.”
was submitted in the alternative that if Cr Thaler’s stay application of
the third suspension order was refused, but he was
ultimately successful in
appealing against that order, or succeeded with his pending appeal against the
second suspension order,
s 275(1A)(g)
would no longer operate.
Secretary also relied on the provisions of
which provides
“If the Tribunal sets aside a decision to suspend a
councillor, any fee or other remuneration, or expenses, withheld under the
suspension is payable to the councillor and any disqualification that would have
resulted from suspension ceases to have effect.”
for the Secretary fairly conceded that the remedy provided by
from the date of the order setting aside a suspension order which has not been
stayed. In those circumstances, as submitted
on behalf of Cr Thaler, whether
success with his appeal against the second and/or third suspension order(s)
would automatically,
or necessarily result in his return to office is unclear.
was accordingly submitted by the Secretary that, by the provisions identified
Local Government Act
“contains a mechanism” to
address either situation in which Cr Thaler may find himself, and that there is
accordingly
no need to consider whether the Tribunal “has an implied power
to grant injunctive style relief”. The Secretary submitted
Tribunal had no such power. In the absence of authority supporting a finding
that the Tribunal has implied or incidental
powers, the Tribunal would not make
that finding.
Secretary submitted that, for present purposes, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
was confined to its “external appeal jurisdiction
over a decision ... made
by an external decision maker” pursuant to s 31 of the CAT Act and a
“general jurisdiction over
a matter” pursuant to s 29(2)(a) of the
CAT Act. It was submitted that a “future decision which has not yet been
is neither a decision, nor part of a matter presently before the
Tribunal”. It was submitted that, until there were
“proceedings”
concerning a third suspension order against Cr Thaler,
most obviously by way of appeal, the Tribunal lacked the “general”
Thaler’s reliance on the power of the Tribunal to grant a stay or
adjournment was submitted to be misconceived. The Secretary
submitted that, in
substance, Cr Thaler was not seeking a stay but rather an interlocutory
injunction to restrain the Secretary from
exercising a legal right. That was
asserted to involve restraining the Secretary from doing something which Cr
Thaler has no right
to prevent the Secretary from doing (
Broadcasting Corporation v Lenah Game Meats Pty Limited
(2001) 208 CLR 119
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v MZAPC
[2025] HCA 5
99 ALJR 486).
was submitted that nothing in the
Local Government Act
or the CAT Act
“suggests the Tribunal has power to grant relief from future inchoate
decisions, least of all in an external
appeal proceeding”. It was further
submitted, in reliance upon the decision in
that Cr Thaler could
not demonstrate a prima facie case for final relief in the Tribunal against a
decision which the Secretary has
not yet made, and that Cr Thaler could not
successfully contend that it was necessary to grant the injunctive relief in
avoid the fruits of a successful appeal(s) being rendered nugatory,
preserve the integrity of the Tribunal’s proceedings or
protect its own
Relevant Legislative Provisions
3 of the CAT Act articulates the objects of the Act, and provides (3(a)) for the
establishment of an independent Tribunal
which is enabled
(i) to make decisions as the primary
decision maker in relation to certain matters, and
(ii) to review decisions made by certain persons and bodies,
(iii) to determine appeals against decisions made by certain
persons and bodies, and
(iv) to exercise such other functions as are conferred or
imposed on it.
been created by statute, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is defined by that
statute. Section 28 of the CAT Act is concerned
with the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal “generally” and provides (s 28(1)) that the Tribunal has
“such jurisdiction
and functions as may be conferred or imposed on it by
or under this Act or under any other legislation”. Section 28(2)
the “kinds of jurisdiction” which the Tribunal has. Most
relevantly for present purposes, s 28(2)(c) invests the Tribunal
with appellate
provides that external appeal jurisdiction
is conferred by the legislation
governing the decisions which can enliven the Tribunal’s external appeal
Cr Thaler’s appeal against his second suspension
order is an external appeal pursuant to the
Local Government Act
and the CAT
29 of the CAT Act provides that the Tribunal has:
(a) legislation (other than this Act or the procedural
rules) enables the Tribunal to make decisions or exercise other functions,
whether on application or of its own motion, of a kind specified by the
legislation in respect of that matter, and
(b) the matter does not otherwise fall within the
administrative review jurisdiction appeal jurisdiction or enforcement
of the Tribunal.
29(2) provides that the Tribunal has jurisdiction in proceedings for the
exercise of its general jurisdiction (a) to make
“ancillary or
interlocutory decisions of the Tribunal in the proceedings”. It is
apparent that jurisdiction pursuant
to s 29(2)(a) is dependent on there being
existing proceedings, and that, unless enlivened pursuant to s 29(2)(b), which
has sensibly
not been relied on, a “stand alone” application for
ancillary or interlocutory relief cannot enliven the Tribunal’s
is not in contest that, if the Tribunal is exercising jurisdiction pursuant to s
28 of the CAT Act, it is empowered to grant a
stay of, relevantly for present
purposes, the orders which are the subject of the proceedings before the
Tribunal, which in the present
circumstances, are the external appeal
proceedings pursuant to s 28(2)(c) of the CAT Act. Cr Thaler has unsuccessfully
stay the second suspension order in those proceedings.
Unsurprisingly,
no provision of the CAT Act invests the Tribunal with jurisdiction under the
Local Government Act
. As the terms of
envisage, such jurisdiction
and functions as the Tribunal may have with respect to matters arising under the
Local Government Act
are the jurisdiction and functions which are
“conferred or imposed on it” by the
Local Government Act
the risk of oversimplification, the CAT Act is concerned with how the Tribunal
exercises jurisdiction, rather than whether it
has jurisdiction with respect to
any particular matter or statute.
36 and 38 of the CAT Act, on which Cr Thaler relied, find expression in Part 4
of the Act, which is concerned with “practice
and procedure”. As
their terms confirm, the provisions of Part 4 prescribe how the Tribunal
exercises jurisdiction, but are
not directed to the existence of
other provisions of the
Local Government Act
require consideration in the
context of the remaining orders sought by Cr Thaler, only some provisions
require consideration for
present purposes.
Local Government Act
is concerned with disciplinary action
for misconduct, and relevantly provides
(s 440I(2)(g))
that the Departmental
Chief Executive may suspend a councillor who has engaged in misconduct for a
period not exceeding 3 months.
Pursuant to
, a councillor who is thus
suspended has a right of appeal to the Tribunal. If Cr Thaler is again
suspended, that would be pursuant
of the Act, and would be appellable
purusuant to
Local Government Act
invests the Tribunal with
such time as the Tribunal
determines an appeal against a suspension order.
Section 440L(3A)
provides that, if the Tribunal stays a suspension order that
has resulted or will result in disqualification from civic office under
the disqualification ceases to have effect or does not take effect (as
the case requires) until such time as the appeal is finally
determined or
withdrawn”.
Local Government Act
provides that, if the tribunal sets
aside a decision to suspend a councillor, inter alia, “any
disqualification that resulted
from the suspension ceases to have effect”.
Without needing to express a concluded view in this decision, until
pursuant to the provision, the suspension would appear to
Consideration
the event that, as appears likely, Cr Thaler is suspended for a third time, and
appeals against that suspension, he could undoubtedly
seek a stay pending the
determination of the appeal, but, nothing to which the Tribunal has been
referred establishes the jurisdiction
to grant injunctive relief to restrain the
Secretary from exercising rights or powers pursuant to the
Local Government
. As it is the
Local Government Act
which invests the Tribunal
with jurisdiction under that Act, it would be necessary to identify a provision
of that Act which confers
seeks. Cr Thaler has not identified such a provision.
reference to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to grant relief in the
present circumstances suggests that the Tribunal’s
lack of jurisdiction
does not necessarily mean that Cr Thaler is without a forum in which he might
pursue the relief which he currently
Supreme Court
(NSW) provides that the Court “shall have all jurisdiction
which may be necessary for the administration of justice in New
Section 66(4)
Supreme Court Act
provides that
“the Court may at any stage of proceedings, on terms, grant an
interlocutory injunction in any case in which
it appears to the Court to be just
or convenient to do so”.
learned authors of
suggest, at page 1032 that it is “not
uncommon for a person to obtain an injunction from the Supreme Court to restrain
a defendant
from wrongfully removing them from office”. In
(1957) State Reports (NSW) 24, Hardie J held that a member of a
shire or municipal council has a statutory right to attend meetings
council, and that the president or mayor of such council was under a statutory
duty to permit a member to so attend unless
there had been a valid and effective
determination to the contrary pursuant to the provisions of s 87(2)(f) of the
Local Government Act
. It was thus held that the Supreme Court in
equity had jurisdiction to grant an injunction to prevent the wrongful exclusion
member of such a council from meetings of that council. The purported
exclusion of the member from meetings of the council in that
case was in
reliance upon remarks made by the council member which he repeatedly refused to
withdraw. The council member sought injunctive
relief to restrain the mayor from
excluding or removing him from meetings of the council unless he apologised
without reservation
for the alleged acts of disorder.
Howes v Gosford Shire Council
(1962) NSWR 58
Jacobs J held that, in order
to attract the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in equity a plaintiff required
a “special interest
relating to the subject of the claim”. His
Honour held that a shire clerk, although a servant of the council and governed
protected by statutory provisions in regard to his service had a
“special interest” in his right to continue in the service.
circumstances, the employee was held to have standing to seek injunctive relief.
His Honour observed that the existence
of a possible “concurrent
right” in the Industrial Commission was not sufficient to deprive the
Court in Equity of jurisdiction
to entertain the plaintiff’s application
for injunctive relief.
the Tribunal has jurisdiction to grant the interlocutory injunctive relief
sought by Cr Thaler, it would not exercise the discretion
notwithstanding that the matters relied on in support of the challenges which
remain to be decided raise serious issues
for determination. The reasons why the
Tribunal would decline to grant the relief sought by Cr Thaler can be shortly
view of the effect of the provisions of the
Local Government Act
identified earlier in these reasons, the Tribunal does not find that refusal of
the injunctive relief sought by Cr Thaler would be
likely to visit an
irreparable injustice upon him, or be likely to render nugatory the fruits of
success with his present appeal,
or the appeal which he would be likely to lodge
against a third suspension imposed upon him. It is not in doubt that, if Cr
is further suspended, he has a right to appeal against that suspension
and, having lodged an appeal, the Tribunal has jurisdiction
to entertain, and if
deemed appropriate, grant a stay of the suspension pending the determination of
his appeal.
equity, an interlocutory injunction will only be granted when there is an
underlying cause of action to be tried, its purpose being
to preserve the
subject matter of the dispute, and the status quo, with the least injury to all
parties, until the hearing of the
substantive dispute (
Broadcasting Commission v Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd
(2001) 208 CLR 199
[2001] HCA 63).
Unless and until Cr Thaler is again suspended, and appeals
against such suspension, there is no underlying claim which could be preserved,
or lost if not preserved. Regardless of the test to be applied, in the present
circumstances, there having been no suspension, and
thus nothing against which
to appeal, Cr Thaler cannot demonstrate that he has a prima facie case
Beacham Group Ltd v Bristol Laboratories Pty Ltd
(1968) 118 CLR 618
[1968] HCA 1)
, or that here is a serious question to be tried
Bridgetown/Greenbushes Friends of the Forest Inc v Department of
Conservation and Land Management
(1997) 18 WAR 102
; LGERA 436). Unless and
until Cr Thaler is again suspended, there is no “subject matter”
which could be preserved or
the actual and possible implications for him of a third suspension order not
being stayed, it is improbable that the Tribunal
would not facilitate an urgent
hearing of any stay application which Cr Thaler may make if he appealed against
such an order. The
principles governing stay applications are not in doubt (see
Alexander v Cambridge Credit Corp Ltd
[1985] 2 NSWLR 685
at [694]). The
observations of Campbell JA in
Woolworths Ltd v Strong (No. 2)
[2011] NSWCA 72
with respect to risk of irreparable loss or damage would,
particularly having regard to the submissions of Cr Thaler’s Counsel
reference to s 440L(6) in the present application, be likely to assume
prominence in the determination of any stay
application.
Tribunal is not persuaded that it has jurisdiction to grant the injunctive
relief sought by Cr Thaler and that, if it does, the
exercised to grant the relief which Cr Thaler
(1) The relief sought in order 1 of the application of Councillor Thaler
filed on 17 October 2025 is refused.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (278 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter