URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1328.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Qantas Airways Limited v Persons Unknown (No 2) [2025] NSWSC 1328 (10 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Qantas Airways Limited v Persons Unknown (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1328
Hearing Date(s):
2 October 2025
Date of Orders:
2 October 2025
Decision Date:
10 November 2025
Default judgment entered; suppression and non-publication orders made
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE — Hearings — Suppression and non-publication
— Names of law firm, lawyers and counsel
Legislation Cited:
Court Suppression and Non-publication Orders Act 2010
Procedure Act 2011
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Cases Cited:
“A” bht “S” v State of NSW
[2011] NSWDC 54
(on behalf of the Asbestos Victims Support Groups Forum UK) v Cape Intermediate
Holdings Ltd
[2019] UKSC 38
[2020] AC 629
AB (A Pseudonym) v R (No 3)
[2019] NSWCCA
Australian Football League v The Age Company Ltd
[2006] VSC 308
(2006) 15 VR 419
Commissioner of Victims Rights
[2020] NSWCA 136
Fairfax Digital Australia and
New Zealand Pty Ltd v Ibrahim
[2012] NSWCCA 125
(2012) 83 NSWLR 52
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers v
Persons Unknown
[2024] NSWSC 71
(2024) 113 NSWLR 418
[2005] NSWCCA 245
(2005) 64 NSWLR 335
Perish; R v Lawton; R v Perish
[2011] NSWSC 1102
Rinehart v Welker
State of New South Wales v Plaintiff A
[2012] NSWCA 248
Opportunities Pty Ltd atf The Clear Runway Trust v Susan Quinn Pty Ltd atf The
Susan Amelia Quinn Trust
[2025] NSWSC 231
Tarrant v The King
[2024] NZCA
Tickle and Summers v BBC, PA
[2025] EWCA Civ 42
The University of
Notre Dame Australia v Persons Unknown
[2025] NSWSC 550
[2011] NSWSC 1094
YSA (anonymity of barristers)
[2023] UKUT
Zhang v The Age Company Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTCA 10
Texts Cited:
T Epati, ‘Weathering the Storm – Should a Novel Case to
Suppress the Identities of Lawyers in a High-Profile Case be that
(2025) 99 ALJ 449
Principal judgment
Qantas Airways Limited (Plaintiff)
Persons Unknown
(Defendants)
Representation:
Counsel: Name suppressed (Plaintiff)
Solicitors: Name suppressed
(Plaintiff)
File Number(s):
2025/272678
(my emphasis) the internet attribution is to be trusted, an American cyber
security expert named Chris Painter is said to have observed
“cybersecurity is a continuous cycle of protection, detection, response,
and recovery.” This judgment concerns what
is part of the response and
recovery undertaken by the plaintiff,
Airways Limited, to a now
widely reported cybersecurity breach.
2 October 2025, the Court made final
in this matter on the
application of Qantas, which was represented by
. As has been the
case throughout these proceedings, there was no appearance for the defendants,
to whom I refer as the
threat actors
orders, in their slightly redacted form, appear at the end of these reasons. It
is necessary, but certainly not encouraging,
to observe that this matter may be
added to the growing list of applications to the Court by corporations or
institutions that have
been the victim of a cyber-attack, the exfiltration of
confidential data and an extortion attempt by the threat actors: see, for
HWL Ebsworth
Lawyers v Persons Unknown
[2024] NSWSC 71
The University of
Australia v Persons
[2025] NSWSC 550.
by the detailed written and oral submissions of counsel, at the conclusion of
the hearing on 2 October 2025, the Court was
satisfied that the orders should be
made. These reasons reflect acceptance of, and are based upon, those
submissions, which the Court
acknowledges with gratitude.
as the final injunction in order 1 is concerned, it is sufficient for me record
that the Court was satisfied on the evidence
that the necessary jurisdictional
and other prerequisites were satisfied for the making of that order. That such
an order could be
made was determined in
HWL Ebsworth.
Similarly, subject
to the specific matter which is dealt with in these reasons, the suppression and
non-publication orders which
the Court has made are broadly similar to those
made in previous matters and the Court is satisfied they are justified on the
in this case.
at the time I made the orders, I indicated that I would deliver reasons in
relation to the more novel issue raised by the
application, being for a
six-month non-publication order in relation to the identity of the law firm,
solicitors and counsel acting
for Qantas in this matter. That is the subject of
these reasons.
summary, in my respectful opinion the Court, as far as it can properly conclude
it is necessary to do so, should not make it any
easier for threat actors
engaged in illegal activity to disrupt innocent people’s lives, including
those who are the professional
advisers to the victims of that illegal activity.
Having regard to the totality of the expert evidence relied upon by Qantas, the
Court is satisfied that “in the heat of the battle” and for a short
time thereafter (given that the perpetrators will
move on to other wrongdoing),
there is a sufficiently real risk of harassment or retaliation for retribution
and possibly extortion
against solicitors and counsel acting for a party such as
Qantas that it is necessary (and not just convenient or desirable) to grant
limited relief under the
Court Suppression and Non-publication Orders Act
it may be assumed that even an offshore threat actor could, with determination,
ascertain the identity of those persons, the
Court accepts counsel’s
argument that publication of their identities is, in counsel’s words,
“painting a target”
on the backs of those persons. That risk should
be ameliorated where, as in this case, proper weight can be given to the
principle of open justice by, first, only a non-publication order
being made and, second, the order being limited to the time the
extortion threat
is ongoing and a short period thereafter.
should also record that at each interlocutory step of these proceedings where
suppression and non-publication orders have been made,
the Court, with the
assistance of Qantas, has taken steps to ensure that if the media (or any other
interested person) wished to
appear as contradictor in relation to any of the
orders being sought, they would have a proper opportunity to do so. No one took
up that opportunity, including for the final hearing on 2 October
The final suppression and non-publication orders
matter came before me on 12 September 2025 for the making of final orders. At
that time, the Court was provided with a set of
all the materials which were
proposed to be subject to suppression and non-publication orders. Properly and
sensibly, it was accepted
by Qantas that a different regime would be appropriate
in relation to different types of information. The different categories were
identified by colour coding in the materials provided to the Court.
the course of that hearing, I expressed to counsel my provisional view that, in
some respects, an over generous view seemed to
have been taken as to what should
be the subject of suppression or non-publication orders. I did not make that
observation critically
or to suggest that an irrational or improper approach had
been taken. Given my observations, counsel suggested that the most efficient
course would be for Qantas to reconsider its application in the light of my
tentative observations, and to revisit what was proposed
to be the subject of
suppression or non-publication orders by taking a more confined and focused
approach. That is what occurred.
ultimately contended for by Qantas, the categories of information to be the
subject of suppression or non-publication orders were
(1) “Suppression Material” (the subject of orders 2 and 3 in the
orders) was highlighted in red to be the subject of
a five-year suppression
order. In my respectful opinion, this category was uncontroversial. It included
the most sensitive information
such as extracts of the stolen information,
disclosures about specific technical features of Qantas’ cybersecurity
and material that risked educating the threat actors and others about
the value and nature of the data, including the source of vulnerability
Qantas’ system exploited by the threat actor to exfiltrate the
confidential information.
(2) “Type A” (Yellow) Non-Publication Material is referred to in
order 5 of the orders. Again, in my respectful opinion,
this category was not
controversial. It comprised material of a similar character to the Suppression
Material, but of a more transient
or low-level nature. That different character
was reflected in the making of only a non-publication order, such that it might
accessible to anyone who inspected the redacted court file, and for one year
(3) “Type B” (Blue) Non-Publication Material is referred to in order
6 of the orders. This sought a one-year non-publication
order in relation to the
identity of a particular deponent employed by Qantas which, again, I was of the
view was not contentious
given the sensitive and senior nature of the
individual’s position and the evidence that they had given. The Court
that person was likely to have a longer period of engagement with the
incident than Qantas’ lawyers, for whom a short period
of non-publications
was sought. The evidence demonstrated a real possibility of retribution against
that person by the threat actor.
six month non-publication order was sought in relation to the identity of the
law firm, lawyers and counsel acting for Qantas (which
information would again
nevertheless be available by inspection of the Court file). It is to this aspect
to which I will now turn.
The evidence
applications for suppression or non-publication, save in cases where judicial
notice may be taken, evidence is required as to why
the order should be made and
for the period sought. In this case, Qantas relied on the report of an
international
The expert, who had impressive academic
qualifications in computing and cybersecurity, leads a company which specialises
in advising
and assisting victims of cyber-attacks. The expert had been involved
in assisting victims of over 1,000 such incidents, including
governments,
schools, hospitals and critical infrastructure. The Court has no doubt that the
expert was well qualified to give their
evidence and accepts that evidence.
expert addressed the risks and concerns arising from the disclosure of
identities and personal information
of individuals involved in responding
to the data breach. It was considered that notification to the threat actor of
names of the
people at Qantas and their instructed firms in relation to the
injunctive proceedings would escalate the situation, possibly leading
additional harassment, harm or other damage. Such action would be motivated by
retaliation, notoriety, intelligence gathering
and financial gain. The expert
outlined the key actions of concern, namely:
(1) Phone and online harassment: Threatening phone calls to the individuals
listed in the injunctive proceedings is a common tactic
for threat actors. This
may also include messages by text, email or other means;
(2) Online retaliation: Another common tactic is called
involves the use of a carriage service to make available, publish or otherwise
distribute information about the individual that
enables the individual to be
identified, contacted or located, in a menacing or harassing way;
(3) Swatting: The expert noted that while direct physical harm is unlikely due
to the probable geographic distance from the threat
actor, there is a risk of
. This is described in the April 2025 advisory from the United
States Federal Bureau of Investigation as:
“making hoax calls or reports to emergency services, typically feigning an
immediate threat to life. Swatting is intended to
draw a large response from
SWAT teams or other law enforcement resources to an unsuspecting victim’s
location, causing chaos
and the potential for injury or violence... It is a
serious crime that can have deadly consequences due to confusion on the part
victims and responding officials”.
The expert stated swatting has been known to occur in Australia; and
(4) Other damages: While it can be difficult to forecast other damages that
may occur, the expert highlighted that threat actors are
increasingly
cooperating, coordinating and sharing data with organised crime syndicates and
nation-state actors.
expert expressed the view that in relation to firms and individuals assisting
Qantas, the risks should be taken seriously due
to the threat actors clearly
demonstrating malicious intent through both direct and indirect threats towards
Qantas. The expert’s
evidence was that, in some instances, other
cybercriminal groups have demonstrated a willingness to re-extort victims using
leaked by the original attacker.
to the affiliates of this threat actor having an established history of sharing
victim information to increase pressure and incite
attacks by others, the expert
considered the risk of further harassment of Qantas and its instructed firms
(see [15(1)] above) to
have a high probability of occurring. High probability
was defined as between 49% and 75%. The expert considered the risk of doxing
direct physical harm to be possible, despite not being personally aware of this
threat actor engaging in such actions. Possible
was defined as between 1% and
24% but within the realm of theoretically possible based on the available
information and assumptions.
to individuals, the expert stated that threat actors have been observed to
engage in harassment and doxing of individual professionals
who were identified
as assisting victims. The expert considered the risk of further harassment by
the threat actor of those involved
in assisting Qantas to be a possibility, as
was the risk of doxing and direct physical harm. Possible was again defined as
1% and 24%.
expert stated that when communicating with threat actors, the expert’s
firm adhered to strict rules of engagement which
included never identifying or
“shining a spotlight” on an individual or firm, as it may provoke a
cyberattack leading
to extortion, blackmail or damage to
reputation.
Suppression or non-publication of lawyers’
The legislation
relevant legislation is the Act. The power relied upon to make the orders sought
is set out in
Power to make orders
A court may, by making a suppression order or non-publication order on grounds
permitted by this Act, prohibit or restrict the publication
or other disclosure
(a) information tending to reveal the identity of or otherwise concerning any
party to or witness in proceedings before the court
or any person who is related
to or otherwise associated with any party to or witness in proceedings before
the court, or
(b) information that comprises evidence, or information about evidence, given in
proceedings before the court.
considering whether to exercise the powers granted under the Act, two sections
are relevant:
6 Safeguarding public interest in open justice
In deciding whether to make a suppression order or non-publication order, a
court must take into account that a primary objective
of the administration of
justice is to safeguard the public interest in open justice.
8 Grounds for making an order
(1) A court may make a suppression order or non-publication order on one or more
of the following grounds—
(a) the order is necessary to prevent prejudice to the proper administration of
(b) the order is necessary to prevent prejudice to the interests of the
Commonwealth or a State or Territory in relation to national
or international
(c) the order is necessary to protect the safety of any person,
(d) the order is necessary to avoid causing undue distress or embarrassment to a
party to or witness in criminal proceedings involving
an offence of a sexual
nature (including sexual touching or a sexual act within the meaning of Division
Crimes Act 1900
(e) it is otherwise necessary in the public interest for the order to be made
and that public interest significantly outweighs the
public interest in open
(2) A suppression order or non-publication order must specify the ground or
grounds on which the order is made.
(3) Despite subsection (1) (d), a court may make a suppression order or
non-publication order on the grounds that the order is necessary
causing undue distress or embarrassment to a defendant in criminal proceedings
involving an offence of a sexual nature only
if there are exceptional
circumstances.
outlines the procedure to be followed:
Procedure for making an order
(1) A court may make a suppression order or non-publication order on its own
initiative or on the application of—
(a) a party to the proceedings concerned, or
(b) any other person considered by the court to have a sufficient interest in
the making of the order.
(2) Each of the following persons is entitled to appear and be heard by the
court on an application for a suppression order or non-publication
(a) the applicant for the order,
(b) a party to the proceedings concerned,
(c) the Government (or an agency of the Government) of the Commonwealth or of a
State or Territory,
(d) a news media organisation,
(e) any other person who, in the court’s opinion, has a sufficient
interest in the question of whether a suppression order
or non-publication order
should be made.
(3) A suppression order or non-publication order may be made at any time during
proceedings or after proceedings have concluded.
(4) A suppression order or non-publication order may be made subject to such
exceptions and conditions as the court thinks fit and
specifies in the order.
(5) A suppression order or non-publication order must specify the information to
which the order applies with sufficient particularity
to ensure that the order
is limited to achieving the purpose for which the order is made.
terms of duration,
Duration of orders
(1) A suppression order or non-publication order operates for the period decided
by the court and specified in the order.
(2) In deciding the period for which an order is to operate, the court is to
ensure that the order operates for no longer than is
reasonably necessary to
achieve the purpose for which it is made.
(3) The period for which an order operates may be specified by reference to a
fixed or ascertainable period or by reference to the
occurrence of a specified
future event.
Legal principles
law in this area is still evolving, in part reflecting the evolution in
cybercrime. However, the foundational principle of open
justice has a long
history. In
(on behalf of the Asbestos Victims Support
Groups Forum UK) v Cape Intermediate Holdings Ltd
[2019] UKSC 38
[2020] AC 629
principal purposes for the open justice principle were identified by the Supreme
Court of the United Kingdom:
“[42] The first is to enable public scrutiny of the way in which courts
decide cases – to hold the judges to account
for the decisions they make
and to enable the public to have confidence that they are doing their job
properly...
[43] But the second goes beyond the policing of individual courts and judges. It
is to enable the public to understand how the justice
system works and why
decisions are taken. For this they have to be in a position to understand the
issues and the evidence adduced
in support of the parties’ cases.”
was also held that a “fact-specific balancing exercise” is required
to be undertaken between:
“[45] ... On the one hand will be the “purpose of the open justice
principle” and “the potential value of
the information in question
in advancing that purpose”.
[46] On the other hand will be “any risk of harm which its disclosure may
cause to the maintenance of an effective judicial
process or to the legitimate
interests of others”. There may be very good reasons for denying access.
The most obvious ones
are national security, the protection of the interests of
children or mentally disabled adults, the protection of privacy interests
generally, and the protection of trade secrets and commercial
confidentiality...
[47] Also relevant must be the practicalities and the proportionality of
granting the request.”
, several aspects of the open justice principle were identified
by the ACT Court of Appeal in
v The Age Company Pty
[2023] ACTCA 10
(citations omitted):
“43 Using these two aspects of the application of the open justice
principle – that proceedings are open to the public
and judgments are
given in public – it is possible to illustrate how the principle serves
the goal of a fair, competent and
independent exercise of judicial power:
(a) It exposes, and thereby discourages, bad behaviour by judges. Examples of
such behaviour would be presiding while intoxicated,
sleeping during trials,
being abusive towards counsel or witnesses, engaging in procedurally unfair
conduct or being partial to one
side or the other...
(b) It exposes the reasoning adopted by judges to public and professional
scrutiny, thereby encouraging judges to maintain appropriate
standards in their
judgments and exposing those who cannot.
(c) It serves to educate the public about the law and the judicial process. For
example, the theory of general deterrence, a principle
underlying a great deal
of sentencing, depends upon public dissemination of the consequences of the
exercise of judicial power in
particular cases. Victims and the community are
able to understand and assess the appropriateness of the application of the
laws for which they, through their elected representatives, are
ultimately responsible. More generally, it educates the public about
the rule of
law and the constraints that the law imposes on governments, powerful
organisations and individuals. It thereby encourages
widespread acceptance of
the legitimacy of judicial decision making.
(d) It provides an outlet for community concern, hostility and emotion in
relation to criminal conduct and thereby diverts the public
from vengeful
(e) It affects the conduct of persons who may be witnesses both before and after
they become so. The potential for public exposure
of their evidence in a court
is a constraint upon people’s behaviour. This was one of the significant
rationales given by both
Hale and Bentham. Once in court the potential for
public exposure and scrutiny of their evidence is one factor encouraging them to
take their oath or affirmation to tell the truth seriously.
[44] A further beneficial consequence of the open justice principle is that it
serves as a constraint upon the exercise of executive
power. ...”
Court of Appeal also found a variety of exceptions to the principle of open
justice exist:
(a) where public evidence of secret technical processes would destroy the
subject of the whole matter in dispute;
(b) disclosure in open court of evidence in an action for injunctive relief
against an anticipated breach of confidence;
(c) public identification in a prosecution for blackmail of the name of the
blackmailer’s victim;
(d) in certain circumstances the name of a police informant or the identity of
an undercover police officer;
(e) where there are exceptional and compelling considerations going to national
security; and
(f) where the court is exercising jurisdiction in relation to wards of the State
and mentally ill people.
While these categories are not closed, they will not lightly be extended...
[48] There are also a significant number of statutory exceptions...
[49] These common law and statutory exceptions reflect that open justice comes
at a cost and sometimes the net benefits of open justice
will be seen to be
outweighed by other public policy considerations which are consistent with the
proper administration of justice.”
principle of open justice has been repeatedly found to be a key consideration in
deciding whether to grant non-publication or
suppression orders, particularly in
the case of solicitors and counsel. Prior to the commencement of the Act, orders
were made under
s 72 of the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
) which states:
72 Court may prohibit disclosure of information
The Court may, by order, prohibit the publication or disclosure of any
information tending to reveal the identity of:
(a) any party to proceedings, or
(b) any witness in proceedings,
If it is of the opinion that it is necessary to do so to secure the proper
administration of justice in the proceedings.
“A” bht “S” v State of NSW
[2011] NSWDC 54
), Levy SC DCJ made interim non-publication orders at the
commencement of the hearing over the identities of the counsel and solicitors
the defendant under s 72 of the CP Act. The basis of the orders was stated to
“[2]... a past history of threatening behaviour alleged to have been
initiated by the plaintiff towards expert witnesses and
legal practitioners
retained by the defendant, and towards a judge involved in previous
interlocutory and case management hearings
in these matters.”
non-publication orders were then sought, and his Honour considered the
application of the principles of open justice to such
an order. His Honour found
that the provision has a requirement of necessity ([11]), and this “strong
word” is to be
“determined by considerations of
reasonableness” (see [12] and [18]).
considering the position specifically of judges and counsel, Levy SC DCJ said
(citations omitted):
“[30]... The principles of open justice require that the parties in the
proceedings, and the public, have a direct interest
in knowing [their
[31] Open justice must mean justice administered in open court and in public
view, where evidence is tendered, where arguments are
presented and where
accountable decisions are openly made on the issues to be determined. Any
departure from those principles must
be based on good reasons founded upon an
actual necessity.
[32] In my view, it is insufficient to say, as was submitted, that the
de-identification of the judicial officer and counsel would
not prevent or
hinder the adjudicative process, including the accountability of that process on
appeal if the need arose. In my view,
the complete answer to that submission is
that first, the public generally, and the plaintiff in particular, has a right
which counsel appears in, and which judge decides, these particular
cases, and secondly, the test of necessity still needs to be
fulfilled as a
pre-condition.”
Honour declined to make the final non-publication orders, finding that the
threshold of necessity had not been met where the threats
had been made more
than six years prior, absent any evidence of recent repetition or current
appeal, the decision not to make the final non-publication orders was upheld in
State of New South Wales v Plaintiff A
[2012] NSWCA 248
, with Basten JA
(Beazley and Hoeben JJA, as their Honours then were, agreeing) observing (at
“The circumstances of the application appear to be unique. Certainly no
precedent for such an order was provided to the Court,
other than the judgment
of the District Court in this case. Normally a party to civil proceedings is
entitled to be and will be present
in Court and will therefore be likely to know
the names of counsel and the judge or judges presiding. It is difficult to know
a trial could be conducted otherwise.”
it was accepted that three incidents had occurred in which counsel and a judge
had been threatened, the Court said:
“[106] What is missing in support of this application is not only evidence
of threats of violence directed to legal representatives
of the State during the
eight years, but also a full chronology of the circumstances of the plaintiff,
including periods in custody
and period in which he actively participated in the
proceedings. In addition, there is no evidence from a psychiatrist suggesting
that there is any current threat of violent behaviour towards the lawyers for
the State.”
on a similar provision in the
Criminal Procedure Act 2011
appellant’s lawyers in
[2024] NZCA
sought a permanent suppression over the publication of their names. The
application was opposed by both the Crown and four media
organisations. Mr
Tarrant was the perpetrator of a mass shooting at a mosque in Christchurch.
While the principle of open justice
is not mentioned in the section, in finding
that such an order should be made, the Court of Appeal stated:
“[39] We fully endorse the principle of open justice and the importance of
the media being able to report on court proceedings
so as to ensure the public
are informed about those proceedings. It is, however, questionable whether the
role of the media is compromised
through not being able to report the names of
counsel representing Mr Tarrant, and if so, to what extent. What is undoubtedly
is that the media is able to report what counsel says in Mr
Tarrant’s appeal. The identity of the persons speaking on behalf
Tarrant is not nearly as important as the submissions made on his behalf... We
do not consider that any reporting will be materially
[40] However, we do note the presumption of open justice, in the vast majority
of cases, will of course require counsel to be named.”
Court of Appeal rejected the Crown’s submissions that other criminal
barristers may be targeted as a scapegoat if a person
thought they may be
responsible for representing Mr Tarrant. The Court of Appeal found this
supported the genuine concerns held as
to the safety of the appellant’s
lawyers and their families ([42]). Likewise, the Court of Appeal rejected
contentions that
the cab-rank rule would be undermined, instead seeing the
application as one which would protect and strengthen the cab-rank rule
“by allowing counsel to represent Mr Tarrant without suffering harm”
it was accepted that people attending the appeal would be able to identify Mr
Tarrant’s lawyers, it was held that:
“[48] We do not, however, accept that we should decline this application
simply because a subversive individual may elect to
breach our orders. The law
must be administered dispassionately and not in a way that assuages those who
would seek to break the
considering the precedential effect of the decision to make orders suppressing
the identity of Mr Tarrant’s lawyers, the
Court of Appeal noted (at [55])
that this would be the first case “in any jurisdiction in which current
counsel [had] been
granted permanent name suppression out of concerns for their
wellbeing and security”. The Court of Appeal considered the case
(anonymity of barristers)
[2023] UKUT 74.
However, the application in that
case had arisen due to the media suggesting in their reporting of the matter
that the lawyers were
bringing unmeritorious challenges to proper governmental
actions in order to make money. As such, it was held (at [53]) “that
balance “very clearly” weighed against the applications, and that
the proposed order would be a disproportionate
response to the media’s
right to freedom of expression.”
has been argued that “the courts need to remain open about employing
protective measures to support the secure and proper
functioning of the criminal
justice system – including, where appropriate, suppressing the identities
of legal counsel”
(T Epati, ‘Weathering the Storm – Should a
Novel Case to Suppress the Identities of Lawyers in a High-Profile Case be
Novel?’ (2025) 99 ALJ 449, 449). Ms Epati explores
looking at the case of
and Summers v BBC, PA
EWCA Civ 42
, which reversed a decision to suppress the identity of the judges
who had determined interlocutory aspects of what was described
difficult and tragic case. Ms Epati observes, and I respectfully agree, that
“is a case which illustrates the boundary between the
special position of judges (a public appointment with arguably greater
and protection by way of other security measures) and the professionals who are
caught up in the justice system by virtue
of their professional
obligations.” In considering the application of these authorities to the
present case, I have not overlooked
that these are not criminal proceedings.
However, as the evidence of the expert demonstrates, advisers to victims of
cybercrime are
themselves vulnerable to retaliation by means which can be
practically devastating in the online world in which we now work, even
physical danger is not involved (although it theoretically could be) (see
further [52] below).
Act explicitly incorporates the principle of open justice in s 6, which requires
the Court to “take into account that a
primary objective of the
administration of justice is to safeguard the public interest in open
justice.” This requirement was
described in
[2011] NSWCA 403
by Bathurst CJ and McColl JA (citations
“[32] ... s 6 of the CSPO Act requires the court when considering whether
to make an order under the Act to "take into account
that a primary objective of
the administration of justice is to safeguard the public interest in open
justice". The principle of
open justice is one of the most fundamental aspects
of the system of justice in Australia. Open justice ensures public confidence
the administration of justice. It is unnecessary to add to the large body of
judicial opinions discussing the concept. It is sufficient,
in our view, to
illustrate the proposition embedded in s 6 by referring to Lord Atkinson's
statement in Scott v Scott [1913] AC 417
(at 463) , that "in public trial is [to
be] found, on the whole, the best security for the pure, impartial, and
efficient administration
of justice, the best means of winning for it public
confidence and respect."
[36] As Brereton J said (Suppression Order decision (at [11]),
to John Fairfax Group Pty Ltd (Receivers and Managers
Appointed) and Another v Local Court of New South Wales
(1991) 26 NSWLR
(at 141) per Kirby P), another "well-established illustration was in
blackmail and extortion cases", where:
"If the very openness of court proceedings would destroy the attainment of
justice in the particular case (as by vindicating the
activities of the
blackmailer) or discourage its attainment in cases generally (as by frightening
off blackmail victims or informers)
or would derogate from even more urgent
considerations of public interest (as by endangering national security) the rule
of openness
must be modified to meet the exigencies of the particular
to cases against “Persons Unknown” and data breaches, the seminal
case was that of
HWL Ebsworth
. Slattery J entered default judgment
against the defendants, including orders for injunctive relief restraining any
use of the confidential
information gained by the defendants. However, no
non-publication or suppression orders were sought or granted.
Notre Dame,
Brereton J also entered default judgment against the
defendants and granted injunctive relief. His Honour was satisfied that a three
year non-publication order should be made over, among others, the names of the
plaintiff’s solicitors. No order was made as
to the name of the
plaintiff’s counsel. It would appear that an application for that relief
was not ultimately pressed.
Submissions
was submitted, and the Court accepts, that Qantas’ solicitors and counsel
were obviously “associated with” Qantas
for the purposes of s 7 of
the Act. In accordance with s 12(2) of the Act, the duration of an order should
be no longer than is necessary
to achieve the intended purpose, with the Court
favouring an approach where periods are defined and fixed, rather than
DRJ v Commissioner of Victims Rights
[2020] NSWCA 136
to [54]). As such, specific time periods had been assigned to reflect the
relevant level of risk, such as security secrets having
a 5 year period, while
lawyers’ names would be protected for a much shorter period.
to the application of s 8(1) of the Act, it was submitted that
‘necessary’ has been described as a “strong word”
required “reasonably necessary” orders, a bar higher than merely
convenient or sensible (
Rinehart v Welker
at [27] and [29]).
Digital Australia and New Zealand Pty Ltd v
[2012] NSWCCA 125
(2012) 83 NSWLR
was relied upon for the proposition that necessity requires
consideration of the interplay between the probability of harm, the nature
harm, and the effect of preventative measures. This consideration has also been
described as “unacceptable consequences”
[2005] NSWCCA 245
was submitted that there remains utility in the non-publication orders sought,
even though some material is available online, as
only a limited degree of
publication has occurred (see
; R v Lawton; R v
[2011] NSWSC 1102
). This proposition was submitted to be
reinforced where the material is speculative, with counsel relying on the
analogous context
of confidentiality orders (
Australian Football League v The
Age Company Ltd
[2006] VSC 308
(2006) 15 VR 419
submitted that it is a matter of judicial notice that a shared national and
public interest exists in resisting the growing
occurrence of digital extortion
crimes. Not assisting threat actors in achieving their aims, building their
technical capabilities,
or threatening victims and their service providers was
therefore submitted to be in the public interest for the purposes of s 8(1)(e),
a conclusion also relevant to ss 8(1)(a) and (c). The Court accepts those
submissions.
with the public interest, it was submitted that the administration of justice
referred to in s 8(1)(a) of the Act is a notion
broader than merely preventing
prejudice in the particular case, and extends to consequences for future cases.
As such, the Court
is permitted to consider the systemic effects of exposing
security related information and lawyers to threat actors (
[48]). For example, protecting an informant’s identity will assist in
obtaining similar evidence in future cases.
also relied on the safety concern in s 8(1)(c), applying the calculus of risk
AB (A Pseudonym) v R (No 3)
[2019] NSWCCA 46
as the several public interests significantly outweighing any public interest
against the orders under s 8(1)(e). The imbalance
in favour of public interest
over the interest in open justice must be significant and not merely be
“ever so slightly”
in favour of suppression (
Welker v Rinehart
[2011] NSWSC 1094
per Brereton J (as his Honour then was)).
was accepted that any application must be supported by proper material, with a
mere belief being insufficient (
at [42]). Counsel submitted
that the expert report, and the evidence from a senior executive at Qantas
provided sufficient evidence
of the potential risks. I agree.
was submitted that the names of the lawyers should be subject to a
non-publication order for six months, being the estimate of
the length of
hostilities with the threat actor. The reason for this delayed publication being
necessary was stated to be that the
threat actor belongs to a class that is
known to retaliate and pressure not only its victim, but those assisting the
victim, particularly
during the negotiation period. While such orders are rare,
it was submitted calling them ‘unusual’ would be premature
was a developing area.
principal purposes served by the open justice principle in s 6 of the Act was
submitted to be ensuring there is public scrutiny
of the way in which courts
decide cases and to enable the public to understand how the justice system works
at [43]). It was submitted that the effect on open justice would
be slight. Considering lawyers are not the deciders of cases, the
purposes are not significantly hindered by a temporary restraint on publishing
the identity of the lawyers involved. While
it was accepted knowledge of the
lawyers’ names can permit the detection of certain improprieties in the
justice system such
as biases or conflicts of interest, the lack of suppression
orders and the non-publication being only temporary would allow any potential
improprieties to be quickly detected.
was also accepted that the present case is not one that falls into the more
extreme cases justifying a non-publication order, and
while it is common for
lawyers to receive threats or bear opprobrium when representing particular
clients, there is no automatic
protection (
at [30] to [37]).
However, it was submitted that the position with digital extortion has different
features, namely:
(1) The threat actors being able to act remotely and with impunity;
(2) The case not being about free speech, instead the conduct may involve acts
of criminal contempt, unlawful intimidation and attempts
to pervert the course
of justice;
(3) Lawyers acting against foreign threat actors do not have the benefit of
public tolerance of the ‘cab rank’ rule;
(4) The degree of non-publication required to achieve the bulk of the benefit
sought is limited because it does not involve permanent
non-publication or
suppression orders.
favour of the order, counsel put that there is the power to make the orders
sought, there is clear evidence that the threat actors
are prone to retaliation
and pressure campaigns, and members of the profession and media are aware of the
identities of the lawyers
as the orders are only for non-publication. It was
submitted that in attempting to create a systematic approach to dealing with the
societal problem, giving institutions a temporary shield protecting them from
being targeted by foreign threat actors, where the
imposition is limited, was
necessary and justified. I accept that submission.
was also put that the present case can be distinguished from
where a suppression order was sought for counsel’s name and was
refused. The distinguishing feature was submitted to be that
Levy DCJ in that
case found the intention of the orders was to prevent the plaintiff from knowing
the names, which is at odds with
the ability of a person who is prosecuting a
case to know who is appearing. On appeal, the Court of Appeal held the evidence
suppressing the names was very weak, considering the threat was a physical
threat made by the plaintiff eight years prior. It was
also highlighted that in
the present case, only a temporary non-publication order is sought. In my
respectful view, the evidence
of the expert in this case is clear and compelling
as to the potential risks, and supports the conclusion which the Court draws
limited non-publication orders are necessary within the meaning of that
term in s 8(1) of the Act.
have recorded that there was no appearance by the defendants. As what occurred
was a hearing of which they had notice, it was not
an ex parte hearing which
engaged the strict duty of candour required of an applicant at such a hearing.
The matter proceeded before
me in accordance with the principles for undefended
hearings recently set out by Griffiths AJ in
Take Off Opportunities Pty Ltd
atf The Clear Runway Trust v Susan Quinn Pty Ltd atf The Susan Amelia Quinn
[2025] NSWSC 231
and which I gratefully adopt:
“18 The defendant’s non-attendance does not mean
that the plaintiff becomes liable to a more demanding obligation to
Court as would apply if, for example, the defendant was absent because the Court
was dealing with an ex parte application.
I respectfully agree with Barrett
J’s observations in
Satz v ACN 069 808 957 Pty Ltd
where, after referring to several authorities, including
Isaacs J’s observations in
Thomas A Edison Ltd v Bullock
[1912] HCA 72
at 681 concerning a “most serious
responsibility” imposed upon a party who comes to court seeking relief in
the absence
of the other party, Barrett J stated:
It seems to me that the “most serious responsibility” to which
Isaacs J referred is attracted only in those cases where
a party has not been
given proper notice of a hearing and is absent when an application is pressed.
In those cases, the applicant
is obliged to bring to the court’s attention
all relevant facts known to the applicant, including those unhelpful to the
applicant’s
case. That “most serious responsibility” is not
attracted if the defendant has been served and given ample opportunity
attend. Such a defendant’s non-attendance does not give rise to an
entitlement to some especially favourable treatment.
The plaintiff is, in such a
situation, under the generally prevailing obligation to assist the court and not
to mislead it. If the
case is one of interlocutory hearing of the “limited
inquiry” type to which Young J referred, the duty to assist the
particularly pronounced. But where, as here, the application is an application
for final relief and the defendant has not
only received the originating process
and supporting affidavit but also presented a somewhat relaxed demeanour in the
face of the
claim (see paras [42]–[45] above), it seems to me that the
duty or expectation is confined to honestly [sic], frankness and
conduct apt to mislead the court in relation to any material matter.”
Conformably
with his duty to assist the Court, and notwithstanding that it was not an ex
parte hearing as properly understood, counsel
very properly and fairly drew to
the Court’s attention arguments contrary to Qantas’ interest,
neither of which the Court
found sufficiently persuasive to alter the outcome.
Counsel put that they do market themselves as appearing in this particular area,
and it would not be necessarily difficult for threat actors to identify them as
someone who regularly appears in this area. It was
also put that the position
between solicitor and counsel is different, particularly with counsel having
less data stored and a lower
potential perception of wealth (compared to a law
firm) so as to be less worth pursuing.
Consideration
Court has the power under s 7(a) of the Act to make orders for the
non-publication of the names of solicitors and counsel in this
matter. The
grounds relied on are ss 8(a), (c), and (e) and the Court accepts
counsel’s submissions as to why those grounds
have been made out.
have considered the principles of open justice as required under s 6 of the Act,
and I have concluded this case falls into, or is
at least closely analogous to,
the established exception category of blackmail and extortion. While the
specific order being considered
is not of the kind usually made in that category
of exception, that such a category of exception exists demonstrates the
recognition of the harm threat actors pose, and a willingness to
protect individuals from this harm.
expert’s evidence supports what might be thought to be the common sense
observation that the threat actors have numerous
motivations which include
retribution and moneymaking. In the case of law firms, depending on their size,
financial gain may also
be a motive, as
HWL Ebsworth
demonstrates. It
must be accepted that considerable disruption could also be visited on a sole
practitioner such as a barrister by
cyberattack on the practitioner. As
shows, protecting counsel may also strengthen the cab-rank rule
by allowing victims of threat actors to obtain representation because
would be able to discount the possibility of retaliation or suffering other
expert’s evidence demonstrates a sufficient degree of risk that
Qantas’ solicitors and counsel might suffer one or
more of the detriments
set out at [15] above so as to make necessary the orders sought under the Act.
The peak period of risk is
during the period of the encounter (‘heat of
the battle’) but it may be accepted that for a short period thereafter
retribution
remains a real possibility against law firms and counsel
necessitating protection. Inevitably committed criminals will move on to
next target. The Court has concluded that the period of six months is an
appropriate and clearly defined time period for the
non-publication orders to be
imposed in accordance with s 12 of the Act.
the orders are for non-publication rather than suppression also strikes an
appropriate balance, especially where the threat actor
is overseas, and is in
keeping with the principles of open justice. While it may be accepted that a
determined threat actor could
find out the identity of the solicitors or
counsel, it is accepted that there is no need to assist the threat actors by
them with, in counsel’s words, a clear or easy bullseye at which
orders of the Court were:
The Court grants leave to proceed pursuant to UCPR 11.8AA, and orders:
Final Injunction
1 Pursuant to r. 16.10 (Default Judgment) of the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) (UCPR), or the Court's inherent power, the Court
makes the following orders:
a. The Defendant (by their servants, agents or by any third
party in possession of some or all of the Exfiltrated Dataset, defined
restrained from:
i. Placing any material from the Impacted Dataset, as defined
below, (including the Exfiltrated Dataset) at any location on the
ii. Transmitting, publishing or disclosing any of the Impacted
Dataset (including the Exfiltrated Dataset) to any person or facilitating
iii. Using (including viewing) any information from the
Impacted Dataset (including the Exfiltrated Dataset) already in their possession
for any purpose, other than obtaining legal advice in connection with these
iv. Promoting or publishing any links to locations from which
the Impacted Dataset (including the Exfiltrated Dataset) may be able
downloaded,
without the Plaintiff's written consent.
b. The Defendant take all steps to immediately remove all and
any of the Impacted Dataset (including the Exfiltrated Dataset) from
accessible internet locations (including, for the avoidance of doubt, from 'dark
web' locations).
c. Nothing in these orders prevents the Defendant or any other
person from publishing, communicating, using or disclosing such
of the Impacted
Dataset which:
i. is lawfully in their possession other than as copied from
the Exfiltrated Dataset; or
ii. already in or thereafter comes into the public domain;
in each case other than as a result of a breach of orders made by the Court in
these proceedings.
Suppression
2 That up to and including 2 October 2030, the Suppression
Material not be disclosed pursuant to
-(b) of the
Court Suppression and
Non-publication Orders Act 2010
(NSW) (CSNPOA) on the following grounds (per
of the CSNPOA) with the order operating throughout Australia (per
of the CSNPOA):
a. the order is necessary to protect the safety of persons;
b. the order is necessary to prevent prejudice to the
administration of justice; and
c. the order is necessary in the public interest and that
public interest significantly outweighs the public interest in open justice.
3 The Plaintiff is granted leave to redact the Suppression
Material (Red) in the Public Court File.
Non-publication
4 Each of the orders in this section is made pursuant to
-(b) of the CSNPOA on the following grounds (per
of the CSNPOA) with
the order operating throughout Australia (per
of the CSNPOA):
a. the order is necessary to protect the safety of persons;
b. the order is necessary to prevent prejudice to the
administration of justice; and
c. the order is necessary in the public interest and that
public interest significantly outweighs the public interest in open justice.
5 That up to and including 2 October 2026, Type A (Yellow)
Non-Publication Material not be published.
6 That Type B (Blue) Non-Publication Material not be
a. up to and including 2 April 2026, insofar as it identifies
law firms and lawyers and counsel; and
b. up to and including 2 October 2026, insofar as it identifies
deponents from Qantas.
7 Orders 2 to 6 above do not apply to prohibit any publication
or disclosure by the Plaintiff, or any publication or disclosure
written authority of the Plaintiff.
8 Exhibit to the affidavit of [ ] dated 5 September 2025 which
was handed up to the Court during the hearing on 12 September 2025
be returned
to the Plaintiff and need not be included in the Public Court File.
Access to the Public Court File
9 Order that there may be access to the Public Court File by
news media organisations (as that term is defined in the CSNPOA) on
that these orders are placed on the cover of the Public Court File and/or
provided to any applicant for access.
10 Order that there not be access to other materials on the
court file, without application being made by notice of motion supported
affidavit, on 3 days' notice to the Plaintiff.
Treatment of any materials served on the Defendant
11 The Court confirms, pursuant to UCPR 16.3(1A), that the
documents filed by the Plaintiff on 5 September 2025 or read or tendered
the hearing on 2 October 2025, or otherwise filed in relation to this
application, need not be served on the Defendant.
12 The Plaintiff is entitled to redact any Suppression Material
or Non-Publication Material marked in these orders in any documents
the Defendant.
13 The Defendant pay the Plaintiff's Costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (322 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter