URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/192.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barnes v R [2025] NSWCCA 192 (14 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 192
Hearing Date(s):
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Adamson JA at [1]
Chen J at [42]
R A Hulme AJ at [43]
Refuse an extension of time for leave to appeal.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — appeal against conviction — causing grievous
bodily harm with intent to cause grievous bodily harm —
unreasonable verdict — substantial evidence of multiple blows to the
victim’s head – admissibility of statement
made immediately after
assault — statement made when victim unconscious — whether capable
of constituting admission —
motive to inflict grievous bodily harm —
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) — extension of time — delay caused by
seeking a second opinion — appeal lacking merit
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Evidence Act 1995
Cases Cited:
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2020] HCA 12
The Queen v
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
ZT v The King (2025) 281 CLR
[2025] HCA 9
Principal judgment
Kurt Barnes (Appellant)
Rex (Respondent)
Representation:
T F Woods (Appellant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
McGirr & Associates
(Appellant)
Solicitor for Public Prosecutions (NSW) (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2018/372859
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court
Date of Decision:
13 April 2022
N Williams DCJ
File Number(s):
2018/372859
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The applicant, Kurt Barnes, was found guilty by a jury before N Williams DCJ
of causing grievous bodily harm with intent to cause
grievous bodily harm to
Manish Chauhan (the victim) (count 1). The applicant was also convicted of
assault occasioning actual bodily
harm to Pradeep Manoharan (count 3).
The circumstances of count 1 were established by CCTV footage of platforms 3
and 4 at Clyde railway station, and by eyewitness testimony.
The evidence showed
that the applicant, without provocation, punched the victim multiple times to
the head. The victim took no defensive
action, lost consciousness, and fell
backwards onto the platform, sustaining grievous bodily harm.
The applicant sought an extension of time for leave to appeal against his
conviction on count 1 on the single ground that the verdict
of guilty of
wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm was unreasonable. He argued
that it was not open to the jury to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he
intended to cause grievous bodily harm. He did not challenge the conviction on
The Court held
(Adamson JA, Chen J and R A Hulme AJ agreeing)
refusing an extension of time for leave to appeal:
(1) Having regard to the overwhelming evidence of the
ferocity of the attack, in the course of which the applicant threw multiple
punches to the victim’s head, one of which was of sufficient force to
render him unconscious, and the surrounding circumstances,
it was open to the
jury to find that the applicant intended to cause the victim grievous bodily
(2) The jury was entitled to take into account the
applicant’s statement made immediately after the assault that the victim
would not say “that” to his girlfriend again. Although the victim
was unconscious and could not hear or comprehend the
statement, it formed part
of the surrounding circumstances of the offence and was admissible as an
admission under
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW): [36].
(3) The statement was adverse to the applicant’s
interests and capable of revealing a performative and vindictive motive,
the applicant acted violently to assert ownership over Ms McLean and to
demonstrate to her and others that no man should speak
to her in a particular
way (although there was no evidence that anyone present had said anything
untoward to Ms McLean). It was open
to the jury to regard the statement as
evidencing an intention to cause grievous bodily harm to the victim as part of
that motive:
(4) The delay in filing the appeal was the result of the
applicant seeking a second opinion on his prospects of appeal, a legally-aided
advice having already been obtained (from which it can be inferred that that
advice was that the appeal lacked merit): [37].
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
[2002] HCA 53
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR
[2022] HCA 25
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2020] HCA 12
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
, considered.
: On 13 April 2022, Kurt Barnes (the applicant) was found guilty by a
jury over which N Williams DCJ (the trial judge) presided of
causing grievous
bodily harm to Manish Chauhan (the victim) with intent to cause grievous bodily
harm (count 1). The alternative
charge of causing grievous bodily harm to the
victim being reckless as to causing actual bodily harm to him did not arise
2). The applicant was also charged with and convicted of assaulting
Pradeep Manoharan and occasioning actual bodily harm to him (count
circumstances of the offence charged as count 1 are established by CCTV footage
of platforms 3 and 4 at the Clyde railway station,
as well as the evidence of
eye-witnesses who were present at that location at the time. The effect of the
evidence (which is addressed
in more detail below) was that the applicant,
without the slightest provocation, punched the victim multiple times to the
circumstances where the victim took no retaliatory or defensive action
against him. The victim lost consciousness and fell backwards
onto the platform,
suffering grievous bodily harm.
applicant seeks leave to appeal against his conviction on count 1 on the single
ground that the verdict of guilty of wounding
with intent to cause grievous
bodily harm was unreasonable because it was not open to the jury to be satisfied
beyond reasonable
doubt that he
to cause grievous bodily harm.
He does not challenge the conviction on count 3. Mr Woods, who appeared on his
behalf, accepted that,
if the ground were made out, this Court would find the
applicant guilty of count 2 and proceed to re-sentence him accordingly.
Re-sentence
would be required as the maximum penalty for count 1 is 25
years’ imprisonment, with a standard non-parole period of 7 years
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW)); whereas the maximum penalty for
count 2, the alternative charge, is 10 years’ imprisonment with a standard
period of 4 years
the appeal was filed out of time, an extension of time is required. As I
consider the appeal to be without merit, I am not persuaded
that an extension of
time ought be granted. My reasons for proposing that the application for
extension of time be refused are as
Woods, who appeared for the applicant, made various concessions, including the
(1) the applicant in fact caused grievous bodily harm when he punched the victim
in the head on more than one occasion (having thrown
multiple punches at his
head, some of which connected);
(2) it was open to the jury to find that at least one of the punches had caused
the victim to lose consciousness and fall backwards
onto his head on the
(3) it was open to the jury to find that the victim had his arms by his side
while the applicant was punching his head; and
(4) an intent to cause grievous bodily harm can, in some cases, be inferred from
an assault in the absence of a weapon and by the
use of an accused’s fists
is difficult to comprehend, having regard to the concessions made by Mr Woods
(each of which was sensibly made), how the ground
of appeal is even arguable. Mr
Woods sought to defend the ground by contending that not every man who punches
another man in the
head and kills him is guilty of murder. He submitted that, if
the act of punching another in the head was, of itself sufficient to
jury to find intention to cause grievous bodily harm, this would not be the
case. Generalities are rarely helpful in this
area and are particularly
unhelpful when the hypothetical proposed bears little relation to the actual
evidence in the trial, which
must be assessed for the purposes of addressing the
proposed ground (the strength of which bears on whether an extension of time
ought be granted).
is necessary for this Court to review the evidence identified by the parties as
germane to the issue identified by the applicant:
ZT v The King
281 CLR 137;
[2025] HCA 9
(Gageler CJ, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones
JJ). The sole issue is whether it was open to the jury to find that the
applicant intended
to cause the victim grievous bodily harm, at the time of the
assault alleged in count 1.
relevant principles are well established. It is for this Court to determine
whether it was “open” to the jury to find
the applicant guilty or
whether a jury “must have had a doubt”:
M v The Queen
181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2020] HCA 12
(Kiefel CJ,
Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ). This Court must make its
own independent assessment of the evidence.
The primary function of determining
guilt or innocence has been entrusted to the jury as the tribunal of fact:
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
CJ, Kiefel, Bell, Keane and Gordon JJ).
evidence in the prosecution case, which was open to be accepted by the jury is
summarised below. It derives from:
(1) evidence of CCTV footage taken at Rosehill and Clyde railway stations and
the Commercial Hotel in Parramatta;
(2) evidence of prosecution witnesses:
(a) the victim and three of his friends, Mr Manoharan, Tharan Arunthavanathan
and Ruben Banerjee;
(b) members of the public who witnessed the assault or its prelude or aftermath;
(c) investigating police officers;
(3) admissions made by the applicant in his Electronically Recorded Interview
with a Suspected Person (ERISP) which took place on
4 December 2018.
1 December 2018, the applicant and his girlfriend, Jessie McLean, attended a
function at Rosehill racecourse associated with her
work. They arrived at about
midday or 1pm and stayed for about five hours. They both consumed alcohol there.
The applicant estimated
that he had consumed about five “beers” and
had not eaten all day and that Ms McLean had drunk “maybe four glasses
wine”. As the applicant was leaving, an “obviously attractive
lady” came up to him and asked him for a cigarette
lighter, which he gave
her. Ms McLean saw this happen and started “yelling” at the
5.31pm, the applicant and Ms McLean boarded a train at Rosehill railway station
which was travelling in the direction of Clyde
(Ex 4, 3.41-4.00).
McLean was so “obviously emotional [and] upset” that they travelled
on the train from Rosehill to Clyde in different
carriages. The applicant
explained that he actually left her in one carriage to “cool off”
and told her to “[c]alm
down”. When they got to Clyde, the applicant
told her that they had reached their stop but they otherwise separated when they
left the train.
the Commercial Hotel in Parramatta. They left the
hotel between 5.17pm and
5.30pm and went to the Rosehill railway station where they boarded a train bound
for Clyde station where
they intended to change trains to go to the city.
Mehra, who was also a passenger on the train from Rosehill to Clyde, saw the
applicant and Ms McLean walking through the
carriage. Ms McLean, who was
“swaying and not very stable” was shouting abuse at the applicant.
Ms Mehra got off the
train at Clyde, as did the applicant and Ms McLean.
Mr Banerjee got on the train at Rosehill with his three friends, he noticed a
woman (Ms McLean) sitting on the “handicap
seat” in the carriage. He
gave evidence that she was “saying things that didn’t make sense and
her body language
wasn’t right”. He found her behaviour “quite
shocking” and exchanged glances with others when she left the
When the train arrived at Clyde railway station, the victim and his three
friends alighted from the train. Three of the
four used the restroom on platform
1 while Mr Banerjee waited outside. When they emerged from the restroom, the
four of them went
to platform 4 to wait for a train to take them to the city.
they were going up the stairs from platform 1 to platform 4, Ms McLean followed
them and called out to them, saying, “Do
you have the balls to fuck my
pussy?” and “You guys have pencil dicks”. The four men chose
not to respond. Mr Banerjee
We kept walking, right. So all of us we, so I was at the front along with
Pradeep if I remember correctly and I was like, “Hey,
guys, just, just
move on. Come on. Let’s just, just march.” And yeah, so all of us we
just kept, you know, and rather
than walking slowly we were doing brisk walk.
Banerjee sat next to other commuters while his three friends stood near
Carey, who had also been on the train from Rosehill to Clyde, observed a woman
on the train who “was wearing a tight-fitting
skirt and long ... brown
hair with dreadlocks [who] had a small black bag and very tall heels”. He
recognised her at Clyde
railway station. Mr Carey described the victim and his
friends as remaining “incredibly quiet” when she interacted with
them. He inferred that they “didn’t want any part of it”
because he heard one of the group say, “We don’t,
you know, want any
Ms McLean walked onto the platform, she kept yelling at the victim and his
friends. It was Mr Banerjee’s impression that
Ms McLean was looking for
someone she knew on the platform. She approached the applicant, who was sitting
facing platform 3 and said,
“Hey, what are you looking at?” and
“What are you going to do about it?”. She pointed towards the victim
and his three friends before she “started charging towards [them]”.
She then “frantically started ... using her
hands to slap ... all of
[them]”. Mr Banerjee raised his palms, which were open and facing forward
at head height to protect
his head from being slapped. He said that Mr
Arunthavanathan eventually did “push her back ... in self defence”.
witnesses gave evidence to the same effect.
witness, Njegos Veljovic, who was standing on platform 5 (across the tracks from
platform 4) heard a woman (Ms McLean) say loudly,
“[s]ay it to my face if
you have guts.” Mr Veljovic saw the woman slap or hit at least one of the
men on the head and
saw that the men put their hands up to their faces to
protect their heads. He heard one of the men telling her that they were not
talking about her or to her.
CCTV footage showed the applicant approach the group. Mr Banerjee said that
“all of a sudden, [he] hear[d] this man screaming
saying that, “She
is my girlfriend”, or “She is ... my wife”. Mr Manoharan gave
evidence that the applicant
told him to “stop touching [his]
girlfriend”. Mr Manoharan put his hands up with his palms facing forwards
at about face
level to indicate that he “didn’t do any harm to this
lady”. The applicant punched him and he fell onto the platform
because he lost his balance after the blow glanced his glasses). This assault
resulted in a conviction on count 3, which
was not challenged on appeal.
CCTV footage depicted Mr Arunthavanathan putting his hands up in an apparently
defensive fashion before running away from the
applicant in the direction of
platform 3.
was open to the jury to find the following, from the CCTV footage and the
evidence of witnesses. The applicant approached the victim
and threw a punch
with his left hand which appeared (from the CCTV footage) to connect with the
right side of the victim’s
head. The victim’s arms were by his side.
Ms McLean then approached the victim on his left side and slapped the left side
his head with her right hand. The victim turned towards her. His hands were
raised in a defensive way. While he was facing Ms McLean,
the applicant
approached the victim on his right side and punched him again with his left
hand, which connected with the right side
of his head. The applicant positioned
himself to face the victim, whose arms were lowered although his right hand was
slightly extended
in the applicant’s direction. The applicant punched the
right side of the victim’s head again, using his left hand. This
the victim’s body to move, apparently from the force of the punch. Almost
straight away, the applicant punched the complaint’s
head with his right
hand. The force of the punch caused the complainant’s head to swing
backwards. The victim’s body
appeared to be lifeless as he fell to the
Woods accepted that it was open to the jury to find that the victim had lost
consciousness as a result of the last punch or the
cumulative effect of more
than one punch, before he fell to the ground, hitting the back of his head on
the platform. There is some
indication that the applicant threw another punch at
the victim with his left hand.
eye-witnesses gave evidence about the number and force of the punches thrown by
the applicant at the victim’s head,
including Anthony Kresa, who said that
he had “seen plenty of boxing fights and UFC [Ultimate Fighting
Championship]”.
Mr Kresa considered that the victim was unconscious when
he fell as “no one falls like that consciously”.
Banerjee said of the series of punches inflicted by the applicant to the
victim’s head after the applicant punched Mr Manoharan,
who fell to the
So, after, after - so, when [Mr Manoharan] fell down, I was kind of going to
And, as soon as I - you know - looked up again, he had already punched [the
victim] on the face once. By the time we could - you
know - really understand,
comprehend what’s, what’s going, what the hell is happening, two or
three more punches was
on his face, one after the other. Right. You know - it
quick - like - you know - if you, you’re punching a bag, you will go
quickly one after the other, something like that.
The first punch [the victim], he, he was shocked obviously. He couldn’t do
anything. ... by the time he was - he was - he could
gather himself and
understand what, what’s happening and try to defend himself, he already
had got like, like three punches
on the face. And the last one - and he tried to
defend himself, he - by the time he could raise his hand to do that, he had
one on his left temple that knocked him out, and he fell on, on the
– on the concrete head first, like back of the head. So
he fell backwards.
Banerjee described the punches as “brutally [sic] closed fist
punches”. Mr Kresa heard the applicant say, after punching
the victim,
“you won’t say that to my girlfriend again”.
applicant then led Ms McLean away and they left the station. One witness, Lee
Barnard, called after the applicant saying, “You
got to stop. You could
have killed that guy”.
harm to the victim was accepted to amount to grievous bodily harm. The victim
required significant surgery, was hospitalised for
six weeks and had a period of
32 days of post-traumatic amnesia (Agreed Facts).
applicant’s defence at trial was conducted on the basis of self-defence.
He maintained in his ERISP that he believed that
one of the men had assaulted Ms
McLean and that he was fearful for his own sake. The applicant exercised his
right to silence and
did not give evidence at the
Consideration
Woods accepted that it was open to the jury to find the following:
(1) the applicant had thrown multiple punches at the victim although it was not
clear from the CCTV footage precisely how many of
those punches actually
connected with the victim’s head;
(2) for the purposes of inferring the requisite intent, it was not important
whether the punches connected or not;
(3) the victim was an innocent bystander who was not responsible for any conduct
which would be relevant to whether the applicant
had the requisite intent;
(4) the applicant was not acting in self defence; and
(5) the words, “you won’t say that to my girlfriend again”,
which Mr Kresa heard the applicant say to the victim
who was lying, inert, on
the platform, showed that the applicant was “taking ownership of what he
had done, and he was pleased
that he had inflicted that level of pain”.
Woods submitted that it was significant that the applicant had drunk five beers
over five hours, had not eaten and had just had
a fight with his girlfriend. Mr
Woods accepted that it was open to the jury to find that the applicant had
assaulted the victim in
the presence of Ms McLean to prove his manliness and
commitment to her and that there “may have been an attempt on his part
simply to knock this man to the floor and to achieve a feeling of dominance over
him ... [and] to throw his weight around to demonstrate
that he was protecting
Ms McLean, and he may have wanted to knock the victim over.”
Woods submitted that what the applicant had said to the victim immediately after
the assault (“you won’t say that to
my girlfriend again”)
could not be used to infer intent at the time of the assault and that, even if
the words spoken by the
applicant could be construed as vindictive, they were
insufficient to prove what his intent was beforehand. In substance, Mr Woods
submitted that it was not open to the jury to infer intent to cause grievous
bodily harm from the applicant’s acts in the circumstances
established by
the evidence.
consider that, having regard to the evidence as a whole, and particularly the
actions of the applicant which are summarised in [23]
above, when taken with the
concessions identified in [31] above, it was open to the jury to find that the
applicant intended to cause
the victim grievous bodily harm. The
applicant’s statement (discussed below) strongly supported that inference,
in my view, plainly open even without the statement.
evidence showed that the applicant’s consumption of alcohol equated to
no evidence to suggest that he
was intoxicated at the time of the assaults. The applicant did not raise
intoxication at trial as
amounting to a reason why he did not form the intent to
cause grievous bodily harm. In these circumstances, I do not consider
intoxication
to be relevant.
present case does not turn on credibility of witnesses since the observations of
witnesses were to similar effect and were largely
borne out by what was able to
be detected on CCTV footage. The surrounding circumstances showed that each of
the concessions made
by Mr Woods was well made.
reject the submission that the jury was not entitled to take into account the
applicant’s statement to the victim (who, being
unconscious, could neither
hear, nor understand it) that the victim would not say “that” to his
girlfriend again. The
statement was made seconds after the last punch and formed
part of the surrounding circumstances. As it was a statement adverse to
applicant’s interests, it was capable of amounting to an admission and was
therefore admissible pursuant to
Evidence Act
(NSW). It was open to the jury to regard the statement as revealing that the
applicant’s motive to punch the victim repeatedly
was to cause the victim
grievous bodily harm for the performative and vindictive purpose of
demonstrating (including to Ms McLean
herself) that Ms McLean was his
girlfriend, that no other man should speak to her (in a particular way) and that
he would act violently
to punish anyone who spoke to her or was associated with
anyone who had spoken to her or who might have spoken to
Whether time ought be extended to file the notice of
need for an extension of time was occasioned by the fact that there was a delay
in briefing counsel to advise on the appeal due
to matters outside the
applicant’s control. A merit advice for the purposes of a Legal Aid
application was received on 30 November
2024 (from which it can be assumed that
counsel briefed advised that there was no merit in an appeal). The applicant
then sought
a second opinion from private counsel in late March 2025. The advice
was received on 27 July 2025 and the appeal filed on 31 July
was common ground that, if the appeal had merit, time ought be extended. As
referred to above, the appeal lacks merit. Time to
file the notice of appeal out
of time ought not be extended. Accordingly, the question of leave to appeal does
the question whether an argument is worth putting can be a difficult one, it is
important that counsel do not, by advising that
an appeal has prospects when it
has none, give false hope to those who are imprisoned that this Court might
abbreviate the period
of their incarceration.
propose the following order:
(1) Refuse an extension of time for leave to appeal.
: In my view, having reviewed the evidence at trial and what was conceded
by the applicant on appeal as being open to accept by the
jury, as set out by
Adamson JA, there was an abundance of evidence available upon which a jury
could, in relation to count 1, infer
and find to the required standard that the
applicant had the requisite intent to cause grievous bodily harm to the victim.
It follows,
given the narrow issue raised by the applicant’s proposed
ground of appeal, that it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond
doubt of the applicant’s guilt. I agree with the order proposed by Adamson
: The analysis described in the judgment of Adamson JA accords
with my own. I agree with the order proposed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (274 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter