URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/263.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jones v Secretary, Department of Education [2025] NSWCATAD 263; (27 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Jones v Secretary, Department of Education
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 263
Hearing Date(s):
29 July 2025
Date of Orders:
27 October 2025
Decision Date:
27 October 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
J Smith, Senior Member
(1) The decision of the Respondent of 30 May 2025 is affirmed.
decision of the Respondent of 26 March 2025 is varied so as to provide the
Applicant access to the information as set out
at [74] and [109] of this
decision. The Respondent is to provide the Applicant access to this information
within 28 days of this
(3) The decision of the Respondent of 26
March 2025 is otherwise affirmed.
(4) Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(b)
and (d) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), the publication of, and
disclosure to the Applicant of, the confidential material is prohibited.
Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(b)
(1)(d) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NSW), the transcript and recording of the confidential hearing is not
to be published or disclosed to the Applicant or the public.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – administrative review –Government
information – parent seeking access to their child’s
student file -
reasonable searches – revealing personal information of other persons
including children – disclosure
of psychological testing material –
disclosure of internal correspondence - responsible and effective government and
the functions of the agency - balancing competing public interest
factors in favour of and against disclosure
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
Cases Cited:
Cameron v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force
NSWCATAD 13
Camilleri v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force
[2012] NSWADT
CLT v Secretary, Department of Education
[2022] NSWCATAD 34
Commissioner
of Police, NSW Police Force v Barrett
[2015] NSWCATAP 68
Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force v Camilleri (GD)
[2012] NSWADTAP 19
Commissioner of
Police v District Court of NSW (1993) 31 NSWLR 606
FNJ v Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force
[2022] NSWCATAD 130
GU v Commissioner, Department of
Corrective Services
[2003] NSWADT 176
Hurst v Wagga Wagga City Council
Klaric v Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAP 153
Learmouth v
Secretary, Department of Education
[2020] NSWCATAD 109
Mansfield v Department
of Family and Community Services
[2014] NSWCATAD 43
Marden v Pharmacy
Council of New South Wales
[2017] NSWCATAD 34
Medlyn v Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAD 125
Miriani v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police
[2005] NSWADT 187
Miskelly v Secretary, Department of Education
NSWCATAD 48
Nakhl Nasr v State of New South Wales; George Nasr v State of New
South Wales
[2007] NSWCA 101
Newcastle City Council v Newcastle East
Residents Action Group Inc
[2018] NSWCATAP 254
Taylor v Destination NSW
[2017] NSWCATAD 272
WL v Randwick City Council (GD)
[2007] NSWADTAP
Wojciechowska v Commissioner of Police (NSW)
[2020] NSWCATAP 173
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Nicole Jones (Applicant)
Secretary, Department of Education
(Respondent)
Representation:
Applicant (Self-Represented)
Department of Education
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00110660
2025/00110645
Publication Restriction:
1. Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(b)
and (d) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NSW), the publication of, and disclosure to the Applicant of, the
confidential material is prohibited.
2. Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(b)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), the transcript and
recording of the confidential hearing is not to be published or disclosed to the
Applicant or the public.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Tribunal’s Decision
21 May 2024, the Applicant made an access application under the
Information (Public Access) Act 2009
(NSW) (GIPA Act) to the Respondent for
her child’s “entire student file”. The Applicant sought access
documents to support a disability discrimination complaint and a
refused access to some information saying either that it does not hold the
information or that there is an overriding
public interest against disclosure.
Tribunal has decided to affirm the decision that certain documents are not held
by the Respondent because the information was
not located despite reasonable
for and against disclosure,
the Tribunal has decided to vary the decision so as
to provide the Applicant access to further information.
parties agreed that the application for access to information be split into two
applications, with the first application dealing
with the first 500 pages of
14 May 2024, the Respondent decided to release the information in 524 pages of
records in response to the first application. On
25 June 2024, the Respondent
decided to release 505 pages of records in response to the second application.
11 July 2024, the Applicant applied for an external review of both decisions to
the Information Commissioner. On 8 January 2025,
the Information Commissioner,
amongst other matters, completed the review and:
(1) was not satisfied that the Respondent had conducted reasonable searches
given the lack of information that the Respondent had
provided about the
(2) concluded that the Respondent’s implied decision, that information was
not held, was not justified; and
(3) recommended that the Respondent conduct an internal review.
20 March 2025, the Applicant filed administrative review applications for both
decisions, as the parties had not reached agreement
to extend the time for the
internal review.
26 March 2025, the Respondent completed the internal review of both decisions.
The internal review resulted in providing the Applicant
with access to an
additional 10 pages, and otherwise affirmed both decisions, including the
implied decision that no further information
was held by the Department.
22 April 2025, the Tribunal made an order that both applications (2025/00110660
and 2025/00110645) be dealt with together.
1 May 2025, the Tribunal ordered that the Applicant provide a list of documents
that the Applicant contends are held by the Respondent
but not identified or
located by the Respondent. On 30 May 2025, the Respondent made a further
decision after receiving the Applicant’s
list of seven documents and
released an additional four pages to the Applicant.
29 July 2025, both an open and confidential hearing was held.
the hearing, in accordance with orders the Tribunal had made, the Respondent
sought further instructions in relation to the
existence of a document claimed
not to be held (a 2024 Access Request), which was located. This document was
released to the Applicant.
issue arising from the review of the Respondent’s decision made on 30 May
2025, that the documents identified in the Applicant’s
list of 1 May 2025
(the “requested information”) are not held by the Respondent is:
Does the Respondent hold the requested
information?
issue arising from review of the Respondent’s decision on 26 March 2025 in
terms of the remaining redacted or withheld information
(“the disputed
information”) is: Is there an overriding public interest against
disclosure of the disputed information
to the Applicant?
Respondent hold the requested information?
Relevant law
Respondent is only obliged to provide access to information it holds when the
application is received (GIPA Act,
The Respondent may decide that
“the information is not held by the agency” (GIPA Act,
s 58(1)(b)).
This decision can be reviewed by the Tribunal (GIPA Act, s 80(e)). The burden of
establishing that the decision that information
is not held is justified, lies
on the Respondent (GIPA Act, s 105(1)).
Respondent must undertake “such reasonable searches as may be
necessary” to find any of the information sought by
the Applicant that is
held by the Respondent. Such searches must be conducted “using the most
efficient means reasonably available
to the agency” (GIPA Act, s 53(2)).
This extends to “searches using any resources reasonably available to the
including resources that facilitate the retrieval of information stored
electronically” (GIPA Act, s 53(3)).
Respondent is not required to search for records in an electronic back up system
unless a record has been lost to the agency as
a result of having been
destroyed, transferred or otherwise dealt with, in contravention of the
Records Act 1998
(NSW) or contrary to the agency’s established record
management procedures (GIPA Act,
Respondent is “not required to undertake any search for information that
would require an unreasonable and substantial diversion”
Respondent’s resources (GIPA Act,
likelihood of the information existing and being held by an agency should be
considered when taking into account the reasonableness
of the searches, with the
agency being best placed to make this assessment given its familiarity with the
holds and its information management and retrieval
Wojciechowska v Commissioner of Police (NSW)
[2020] NSWCATAP
, at [37]-[38].
question of whether government information is held by an agency is distinct from
the question of whether the agency has conducted
reasonable searches. The
Tribunal has power to review a decision that information is not held, but it has
no power to review the
sufficiency of an agency’s search:
Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAP 153
, at [33]. However, whether an
agency has complied with obligations under s 53 of the GIPA Act (which includes
undertaking reasonable
whether an “information is not held” decision is the “correct
and preferable decision”:
Wojciechowska
, at [40]-[41].
constitutes a sufficient search will vary with the circumstances. Key factors in
making an assessment include the clarity of
the request, the way the
agency’s recordkeeping system is organised and the ability to retrieve any
documents that are the
subject of the request, by reference to the identifiers
supplied by the applicant or those that can be inferred reasonably by the
from any other information supplied by the applicant:
Miriani v Commissioner
of Police, New South Wales Police
[2005] NSWADT 187
the Tribunal stated in
CLT v Secretary, Department of Education
NSWCATAD 34
, at [40], s 53 of the GIPA Act imposes a standard of
“reasonableness” in relation to the searches required to be
by an agency rather than any absolute or strict standard. Such
but are not
required to be extreme or excessive. The reasonableness standard is an objective
one. It is what a fair-minded person
possessing reasonable knowledge of the
agency’s obligations and the circumstances of the case would consider
reasonable. It
is not the standard of an obsessive, mistrustful, perseverative
or belligerent observer.
Appeal Panel confirmed in
Wojciechowska
, at [44], that the task for the
Tribunal when reviewing a decision that the requested information is not held by
the agency is to:
(1) identify, on the basis of the agency’s reasons and the
applicant’s submissions, any relevant factual issues including
derived from s 53(1) – (5) of the GIPA Act;
(2) determine whether the agency has proved any relevant factual issues on the
balance of probabilities;
(3) consider any evidence which may have emerged since the agency made its
decision, which might tend to prove that the requested
information is held by
the agency;
(4) applying those findings, decide what the correct or preferable decision is
(the task of the Tribunal is to decide what the correct
and preferable decision
is, having regard to any relevant factual material and any applicable law
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW) (ADR Act),
(5) affirm, set aside or vary the agency’s decision (ADR Act,
Relevant evidence and submissions
Applicant’s list of requested information
Applicant’s list of 1 May 2025 identified the following records that she
believed are held by the Respondent but which were
not identified or
(1) MultiLit Positive Teaching and Learning – Learning and Behaviour
Profile (“assessment material”) and any other
related documents
including, but not limited to, the Functional Behaviour Assessment and
Reinforcement Preferences documents –
for the period around February 2023
(“Item 1”).
(2) Full application form for any Access Request applications and all supporting
documents. Also, any automated emails from the Access
Management Utility, and
emails or documents relating to the application’s outcome, the amount of
funding gained, and how the
money was spent – for the period around
October to November 2023 (“Item 2”).
(3) The minutes and updated Student Profile with the child’s adjustments
for the meeting between the Applicant and two named
professionals on 22 May 2023
(“Item 3”).
(4) Minutes from the 6 March 2023 suspension resolution meeting with a staff
member and minutes from the 6 December 2022 and 15 February
2023 meetings with
this same staff member (“Item 4”).
(5) Emails sent by the Respondent’s staff about the child – for the
period from 2020 to 2024 (“Item 5”).
(6) Nationally Consistent Collection of Data (NCCD) adjustments submissions
supporting documents - for the period from 2020 to 2024
(“Item 6”).
(7) Documents missing from the wellbeing/incident records including, but not
limited to the child’s 18 August 2022 suspension,
6 December 2023 incident
where a caution was given, 13 February 2023 classroom incident and 4 March 2024
incident involving the child’s
then science teacher – for the period
from August 2022 to March 2024 (“Item 7”).
Item 1, the Respondent states that the assessment material has been withheld
(rather than not being held). These documents are
therefore considered by the
Tribunal below, as to whether access should be granted to the Applicant. The
Respondent stated that the
Functional Behaviour Assessment and Reinforcement
Preferences documents have not been located.
Item 2, it was confirmed in the material filed by the Respondent after the
hearing that the Respondent had not submitted an Access
Request for the child.
An Access Request had commenced but was withdrawn in 2024 and never submitted.
After the hearing, the Respondent
was able to locate the withdrawn Access
Request which was released to the Applicant. The Respondent stated that it can
be difficult
to sort searches between active and withdrawn Access Requests on
Enrolment and registration number (ERN) – the Respondent’s
Access Request which a regular ERN
user would not necessarily be familiar with.
3 was located by the Respondent and released to the Applicant on 30 May
Item 6, the Respondent states that when schools submit the relevant NCCD, they
submit a list of student names, but do not submit
actual evidence for each
student. On 30 May 2025, the Respondent released to the Applicant a record of a
class roll of students identified
for inclusion in the 2023 NCCD, including the
child, with a list of supporting documents. The information about the other
was redacted. The Respondent released these supporting documents to the
Applicant, which were not held separately as NCCD “supporting
documents”.
therefore remains for the Tribunal to consider is part of Item 1, and Items 4,
The Respondent’s searches
Respondent understood the Applicant’s request for the child’s
student file to include the child’s school and
counselling records. As a
result, the child’s school was asked to search for "complete school
records to include: school reports,
attendance records, Sentral records,
incident reports, meeting and diary notes, risk assessments and
correspondence”. Counselling
files were sought separately from the
Respondent’s School Counselling Service.
Respondent spent 29 hours in the initial work done in response to the
Applicant’s access request as follows:
(1) Hardcopy school files – 1 hour
(2) School local computer drives and emails – 7 hours
(3) School record cards – 16 hours
(4) Electronic searches in counselling records – 5 hours
past and current School Principals of the school undertook further searches in
February 2025 and March 2025 during the internal
review. The Respondent submits
that searches cannot be undertaken of the emails of a Principal who had retired,
as they cannot be
accessed by any other person. The Respondent submits that only
emails that were saved by the retired Principal in electronic files
May 2025, the school spent a further 7 hours searching for records identified in
the Applicant’s list of 1 May 2025.
Respondent maintains that no records have been identified for part of Item 1
(Functional Behaviour Assessment and Reinforcement
Preferences documents) and 4.
For Item 7, the Respondent submits that no further records have been identified
(in addition to what
has been released to, or withheld from, the Applicant). The
Respondent submits that these records may not have existed in the first
or alternatively were not required to be retained in accordance with the
school’s usual practices. The Respondent states
that not all meetings will
have associated meeting minutes taken or recorded.
Item 5, the Respondent conducted searches of all relevant systems including
school emails, School Bytes (school management platform)
and Sentral (online
school management system) to search for emails relating to the child.
Respondent notes that no emails were included in the response to the first
application as these records were predominantly comprised
of school counselling
records. The Respondent states that for school counselling records, all relevant
emails are saved by the relevant
school counsellor in the specific
student’s counselling file with central TRIM (content manager) system,
which was searched.
Respondent states that emails were released to the Applicant in response to the
second application, which were the records provided
by the school. The Applicant
did agree to remove from the scope of the application “correspondence and
documents that were
received by you from [...] School and forwarded to relevant
staff members within the school”, which removed many emails from
of the application.
Tribunal’s findings
Tribunal is satisfied that the Respondent has conducted reasonable searches for
these documents because the Respondent searched
the relevant locations for Items
4, 5 and 7. The Tribunal has considered the amount of time that has been spent
in searching for
these items, and the way the searches were conducted, which
demonstrate a significant attempt by the Respondent to identify and locate
information sought by the Applicant.
emails from the retired Principal that fell within Item 5 are not accessible by
the Respondent, however reasonable searches were
conducted for records of any
emails that the retired Principal may have saved in the electronic files.
events in Items 4 and 5 have occurred and there are other records released to
the Applicant that relate to these events. As the
Applicant submits, good record
keeping practice would require minutes of formal meetings to be taken and
incidents to be recorded,
however there is no corroborative evidence that
minutes were actually taken of these meetings or that the incidents referred to
the subject of a formal incident report. While the Respondent does not
concede that poor record keeping is an issue, the fact that
there may be
failures in an agency’s record keeping processes does not necessarily lead
to the conclusion that the search has
not been reasonable, or sufficient, or
Camilleri v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force
Tribunal is not satisfied that it is likely that these records exist. Given the
that the information falling
within Items 4, 5 and 7 exist.
Applicant submitted that the Applicant is required to search for these records
in an electronic back up system. The Tribunal,
however, is not of the view that
the Respondent is required to do this because there is no evidence that the
information has been
lost as a result of having been destroyed, transferred or
otherwise dealt with in accordance with the
State Records Act 1998
contrary to the agency’s established record management procedures (GIPA
Respondent has conducted reasonable searches for the requested information in
accordance with its obligations under s 53 of the
GIPA Act. The decision that
the Respondent does not hold the requested information is therefore affirmed.
Is there an overriding public interest against disclosure of the
disputed information to the Applicant?
disputed information has been dealt with by the Tribunal in two parts:
(1) personal information about third parties, including children; and
(2) assessment material and correspondence concerning the management of school
Personal information about third parties, including children
Relevant law
Legally enforceable right to access unless overriding public interest
against disclosure
is a general public interest in favour of the disclosure of government
information (GIPA Act, ss 5, 12(1)). A person who makes
an access application
for government information has a legally enforceable right to be provided with
access to the information in
accordance with Part 4 (Access applications) unless
there is an overriding public interest against disclosure of the information
(GIPA Act, s 9(1)). There is an overriding public interest against
disclosure of government information if (and only if) there are
interest considerations against disclosure and, on balance, those considerations
outweigh the public interest considerations
in favour of disclosure (GIPA Act, s
is consistent with the objects in s 3 of the GIPA Act that support maintaining
and advancing a system of responsible and representative
democratic Government
that is open, accountable, fair and effective.
Note to s 12 of the GIPA Act provides examples of public interest considerations
in favour of disclosure of information:
(1) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to promote open
discussion of public affairs, enhance Government accountability
or contribute to
positive and informed debate on issues of public importance.
(2) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to inform the
public about the operations of agencies and, in particular,
their policies and
practices for dealing with members of the public.
(3) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to ensure
effective oversight of the expenditure of public funds.
(4) The information is personal information of the person to whom it is to be
(5) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to reveal or
substantiate that an agency (or a member of an agency)
has engaged in misconduct
or negligent, improper or unlawful conduct.
14 of the GIPA Act contains a Table with seven categories (“T1” to
“T7”) which includes the only considerations
(apart from the
conclusive presumptions that there is an overriding public interest against
disclosure included in Schedule 1 of
the GIPA Act) that may be taken into
account under the GIPA Act as public interest considerations against disclosure
for the purpose
of determining whether there is an overriding public interest
against disclosure of government information.
factors can be considered when determining whether there is an overriding public
interest against disclosure or alternatively
as factors in favour of providing
the applicant with access to the information (GIPA Act, s 55):
(1) the applicant’s identity and relationship with any other person;
(2) the applicant’s motives for making the access application;
(3) any other factors particular to the applicant.
this case, the Respondent relies on considerations in T1. Personal factors
cannot be used as factors against providing access on
the basis of the
considerations in T1 (Responsible and effective government) (GIPA Act, s 55(3)).
15 of the GIPA Act provides that a determination as to whether there is an
overriding public interest against disclosure of
government information is to be
made in accordance with the following principles:
(a) Agencies must exercise their functions so as to promote the object of the
(b) Agencies must have regard to any relevant guidelines issued by the
Information Commissioner.
(c) The fact that disclosure of information might cause embarrassment to, or a
loss of confidence in, the Government is irrelevant
and must not be taken into
(d) The fact that disclosure of information might be misinterpreted or
misunderstood by any person is irrelevant and must not be
taken into account.
(e) In the case of disclosure in response to an access application, it is
relevant to consider that disclosure cannot be made subject
to any conditions on
the use or disclosure of information.
Public interest against disclosure of personal information
is a public interest consideration against disclosure if the disclosure of the
information could reasonably be expected to have
one or more of the following
effects (relevant to this issue):
(1) Reveal an individual’s personal information (T3(a)).
(2) Contravene an information protection principle under the
Personal Information Protection Act 1998
(NSW) (PPIPA) (T3(b)).
(3) In the case of the disclosure of personal information about a child –
it would not be in the best interests of the child
to have the information
disclosed (T3(g)).
4 of Schedule 4 of the GIPA Act defines “personal information” as
“information or an opinion (including information
or an opinion forming
part of a database and whether or not recorded in a material form) about an
individual (whether living or dead)
whose identity is apparent or can reasonably
be ascertained from the information or opinion.” Personal information does
include information about an individual (comprising the individual’s
name and non-personal contact details, including the individual’s
title, public functions and the agency in which the individual works) that
reveals nothing more than the fact that the person
was engaged in the exercise
of public functions (GIPA Act, Sch 4, cl 4(3)(b)).
18 of PPIPA states that a public sector agency that holds personal information
must not disclose the information to a person
(other than the individual to whom
the information relates) or other body, whether or not such other person or body
is a public sector
agency, unless:
(1) the disclosure is directly related to the purpose for which the information
was collected, and the agency disclosing the information
has no reason to
believe that the individual concerned would object to the disclosure, or
(2) the individual concerned is reasonably likely to have been aware, or has
been made aware, that information of that kind is usually
disclosed to that
other person or body, or
(3) the agency believes on reasonable grounds that the disclosure is necessary
to prevent or lessen a serious and imminent threat
to the life or health of the
individual concerned or another person.
‘essence of disclosure’ is “making known to a person
information that the person to whom the disclosure is made
did not previously
Nakhl Nasr v State of New South Wales; George Nasr v State of
New South Wales
[2007] NSWCA 101
identity can be reasonably ascertained even if the person’s name is not
included within the record. Documents which themselves
do not contain any
obvious features identifying an individual may take on the quality by virtue of
the context to which they belong:
WL v Randwick City Council
NSWADTAP 58
, at [15]. A person’s handwriting can constitute personal
information as it can communicate knowledge about that person including
likely identity of the author:
Marden v Pharmacy Council of New South
[2017] NSWCATAD 34
is a distinction to be drawn between information relating to a public
servant’s personal affairs and information relating
to the performance of
his or her public duties. If what is disclosed is no more than the identity of
the officers and employees of
the agency performing their public duties, then
there would appear to be nothing personal to the officers concerned:
Commissioner of Police v District Court of NSW
(1993) 31 NSWLR 606,
3(g) of the Table in s 14 of the GIPA Act is concerned with the interests
or more broadly, the rights, of the child in a generic
not in the context of the particular child to which the information
relates. This public interest consideration against
disclosure applies even
though at the time consideration is given to whether the information should be
disclosed, the child about
whom the personal information relates is no longer a
Medlyn v Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAD 125
[115]-[116].
Balancing the public interest considerations
approach to be adopted by the Tribunal in the task of deciding the correct and
preferable decision, is the two-step process set
Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force v Camilleri (GD)
[2012] NSWADTAP 19
[24]–[25]. Unless a conclusive presumption is relied on (which is not so
in this matter), the Tribunal is to consider the
public interest considerations
in favour of disclosure (GIPA Act, s 13) and the public interest considerations
against disclosure
(GIPA Act, s 14) and determine where the balance lies between
these competing public interests.
Tribunal must attribute the appropriate weight to each relevant consideration
for or against disclosure, but the balance is always
weighted in favour of
disclosure:
Taylor v Destination NSW
[2017] NSWCATAD 272
the competing public interest considerations is “a question of fact and
degree, requiring the weighing of competing
matters, and a task that is not
amenable to mathematical calculation”:
Hurst v Wagga Wagga City
[2011] NSWADT 307
Consultation with persons about releasing their personal
information
Respondent is to “take such steps (if any) as are reasonably practicable
to consult with a person before providing access
to information relating to the
person in response to an access application” (GIPA Act, s 54(1)). This
requirement only applies
to information that requires consultation, which in
this case is personal information about a person (GIPA Act, s 54(2)(a)). This
requirement is only relevant if the Respondent decides to provide access to
information relating to this person:
Selby v Commissioner of NSW Police
[2013] NSWADT 61
, at [44]. This is not the case in this matter as the
Respondent did not decide to provide access to the relevant personal information
Is there personal
information about third parties in the disputed information?
schedule of disputed information identifies the pages that the Respondent
contends contains personal information about third parties.
The Tribunal has
reviewed these pages and is satisfied that most of the disputed information does
contain personal information about
third parties. These records include names
and opinions of third parties as well as personal information about other
Applicant states that she is not requesting access to names or identifying
information about the students, or parents, or third
parties (who are not the
Respondent’s teachers). The Applicant states that she is requesting
details of their incident statements
with the names or identifying information
excluded. The Tribunal has therefore only considered the disputed information
which falls
within the scope of what the Applicant is seeking access to.
set out below, the Tribunal has decided to give the Applicant access to some
information because it is not personal information.
interest considerations in favour of disclosure
Applicant relies on the general public interest in favour of disclosure of
government information.
Applicant submits that the information she seeks includes personal information
that because some of the
information that the Respondent has collected about them is untrue, inaccurate
or misleading, and she seeks
access to their information so that she can request
corrections and make a complaint. The Applicant having access to information
which is her and her family’s personal information is a public interest
consideration in favour of disclosure.
Applicant also submits that the Respondent should release to her information
that reveals nothing more than the fact that a teacher
(or school staff) were
engaged in the exercise of public functions. As noted above, this information is
excluded from the definition
of “personal information” in the GIPA
Act (GIPA Act, Sch 4, cl 4(3)(b)).
Applicant states that she requires the information to make complaints as the
information can also substantiate that the teachers
at the school have engaged
in misconduct. The Applicant submits that the school has made false claims about
her child’s behaviour
at school, and that her child is being ill-treated
by teachers at the school. If the disclosure of the information could reasonably
be expected to reveal or substantiate that the Respondent has engaged in
misconduct or negligent, improper or unlawful conduct, then
this is a public
interest consideration in favour of disclosure.
Public interest
considerations against disclosure
Respondent submits that the disputed information in this case contains personal
information, including personal information of
staff and other students. The
Respondent submits that disclosure would contravene s 18 of PPIPA, as it would
be without consent for
a purpose other than for which the information was
collected. The Respondent submits that none of the exceptions in s 18 of PPIPA
apply, which would permit disclosure. These are public interest considerations
against disclosure.
Respondent also submits that it is not in the best interest of the third-party
children for their personal information to be released
to the Applicant as it is
likely to have a negative impact on those student’s learning and their
relationships at school. This
is also a public interest consideration against
disclosure that carries considerable weight.
Information which Applicant is to be provided access
set out in the table below, the Tribunal has decided to provide the Applicant
with access to information that is her own personal
information or personal
information about the child and her family. This information is not enmeshed
with the personal information
of other third parties, which would weigh against
disclosure. Providing the Applicant with her and her family’s personal
information
is a factor deserving considerable weight.
the evidence before the Tribunal, the Tribunal is not satisfied that disclosure
of the disputed information could reasonably be
expected to reveal or
substantiate that the Respondent has engaged in misconduct or negligent,
improper or unlawful conduct as alleged
by the Applicant. In
Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force v Barrett
[2015] NSWCATAP 68
, the Appeal
Panel stated that it is a very serious matter for a Tribunal to accept as
relevant to its determination as a public interest
favouring disclosure that
disclosure could reasonably be expected to reveal or substantiate that an agency
(or a member of an agency)
has engaged in misconduct or negligent, improper or
unlawful conduct. The Appeal Panel stated that, as expressed, this consideration
carries an imputation in relation to the agency’s conduct that would need
to have some reasonable basis in the material presented
by the access applicant
or in the material seen by the Tribunal in confidence. In this case, the
Tribunal is not satisfied that there
is a reasonable basis to support the
Applicant’s submission that the Respondent has made false claims about her
behaviour at school or that the Respondent has ill-treated her
enhancing government accountability is a recognised public interest in favour of
disclosure. The Tribunal has placed significant
weight on this consideration
because it is important for the Applicant to understand how the school has
responded to incidents involving
her child, and what information the Respondent
has taken into account when making decisions in respect of her child. According
s 15(c) of the GIPA Act, the fact that disclosure of information might cause
embarrassment to, or a loss of confidence in, the Government
is irrelevant in
weighing the public interest considerations and must not be taken into
Tribunal has decided to provide the Applicant access to the information set out
in the tables below, because the public interest
considerations in favour of
disclosure, namely providing the Applicant with access to her and her
family’s personal information
and enhancing government accountability, are
not outweighed by any public interest consideration against disclosure. There is
information the Applicant should be provided access to, as it is not
personal information of a third party (with some documents only
information that relates to the performance of the Respondent staff’s
public duties) and there is no relevant public
interest against
disclosure:
(1) First bundle of documents (524 pages):
Page number
Description
Summary reasons for providing access
Witness statement
The redactions do not contain personal information or information that
would identify any individual, but are observations by the
Email dated 19 August 2022
The information in this email has already been disclosed to the Applicant.
This information relates to the performance of the employee’s
Email dated 12 May 2023
The information in this email has already been disclosed to the Applicant.
This information relates to the performance of the employee’s
(2) Second bundle of documents (505 pages):
Page number
Description
Summary reasons for providing access
Email correspondence dated 17 February 2022 - Fourth redaction only
This is not personal information. This information relates to the
performance of the employee’s public duties. There are no
considerations against disclosure. The fact that this information may cause
embarrassment or a loss of confidence in the
Respondent is irrelevant.
Email correspondence dated 18 March 2024 – third redaction only
The names of the third parties is personal information and should not be
released (can remain redacted). The rest of the information
should be released
because it is not personal information and there are no overriding
considerations against disclosure.
Counsellor’s case notes dated 12 September 2023 – first
redaction only
This is information that the Applicant has herself provided to the
counsellor and is her own personal information. There are no overriding
considerations against disclosure.
Wellbeing meeting note dated 13 September 2022 attached to
counsellor’s note dated 8 November 2022 – third redaction
This is an observation by the author in the performance of the
employee’s public duties and is not personal information or information
that would identify an individual. There are no overriding considerations
against disclosure.
Document titled “incident 18 August 2022” – fourth
redaction only
This is a statement that the child has made and is his personal
information, not personal information about a third party. There are
overriding considerations against disclosure.
Counsellor’s case notes dated 28 June 2022
The names of the third parties (apart from the Applicant’s family)
should be redacted, however all other information in the
redactions is to be
disclosed to the Applicant as this is the Applicant’s and her
family’s personal information. There
is no other personal information.
This information relates to the performance of the employee’s public
duties. There are no
overriding considerations against disclosure.
Document titled “File attached to case 00533128”, same document
included twice in this bundle
The last redaction on this page should not be disclosed as this is personal
information about another child. As for the rest of the
redactions, only the
names of the third parties (not including references to the teacher) should be
redacted. This information relates
to the performance of the employee’s
public duties. The fact that this information may cause embarrassment or a loss
of confidence
in the Respondent is irrelevant. There is other information of a
similar nature about what occurred that is unredacted in this document.
are no overriding considerations against disclosure.
Document titled “File attached to case 00533128” – same
document included twice in this bundle
This is an observation by the author of the document in the performance of
the employee’s public duties and is not personal
information or
information that would identify an individual. There are no overriding
considerations against disclosure.
Information which Applicant is refused access
Tribunal has decided to refuse to provide the Applicant with access to the rest
of the disputed material that falls under the
category of personal information
relation to the handwritten statements of children, the Tribunal is satisfied
that this is personal information, and it is not
possible to redact these
statements to protect the children’s identities. The Tribunal is not
satisfied that it is in the best
interests of the third-party children to
provide any of their statements to the Applicant, and that disclosure of this
personal information
consideration against disclosure which has significant weight.
Secretary, Department of Education
[2019] NSWCATAD 48
Tribunal stated the disclosure of information that relates to children, either
as a victim, informant or young person of interest
in relation to an incident in
a school, would not be in the best interests of the child, because they may
still currently attend
the school and the information may enable the person to
be identified as being involved in the incident, which is likely to have
negative impact on the students' learning and their relationships at school.
Further, at [127], the Tribunal noted that it was
difficult to
see any circumstances in which the best interests of a child could be served by
disclosure of their personal information
in response to a GIPA application.
Mansfield v Department of Family and Community Services
[2014] NSWCATAD
, at [67], the Tribunal found that significant weight should attach to privacy
issues in respect of the children’s “conduct
at school”.
FNJ v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2022] NSWCATAD 130
[109], the Tribunal concluded that it was not in the best interests of the child
to disclose personal information about that
child which an adult had provided in
confidence, or that the child had provided in confidence, for the purpose of an
investigation.
In that case, the Tribunal found that disclosing information
informant in confidence
would diminish the trust that
individuals (including a child) and the community have in the
Police (who conducted the investigation)
and make them reluctant
to engage with the Police in future concerning issues involving
the safety and wellbeing of children.
Tribunal gives the public interest consideration in favour of disclosure, namely
enhancing Government accountability, less weight
than the public interest
consideration against disclosing personal information about third-party
children. This is because the Tribunal
accepts that this information was given
in confidence while investigations of incidents were conducted, and it is likely
a negative impact on those students if the Applicant (and her family,
including the child who attends school with these children)
is given this
information. Not only could it be reasonably expected that this may this
diminish the trust that the children have
in the school staff who they provided
information to, but it could also cause them to be reluctant to give information
and other matters that are investigated by school in the future,
which would impact on the school being able to properly respond
to incidents and
exercise its functions. The Tribunal accepts that the disclosure of the
children’s personal information may
also impact on these children’s
learning and relationships at school. This is not in the best interests of these
children and
the Tribunal gives this public interest consideration against
disclosure significant weight.
Tribunal is therefore of the view that there is an overriding public interest
against disclosure to the Applicant of the witness
statements by third-party
children, and refuses to provide the Applicant access to this information.
Tribunal has also decided to refuse access to the Applicant of the remainder of
the disputed material which constitutes personal
information about third
parties, including the redacted personal information that is about children
other than the written statements.
Most of this information contains personal
information of third parties that does not fall within the scope of the
review given that the Applicant is not seeking access to names
or identifying information about the students, or parents, or third
(that are not the staff of the Respondent).
Tribunal is satisfied that the rest of the disputed information in this category
reveals personal information about a third party
(including children), that is
not a school employee exercising their public duties. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the disclosure
of this information to the Applicant:
(1) is not in the best interests of the children to whom it relates; and
(2) will breach s 18 of PPIPA because the disclosure is not directly related to
the purpose for which the information was collected,
the individual concerned
would likely object to the disclosure, and the individual concerned was not
likely to have been aware that
the information would be disclosed to the
Tribunal is therefore of the view that there is an overriding public interest
against disclosure of the remainder of the disputed
material which constitutes
personal information of third parties.
Assessment material and
correspondence concerning the management of school issues
Relevant law
relevant law in relation to balancing the public interest considerations is set
out at [44] - [61] above. Further to the determination
of this Issue, public
interest considerations against disclosure if the disclosure of the information
could reasonably be expected
to affect responsible and effective government,
which are relevant to this matter and relied on by the Respondent, are as
(1) prejudice the supply to an agency of confidential information that
facilitates the effective exercise of that agency’s
functions (T1(d)). In
deciding whether confidentiality attaches to records, the decided cases often
look at the policies and practices
of the agency, rather than that of the
individual employee:
Cameron v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police
[2014] NSWCATAD 13
(2) reveal a deliberation or consultation conducted, or an opinion, advice or
recommendation given, in such a way as to prejudice
a deliberative process of
government or an agency (T1(e)). The deliberative processes of an agency are its
thinking processes, including
those by which it seeks internal input and
discussions as to possible courses of action, evaluates the wisdom of them, and
the relative
benefits and detriments of them:
(3) prejudice the effective exercise by an agency of the agency’s function
(4) prejudice the conduct, effectiveness or integrity of any audit, test,
investigation or review conducted by or on behalf of an
agency by revealing its
purpose, conduct or results (whether or not commenced and whether or not
completed) (T1(h)).
Is the assessment material subject to copyright restrictions which prevent
disclosure to the Applicant?
relation to the assessment material, the Applicant submits that “Terms and
Conditions of Sale” which permit the product
to be used “for
personal education use or use in schools with State/Territory accreditation if
in Australia” implies
that the assessment material supplied by Multilit to
teachers delivering training (Positive Teaching and Learning Courses) can be
provided to parents without breaching the copyright restrictions. The Applicant
relies on email correspondence between herself and
MultiLit where she asked if
the “forms provided during the Positive Teaching and Learning Courses can
be shared with parents
when completed for the child?”. MultiLit responded
to the Applicant by stating “the copyright restriction applies to
of materials for commercial purposes, not how they might be used within a
Applicant included in her material a copy of the first page of the assessment
material which is available on the MultiLit website.
The Applicant states that
this front page (but not the rest of the pages) can be viewed in the MultiLit
Positive Teaching and Learning
Video on the MultiLit YouTube Channel.
Respondent states that parental consent is not required to complete this
educational assessment, and that parents are not part
of the process. The
Respondent states that the assessment may be used to help teachers to identify
strategies to support the student
which could then be used in creating student
behaviour and learning plans. These plans can then be shared with the parent but
the assessment material itself.
Respondent maintains that the assessment material is copyright protected, and
any unauthorised use would be a breach by the Respondent
of contractual
confidence and the copyright licence, which would prevent the Respondent from
using this material in the future.
Tribunal is satisfied that the assessment material is subject to copyright
restrictions. However, the Respondent has not provided
sufficient evidence for
the Tribunal to decide whether the disclosure of this material to the Applicant
constitutes an infringement
of copyright. However, the copyright restrictions on
the material and the possibility of an infringement of copyright have been
by the Tribunal as factors weighing against the disclosure to the
Public interest considerations in favour of disclosure
Applicant relies on the general public interest in favour of disclosure of
government information.
Applicant submits that the information she seeks includes personal information
correspondence, the Applicant submits that the school has recorded false private
and health information about her, her child
and other members of her family
without informing her or obtaining her consent. The Applicant submits that
accessing this information
will enable her to correct information and make a
complaint about the conduct. Providing the Applicant with her and her
personal information is a public interest consideration in favour
of disclosure that has significant weight.
relation to the Respondent’s internal correspondence, the Applicant
submits that she requires this information to make complaints
as the information
can substantiate that the teachers at the school have engaged in misconduct. As
noted above, the Tribunal has
found that there is no reasonable basis for this
public interest consideration for disclosure on the evidence before the
however enhancing government accountability is a relevant public
interest consideration in favour of disclosure.
respect of the assessment material, the Respondent concedes that, generally,
there is a significant public interest for disclosure
of this information as it
may contribute to the transparency of the Respondent’s processes used to
manage student’s education
including their assessments. The disclosure of
the information that could reasonably be expected to inform the public about the
of agencies and, in particular, their policies and practices for
dealing with members of the public, is a public interest consideration
of disclosure.
Public interest considerations against
Respondent relies on T1(d), T1(f) and T1(h) as public interest considerations
against the disclosure to the Applicant of the assessment
Respondent submits that providing the Applicant with access to the assessment
material will affect the validity of test results
and the quality of educational
and wellbeing outcomes for students, and therefore undermine one of the
Respondent’s main functions,
to deliver appropriate and effective teaching
and learning for individual students. The Respondent submits that if the
confidentiality
aspect of these assessments was set aside by disclosing this
information to the Applicant, this would prejudice the effective exercise
Respondent’s functions.
relation to the Respondent’s internal correspondence, the Respondent
relies on T1(d), T1(e), T1(f) and T1(h) as public interest
considerations
against the disclosure to the Applicant of this information.
Respondent submits that the Respondent’s executive officers need to be
able to freely discuss discretely and honestly how
to best manage and resolve
various sensitive issues affecting the operations of the Respondent. The
Respondent submits that the release
of all correspondence between executive
staff may seriously impair the Respondent’s ability to perform its
functions relating
to school-based issues. The Respondent submits that it has a
duty to monitor the health and wellbeing of staff.
are similar submissions that were made by the Respondent in
Learmouth v
Secretary, Department of Education
[2020] NSWCATAD 109
, at [100]. In this
case, the disputed information included a statement written by a school staff
member of a discussion that she
had had with the applicant in preparation for a
meeting with the applicant that did not proceed. The Tribunal accepted that the
member had a genuine concern that she feared repercussions from the
applicant if the disclosure of her opinions were released. The
Tribunal found
that disclosure of the whole statement to the applicant could reasonably be
expected to prejudice the effective exercise
by the respondent of its functions
in respect of the health and wellbeing of staff.
Respondent submits that if internal correspondence is released, this could
reasonably be expected to prejudice future communications
when dealing with
sensitive school issues, and to release the information would restrict frank and
honest communication between staff.
Balancing exercise
Information which Applicant is to be provided access
Tribunal has decided to provide the Applicant with access to information set out
in the table below because the public interest
considerations in favour of
disclosure, namely enhancing government accountability and informing the
Applicant of the Respondent’s
operations, which the Tribunal gives
significant weight, are not outweighed by the public interest considerations
related to responsible
and effective government which the Respondent has not
established in its evidence.
considering the public interest against disclosure in terms of the
Respondent’s submissions about the adverse effect on the
Respondent’s functions (T1(d), T1(e), T1(f) and T1(h)), the Tribunal has
taken into account the Appeal Panel’s statement
Newcastle City
Council v Newcastle East Residents Action Group Inc
[2018] NSWCATAP 254
“... when considering the evidence on which it is asserted that disclosure
“could reasonably be expected” to have
a particular effect, the
following principles should be kept in mind:
(1) a mere statement that disclosure could reasonably be expected to have a
particular effect is insufficient;
(2) there must be real and substantial grounds supporting an opinion that
disclosure could reasonably be expected to have a particular
(3) prominence should be given to inferences capable of being drawn from
established facts, rather than on the subjective views of
witnesses.”
Respondent did not file any evidence that establishes that in this case there
are real and substantial grounds to support an opinion
that disclosure to the
Applicant of information in the internal correspondence, could reasonably be
expected to have the claimed
effects on the school. The Respondent did not file
any statements by any of the Respondent’s staff who authored records or
whose statements were referred to in the disputed information. Apart from making
broad submissions, there was no evidence before
the Tribunal that providing the
Applicant with access to the internal correspondence could reasonably be
expected to seriously impair
the Respondent’s ability to perform its
relation to T1(d) - the effect of prejudicing the supply of confidential
information that facilitates the effective exercise of
the agency’s
functions, it was not apparent on the face of the records that the information
in any of the disputed information
in the table below is confidential. The
Respondent did not provide any evidence of its policies or procedures to
establish that this
information is confidential. There was otherwise no evidence
filed by the Respondent, such as any statements by the Respondent’s
that proves that this information is confidential information. The disputed
information mostly consisted of small redactions
to parts of records that the
Applicant has been given access to. That is, the Applicant is aware of most of
what was discussed or
noted about the child or herself, however part of the
record has been withheld by the Respondent. The Tribunal is not satisfied that
the redacted information in these records is confidential information either on
the face of the document, by a relevant policy or
procedure or by any other
relation to T1(e) – the effect of prejudicing a deliberative process of
government or an agency by revealing a deliberation
or consultation conducted,
or an opinion, advice or recommendation, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the
disputed information is
information of deliberative processes or “thinking
processes”. This information does not involve staff seeking internal
or holding discussions as to possible courses of action, evaluating the wisdom
of them, and the relative benefits and detriments
relation to the Respondent’s submission that staff should be “frank
and free” to discuss “sensitive school
issues”, the Tribunal
is not satisfied that the “frank and free” discussions or case notes
that the Respondent
seeks to withhold from the Applicant falls into the T1(e)
public interest consideration, or that even if they did, that it could
reasonably expected to prejudice a deliberative process of the Respondent. On
the contrary, the Tribunal is of the view that providing
the Applicant with
access to this information may improve the Respondent’s processes by
enhancing Government accountability.
The fact that disclosure of information
might cause embarrassment to, or a loss of confidence in, the Government is
irrelevant and
must not be taken into account.
relation to T1(f) – the effect of prejudicing the effective exercise by an
agency of the agency’s functions, as noted
above, the Respondent did not
file any evidence to establish that in this case, it could reasonably be
expected to have this effect.
The public interest considerations of enhancing
government accountability and informing the Applicant of the Respondent’s
operations,
are given significant weight, and weigh in favour of disclosure of
the disputed information set out in the table below. The mere
statement that
providing the Applicant with access to this information would prejudice future
communications when dealing with sensitive
school issues, and restrict frank and
honest communication between staff, is insufficient. The Tribunal is of the view
that providing
the Applicant with access to this information may improve the
Respondent’s transparency and honesty with the Applicant in its
with the Applicant and her child.
relation to T1(h) – the effect of prejudicing the conduct, effectiveness
or integrity of any audit, test, investigation or
review conducted by or on
behalf of an agency by revealing its purpose, conduct or results, there is only
one document that fall
into this category. This is the inspection report dated
23 August 2022, and email dated 19 August 2022. These documents contain minimal
information, including no decision or outcome, and it is not evident that the
disclosure of these documents could reasonably be expected
to have the nominated
effect of prejudicing the effective exercise by the respondent of its functions
(investigating a school-based
incident). The incident did involve the
Applicant’s child, and therefore the public interest consideration in
favour of disclosing
personal information to the Applicant about her child,
carries significant weight. There is no personal information about a third
party, that the Applicant is not already aware of, that would weigh against the
Applicant having access to this information.
balancing the public interests in favour of and against disclosure, the Tribunal
has decided that the Applicant should be provided
access to the following
information:
(1) First bundle of documents:
Page number
Description
Reason for providing access
Meeting minutes dated 18 November 2020 – second redaction on page 171
and all redactions on page 172
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability and informing the Applicant of
the operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the Applicant and her child. The
public interest considerations
against disclosure related to responsible and
effective government do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure,
the information is not confidential information or a deliberative
process and even if it was, there is insufficient evidence that
disclosure could
reasonably be expected to have the nominated effect of prejudicing the effective
exercise of the Respondent’s
functions. Some of this information is a
record of events and observations of the Applicant and the child.
Inspection report dated 23 August 2022 and email dated 19 August 2022
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability, informing the Applicant of the
operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the Applicant and her child, and
providing the Applicant with her
child’s personal information. The public
interest considerations against disclosure related to responsible and effective
do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure, because
there is insufficient evidence that disclosure could reasonably
be expected to
have the nominated effect of prejudicing the effective exercise of the
Respondent’s functions. These documents
contain minimal information and
information known to the Applicant do not contain a decision or outcome. It is
not evident that the
disclosure of these documents could reasonably be expected
to have the nominated effect of prejudicing the effective exercise by
respondent of its functions.
(2) Second bundle of documents:
Page number
Description
Reason for providing access
Email dated 28 August 2023, same document included twice in this
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability, informing the Applicant of the
operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the child. The public interest
considerations against disclosure
related to responsible and effective
government do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure, because
this information
does not appear to be confidential information or a
deliberative process, and even if it was, there is insufficient evidence that
disclosure could reasonably be expected to have the nominated effect of
prejudicing the effective exercise of the Respondent’s
Counsellor case notes dated 5 December 2023 – last redaction
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability and informing the Applicant of
the operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the Applicant and her child. The
public interest considerations
against disclosure related to responsible and
effective government do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure,
the information is not confidential information or a deliberative
process and even if it was, there is insufficient evidence that
disclosure could
reasonably be expected to have the nominated effect of prejudicing the effective
exercise of the Respondent’s
functions. Some of this information is a
record of events and conversation in the exercise of public functions.
Counsellor case notes dated 13 November 2023.
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability and informing the Applicant of
the operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the Applicant and her child. The
public interest considerations
against disclosure related to responsible and
effective government do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure,
the information is not confidential information or a deliberative
process and even if it was, there is insufficient evidence that
disclosure could
reasonably be expected to have the nominated effect of prejudicing the effective
exercise of the Respondent’s
functions. Some of this information is the
Applicant’s and her family’s personal information.
Counsellor case notes dated 12 September 2023 – second redaction
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability and informing the Applicant of
the operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the Applicant and her child. The
public interest considerations
against disclosure related to responsible and
effective government do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure,
the information is not confidential information or a deliberative
process and even if it was, there is insufficient evidence that
disclosure could
reasonably be expected to have the nominated effect of prejudicing the effective
exercise of the Respondent’s
functions. Some of this information is the
Applicant’s and her family’s personal information.
Wellbeing meeting note dated 13 September 2022 attached to
counsellor’s note dated 8 November 2022 – second and third
only on page 443 and second redaction only on page 444.
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability and informing the Applicant of
the operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the Applicant and her child. The
public interest considerations
against disclosure related to responsible and
effective government do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure,
the information is not confidential information or a deliberative
process and even if it was, there is insufficient evidence that
disclosure could
reasonably be expected to have the nominated effect of prejudicing the effective
exercise of the Respondent’s
functions. Some of this information a record
of events and observations in the exercise of public functions.
Counsellor’s case note dated 27 June 2022 – second redaction
only (beginning with “and” and ending in
“physically”).
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability and informing the Applicant of
the operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the Applicant and her child (in
terms of information that the
counsellor relies on to support the child). The
public interest considerations against disclosure related to responsible and
government do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure,
because the information is not confidential information or
a deliberative
process and even if it was, there is insufficient evidence that disclosure could
reasonably be expected to have the
nominated effect of prejudicing the effective
exercise of the Respondent’s functions. Some of this information a record
events and observations in the exercise of public functions. This information
also includes personal information about the Applicant
and the child.
Counsellor case note dated 27 June 2022 – first redaction only.
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability and informing the Applicant of
the operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the Applicant and her child (in
terms of information that the
teacher relies on to support the child). The
public interest considerations against disclosure related to responsible and
government do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure,
because the information is not confidential information or
a deliberative
process and even if it was, there is insufficient evidence that disclosure could
reasonably be expected to have the
nominated effect of prejudicing the effective
exercise of the Respondent’s functions. This information is a record of
and observations in the exercise of public functions.
Counsellor case note dated 21 June 2022
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability and informing the Applicant of
the operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the Applicant and her child (in
terms of information that the
counsellor relies on to support the child). The
public interest considerations against disclosure related to responsible and
government do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure,
because the information is not confidential information or
a deliberative
process and even if it was, there is insufficient evidence that disclosure could
reasonably be expected to have the
nominated effect of prejudicing the effective
exercise of the Respondent’s functions. This information is an observation
the exercise of public functions.
Referrals dated 30 June 2022
The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are enhancing
Government accountability and informing the Applicant of
the operations of the
Respondent and their practices for dealing with the Applicant and her child. The
public interest considerations
against disclosure related to responsible and
effective government do not override the considerations in favour of disclosure,
the information is not confidential information or a deliberative
process and even if it was, there is insufficient evidence that
disclosure could
reasonably be expected to have the nominated effect of prejudicing the effective
exercise of the Respondent’s
functions. This information is a record of an
observation in the exercise of public functions.
Information which Applicant is refused access
Tribunal is satisfied that the email correspondence dated 14 March 2023 (at
pages 21 to 24 of the second bundle of documents),
is confidential information
that has been provided to the Respondent by a third party, and includes personal
information about third-party
children. The public interest consideration in
favour of disclosure, namely enhancing Government accountability, does not
the public interest considerations against disclosure which are
afforded significant weight. That is, prejudicing the supply to the
of confidential information that facilitates the effective exercise of that
agency’s functions, and it not being
in the best interests of the
third-party children for their personal information to be provided to the
Applicant. The Tribunal has
therefore decided that the Applicant should be
refused access to this information.
relation to the assessment material (at pages 105 to 114 of the first bundle of
documents), the Respondent submits that the assessment
material was administered
by a trained teaching professional for use within the school, and was not
administered for wider distribution.
The Respondent submits that the assessment
material is intended for use within the school to assist in creating a positive
environment for students.
relation to T1(d) – the effect of prejudicing the supply to the Respondent
of confidential information that facilitates the
effective exercise of the
Respondent’s functions, the Tribunal is satisfied that the assessment
material is subject to copyright
restrictions and that the assessment material
is treated confidentially by the Respondent. If disclosed to the Applicant,
possibly copyright infringement, it is relevant to consider that
disclosure cannot be made subject to any conditions on the use or
disclosure of
information (GIPA Act, s 15(e)). This means that the Tribunal cannot restrict
the Applicant from providing the assessment
material to any other person,
including her children. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that disclosure
could reasonably be expected
to undermine the effectiveness of the
Respondent’s ability to confidentially administer tests of students in the
relation to T1(f) – the effect of prejudicing the effective exercise by
the Respondent of its functions, which includes evaluation
of students’
educational and clinical assessments, the Tribunal accepts that it can be
reasonably expected that the disclosure
of the confidential assessment material
(not the test results themselves which can be disclosed) to the Applicant would
the effective exercise of the Respondent’s functions.
relation to T1(h) – the effect of prejudicing the conduct, effectiveness
or integrity of testing conducted by or on behalf
of an agency by revealing its
purpose, conduct or results, the Respondent submits that disclosure of the
assessment material to the
Applicant may give the Applicant and parents an
opportunity to use the materials prior to formal supervised assessments. The
submits that the students that are assessed would then not be
answering the questions in a candid manner, as they may be
GU v Commissioner, Department of Corrective Services
, also involved an applicant seeking access to copies of psychological
test material. In that case, the Tribunal refused the applicant
access to copies
of psychological tests that he undertook to assess his progress after
participating in a treatment program for sex
offenders. While most of these
tests were publicly available, the Tribunal accepted that if they were widely
circulated, those who
had an opportunity to study the test questions would not
answer in an impromptu or spontaneous manner, which would affect the validity
the test results. The Tribunal found at [19] that the public interest
considerations against disclosure are that the validity
of the tests could
reasonably be expected to be compromised and the agency would lose the
opportunity to share information with the
scientific community about the results
of that testing. In addition, the scientific community would be reluctant to
share information
with the agency if they knew that they could not keep the
tests confidential.
Tribunal accepts that in this case, the validity of the testing for the child
and potentially other students could reasonably
be expected to be compromised if
the assessment material was disclosed to the Applicant.
Tribunal is satisfied that the public interest considerations against disclosure
in relation to responsible and effective government,
as well as possible
public interest considerations in
favour of disclosure of providing the
Applicant access to her child’s personal information, enhancing Government
accountability
and providing the Applicant with information about the
Respondent’s operations. The Tribunal has therefore decided that the
Applicant should be refused access to the assessment material.
the Tribunal has found that the requested information is not held by the
Respondent because it is not likely that the information
exists and reasonable
preferable decision is that
the Respondent’s decision of 30 May 2025 is
balancing the public interest considerations for and against disclosure, the
Tribunal has decided that the Applicant is to be
provided access to certain
information as set out in the tables at [74] and [109] of this. The correct and
preferable decision is
that the decision of the Respondent of 26 March 2025 is
accordingly varied. The decision to refuse access to the remainder of the
disputed information is affirmed.
is appropriate to make orders which will prohibit the publication and disclosure
of the confidential information, as well as publication
and disclosure of the
transcript and recording of the confidential hearing, to the Applicant.
(1) The decision of the Respondent of 30 May 2025 is affirmed.
(2) The decision of the Respondent of 26 March 2025 is varied so as to
provide the Applicant access to the information as set out
at [74] and [109] of
this decision. The Respondent is to provide the Applicant access to this
information within 28 days of this
(3) The decision of the Respondent of 26 March 2025 is otherwise affirmed.
(4) Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(b)
and (d) of the
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), the publication of, and disclosure to the Applicant
of, the confidential material is prohibited.
(5) Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(b)
(1)(d) of the
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), the transcript and recording of the confidential
hearing is not to be published or disclosed to the Applicant or the public.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the
reasons for decision of the New South Wales Civil and Administrative
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (428 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter