URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/308.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kilpatrick v Port Kembla Port Corporation (No. 2) (Costs) [2013] NSWADT 308 (31 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Kilpatrick v Port Kembla Port Corporation (No. 2) (Costs)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 308
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Decision Date:
31 December 2013
Judge K P O'Connor, President
(1) The respondent's costs application is granted.
applicant is to pay the respondent's costs of the proceedings, fixed at $5,000.
Catchwords:
COSTS - Review application outside jurisdiction - Respondent's application
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Uncollected Goods Act
Cases Cited:
Kilpatrick v Port Kembla Port Corporation
[2013] NSWADT 195
Leslie Kilpatrick (Applicant)
Port Kembla Port Corporation
(Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
In person (Applicant)
S Dyball, Heard McEwan Legal (Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
have dismissed the applicant's review application on the ground of want of
Kilpatrick v Port Kembla Port Corporation
[2013] NSWADT 195
(30 August 2103). The respondent, as it foreshadowed in its principal
submissions, has now applied for its costs of the proceedings.
The Registrar
gave directions to the parties to file submissions, the respondent by 17
September 2013, and the applicant by 1 October
2013. The respondent filed its
submissions on 12 September 2013, and there were no submissions from the
applicant. The file was returned
to me late in November.
respondent applied for an order for its full costs of the application and the
response, including indemnity costs in accordance
with the general rule at law
that costs follow the event. I note at this point that the
costs-follow-the-event rule does not apply
in this Tribunal (see further
3 December 2013 I requested the respondent to provide a fixed amount costs
estimate, so that, if I was minded to accede to the
application, I could make a
final costs order. I have adopted this practice in recent years so as to avoid
yet another point of dispute
between parties. The request was copied directly to
the review applicant.
led to a reply from the review applicant protesting that he had never received
the respondent's submissions filed 12 September
2013. I gave him time to file.
He filed submissions on 11 December 2013 responding to those submissions. The
review applicant submitted
that each party should bear their own costs. The
submissions referred to the history of the dispute between the parties over the
goods left on the respondent's land, and contended that the review applicant's
interests had been dealt with in an improper way in
various respects by the
respondent and the respondent's solicitor.
12 December 2013 the respondent's solicitor filed an estimate of professional
costs and disbursements, $8082.92 in the form of
an itemised bill prepared by
the firm. On 18 December 2013 the respondent's solicitor filed substantive
submissions replying to the
review applicant's submissions. As to the review
applicant's claim that he did not receive the respondent's submissions filed 12
September 2013, the respondent's submissions of 18 December 2013 annex a letter
showing that it was copied by email to Paul Kilpatrick
at Paul's email address.
Paul Kilpatrick had appeared as non-lawyer agent for his father before me in the
earlier proceedings, and
was still recorded as his representative at that time.
He was no longer recorded as representing his father when the file was returned
to me, giving rise to the direct communication with his father.
The Ordinary Rule
ordinary rule in the Tribunal is that each party bears its own costs.
Administrative review proceedings concern the relationship
between individuals
and government, and a public purpose is served by the accountability that
administrative review proceedings bring
to the functioning of government. It is
most unusual for the Tribunal to depart from the usual rule in administrative
review proceedings.
Tribunal's power to award costs is by way of exception, and
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(ADT Act) governs the
discretion. It provides:
(1) Each party to proceedings before the Tribunal is to bear the party's own
costs in the proceedings, except as provided by this
(1A) Subject to the rules of the Tribunal and any other Act or law, the
Tribunal may award costs in relation to proceedings before
it, but only if it is
satisfied that it is fair to do so having regard to the following:
(a) whether a party has conducted the proceedings in a way that unnecessarily
disadvantaged another party to the proceedings by conduct
(i) failing to comply with an order or direction of the Tribunal without
reasonable excuse, or
(ii) failing to comply with this Act, the regulations, the rules of the
Tribunal or any relevant provision of the enactment under
which the Tribunal has
(iii) asking for an adjournment as a result of a failure referred to in
subparagraph (i) or (ii), or
(iv) causing an adjournment, or
(v) attempting to deceive another party or the Tribunal, or
(vi) vexatiously conducting the proceedings,
(b) whether a party has been responsible for prolonging unreasonably the time
taken to complete the proceedings,
(c) the relative strengths of the claims made by each of the parties,
including whether a party has made a claim that has no tenable
basis in fact or
(d) the nature and complexity of the proceedings,
(e) any other matter that the Tribunal considers relevant.
(2) The Tribunal may:
(a) determine by whom and to what extent costs are to be paid, and
(b) order costs to be assessed on a basis set out in Division 11 of
Legal Profession Act 2004
or on any other basis.
(3) However, the Tribunal may not award costs in relation to proceedings for
an original decision unless the enactment under which
the Tribunal has
(4) In this section,
(a) costs of or incidental to proceedings in the Tribunal, and
(b) the costs of or incidental to the proceedings giving rise to the
application, as well as the costs of or incidental to the application.
Respondent's Submissions
respondent did refer in its submissions to several of the considerations listed
s 88(1A)(a)
, in particular items (i), (iii) and (v). The applicant failed to
file and serve submissions in accordance with the original timetable,
a wasted preliminary hearing (31 July 2013) with the result that the matter was
delayed, and the hearing needed to be
put back by five days to 5 August 2013.
The submissions go on to contend that the applicant has vexatiously conducted
the proceedings
(see item (vi)), and a case that had no tenable basis in fact or
law (para (c)).
respondent states that on numerous occasions it made the applicant aware that
the items of equipment the subject of the proceedings
were not in the
respondent's possession and could not be returned to the applicant without the
authority of the liquidator of Kilpatrick
Group Pty Ltd (in Liquidation). The
applicant is the principal director of the company.
respondent has also submitted that the applicant attempted to deceive (see item
(v)) the respondent and the Tribunal by submitting
an affidavit of Paul
Kilpatrick (his son and then representative before the Tribunal) sworn 19 July
2013 purporting to be witnessed
by a person described as a barrister, 'H K
Tobin'. The submissions have attached a letter from the NSW Bar Association
stating there
is no barrister known to it with that name, now or in the
Review Applicant's Submissions
review applicant submits that he did make all reasonable efforts to resolve the
dispute. The submissions refer to notices said
to have been given three times by
the respondent in April 2013 (on the 19th, 24th and 30th) that it would be
taking action in the
Supreme Court in relation to the goods left on its land
Uncollected Goods Act 1995
and claims that it failed to pursue
the demand, forcing the review applicant to proceed by filing a review
application on 31 May
2013 in the ADT to get the dispute resolved, invoking the
Impounding Act
applicant obtained an injunction from Kunc J of the Supreme Court
after learning
that the equipment was due to be auctioned on 1 June 2013. The review applicant
claims that he was 'intentionally
mislead' by the notices given in April
review applicant rejects the respondent's assertion that the witness to the
affidavit sworn 19 July 2013 was not qualified.
review applicant also makes a technical submission, arguing that the Tribunal
was not involved in its review jurisdiction when
making its decision upholding
its objection to jurisdiction. The argument is that as the review application
was found incompetent,
the review jurisdiction was never engaged, and therefore
the Tribunal must have been in its 'original' jurisdiction, and s 88(3)
be satisfied. There is no relevant provision. This argument is misconceived. The
Tribunal was seized of an application purporting
to engage its review
an application engages the review
the application falls within the jurisdiction, standing, compliance
with time limits and the like. A respondent forced to appear
in the Tribunal by
the lodgment of a review application is not barred from applying for costs by
being successful in bringing the
application to a quick end on a preliminary
point going to jurisdiction.
will not address the issue as to the witnessing of the affidavit. This is a
dispute of fact that I do not need to address to decide
this application. I make
no finding on the matter. The witness statement would, in the ordinary practice
of this Tribunal, have been
accepted even if the witness did not belong to the
classes required for the witnessing of affidavits.
do not accept that the respondent or the respondent's solicitor engaged in any
improper conduct in the pursuit of its claim against
the goods, and in placing
them with an auctioneer. I accept the respondent's solicitor's account of the
attempts it made to obtain
a resolution of its claim in respect of the
agree that there was an unnecessary delay caused by the applicant's failure to
file submissions in accordance with the original
timetable. I do not regard that
as a significant matter in the context of a case of this dimension. Further the
hearing was conducted
by telephone, so that the respondent did not have any
costs of attendance in Sydney. Ms Dyball, solicitor of Heard McEwan Legal,
prepared the respondent's written submissions, and presented the oral
submissions.
my view the applicant's case was untenable. I refer in particular to para [32]
of my reasons. The only reasonable connotation of
the circumstances was that the
respondent took action against the goods under the
Uncollected Goods Act
, and therefore the review jurisdiction of this Tribunal was not
engaged. This is so, even if, as the applicant contends, he owned
personally not the company in liquidation.
do not see the case as one so hopeless or so badly conducted that an indemnity
costs order should be made. It is sufficient that
there be an award of costs
free of that consideration. If I make an unquantified order and leave the amount
to be determined by negotiation
or the costs assessment process, I will be
allowing another theatre of conflict. The respondent has filed an itemised bill.
all refer to work reasonably connected with the ADT proceedings and
the specific amounts appear reasonable.
my view an award of $5,000 is appropriate. I accept that this amount is short of
the amount shown in the itemised account. But
I think it better to fix an amount
and bring an end to the controversy before the ADT.
(1) The respondent's costs application is granted.
(2) The applicant is to pay the respondent's costs of the proceedings, fixed
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (124 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter