URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/115.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Couley v Elaro [2025] NSWCATCD 115; (13 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Couley v Elaro
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 115
Hearing Date(s):
27 June 2025
Date of Orders:
13 August 2025
Decision Date:
13 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
S Hunt, General Member
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
ordered that the rent shall not exceed the sum of $635.00 per week from 28 June
2024 to 27 June 2025, having regard to a reduction
or withdrawal of facilities
provided with the premises.
(2) The excess rent paid
by Judith Couley as a result of Order (1) should be refunded to her by Bakhous
Elaro within 14 days of
the date of these orders.
The landlord, Bakhous Elaro, is to pay the tenant, Judith Couley, the sum
of $400 within 14 days of the date of these orders.
(a) $400 as
compensation for breach of quiet enjoyment, and breach of notice requirements
for access.
(4) All other claims by the tenant are
Catchwords:
RESIDENTIAL TENANCY – quiet enjoyment – rent reduction -
Legislation Cited:
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
Cases Cited:
Advance Fitness v Bondi Diggers
[1999] NSWSC 264
Callum [2024] NSWCATAP
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Judith Couley (applicant)
Bakhous Elaro (respondent)
Representation:
Mr Orman, Seniors Rights Service (applicant)
Mr Bui, Kims Realty
(respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00113034
Publication Restriction:
application concerns a written residential tenancy agreement for a house at
Greenacre, NSW, between the Ms Couley, the applicant
tenant, and Bakhous Elaro,
the respondent landlord. There was a fixed term agreement between the parties
for the period 24 August
2023 to 25 August 2025. The tenancy continued on a
periodic basis. The rent was $660/week.
The application
application was received by the tribunal on 21 March 2025. At the time of
lodging the application, the applicant sought, broadly:
orders under the
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
(NSW)(the RT Act) for particular work and repairs
to be undertaken by the respondent; orders for compensation to be paid to the
for damage to personal goods; and order for rent reduction on the
basis of a withdrawal or reduction in services or facilities.
30 April 2025, when the matter was before the tribunal for conciliation and
hearing, orders were made by consent for the landlord
to undertake certain work,
including installing a window and removing certain rubbish. At that time, the
orders sought by the applicant
were clarified to include, in summary: orders for
repairs to be undertaken to the workroom/garage roof and to the back patio to
leaks; an order for $92 compensation for damaged sewing materials; and
an order for rent reduction during the period the stove, oven
and work/room
garage leaks were not repaired; as well as an order for compensation in the
amount of $500 for breach of quiet enjoyment
for 7 attendances at the premises
by the landlord without notice, which had occurred since commencement of
proceedings. The tribunal
at that time ordered that the parties continue to have
leave to be legally represented in proceedings, and made other directions.
The hearing and evidence
heard the application at a special fixture hearing at Campbelltown on 27 June
2025. At the hearing before me, the applicant was
represented by Mr Orman,
solicitor, for the Seniors Rights Service. Ms Couley also appeared and gave
evidence. The respondent was
represented by Mr Bui of Kims Realty, managing
agent. Mr Bui also gave evidence.
parties had exchanged and submitted documentary evidence prior to the hearing
before me, with the applicant’s documents
submitted on 21 March 2025, with
the application, and 16 May 2025. The respondent’s documents were
submitted on 8 April 2025.
the hearing, the applicant confirmed that she was no longer seeking work orders,
and withdrew the application for those orders,
as she intended to move out soon,
but that her other claims were pressed.
issues I have considered in making a decision in this matter are:
(1) Is the applicant entitled to an excessive rent order
equivalent to a 20% rent reduction for a period of 12 months on the basis
the respondent has withdrawn or reduced facilities or services?
(1) Is the applicant entitled to $92 for damage to her personal
possessions?
(1) Is the applicant entitled to $500 compensation for breach
of her right to quiet enjoyment?
Relevant law
section 44(3)
Residential Tenancies Act
(NSW)(the RTA), a
tenant may, before the end of the tenancy, make an application to the tribunal
for an order that the rent is excessive,
having regard to the reduction or
withdrawal of any goods, services or facilities provided with the residential
premises. The tribunal
may make such an order under
s 44(1)(b).
A non-exhaustive
list of factors the tribunal may consider in making an excessive rent order are
Mulcair v Callum
[2024] NSWCATAP 30
at 65-69, the NCAT Appeal Panel set
out the steps to generally consider when determining a rent reduction claim
as a result of breach of landlord’s obligations. In
(a) Firstly, it is necessary to identify what were the obligations of the
landlord under the residential tenancy agreement concerning
the residential
premises and the provision of goods, services and facilities.
(b) Secondly, identify any breaches in connection with the obligations.
(c) Thirdly, determine whether any defects in or repairs required to the goods,
services or facilities resulted in a relevant reduction
or withdrawal. In so far
as facilities are concerned, this requires the tribunal to be satisfied that:
(i) There had been an inability to use or enjoy the particular facilities in
whole or in part.
(ii) The inability arose because of the landlord’s conduct, being a
failure to supply relevant facilities, make good defects
or correct any breaches
affecting the relevant use and enjoyment.
(d) Fourthly, if there are discrete matters said to give rise to separate
reductions or withdrawals, the tribunal ordinarily needs
to consider each in
terms of cause and effect, and the period a reduction should apply. Any separate
awards for breach or compensation
should be considered in the overall
appropriateness and reasonableness of the proposed rent reduction order.
of the RTA, a landlord is under a general obligation to provide the
residential premises in a ‘reasonable state of cleanliness’
‘fit for habitation’ by the tenant:
Section 52(1A)
out a non-exhaustive list of requirements for a premises to be ‘fit for
habitation’, which includes ‘have
adequate plumbing and
drainage’ and ‘structurally sound’ as defined. The obligation
is not limited to the state
of the premises at the beginning of the tenancy, but
is ongoing.
of the RTA, a landlord must also provide and maintain the residential
premises in a reasonable state of repair, having regard to
the age of, and rent
payable for and prospective life of the premises:
The obligation
applies even though the tenant had notice of the state of repair before entering
into occupation:
A landlord is not in breach of the obligation if the
disrepair is caused by the tenant’s breach:
, and cannot be found
in breach of the obligation undertake repairs, when considering a repair order
, unless it is satisfied that the landlord had note of the need to
repair or ought reasonably to have known of the need for repair.
Residential Tenancies Act
2010 (the RTA) provides as
50 Tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment
(1) A tenant is entitled to quiet enjoyment of the residential
premises without interruption by the landlord or any person claiming
by, through
or under the landlord or having superior title (such as a head landlord) to that
of the landlord.
(1) A landlord or landlord’s agent must not interfere
with, or cause or permit any interference with, the reasonable peace,
(1) Maximum penalty—10 penalty units.
(1) A landlord or landlord’s agent must take all
reasonable steps to ensure that the landlord’s other neighbouring
do not interfere with the reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of the tenant in
using the residential premises.
(1) This section is a term of every residential tenancy
the right to quiet enjoyment is expressed in absolute terms in s 50(1), the
breach provisions in s50(2) and s50(3) refer to
interference with the
‘reasonable’ peace, comfort or privacy of the tenant.
respect of a tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment and the landlord’s
breach of that right, a ‘mere interference’
with the comfort of a
tenant from an annoyance is insufficient to constitute a breach of a
tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment.
There must be a substantial
interference with the enjoyment of the premises through an act or omission that
was either deliberate
or negligent in the sense that the consequences were
reasonably foreseeable:
Advance Fitness v Bondi Diggers
[1999] NSWSC
Consideration
Is the applicant entitled to an excessive rent order?
have considered each area of the applicant’s complaints
‘leaks’ in the workroom/garage
tenant claims that the landlord has failed to repair the leaks in the workroom
in breach of their obligations despite complaints
since soon after she moved in.
considered and weighed the evidence, I make the following findings of regarding
the factual basis of the issue:
(1) The room in question, which is variously referred to as a
‘workroom’ (the applicant), ‘garage’, ‘storage
room’ (by the respondent) is a converted garage, with a storage room as
part of it. The garage was lined and tiled by a previous
tenant without
permission. This is based on the evidence of Mr Bui and accords with the
photographic evidence in the incoming condition
report and with the evidence of
the applicant.
(2) The room was not advertised as a ‘workroom’ when the property
was advertised prior to the tenant moving in. This
claim is not made out. The
solicitor for the applicant claimed this in submissions, but the respondent
disputes this, and there is
no evidence to support the solicitor’s claim.
There is no statement to this effect in the tenant’s statutory
declarations
nor in her other evidence. There is no evidence before the tribunal
of the text of the advertisement. It is described as a general
garage/carport/storeroom and general garden shed in the incoming condition
(3) The tenant discussed with the agent using the room for her sewing business
prior to entering into the agreement. This is primarily
based on the
tenant’s sworn statement. Despite this, I note that the agreement contains
an express term that the premises be
used for residential use only.
(4) The water ingress into the room is occasional, when rain is particularly
heavy. The applicant stated in her first statement that
it shortly after she
moved in, she became aware that the room “had leaks causing water to enter
every time there was rain”,
and subsequent complaints reiterated similar
claims, and the claim was repeated at the hearing. But in evidence during the
and in explaining why she had continued to use the workroom for her
business, the applicant gave sworn evidence that water had entered
the room on
tenant had resided in the premises for
over 18 months.
(5) The water ingress is likely caused by water flowing under the door, due to
the tile floor being below the level of the ground
outside, rather than what is
commonly understood as ‘leaks’. While the tenant has repeatedly
complained of ‘leaks’
to the room, the evidence does not support the
fact that there are ‘leaks’ in the common sense as in leaks in the
The landlord’s evidence was that a new roof and guttering was put on
the room shortly before the tenancy commenced, and their
only explanation, prior
to recently establishing the water under the door theory, was that the gutters
lacked capacity to deal with
torrential rain. It also accords with the
applicant’s evidence that the SES had sandbagged the door at one point,
flowed under the sliding door, the photos showing water on the floor
of the room, and the nature of the damage to the fabric claimed
(6) The landlord did investigate the ‘leaking’ room on 10 October
2023, noted that there were plants climbing onto the
roof which they suspected
was the cause, and stated they would cut the plants and monitor the situation.
Later they advised that
the roof and guttering were new.
have next considered whether the landlord has breached any obligations in
respect of the workroom/garage.
applicant’s claim was primarily based on the alleged failure to repair the
leak in the room despite being on notice of the
issue. I am persuaded that the
landlord was on notice of the issue of water ingress into the room from very
early in the tenancy,
and the issue was not rectified at the time of hearing.
The landlord’s task was not assisted by the description of the issue
‘leak’ and the fact that the issue was occasional and not directly
observed. And I note that the landlord did, in
fact, take steps to investigate
the issue and address it. First by inspecting, theorising that it was overgrown
vines, and making
a plan to rectify. In the circumstances, I am not persuaded
that there was a failure of the duty in s 63 of the RT Act. It was not
of maintenance of state of repair.
have also considered whether there was a breach of the landlord’s
obligation to provide premises that are fit for habitation
under s 52 of the RT
of the requirements for a premises to be considered ‘structurally
sound’ and ‘fit for habitation’ is that:
with respect to the
floors, ceilings, walls and supporting structures – are not subject to
significant dampness: s 52 (1B)(b).
Another is that: with respect to the roof,
ceilings and windows – do not allow water penetration into the premises: s
am persuaded that in light of the occasional but significant water ingress into
the workroom/garage that the room is subject to
significant dampness and
consequently not fit for habitation because it is not structurally sound.
have considered that the room is a converted garage. There may not be an
expectation that a garage is ‘habitable’ or
that it does not suffer
from the weather. But in the circumstances of this case, I am persuaded that the
room in question was presented,
when the tenant entered the agreement, as a
habitable room. It had a tiled floor, walls and a ceiling, despite the labels on
photos in the incoming report. Even though tenant was proposing and has in
fact used the room for a non-permitted purpose, in carrying
on a business, she
could have used the room for any purpose. There was no disclaimer in the
agreement that the room was a garage
or not habitable. It is contrasted the
separate ‘garden shed’ which was clearly a shed.
a consequence, I find that the respondent is in breach of their obligation to
provide habitable premises in respect of the workroom/garage.
The room has not
been habitable throughout the tenancy.
The stovetop and
tenant claims that she was without a functioning stovetop and oven from the
beginning of the tenancy in September 2023 until they
were fixed earlier in
2025, and that she is entitled to an excessive rent order as a result, impliedly
on the basis that the landlord
has breached their obligations to maintain and
repair the premises.
evidence about the state of the oven and cooktop during the tenancy is confusing
and conflicting. That evidence includes: the
applicant’s statutory
declaration, the incoming condition report, correspondence between the
applicant’s caseworker,
Ms Everingham and the agent, references to two
Department of Fair Trading complaints made by the applicant and related
correspondence
between the DFT and the agent, and invoices for work.
general, the applicant claims that the landlord did not take sufficient action
in relation to her complaints regarding and failed
to repair the stove top and
oven adequately until February 2025. In general, the respondent claims that they
have acted promptly
and diligently to the issues regarding the stove top and
specifically, the applicant claims and states at various times that the
stove-top hobs were incorrect when she move in, that
they were rusted
throughout, that they were unsafe and leaking gas, and that an igniter was
required to light them (though this may
only have been the oven), and that a
plumber engaged to fix them in October or November was not successful. She also
gave evidence
that she never used them.
to whether the initial problem with the stove hobs was addressed, I find, on the
evidence before me, and on the balance of probabilities,
that it was addressed,
and was fixed promptly. The respondent has produced an invoice from Hon
Maintenance dated 27 September 2023
for $150 to fix the cooktop. Further, a
record of the applicant’s complaint to the Department of Fair Trading
dated 10 October
2023, and reproduced in email correspondence between the DFT
and the agent in the respondent’s documents, the applicant acknowledges
that the stovetop had been repaired.
to whether the landlord acted promptly and appropriately to the complaint
received via the DFT in October 2023 that the stovetop
was leaking gas, I find
again, on the evidence before me, that they did so. The complaint was apparently
received visa the DFT rather
than directly. The agent reports in their response
that they had visited the premises to inspect, and found no gas leak, but rather
a weak flame, which was being investigated through the gas company. Evidence
submitted by the respondent indicates, and I find that
the landlord engaged a
plumber in December to run a new 24-meter gas line to the premises and
re-commission the stove.
there was some suggestion of an incident involving the fire brigade and gas
leak, there is insufficient evidence about this
incident to make any findings
regarding whether there was a leak and if so, what might have been the cause.
respect of the oven, while the applicant, often through a third party, has
consistently complained about the lack of use of the
oven, her direct evidence
on this at the hearing was that after the plumber visited in late 2023, the auto
igniter did not work,
and complained about having to light the oven with a
match. I am persuaded that between late 2023 and early 2025, the oven in the
premises only functioned if it was manually lighted with a match or a handheld
igniter. The applicant said this was inconvenient,
having to bend down, but I
consider that it is not generally and objectively more than an inconvenience. I
do not accept, on the
basis of the evidence before me, that the applicant was
without a functioning oven at any time during the tenancy.
Rubbish and other
submissions and at the hearing, in addition to the claims regarding the
stove/oven and workroom/garage, the applicant pressed the
issue that there was
rubbish left in the yard, which had reduced the use of the premises. While there
were complaints about rubbish
left on the premises, and a consequent claim that
the landlord had breached their obligation by not letting the premises
clean nor free of rubbish, I find that this claim is not made out. I
am positively persuaded that there was one item left at the
side of the
premises, which was subsequently removed. But in relation to the claim that
goods were left at the back corner of the
large yard, I am not persuaded that it
is made out. The photo presented is not dated, and does not accord with the
photos in the
incoming condition report. It appears possible that any goods may
have been later deposited by others, perhaps neighbours. If I am
wrong, and the
good were there at commencement, I find that there was not substantial loss of
amenity as a result, and the application
was made out of time.
relation to other claims mentioned, regarding security, the garage/carport, the
patio, I am not persuaded, on the evidence, that
any breach is made out nor any
loss demonstrated.
Is an excessive rent order warranted?
considering the applicant’s claim for an excessive rent, I have found that
the landlord breached their obligation to provide
habitable premises in respect
of the room described as workroom/garage, but I have not accepted the
applicant’s other claims
regarding the stove and oven or rubbish.
find that the landlord’s failure resulted in an inability to enjoy the
room in part. I note the applicant’s evidence
at the hearing that there
had been water ingress on about 10 days, but I accept that outside those days
the threat of rain may well
have restricted the use of that room. She had
continued to use the room throughout. I have considered that the room in
question was
just one additional room in what was otherwise a 3-bedroom house,
with a kitchen, living room and bathroom, a large yard, car port
and a garden
shed. It was not represented as a bedroom. It was a relatively minor space in
the premises, and its use was only restricted
in part. I do not think it fair or
appropriate to give additional consideration to its use for business purposes in
circumstances
where the agreement specifically stipulated that the premises were
for residential use only. The advertisements for other premises
presented by the
respondent, which are not date, suggest but do not demonstrate that the rent
paid by the applicant may be lower
than for other comparable properties.
the best I can on the evidence presented, I consider that a $25/week rent
reduction by way of excessive rent order is appropriate
in all the circumstances
of this case.
Is the applicant entitled to compensation for the
damage to her sewing materials?
applicant claims the sum of $92 in compensation for sewing material that weas
damaged after water ingress to the storeroom attached
to the workroom/garage.
The damage was claimed to have occurred in September 2024. The applicant claimed
that while she was aware
of water ingress to the workroom/garage, the goods were
in the attached storeroom. An application for an extension of time to make
claim was made.
circumstances where the applicant was aware of the issue of water ingress to the
floor of the garage/workroom, which I infer shared
a floor with the storeroom
from about 12 months prior to the incident where the fabric was damaged, I find
that the applicant failed
to mitigate any losses. She was on notice of the
issue, and could have moved anything of any value into the house proper. In
circumstances, I dismiss the claim, without considering her application
for an extension of time to make it.
Is the applicant entitled
to compensation for breach of her right to quiet enjoyment of the
applicant claims $500 compensation for what she claims were 7 attendances by the
respondent landlord at the premises without notice
during April 2025. Her
statutory declaration of 15 May 2025 recounts the incidents.
respondent conceded that the respondent landlord had been involved with prior
issues of attending the premises without notice
and had been counselled against
it. They conceded that the first incident was not permissible but claimed that
on the other occasions
the landlord had attended to undertake work that the
applicant had requested, including cutting down the step so that her car could
enter into the car park and removing rubbish.
find that the first incident recounted of attendance without notice on 2 April
2025 is serious and compensable. The applicant recounts
that the landlord
attended to challenge her about having made an application to the tribunal for
redress. She recounts that the landlord
shouted at her and she perceived his
tone as aggressive. This evidence was not contested. There was a second incident
when the landlord
attended on 20 April 2025 and told her to cancel the
application. Again the applicant’s evidence regarding this incident was
not challenged.
other incidents recounted were: a visit on 19 April 2025 where the landlord
requested to borrow her bins, then visits on 22 and
23 April 2025 where the
landlord attended to complete work on the front step without notice, and further
visits on 24 and 26 April
landlord can access residential premises at any time with the consent of the
tenant. For non-urgent necessary repairs, two days’
notice is required: s
55 (2)(c) of the RT Act. For general inspections, generally 7 days’ notice
is required.
find that the landlord attended the premises and breached the tenant’s
right to quiet enjoyment on 2 and 20 April 2025. I
find that the interference
was substantial on those dates because they were retaliatory and distressed the
applicant. I award $250
for the visit on 2 April 2025 and $100 for the visit on
20 April 2025. In respect of the other visits, I find that they were breaches
the obligation by the landlord to provide notice of access under s 55 of the RT
Act, but at the same time they appear to be related
to the landlord seeking to
comply with orders of the tribunal or undertaking work requested by the
applicant. While the applicant
may have been feeling ongoing effects from the
earlier visit, the visits also appeared to have a legitimate purpose. For each
those breaches, I award nominal compensation of $10 each.
conclude that the total award of compensation for the landlord’s visits in
April should be $400.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (269 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter