URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lloyd-Jones v Pontil Pty Ltd [2003] NSWCC 15 (8 July 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Lloyd-Jones v Pontil Pty
Ltd [2003] NSWCC 15
Irene D Lloyd-Jones
CASE NUMBER: 6434 of 2001 of 2003.00
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Neilson
DATES OF HEARING: 07/07/2003, 08/07/03
EX TEMPORE DATE:
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:
Perry instructed by Booth Brown Samuels & Olney appeared for the
FOR RESPONDENT:
Mr P J Nolan instructed by Moray & Agnew
appeared for the respondent.
1. This is a claim under
Workers Compensation Act 1987
claim arises out of the tragic death of the late Colin Stephan Lloyd-Jones in an
explosion at the North Parkes Mine on 24 November
1999. The applicant was
employed by the respondent which is a drilling contractor. He was employed as a
driller's assistant to
work in the North Parkes Mine.
2. His period of employment with the respondent commenced on 17 October
1999. He appears to have worked merely five weeks prior
to his death. However,
the deceased had worked on and off for the current respondent over a period of
some 10 years.
3. The applicant in these proceedings is Mr Colin Stephan Lloyd-Jones'
mother, Mrs Irene Dorothy Lloyd-Jones, who resides at Raumati
South in the
Dominion of New Zealand.
4. To understand the claim it is necessary to look to the background
relationship between the deceased worker and his mother. The
applicant, Mrs
Lloyd-Jones, was born on 21 March 1929. She is currently seventy-four years of
age. In 1949 she married the late
Brian Lloyd-Jones. There were 11 issue of
the marriage. Those issue were Graham who was born on 22 September 1950, Susan
born on 9 September 1952, Douglas who was born on 21 January 1954, Rose
who was born on 28 July 1955, Colin the deceased who was
born on 5 September
1958, Geoffrey who was born on 12 February 1960, Adele who was born on 17 May
1961, David who was born on 4 November
1962, Alexander who was born on 10 August
1965, Marilyn who was born on 19 October 1966 and Pauline who was born on 14
October 1967.
5. Mr Brian Lloyd-Jones died on 22 October 1973. At that time Colin was 15
years of age. The youngest of Mrs Lloyd-Jones' children
was then 6 years of
age. At the time of her husband's death the applicant commenced to receive a
widow's pension in the princely
sum of NZ$45.00 per week. It was obviously very
difficult to raise so many children on such a meagre income and the applicant
to do odd jobs "to make ends meet". She worked as a cleaner and used her
skills as a dressmaker to sew items which she sold to make
6. Colin left school at the end of 1973 when he was 15, the year of his
father's death. An elder brother, Douglas, went to Australia
in early 1974 and
commenced working as a contract cleaner. Douglas undertook to Mrs Lloyd-Jones
to care for his younger brother,
Colin, and Colin left the matrimonial home in
Wellington to move to Australia to work with Douglas in the contract cleaning
7. Over the next 10 years the contact between Colin and his mother was
limited. They did not meet. They corresponded by greeting
cards and on the
telephone. However, it appears that probably at the end of the 1980's Colin
commenced travelling to Wellington
to visit and stay with his mother, I infer,
during the Christmas holiday period.
8. The applicant's recollection of dates is not particularly satisfactory but
that is completely understandable. I do know that the
applicant sold the
property in Wellington in 1993, probably, and then moved to Carterton, where she
rented a property for approximately
12 months and then she bought the property
at Raumati South where she now lives.
9. Prior to the applicant's selling the property in Wellington, Colin had
visited on a number of occasions, which the applicant can
recollect, and on
those occasions Colin did substantial work on the applicant's property. On one
visit of approximately four weeks
Colin excavated beneath the house in order to
build there a flat. It appears that the only one of his siblings then living at
was David, who had some health problems. He was a chronic asthmatic and
had lost the sight of one eye in a motor vehicle accident.
The inference to be
drawn from his state of health is that he was not a particularly robust
10. Colin hired a jackhammer and excavated earth and rock from beneath the
house, but more importantly removed concrete piers which
were the foundations of
the house. He then had to support the house by erecting concrete walls or
barriers within which the flat
was constructed. After the flat was constructed,
David lived in it for a while with his wife. David and his wife then separated
but a child was born shortly after the separation. David had obviously left the
flat at the time of the separation but came to live
in the flat again with a new
de facto partner and he was living in the flat with his de facto partner when he
died on 9 June 1992
as the result of a ruptured aneurysm.
11. What happened to David prior to his death and his commencing to reside in
the flat indicates to me that the flat was constructed,
not as initially thought
in 1991, but earlier.
12. The important thing to note is that during the four weeks during which
the flat was constructed, that the deceased, Colin, worked
virtually non-stop on
the property and hired, for example, the jackhammer with which to do the work.
On another visit Colin erected
a dividing fence on the block of land on which
the applicant's house stood. This visit may have been between 27 December 1991
15 February 1992.
13. The length of the dividing fence was 140 feet and was built along a
slope. The backyard of the property was towards the top of
the slope, the front
of the property was towards the bottom of the slope. Also the adjoining land
which was being fenced off was
at a higher level than the applicant's block, so
that one can understand as the applicant told me, that not only was a fence
but it was necessary to do some excavation in order that the fence would
stand properly. The evidence discloses that the weight
of earth from the
adjoining property was one of the reasons that the old fence came down.
14. Again, Colin worked assiduously on the fence the entire period of his
visit. He might only have one day off for each week of
his visit. The
applicant told me that Colin was a very methodical person and would work from
8.30 in the morning to 5.00 pm or 6.00
pm each evening.
15. When Colin visited the applicant he essentially provided food for the
applicant and himself and any visitors that they had. The
applicant told me of
the deceased’s going to buy a side of lamb and fruit and vegetables. When
the deceased left to return
to Australia to continue his work, he would leave a
supply of provisions for the applicant which would keep her going for a further
three weeks.
16. The provision by Colin of foodstuffs for the family home enabled the
applicant to buy herself a few luxuries which included items
of clothing, shoes
and medication.
17. As I have earlier mentioned, David died of a ruptured aneurysm on 9 June
1992. Colin returned to Wellington on the following
day and stayed with the
applicant until 22 July 1992 when he returned to Australia. This period was
seven weeks and was a period
in which the applicant was consoled in her loss by
18. In the following year the applicant sold the property at Wellington and
moved to Carterton. Whilst the applicant was living at
Carterton Colin again
visited and helped the applicant look for and purchase a property at Raumati
19. When I have regard to Exhibit C it can be seen that Colin visited New
Zealand between 26 December 1994 and 2 March 1995, a period
20. Two of the applicant's neighbours, Helen and Sean Ferris, in a letter
addressed to the applicant's solicitors which has been tendered
by consent,
point out that the applicant moved into the property at Raumati South in 1995.
The applicant's recollection is clear
that Colin was present when contracts were
exchanged for the purchase of the house at Raumati South, but was not present
moved into the property. It appears therefore that the applicant's
estimate of the move into Raumati South was inaccurate and the
move should be
seen as being early in 1995.
21. It may be that the applicant sold the property in Wellington in late 1993
or early 1994 then moved to Carterton for a year and
in early 1995 moved into
her property at Raumati South. I do accept, however, that Colin visited his
mother for the 10 week period
over Christmas and New Year 1994/95 and greatly
assisted her in the selection and purchase of her new home and otherwise cared
22. The deceased, Colin, visited the applicant twice more prior to his tragic
death. Between 31 December 1995 and 23 January 1996,
a period of just over
three weeks, Colin visited the applicant at Raumati South and did substantial
work on her property. He also
visited the applicant between 27 December 1997
and 23 February 1998, a period of eight weeks, and again did substantial work on
applicant's property.
23. The house at Raumati South in which the applicant now resides is
weatherboard and covered by a galvanised iron roof. The applicant
referred to
it as having been built as a weekender in the 1920's. An addition had been made
to the original cottage which one might
describe as the traditional wash house.
It contained the bathroom, lavatory and laundry. When Colin visited on the
first occasion
he assisted in the construction and installation of new bathing
facilities in the house and the former wash house was turned into
a living area
which gave the applicant a larger bedroom.
24. A drain was found to be blocked and had to be dug up for inspection and
was found to be blocked by a dead hedgehog. This was
essentially labouring work
done by Colin.
25. The roof was leaking in the area where the wash house was joined to the
original structure and the leaking roof was repaired by
26. On a further visit Colin did substantial work in the garden and
surrounding area of the cottage. He removed a number of trees
and cut them up
for firewood. There are in evidence four photographs (Exhibit F) showing Colin
doing labouring work with the trees
on the property. That labouring work
included a fairly large excavation.
27. Colin also poisoned and then cut down a bamboo grove. He pulled down
then burnt an old wooden fence and had commenced the construction
fence prior to returning to Australia.
28. From the applicant's unchallenged description, it is clear that Colin
worked constantly on every day of his visit to his mother
in New Zealand on her
property, making life much easier for her and making her life more enjoyable.
There may have been a day off
here and there and on those days off the applicant
deposed to Colin’s taking the applicant on drives or to visit friends,
the applicant on outings which she otherwise would not enjoy.
29. On the evidence before me of the 10 children of the marriage of Brian and
Irene Lloyd-Jones who survived David's death, it was
only the deceased, Colin,
who gave her support and comfort after David's death.
30. The eldest child, Graham, may live in Wellington at the current time but
has or is about to move to Sydney. The applicant has
had very little to do with
him for the last 10 years. Susan lives in London. Douglas still lives in
Sydney. Adele lives in Canberra.
Roslyn lives in Wahroonga. Geoffrey lives in
Taiwan. Alexander lives in the North Island of New Zealand, some 50 to 60 kms
from the applicant, but he has separated from his first wife and the
applicant sees very little of him. She does have some visits
from his children.
Marilyn lives in Japan and Pauline lives at Beaudesert in Queensland.
31. The applicant all told has 23 grandchildren but the evidence discloses
that she only has contact occasionally with Nicola, a daughter
of Alexander. Of
the nine surviving children of Mrs Lloyd-Jones' children only one essentially,
Alexander, now lives in New Zealand
and has his own family to look after and has
very limited contact with his mother. As I said, the evidence discloses that
was the only person who regularly gave support to the applicant.
32. Colin never married, had not lived in any de facto relationship and did
not have any children. He was available to care for his
mother and did so at
his own expense by commuting every second year to New Zealand to be with his
mother, to care for her emotionally
and physically and to support her physically
and economically.
33. The question for my determination is how to value the financial support
which Colin provided to his mother. The pattern is clear
that the deceased was
visiting his mother essentially every second year for approximately seven weeks
in each second year, for example,
between 17 December 1991 and 15 February 1992
Colin was in New Zealand with the applicant for a period of some seven weeks.
David's death, Colin was again in New Zealand for approximately seven
weeks. The visit in 1994/95 was 10 weeks, the visit in 1995/96
was limited to
three weeks but the visit in 1997/98 was for eight weeks. I accept the
submission of learned counsel for the applicant
that I should average those
visits as being approximately seven weeks every second year.
34. Colin was 41 years of age at the time of his death. From the photographs
(Exhibit F) and from the applicant's description of
Colin's athleticism the only
inference to be drawn is that Colin was in rude good health and would easily
have expected to live the
normal span of years but for his tragic death in the
North Parkes Mine.
35. The life expectancy for a 41 year old male in 1998 was 39.66 years, that
is approximately 40 years.
36. Colin and his mother had discussed the future both indirectly and
directly. Quite understandably Mrs Lloyd-Jones was concerned
able to care for her in her declining years. For example, she raised with Colin
who would provide and chop the
firewood when the supply that he had made ran
out. Colin assured the applicant that she need not worry about the future.
told his mother that if there were problems he would ring her and he would
come back to care for her.
37. There were explicit conversations in which Colin made it clear in the
event of any problem developing he would come back and care
for either the
applicant herself or for her property. Indeed the inference to be drawn from
the conversations between Colin and
his mother was that Colin eventually hoped
to return to live in his native land, indeed the property at Raumati South was
resemble Australia somewhat by the planting of 25 gum trees and wattle
trees along the boundary. The garden that was constructed
was to remind Colin
of his period of life in Australia.
38. In mentioning the garden I should point out that the evidence discloses
that when Colin was present four truckloads of soil were
delivered and Colin
hired a bobcat and spread the soil over the property in order that the garden
might be created. That is just
another example of the type of work Colin was
regularly doing on the property at Raumati South. In that exercise also Colin
up an old concrete path with a sledgehammer and then buried the remains of
the path on one part of the property, probably to be covered
over by the new
39. The applicant herself as I said is now 74 years of age. She has had a
cardiac stent inserted but has no ongoing cardiac problems.
She told me that
she has been given a rosy prognosis in that regard by her treating surgeon. The
applicant has had a problem with
high cholesterol that has now been reduced to a
safe level by prescribed medication. The applicant otherwise is in good health
I have no hesitation in finding that she has a normal life expectancy. The
life expectancy for a 74 year old lady under the 1998
life tables is 13.78 years
and I find that the applicant has a life expectancy of 14 years.
40. The probabilities in my view are these: had Colin survived he would have
continued to visit his mother for approximately seven
weeks every second year.
Colin and his mother had discussed a visit over Christmas and New Year 1999/2000
but Colin told his mother
that he would not be visiting her as, I infer from
what she said, he was dissuaded by what could be described as 'millennium hype'
by those who do not know when a millennium begins. However, I infer that Colin
would have visited his mother for seven weeks over
Christmas and New Year 2000
and 2001 and over Christmas and New Year 2002/2003.
41. For the further 14 years of the applicant's life one would anticipate at
least seven more visits by Colin to his mother. I will
in a moment.
42. The next question is how do I value the visits by Colin to the applicant
over those seven week periods? There is in evidence
a letter from a company
"Jill's Of All Trades Limited”
of New Zealand
indicating that handyman, or perhaps one should say handywoman rates, are
between NZ$25 and NZ$35 per hour. Jill's of All Trades
Limited also runs a
gardening company called the
"Nice Little Garden Company"
, and gardening
services are provided at rates between NZ$22 and NZ$50 per hour. That range for
these services is accordingly between
approximately NZ$25 and NZ$50 per hour.
NZ$25 is currently A$20.75 and NZ$50 is currently A$41.50.
43. It appears to me therefore that the applicant if she paid for someone to
provide to her the services which Colin provided would
be paying approximately
A$30 per hour. The evidence is clear that Colin worked assiduously for at least
six days each week for at
least eight hours each day. $30 per hour for eight
hours per day for six days per week comes to $1440. However it must be
for two reasons at least. Firstly, the worker himself was not earning
that much in Australia at the time of his death and secondly,
although he was a
bit of a jack of all trades or as the applicant described him
"a typical New
Zealand male able to do anything"
he was not a professional gardener or a
professional handyman.
44. Wage records are part of Exhibit K and the first indicates that Colin was
earning $1051 per week gross or $887 per week net.
The second indicates that
over a period of eight days the applicant worked for seven days and his net
earnings in that period were
$1140.87. Over a fortnight Colin's net earnings
were $1540. His income tax assessment notice for financial year end of 30 June
1998 indicates that the deceased's average gross earnings were $850 per week and
his net earnings were $633 per week.
45. However, again it must be stressed that it was the value that the
applicant received from Colin's work that must be estimated,
not Colin's earning
capacity. I would moderate $1440 per week to $1000 per week. The value in the
labour provided by Colin to his
mother during each visit should be seen as being
$7000. To that must be added the value to the applicant of Colin's providing
for the consumption of his mother, himself and their visitors during each
seven week period and provisioning the freezer, refrigerator
and pantry for at
least three weeks thereafter. One can see 10 weeks of provisioning which I
estimate as being $150 per week, indicating
a total figure of $1500 in food and
groceries that Colin provided to his mother for her own benefit. It appears to
me that the cost
for two at the current time would be in excess of $300 per
46. Colin also used Mrs Lloyd-Jones vehicle when he was in New Zealand for
his own use but also for the applicant's use and he filled
it with fuel each
week. I would estimate that fuel at $30 per week and 7 x $30 is $210.
47. The remaining financial input by Colin to Mrs Lloyd-Jones was the cost of
materials and tools that Colin used in his various works
and the value to Mrs
Lloyd-Jones of, for example, Colin's repairing things, Colin's fixing the motor
mower, Colin's hiring of machines
such as the bobcat at Raumati and the
jackhammer in Wellington, the hiring of equipment as it was needed for carrying
out the handyman's
work. That part of the new dividing fence that Colin erected
at Raumati South was paid for by him. He also paid for galvanised
iron that was
used to repair the roof and paint that had to be placed on the roof and on the
building itself.
48. It has been submitted by Mr Perry for the applicant that I should value
that at $70 per week or $490 per visit. I think that
is excessive. I would
value that input as being approximately $290 per visit.
49. If my mathematics be correct then the value to the applicant of food
provided by Colin, fuel for her car, and the cost of materials,
tools, fuels and
the hire of equipment for each visit amounts to $2000. Therefore I value the
financial benefit to Mrs Lloyd-Jones
of each visit by Colin at $9000.
50. Up to the present time Mrs Lloyd-Jones could have expected two visits
from Colin, as I said in 2000/2001 and 2002/2003, so that
the total value of
financial support that Mrs Lloyd-Jones has lost to the current time is $18,000.
In the future she could expect
at least seven further visits at a financial
benefit to her of $9000.
51. The next consideration, of course, is the unpleasant rule we must all
face in that as we become older we become more feeble, less
able to look after
ourselves and prone to maladies. It is always possible that the applicant in
the future might have some cardiac
problems or perhaps even a stroke. As we
have learned medically to care for our hearts, the incidence of death by heart
has diminished. We have all commenced to live longer only to succumb to
the more insidious and painful malady of cancer. Any of
those sorts of problems
might befall the applicant in the future. Even if they do not, one can expect a
gradual deterioration in
physical and mental health over the next 14 years.
52. Equally one can accept that the applicant's ability to look after her
physical surroundings will also decline over the coming
years. She will be less
able to do things that she can now do. Even so, she points out to me, that it
is likely the roof will need
replacing, the fence which has been erected now
needs repair. One can expect many problems in the future with a property that
essentially a dwelling house that is some 90 years old.
53. Equally one can note the applicant's evidence that her seaside property
is often cold and buffeted by high winds. Storm or tempest
could do damage to
the property which, given his assurance to the applicant in the past, one would
expect Colin to have attended
to. Equally being New Zealand one can even
postulate that there might be some earthquake damage to the property which might
Colin's assistance to repair.
54. There are therefore two things to consider: the applicant's declining
health as she ages and increasing feebleness and also the
deterioration of an
old property which requires increasing amounts of repair.
55. The question is how to value the financial support that the applicant
might have expected from Colin if he had survived the blast
at the North Parkes
Mine in the future, in light of his promise to care for his mother. It can be
looked at, as counsel has submitted,
in two ways. The first is to say well
there might be three medical emergencies prior to the applicant's death which
would require
Colin's attention. Equally even if there were no medical
emergency, it is likely that as the applicant became more feeble Colin
visit more regularly, perhaps instead of making a biennial visit to making an
annual visit.
56. If there were a medical emergency, it is likely that the applicant would
be in hospital for at least a week. It is likely that
Colin would care for his
mother emotionally but that does not found economic support. However, people
are not kept in hospital for
long periods of time these days and one could
expect after a stroke or a heart turn discharge within a week and on Colin's
with his mother to her home, to care for her for say a period of some
six weeks. Whether Colin was caring for the applicant herself
or for the house,
one could still value that care as being $1000 per week. If one were to use
Dial An Angel figures, one would come
to a figure much greater than $1000 per
57. The other items of support that I have identified would also need to be
slightly moderated because, for example, during the week
when the applicant was
in hospital, Colin would not be required to feed the applicant nor to drive her
around in a motor vehicle.
58. It appears to me that I should value such three further visits as being
worth $7500.
59. To apply the proper discount rate and to provide for vicissitudes it is
necessary to reduce the global amounts which I have indicated
to a weekly amount
in present day values. On an annual basis the value of one ordinary visit is
$3500 and the value of three extra
visits at $7500 per visit averaged over a 14
year period comes to $1607. That makes an annual total of $5107 which can be
be $100 per week.
60. The discount rate which I apply is 3 per cent. That is the discount rate
accepted by judges applying the common law. It was
submitted on behalf of the
respondent that a 5 per cent discount rate should be used because that is now
used in assessing common
law damages. It is correct, as far as I am aware, that
that figure is used in assessing common law damages at the rate that is fixed
statute not by the common law.
61. Mr Nolan was unable to point me to any case in which it was held that the
discount rate at common law is 5 per cent. Therefore
I will use the discount
rate of 3 per cent which has been established at common law. I am advised that
the multiplier at 3 per cent
over 14 years is 598.2, so the total for the future
comes to $59,820. That must be discounted for vicissitudes. The traditional
discount rate at common law in New South Wales is 15 per cent. That is fixed by
decisions at the Court of Appeal which are binding
62. I note that very recently McHugh J in the High Court has indicated that
that discount rate is too great for ordinary wage earners:
[2002] HCA 52
; (2002) 77 ALJR 99,
193 ALR 130.
However, his Honour's observation
at par 99 of the decision is strictly obiter dictum. I think it appropriate to
apply the traditional
15 per cent discount in this case as I am bound to in any
event by authority. Of course here there are two sets of vicissitudes
taken into account, what might happen to Colin in the future and what might
happen to the applicant herself in the future.
It is always possible that
either could meet a tragic death. It is always possible that, for example,
Colin may have married or
moved himself out of reach of the applicant for some
reason or another.
63. Applying the 15 per cent discount rate the figure of $59,820 should be
reduced to $50,847.
64. I decline to discount for vicissitudes the amount of $18,000 which I have
allowed for the past. That is because clearly no vicissitudes
have occurred to
the applicant which would call out for any discount and given Colin's age of 41
years at the time of his death,
his robust athleticism and his failure to
contract any meaningful relationship in his 41 years and given the short period
which has elapsed between his unfortunate death and the current time I
do not believe that any discount is applicable for vicissitudes
to what may have
happened to Colin.
65. The total of $50,847 and $18,000 is $68,847.
66. I have enquired of counsel about the funeral expenses, but I have been
advised that they have been paid for by the respondent
67. To the sum of $68,847 must be added interest on the amount I have allowed
for the past. Mr Perry is claiming interest at the
rate of 6 per cent per annum
under the Jamberoo Accord rather than the rate under the
Supreme Court Act
Under the accepted principles interest must run on $9000 at 6 per cent for the
3.63 years. If my mathematics and my calculator
be accurate, that amounts to
68. The total sum then becomes $70,807.20.
69. I have enquired of the representatives of the parties whether any further
reasons for judgment are required and am told that no
reason is required.
70. I make an award for the applicant for $70,807.20 pursuant to
71. I order the respondent to pay the applicant's costs.
72. A submission was made to me that I should make a specific order that the
respondent pay for the applicant's costs in travelling
here at Sydney. That
submission was probably based on some old case law but that case law is not
applicable to the current claim.
The authorities make it clear that where, for
example, a cause of action arises in, say, Sydney where the applicant was living
Sydney and employed in Sydney but at a time prior to a hearing in Sydney
betakes himself to some foreign part such as Perth for no
reason associated with
the injury, then the costs of that applicant's returning to Sydney for the
hearing of his case are not proper
party and party costs.
73. This is not such a case. The applicant was at all material times in New
Zealand. She found it necessary to come to Sydney to
enforce her rights
therefore the respondent would under normal principles have to pay for the
applicant's costs of attending at Sydney
for the hearing of her case in any
74. I certify that the applicant's counsel is entitled to full refresher for
75. I certify additional conference $200.
Mr P L Perry instructed by
Booth Brown Samuels & Olney appeared for the applicant.
Mr P J Nolan
instructed by Moray & Agnew appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (33.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter