URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPDT/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TOMPSON v PODIATRISTS REGISTRATION BOARD of NSW [2010] NSWPDT 1 (24 June 2010)
PODIATRISTS ACT 2003
PODIATRISTS TRIBUNAL OF NSW
APPEAL UNDER
SECTION 109
MATTER NUMBER: 001/2010
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
VALERIE ANN TOMPSON
REASONS FOR DECISION
_______________________________________________________________________________________
CITATION: Tompson v Podiatrists Registration Board of NSW [2010]
PARTIES: Valerie Ann Tompson
(Appellant)
Podiatrists Registration Board of NSW
(Respondent ) -
represented by Mr Stan Benson instructed by Mr Geoff Boyd, solicitor (Mr
Sagar Thakur appearing), of the Crown Solicitors Office.
FILE NUMBER: PD01/2010
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne Muller (Chairperson)
Ms Deborah Marks
(Podiatrist Member)
Mr Luke Taylor (Podiatrist
Dr Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
DATE OF HEARING: 11 May 2010
DATE OF DECISION: 24 June 2010
DATE OF ORDERS: 11 May 2010
ORDERS (in summary): The Respondent is suspended from practising from 17 May
2010 for a period of two months. Thereafter conditions
apply. Costs in favour of
the Respondent.
CATCHWORDS: Podiatry – failure to comply with conditions on
registration imposed after Board Inquiry – appeal from Board
LEGISLATION CITED:
Podiatrists Act
CASES CITED:
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Podiatrists Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened on 11 May 2010 to conduct an
Inquiry in relation to an Appeal lodged by Mrs Valerie
Tompson (Appellant)
against a decision of the Podiatrists Board (Board) dated 16 December 2009.
Appeal lodged by the Appellant relates to the findings made by a Board Inquiry.
The Complaint before the Board Inquiry was as
Mrs Valerie Tompson, of [address] (the podiatrist) being a podiatrist
registered under this Act, has been guilty of unsatisfactory
professional
conduct within the meaning of
(d) of the Act in that the podiatrist
failed to comply with an order made or a direction given by the Board or the
Tribunal under
Particulars:
Mrs Valerie Tompson, a registered podiatrist, was directed to attend a
meeting with the Complaints Committee of the Board concerning
her refusal to
provide information respecting her continuing podiatric professional education.
Ms Tompson did not attend the interview
as directed.
Pursuant to
section 35(1)(e)
Podiatrists Act 2003
, the Podiatrists
Registration Board has referred the complaint to be dealt with by Inquiry at a
meeting of the Board under Division
4. An Inquiry will be held into the
complaint to ascertain whether you have been guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct or
other behaviour within the meaning of
Podiatrists Act
If the Inquiry finds the subject matter of the complaint against you to have
been proved it will also determine what action should
be taken by the Board,
pursuant to Division 5, Section 50, 51 and 52 of the Podiatrist
accordance with section 35(1)(e) the Board proceeded to deal with the above
complaint at an Inquiry held at a meeting of the Board.
Section 35(1)(e)
35 How complaints are dealt with
(1) When a complaint is made, the Board may at any time decide:
(e) to deal with the complaint by Inquiry at a meeting of the Board under
Division 4,
with respect to findings of the Board may be made to the Tribunal in accordance
with section 75 of the Act. Section 75 provides:
75 Appeals against actions of the Board on a complaint
(1) When a complaint has been dealt with at a meeting of the Board under
Division 4 of Part 4, the podiatrist or the Commission may
appeal to the
Tribunal against:
(a) a finding of the Board, or
(b) the exercise of any power by the Board under Division 5 (Disciplinary
powers of Board and Tribunal) of Part 4.
(2) An appeal must be made within 28 days (or such longer period as the
Chairperson may allow in a particular case) after:
(a) the Board's written statement of the decision by which the Board's
finding is made is made available to the appellant, or
(b) the exercise of the power against which the appeal is made.
(3) The appeal must be lodged with the Registrar who is to refer it to
the Tribunal.
(4) The appeal is to be dealt with by way of rehearing and fresh
evidence, or evidence in addition to or in substitution for the
received at the meeting of the Board, may be given.
(5) The Tribunal may:
(a) dismiss the appeal, or
(b) make any finding or exercise any power or combination of powers that
the Tribunal could have made or exercised if the complaint
had been originally
referred to the Tribunal.
(6) An appeal under this section does not affect any finding or exercise
of power with respect to which it has been made until the
Tribunal makes an
order on the appeal.
20(1)(k) of the Act provides:
20 Annual return to be submitted
(1) A registered podiatrist must, on or before the return date in each
year, furnish in writing to the Board in a form approved by
the Board a return
for the return period specifying the following information:
(k) details of any continuing professional education undertaken by the
podiatrist during the return period
Meaning of ‘unsatisfactory professional
Board Inquiry made findings under Section 25 (c) and (d) of the Act. Section 25
of the Act provides:
25 Meaning of "unsatisfactory professional conduct"
For the purposes of this Act, "unsatisfactory professional conduct", in
relation to a registered podiatrist, includes any of the following:
(a) any conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the podiatrist in the practice
of podiatry is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a podiatrist of an
equivalent level of training or experience,
(b) a contravention by the podiatrist of a provision of this Act or the
regulations or of a condition of the podiatrist's registration,
(c) a failure without reasonable excuse by the podiatrist to comply with a
direction by the Board to provide information with respect
to a complaint under
this Part against the podiatrist,
(d) a failure by the podiatrist to comply with an order made or a
direction given by the Board or the Tribunal under this Act,
(d1) a contravention by the podiatrist of section 34A (4) (Power of
Commission to obtain information, records and evidence) of the
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
(e) any other improper or unethical conduct by a podiatrist in the course
of the practice or purported practice of podiatry.
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is found when the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that
the conduct made out demonstrates one
of the deficiencies or inadequacies that
are set out in
of the Act. The Complaint currently before the
Tribunal alleges that the conduct particularised amounts to unsatisfactory
professional
conduct within the meaning of
(c) and (d).
Meaning of ‘professional misconduct’
Professional
Misconduct is defined in
of the Act as meaning:
For the purposes of this Act, "professional misconduct", in
relation to a registered podiatrist, means unsatisfactory professional
of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
podiatrist's registration.
Standard of proof required
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be “reasonably
satisfied” that the particulars
of the Complaint have been established.
The Tribunal applies the principles of
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Nature of the jurisdiction
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR
at 250-251). The object is not to punish the practitioner but to protect
the public and to maintain proper standards in the profession.
New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High
Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is
in no sense
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of
those who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
Tribunal not only has to protect the public but it is in the community interest
that the profession of podiatry should retain
and be entitled to retain the
respect and high regard in which it is held. Deterrence is also a relevant
Appearances
parties were represented as set out in the headnotes above.
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in the schedule
annexed hereto and marked with the letter ‘A’.
The Appellant
provided further documentation by post outside of the timetable set down for the
filing of documents in support of
her Appeal. These documents were ultimately
received by the Tribunal on 17 May 2010. This information was conveyed to the
in her oral evidence and has been considered by the Tribunal.
Acting Registrar of the Board and the Respondent both gave evidence before the
Background information
Background of the Appellant
Appellant was first registered as a podiatrist (Chiropodist) in 1964. Her
registration is current until 30 June 2010. The Appellant
stated in a number of
her letters to the Board that ‘
I am ex General, Obstets, theatre
University Hosp. London – Concord, and “Nurse Friday” To
Surgeon who had to retire
at 65 from State Hosp. – but continued Surgery
in Private Hospitals’.
Appellant completed her podiatric training at the Sydney Chiropractic training
facility in the early 1960s, the precursor to the
course operated by Sydney
far as the Tribunal is aware, the Appellant currently works part-time as a
podiatrist on the south coast of New South Wales.
Background to the Matter
Appeal arose out of a decision of a Board Inquiry following the
Appellant’s failure to comply with the Board’s repeated
to provide details of her Continuing Podiatric Professional Education.
the Appellant returned her application for re-registration with the Continuing
Podiatric Professional Education Log Sheet (CPPELS)
for the 2007/2008 year,
there was no record made of her current First Aid Certificate. Further, in the
space provided for recording
the Continuing Education activities she had written
(exhibit 2):
I am ex General, Sydney Obstets Sydney, theatre at (University Hosp
I keep up with all advances + Surgical Supplies
I don’t think I need a 1
Board considered this CPPELS form at its meeting on 16 April 2008. The Board
wrote to the Appellant on 7 May 2008 (exhibit 3)
noting that she did not hold a
current First Aid Certificate and that she had not completed her CPPELS. The
Board requested that
the Appellant complete the CPPELS and a suitable first aid
program. The Board also advised the Appellant that it reserved the right
interview any practitioner about whom it had concerns.
Appellant replied by letter dated 8 June 2008 (exhibit 4). In this letter the
Appellant stated (as written):
Regarding 1
Aid Certificate
I am ex General, Obstets & Theatre R.N and I keep up to date with Nursing
and Podiatry literature.
I have a son-in-law who is Nuclear Technologist & SES
Aid & daughter in Pathology.
I have worked in Dr June Fitzhenry now retired & Dr Tom Fuller –
[illegible] Culburra Part Time is Culburra Community Health
Centre where Dr John
Ibrahim practices & he is terrific – All bulk billing.
This saves a great deal as 70% plus are Senior Citizens, Pensioners
I do not work from the above Postal Address
Part Time only and I do not feel necessary to upskill as I retire next
Last year I received a letter from V/A, thanking me for my work
Apparently V/A check up randomly on Medical Auxiliaries
V A Tompson
I write because telephone is a waste of Time and FAX
Board replied to the Appellant by letter dated 26 June 2008 (exhibit 5). The
letter informed the Appellant that at its 18 June
2008 Board Meeting it resolved
to reiterate its request for her to undertake Continuing Podiatric Professional
Education, to complete
a CPPELS and a suitable first aid program. The Board
provided the Appellant with a document titled
‘Continuing Podiatric
Professional Education – Activities and Points’
that provides
details of the type of educational activities that can be undertaken to satisfy
the CPPE requirements of the Board.
further letter from the Appellant was received by the Board on 1 August 2008
(exhibit 6). This letter refers to a letter from the
Board dated 1 July 2008
which cannot be located by the Board. The letter received 1 August 2008 from the
Appellant stated (as written):
I would appreciate details ‘No 4 Impose restrictions on your
registration’
Ulladulla & Environs
I have worked with individual Practitioners for nearly two decades in Dr June
Fitzhenry’s suite until she retired – then
into Dr Tom
Fuller’s rooms until he retired
Since then I only see DOM
[domiciliary patients]
clients referred to
me from medicos
Culburra & Environs
Always major problems too medicos Dr John Ibrahim is in the same area as
myself & he is an excellent Doctor
I need to make copies of such restrictions for the medicos
As for the 1
In this Shire we have St Johns
So September will be the Time – wow
V A Tompson
I will be only working for ? a year – at
Tribunal notes the indication that the Appellant intended to complete a first
aid course in September 2008 and to possibly retire
within the year. The
Tribunal further notes that the Appellant returned the
‘Continuing
Podiatric Professional Education – Activities and Points’
and had handwritten (and signed)
‘I would appreciate an application for
response to this correspondence from the Appellant the Board replied by way of a
letter dated 5 September 2008. The letter includes
the following:
At its meeting of 20 August 2008 the Board considered your correspondence and
wish to advise that should a podiatrist not comply with
the Board’s
request, the Board may consider the podiatrist to be a risk to the safety of the
public of NSW and refer the matter
to the Complaints Committee of the Board for
consideration.
a letter dated 10 June 2009 (exhibit 8), the Board advised the Appellant that at
its meeting on 20 May 2009 it had noted she had
still not completed a CPPELS or
provided the expiry date of her First Aid Certificate. The Board informed the
Appellant that it was
a requirement under the Act for a return to be completed
with these details. The letter continued as follows:
The Board resolved that the Complaints Committee will now deal with your
matter. You are directed to attend an interview with the
Committee at its next
meeting of 15 July 2009 at 1.00pm in the Board’s Office.
a letter received by the Board on 1 July 2009 (exhibit 9) the Appellant
responded to the Board’s letter of 10 June 2009 which
I state my case. –
I am ex General, Obstets, theatre University College Hospital London –
Concord and “Nurse Friday” To Surgeon who
had to retire at 65 from
State Hosp. – but continued Surgery in Private Hospitals
I have a son-in-law who is Chief Nuclear Technologist – also joined SES
– and has showed me each year – the 1
Manual. Nothing has changed My friend – in Nursing & Podiatry Keep me
informed of new procedures & considerations.
They attend “Conventions etc etc”
My small practice involves requests, referrals from Medical Profession
– minority involves Patient/Client I have treated, mostly
This Shire has more Retirees than any other in this State and they have lost
a great deal due to this financial mess the country is
enduring – and they
are not Govt. employed.
So I am to continue for 12 months or so – for some Australians to
afford Podiatry.
I decline attendance
Another son in law has Law & he said appeal any adverse decision.
“Complaints Committee” –
Does this imply complaints from patients or the fact I don’t attend
your further education directions – May I say I keep
all pertinent data
from new patients/clients.
Early this year patient/client had Two attempts at Avalsion of L/Great
attempt successful – R great nail,
attempt deformed – I used drill and
black’s file etc and suggested she contact the Podiatrist about a
attempt – No more ???? or reduce the
deformity – N/C
Another – 3/52 before she retired down here she attended Podiatrist for
OC – but there was the OC.
Another last week Dr had given Antibiotics for infection
– No effect – Reason was the nail had
only been partially removed.
No one is perfect.
I always keep pertinent data.
V A Tompson
Board wrote to the Appellant on 21 July 2009 (exhibit 10) indicating that when
the matter was considered at its meeting on 15
July 2009 it had noted that she
was only providing care for a small number of long term patients and that she
had refused to submit
her CPPELS as had been directed by the Board. The letter
The Board now directs that you attend for a meeting with the Complaints
Committee of the Board to discuss your current work practises
continuing education. The meeting has been scheduled for 18 August 2001 at
1.00pm in the Board’s Office, situated
appears from the letter dated 31 August 2009 (exhibit 11) from the Board to the
Appellant that she did not attend the interview
on 19 August 2009. The Board
advised the Appellant that a finding of unsatisfactory conduct could be made
pursuant to section 25(c)
where the podiatrist fails without reasonable excuse
to comply with a direction of the Board to provide information with respect
complaint. The letter then advised the Appellant that a further interview had
been scheduled for 16 September 2009. The letter
concludes ‘
not comply with a direction of the Board, the matter can be escalated to further
disciplinary proceedings’.
written response was received from the Appellant by way of a letter dated 13
September 2009 (exhibit 12). The letter stated:
I telephoned before 19.8.09 and informed the staff that I would not be able
to comply and requested a copy of the “further education
I did not receive.
Medicos I receive referrals from, asked me what was on the list – I
couldn’t remember them all so I requested the list.
The quantity of work I do is minimal
My net profit from Podiatry was $29,000.
I have other obligations with fine reason, plus many of the elderly
If you have any complaints re my Practice – please tell me.
I keep a list of other Pods work and I think you should spend some time
controlling the cost of Podiatry to Taxpayers, especially
Seniors and families
or is this a concern of the State Govt.
I would appreciate that list of further education.
V A Tompson
Board wrote to the Appellant on 28 September 2009 (exhibit 13). This letter
stated (as written):
I refer to my letter dated 31 August 2009 in which you were directed to
attend for an interview with the Complaints Committee of the
Podiatrists
Registration Board for failing to complete continuing podiatric education as
instructed by the Board.
The Committee considered your correspondence dated 13 September 2009 and
directed that you are required to attend the next meeting
of the Board or a
complaint of professional misconduct may be made out against you.
The next meeting is scheduled for Wednesday 21 October 2009 and your
interview is scheduled for 1.00pm.
The Board reminds you that pursuant to
section 25(c)
Podiatrists
a finding of unsatisfactory conduct can be made out against a
podiatrist where a failure without reasonable excuse by the podiatrist
with a direction by the Board to provide information with respect to a
Board received a letter from the Appellant on 20 November 2009. The letter
stated (as written):
I collected mail from P.O. 11/11/09. 4pm as I have been away due to a
daughter’s illness – more important – May
I say I am the only
grandparent for my four families. They have priority next to the Referrals.
Thank you for the log sheet – I will be Taking it to Medical Practs
– at their request – this week. –
Your last paragraph “a finding of unsatisfactory conduct” –
To this I object
I will communicate next week after I have seen the Medicos.
V A Tompson
The Board resolved to deal with the matter as a Complaint and issued a Notice of
Inquiry (exhibit 15) indicating that a Board Inquiry
would convene on 16
December 2009. The Notice complies with all of the procedural fairness rules
regarding notification. The Complaint
is detailed above.
18 December 2009 the Board wrote to the Appellant (exhibit 16) noting she had
not attended the Board Inquiry on 16 December 2009
and advising her she had been
found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to
section 25(d)
the Act in that she had failed to comply with a direction of the Board. The
letter also advised the Appellant that the following
conditions had been placed
on her registration in accordance with
of the Act:
hereby reprimanded for failing to follow a direction given by the
Within seven
(7) days of the date of this notice you are to engage a qualified podiatrist to
supervise your practice of podiatry at
all times and to notify the Board of the
name and contact details of the qualified podiatrist; and
arrange for the supervisor qualified podiatrist to make independent contact with
the Board to confirm that suitable supervision
arrangements are in
letter also directed the Appellant to inform her professional indemnity insurer
that these conditions had been placed on her registration
and that an Inspector
from the Board would attend her practice to verify suitable arrangements were in
place. The letter also informed
the Appellant she had a right of appeal in
accordance with
of the Act.
a letter dated 12 January 2010 (exhibit 18) the Appellant stated ‘I do
appeal’. The letter also stated:
Re your letter & information regarding “Board of Enquiry found the
Complaint” – guilty of “Unsatisfactory
Professional
Conduct” etc –
To this I object – my Professional Conduct & work – both in
nursing & Podiatry has been more than satisfactory
Your Order “to complete a specified educational course or
when you knew I am only part time retiring end of financial year &
hoping someone to do what I do and my
“Or Provision of service” – B.
When I collected your “Private & Confidential” also (4) four
referrals from the Doctors.
Conditions of Practice (Date of Notice 18/12)
Within 7 days of the date of this notice I am to engage a qualified
To supervise etc etc.
Pre Podiatry qualifications – Nursing General – Obstets, Theatre
London, Concord
Dr Davy Macquarie St
I have perused the latest SES 1
Aid Manual –
Nothing new.
I have spoken to one medico so far and he was not pleased. I showed him the
list of Education Activities & he said – all
Medical Auxilliaries
– their Peers are the Medical Profession & was amazed at the cost to
the people.
Will be contacting more medicos next week.
I have shown letters to a client & he is photocopying many for me
I have my patient’s support
For many years I worked in Dr June Fitzhenry’s suite and then because
she developed CA – then To Dr Tom Fuller etc.
I find the conditions ludicrous
1/ Your letter dated 18/12/09
2/ Within 7 days – “engage a qualified podiatrist To supervise
Notify the Board of details
I would have thought that every one in your dept. would be on
Tribunal was provided with a report from the Board’s Inspector dated 25
March 2010. The Report states that the Appellant
was not contactable at her
registration address and therefore a random routine inspection was not able to
be made. The Inspector
noted that the premises did not appear to have a podiatry
practice operating therefrom. The Inspector noted that the Appellant only
returned his telephone calls in the week following his attendance after he had
left messages on her answering service for her to
do so and left business cards
at the front and rear entrances of the premises. When the Appellant rang the
Board she left a message
‘No, I am having car problems which
need to be seen to and I am not doing anything about the card left by the
Inspector until
I am ready’
. The Inspector made further telephone
calls on 23 and 24 March which have elicited no response.
Board’s Continuing Education Requirements
Board published a document titled
‘Continuing Podiatric Professional
Education Program’
in 2007. This document mandated the requirement for
all podiatrists to hold a current First Aid Certificate to remain registered
required the return of a completed Log Sheet recording the details of Continuing
Podiatric Professional Education they had undertaken.
This form was to be
returned to the Board in May of each year. The document provided details of the
manner in which 60 points of
Continuing Podiatric Professional Education may be
Appellant’s oral evidence
Appellant attended without any of the documentation that had been served by the
Board. She declined the offer of a copy. The Appellant
stated that she
frequently wrote to politicians.
Appellant acknowledged that she had been directed to attend before the Board on
15 July 2009 however she relied upon legal advice
to the effect that she could
just appeal any decision the Board may make.
respect to the Direction of the Board to attend on 19 August 2009, the Appellant
stated she had ‘
not been able to comply’
and that she had
rung the Board indicating this. When questioned on this issue, the Appellant was
not able to provide an explanation
for her inability to comply.
respect to the third direction to attend upon the board on 21 October 2009, the
Appellant stated that she had not opened the
letter until 11 November 2009.
Appellant had worked with Dr Davies in the operating theatres of St Luke’s
Hospital and the Scottish Hospital until he retired
in 1965. This work involved
the care of the surgical instruments. After a ‘stint’ at Concord
Hospital, the Appellant
moved to the South Coast area and worked in the rooms of
Dr June Fitzhenry and Dr Tom Fuller. The Appellant repeated the information
provided in the above letters regarding having a son-in-law who had completed
the SES First Aid Course.
Appellant also gave evidence that she had two podiatry ‘friends’ who
had kept her informed. She also had some ‘nursing
friends’. The
Appellant also consulted with the ‘medicos’. She had also read some
books sent to her by Shirley
Marr. The Appellant stated that she had difficulty
in travelling to Sydney like a ‘yo-yo’. She was a busy person who
had made decisions regarding priorities. The Appellant also stated that she felt
she did not need to undertake the continuing professional
education. She had not
undertaken any formal education for approximately ten years. The cost of these
activities was also an issue.
respect to the St John’s Ambulance course she had mentioned in a letter to
the Board, the Appellant stated that she had
not in fact actually got around to
attending it.
answer to questions from the Tribunal, the Appellant stated that she had eight
sets of equipment and used one set of equipment
for each patient she treated.
These would be autoclaved at home by placing them into small sterilization bags.
No method of tracking
the use of the instruments was employed. Her autoclave was
last validated about five years ago. If she was out on the road and needed
sterilize her instruments she could call in to the office of Dr Ibrahim and use
his autoclave.
Appellant stated that on an average day she saw between zero and three patients.
Evidence of Amanda McEacharn
McEacharn confirmed she was the Acting Registrar of the Board. She confirmed
that the Board was unable to locate the letter dated
1 July 2008 referred to by
the Appellant in exhibit 8 despite an extensive search.
Submissions made by the Appellant
Appellant made a number of statements before the Tribunal in the nature of a
submission. She stated that she was of the view that
she should be entitled to
continue to practise without complying with the Board’s direction to
attend an Inquiry and without
providing a completed continuing education return.
The Appellant was of the view that her training as a nurse (said to have
occurred in 1959), her receipt of facsimiles from professional
colleagues on topics of interest (these communications having ceased
18 months ago) and her association with persons who have completed recent First
Aid courses was sufficient.
Submissions made by the Respondent
submissions on behalf of the Respondent noted that the Inquiry was dealing with
the Appeal by way of a hearing de novo.
was submitted that the Tribunal should view the conduct of the Appellant as
intransigent. The Tribunal would be satisfied that
the Appellant’s
evidence indicated a paucity of formal professional development and of informal
measures to keep up to date
with the practise of podiatry. The Board had made
numerous attempts to engage the Appellant on this issue over an extended period
Respondent also submitted that little reliance could be placed on the
Appellant’s evidence regarding the provision of professional
educational
material by two unnamed colleagues on an ad hoc basis.
was submitted that the Tribunal should not view this matter as one where the
registered health professional had had regular, routine
or frequent dialogues
with professional colleagues as a way of overcoming the challenges of her
isolation. At this point the Tribunal
notes that it was the evidence of the
Appellant that although she was quite willing to travel around the area for the
purposes of
in any professional development, or indeed to attend upon the
Appellant also said she had little regard for a practitioner who was practising
relatively close by.
Board also submitted that attending to professional development was a challenge
faced by all professional people if they wished
to maintain their registration.
Essentially, it is an issue of public safety, the public expecting registered
health practitioners
to regularly update their knowledge.
conduct of the Appellant had the potential to bring the reputation of the
profession into disrepute. Reputations are hard to build
and easy to destroy.
the Board stated it took absolutely no satisfaction in the present situation of
having to deal with a practitioner of so many
years standing it was submitted
that the evidence and conduct of the Appellant indicated that she did not
appreciate how important
maintaining her professional skills was to her
practise. The oral evidence given by the Appellant would raise significant
regarding her current sterilization practises.
Board submitted that this would be of particular concern given the style of
practice of the Respondent involving her attending
to patients in their own
noting the Appellant’s evidence regarding the demands on her time
presented by various commitments, it was submitted on
behalf of the Board that
it was the Appellant’s responsibility to ensure compliance with
professional responsibility. It was
the Appellant choice not to comply with the
Board’s directions and the continued escalation of the matter should be
as being of her own making, and disappointing in view of her long career
in the profession.
Board was an integral part of the statutory framework established to regulate
the profession of podiatry and the Appellant had
treated the Board with
disrespect by ignoring directions. It was submitted that this attitude was
illustrated by her repeated response
of the phrase
to various issues raised in the Tribunal.
Submissions in Reply
Appellant indicated that there would be considerable practical difficulties
associated with her complying with any condition requiring
her to engage in
professional supervision of her practice. The Appellant did not consider that
she presented any risks as she worked
closely with medical practitioners. She
did not appear to understand the meaning of professional supervision as distinct
to supervision.
She also appeared to demand the standing of her profession vis
a vis the ‘medicos’. She was of the view that the approval
medicos should be enough. She indicated she was not inclined to cooperate with
education requirements and in any case she did
not have the time to devote to
such an activity.
Findings in relation to the Particulars of
is no doubt that the Appellant failed to comply with the Board’s direction
to attend a Board Inquiry. The Tribunal also
has no doubt that the Appellant has
failed to provide a completed return detailing continuing professional
development. These are
matters the Appellant admitted to the Tribunal in a
manner that is best described as defiant. The Particulars of the Complaint are
established.
Findings in relation to the
documents before the Tribunal detail the substantial attempts by the Board
seeking to obtain the Appellant’s compliance
with matters that should be
regarded as being in the ordinary course of professional life. Registration is a
privilege, not a right,
and every registered health professional has an
obligation to cooperate with the relevant registration authority and to comply
directions given by it.
Appellant has failed to meet her obligations under the Act. She has failed on
more than one occasion. The failures to comply are
wilful and deliberate.
is not appropriate for a registered health professional to act in such a manner.
It is improper conduct that demonstrates a lack
of judgment and knowledge
regarding the manner in which professional persons should conduct
themselves.
Tribunal notes that the Appellant offered the following matter as reasons why
her conduct should be accepted by the Tribunal as
appropriate in the
circumstances:
The Appellant
had trained as a nurse sometime in the late 1950’s and/or early
The Appellant
had worked as a nurse with a number of surgeons and had contact with nurses and
The Appellant
had an arrangement with two unnamed professional colleagues who had provided her
with educational material of interest
by way of facsimile transmission. This had
ceased some time ago, possibly 18 months prior to this Inquiry.
The Appellant
had operated her practice from the same premises as a number of medical
practitioners, although this had ceased some
years ago. However, she still had
access to the rooms of Dr Ibrahim when she was ‘on the road’ and
needed to sterilize
her equipment.
The Appellant
had the intention of retiring when there was a suitable podiatrist in the area
to act as her replacement.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Appellant has failed to comply with
the directions of the Board and that such conduct
constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct of such a serious nature that justifies the suspension of
her name from the Register.
The Tribunal makes a finding of professional
misconduct. The Appeal is dismissed.
is appropriate that the Appellant is allowed to refer on her current patients so
as not to leave them without care. After the one
week period of grace, the
Appellant is to be suspended from practice for a period of two months. During
this time the Appellant may
reconsider her position. Upon the expiry of the
suspension the Appellant will not be permitted to practise podiatry until such
as she complies with the various conditions set out in Order 3.
being no special or exceptional circumstances costs will follow the event.
The Tribunal orders (as amended):
the Appellant is hereby reprimanded (Annexure B).
Appellant may work as a registered podiatrist from the date of these Orders (11
May 2010) until 17 May 2010 during which time
she is to refer on all of her
current patients. The Appellant is suspended from practising for a period of two
17 July 2010 the Appellant is not to work as a registered podiatrist unless all
of the following have occurred:
Appellant has written to the Board with the name of a suitable registered
podiatrist to act as a Supervisor for her practice and
received written
confirmation of approval of that person from the Board.
Appellant has received the written approval of the Supervisor for her to return
to work as a registered podiatrist and the Appellant
has provided a copy of this
report to the Board.
Appellant is to provide a copy of the Reasons for Decision document in this
matter to the Supervisor and provide written confirmation
of the receipt of same
to the Board.
Appellant has successfully completed a formal Performance Assessment undertaken
by a Board approved Performance Assessor, being
a senior and appropriately
qualified registered podiatrist.
Appellant has successfully completed 30 points of Continuing Podiatric
Professional Education and provided written proof thereof
to the Board.
the time that the Appellant is suspended or not entitled to work as a registered
podiatrist she is not to make representation
to or accept referrals from bodies
such as the Department of Veterans’ Affairs, Medicare, private health
insurance funds or
medical practitioners.
the Appellant has complied with all the conditions in Order 3 the Appellant is
to notify the Board of her intention to return
to practising as a registered
podiatrist and is to authorise and direct her Supervisor to provide reports of
the Appellant’s
practice to the Board every four months. The Appellant is
to ensure these reports are forwarded promptly to the Board. This Order
lifted by the Board after a period of two years from the time the Appellant
returns to practising if it considers the reports
of the Supervisor are
satisfactory.
Appellant has a period of six months to comply with the conditions set out in
Order 3 above. If the Appellant has not complied
with the conditions set out in
Order 3 within a period of six months of the date of these Orders (11 May 2010)
the Board should consider
the Appellant to be in breach of the Orders and
consider referring the matter as a Complaint to the Health Care Complaints
Commission.
with all of the Orders made by the Tribunal are to be at the cost of the
are awarded in favour of the Respondent. If the parties cannot agree on the
quantum of costs either party may apply to have
the matter assessed by the
Dated: 11 May 2010
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision document is
to be forwarded by the Registry to:
1) The Appellant,
2) The CSO,
3) The HCCC, and
3) As the Board is
required by law and as it sees fit.
Dated: 24 June 2010
__________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Deborah Marks
___________________
Luke Taylor
___________________
Noel Greenaway
HCCC v Tompson
Schedule of Exhibits – Documents Tendered by the
Document Description
Registrant Details – Mrs Valerie Ann Tompson
17 July 2009
Continuing Podiatric Professional Education Log Sheet for 2007/2008 filed
by Mrs Tompson
Letter from Ms McEacharn to Mrs Tompson
Letter from Mrs Tompson to Ms McEacharn
8 June 2008
Letter from Ms McEacharn to Mrs Tompson
26 June 2008
Letter from Mrs Tompson to Ms McEacharn
1 August 2008
Letter from Ms McEacharn to Mrs Tompson
5 September 2008
Letter from Ms McEacharn to Mrs Tompson
10 June 2009
Letter from Mrs Tompson to Ms McEacharn
1 July 2009
Letter from Ms McEacharn to Mrs Tompson
21 July 2009
Letter from Ms McEacharn to Mrs Tompson
31 August 2009
Letter from Mrs Tompson to Ms McEacharn
13 September 2009
Letter from Ms McEacharn to Mrs Tompson
28 September 2009
Letter from Mrs Tompson to Ms McEacharn
20 November 2009
Notice of Inquiry
2 December 2009
Letter from Ms McEacharn to Mrs Tompson
18 December 2009
Letter from Ms McEacharn to Mr Pehm, Health Care Complaints
21 December 2009
Letter from Mrs Tompson to Ms McEacharn (Notice of Appeal)
12 January 2010
Podiatrists Code of Professional Conduct
December 2005
HCCC v Tompson
Valerie Tompson, you are a registered podiatrist and it is expected that you
will respect all the obligations associated with holding
that registration. Your
conduct should ensure that it promotes and maintains the high reputation which
the profession enjoys within
the community. You are hereby reprimanded for
failing to comply with the directions of the Board.
You are a podiatrist with significant years of service to the community. It
is extraordinary that you have chosen to wilfully defy
the directions of the
Your conduct has the potential to bring the profession of podiatry into
disrepute and your conduct would attract the severe criticism
of your peers.
Your failure to engage in continuing education is of considerable concern. Your
failure to engage in activities such
as reading relevant journals is
unacceptable.
The suspension from practice for a period of two months should provide you
with sufficient time to appreciate the views of the Tribunal,
the gravity of
your conduct in the professional setting, and to reflect on your conduct.
Provision is made for you to return to practice only when you have satisfied
those parts of the Orders specified in the Reasons for
Decision document. These
are designed to address deficits identified by the Tribunal. Further, the
restriction placed upon your registration
once you are restored to the Register
is designed to ensure that this conduct will not recur. The Tribunal sincerely
hopes that you
will comply with all Board requirements in the future.
In reaching these Orders the Tribunal has been mindful of its role to be
protective and not punitive.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (459 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter