URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/78.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Freeth v Volvo Group Australia Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICPD 78; (5 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Freeth v Volvo Group Australia Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICPD 78
Jayne Freeth
RESPONDENT:
Volvo Group Australia Pty Ltd
Employers Mutual NSW Limited
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W28517/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
President Judge Phillips
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
5 November 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Certificate of Determination dated 16 April 2025 is confirmed.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – operation of
Compensation Act 1987
House v the King
[1936] HCA 40
considered and applied – Member not in error by exercising discretion
to prevent dual benefits of the same kind – separate injuries
with different incapacities not germane to the exercise of the
discretion under
s 46 of the 1987 Act – consideration of requirement to give notice of a
dispute under
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr B McManamey, counsel
Turner Freeman Lawyers
Respondent:
Mr P Perry, counsel
Hicksons Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Freeth v Volvo Group Australia Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPIC 153
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
16 April 2025
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Freeth (the appellant) was employed by Volvo Group Australia Pty Ltd (the
respondent) as a store person. On 31 August
the appellant sustained a
physical injury to her bilateral shoulders and elbows for which she received and
continues to receive compensation.
appellant subsequently made a claim for a primary psychological injury sustained
during the course of her employment between 2017
to 20 August 2024, the date her
employment was terminated.
respondent issued a dispute notice pursuant to s 78 of the
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
1998 Act) on 12
2024 disputing that the appellant had sustained a primary psychological injury
for the purposes of s 4 of the 1987 Act
and raised a defence pursuant to s
11A(1) of the 1987 Act that the injury was wholly or predominantly caused by
reasonable action
taken or proposed to be taken by the respondent with respect
to transfer and/or dismissal. The respondent also disputed that the
was totally or partially incapacitated for work as a result of the injury.
appellant commenced proceedings in the Personal Injury Commission (the
Commission) on 8 November 2024 claiming weekly benefits
and medical
The matter was listed for
conciliation conference and arbitration hearing on 21 February 2025. During the
conciliation conference
the parties reached agreement on the majority of the
issues in dispute. The respondent conceded that the appellant had sustained
primary psychological injury deemed to have occurred on 20 August 2024 and that
a defence pursuant to s 11A(1) of the 1987 Act
did not arise. The parties agreed
that the appellant had no capacity to work from 20 August 2024 and continuing,
and the appellant’s
pre-injury average weekly earnings (PIAWE) as at
20 August 2024 were $1,410 subject to periodic indexation. The parties
were, however,
unable to reach an agreement with respect to the quantification
of the appellant’s entitlement to weekly compensation.
appellant believed she was entitled to receive the full amount of weekly
compensation pursuant to ss 36 and 37 of the 1987 Act
on the basis of having no
work capacity, notwithstanding having already received weekly compensation
during the same period in respect
of a physical injury.
respondent believed that weekly compensation for the primary psychological
injury should be reduced to prevent dual benefits of
the same kind being paid,
noting the Commission has the discretion to make such order pursuant to s 46 of
the 1987 Act.
appellant raised two objections, firstly that the respondent could not rely on s
46 of the 1987 Act given it had not been notified
as a dispute in the section 78
notice prior to the commencement of the proceedings, and, if it wished to rely
on that provision,
it needed to make an application for leave pursuant to s
289A(4) of the 1998 Act. Secondly, that the Application to Lodge Additional
Documents (ALAD) lodged by the respondent on 18 February 2025 should not be
admitted. The ALAD contained amongst other things, certificates
of capacity
relating to the appellant’s physical injury.
a Direction dated 21 February 2025 the Member granted leave to the respondent
pursuant to s 289A (4) of the 1998 Act to have a
dispute heard as to whether the
Commission can and ought to make an order pursuant to s 46 of the 1987 Act. The
Member determined
that the documents lodged by the respondent by way of ALAD be
admitted. The conciliation conference and arbitration hearing was adjourned
until 26 March 2025 to hear the remaining issues in dispute.
a further conciliation conference and arbitration hearing on 26 March 2025, the
Member issued a written determination on 16
April 2025 making an order reducing
the amount of compensation pursuant to s 46 of the 1987 Act by amounts already
paid by the respondent
in respect of the physical injury. It is from that
decision the appellant now appeals.
ON THE PAPERS
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings,
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents that are before me,
and the submissions by the parties that the
appeal can proceed to be determined
on the basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information to proceed
‘on the papers’ without holding any
conference or formal hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
Member identified the issues in dispute between the parties. The Member noted
that neither party applied to adduce oral evidence
or cross-examine any witness.
Member summarised the respondent’s
submissions.
It submitted that the
appellant’s entitlement to weekly compensation in respect of the primary
psychological injury ought to
be reduced given the provisions of s 46 of the
1987 Act, noting that for the period claimed, the appellant was already in
of ongoing weekly payments for an incapacity to work from an accepted
physical injury.
respondent submitted that total incapacity, whether it be a physical or
psychological injury, had the same result, an inability
to work. The respondent
referred the Member to its list of payments which identified payments already
made to the appellant for a
physical injury, during the relevant period based on
an incapacity for work.
respondent referred to
Purkiss v Secretary, Department of
and submitted
that the circumstances of the case are similar and that the order made ought to
be the same. The respondent said the
Commission should find it appropriate to
exercise its discretion to prevent dual benefits in the form of weekly payments,
it did so, the appellant would be in receipt of double compensation.
The respondent noted this approach was consistent with
Cordina Chicken Farms
Pty Ltd v Thoa Hong Le.
respondent referred to the wording of the legislation noting the purpose was
clearly to prevent dual benefits being paid.
Member summarised the appellant’s
submissions.
The appellant referred
to s 46 of the 1987 Act and noted the critical question is the interpretation of
the expression “in
respect of the incapacity concerned”. The
appellant referred to
Sydney City Council v
and submitted that it was
well-established that there could be separate awards for compensation where
separate injuries resulted
in separate incapacities.
appellant submitted that
could be distinguished as the case
involved two injuries creating the one incapacity unlike the current
circumstances, where the two
injuries incapacitated the appellant in two
different ways and did not affect the same aspects of work.
Member noted it was accepted that the appellant had no work capacity because of
the primary psychological injury since 20 August
2024 and the agreed PIAWE
figure was $1,410 as at the date of
Given these concessions,
the Member was satisfied that the appellant was entitled to weekly compensation
pursuant to ss 36 and 37
of the 1987
Member referred to the respondent’s list of payments and certificates of
capacity and was further satisfied that the appellant
had already been paid
weekly compensation for the same period in respect of a physical injury. The
Member accepted that these payments
were made on the basis that the appellant
had no current work capacity.
Member referred to the appellant’s submissions that there was no
legislative basis for reducing the award of weekly compensation
payable for the
appellant’s psychological injury by offsetting payments made in relation
to the physical injury.
Member then referred to the respondent’s submissions that s 46 of the 1987
Act provides the Commission with a discretion
to order a reduction in weekly
compensation for the psychological
Member set out s 46 of the 1987 Act. The Member referred to
Traffic Authority of New South Wales v
noting that it
was a case that considered the effect of s 46 of the 1987 Act.
Member referred to
Workers’ Compensation Dust Diseases Board of NSW v
quoting remarks made by
Basten JA on the operation of s 46 where a worker was not entitled to benefits
Workers’ Compensation (Dust Diseases) Act 1942
dust disease in light of his previous recovery of common law damages.
Member said it was clear the appellant was “entitled to benefits of the
same kind, being weekly compensation under Division
2 of the 1987 Act, in
respect of two injuries” and that both benefits were payable by the
respondent during “the period
of incapacity which is the subject of the
current proceedings.”
Member noted the remaining question in dispute was whether the benefits payable
are “in respect of the incapacity for
The Member referred
to the appellant’s submission that the incapacity for work resulting from
her physical injury is distinct
from the incapacity to work resulting from her
psychological injury.
Member said:
“I accept that the incapacity resulting from both
injuries flows from different symptoms and restrictions. The physical injury
affects the [appellant’s] ability to use her upper limbs for work. The
injury which is the subject of these proceedings affects
the [appellant’s]
psychological ability to engage in
Member quoted from the decision in
“The evidence in this case indicates that while the
symptoms and restrictions resulting from each injury are different, they
at all relevant times, affected the [appellant’s] capacity for work in the
same way. That is, they have rendered her
unable to work in her pre-injury
employment or in any other suitable employment. I am satisfied that the
incapacity resulting from
both injuries has, at all relevant times, been the
Member was thus satisfied that there was a discretion available under s 46 of
the 1987 Act.
Member considered the various provisions under the 1987 Act which operate to
prevent double recovery, including ss 50, 151Z and
Division 8. The Member said
that if the discretion under s 46 is not exercised, the amount of compensation
the appellant would receive
by way of weekly compensation would far exceed the
amount she would have earned had she remained
found that there was a discretion under s 46 of the 1987 Act, the Member turned
her attention to the extent that the amount
of weekly compensation should be
reduced. The Member referred to the appellant’s submissions that any
reduction should be an
amount that would leave 100% of PIAWE to allow the
[appellant] to be properly compensated for the entirety of her losses. The
said that while such approach is generally consistent with the approach
Alcan Australia Ltd v
based on the now repealed s 40 of the 1987 Act, the scheme in the present
case is substantially different, noting that ss
36, 37 and 38 allow for a
PIAWE of 95% or 80% depending on the entitlement period, which is then reduced
based on the worker’s
weekly earnings during periods where there is a
capacity to work in suitable
employment.
Member was ultimately satisfied that the weekly compensation awarded to the
appellant in respect of the psychological injury should
be reduced by the amount
already paid in respect of the physical
the Member addressed her oral decision during the first arbitration hearing that
the Commission had jurisdiction to consider
s 46 of the 1987 Act despite it not
having been raised in the respondent’s dispute notice issued pursuant to s
78 of the 1998
Act. The Member confirmed her view that s 78 did not require
notice to be given of all decisions made by the insurer, and as s 46
concerned a
discretion that was only exercisable by the Commission after the commencement of
certain proceedings, it was not required
to be raised in the s 78 notice.
Member referred to the appellant’s jurisdictional question as to whether
there was any dispute to be heard in the proceedings,
given that during
conciliation the parties had agreed to all aspects of the dispute, except the
quantification of the appellant’s
entitlement to weekly compensation.
Member was of the view that the Commission had the power to make the relevant
order. The Member said the insurer had disputed
liability for the psychological
injury in accordance with s 78 of the 1998 Act at the commencement of the
proceedings and the dispute
was then referred to the Commission pursuant to s
289 of the 1998 Act. The Member said that despite the respondent making several
concessions at the conciliation conference on 21 February 2025, it was the
referral of the dispute to the Commission which enlivened
the Commission’s
of the 1987 [Act] was then
a matter in respect of which both parties were
entitled to be
Certificate of Determination issued on 16 April 2025
“1. Subject to Order 3 below, the respondent to pay
the [appellant] weekly compensation pursuant to
Compensation Act 1987
on the basis of the agreed pre-injury average weekly
earnings figure of $1,410, as periodically indexed, for 13 weeks from 20 August
to Order 3 below, after 13 weeks, the respondent to pay the [appellant] weekly
compensation pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
the basis of the agreed pre-injury average weekly earnings figure of $1,410, as
periodically indexed, to date and continuing.
Workers Compensation Act 1987
, the weekly compensation
payable by the respondent to the [appellant] pursuant to
above is reduced by the amount already paid by the respondent ... in respect of
her physical injury on 31 August 2021 ...”.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant pursues four grounds of appeal. They are expressed in the following
Ground One -
The Member erred in fact and law when she
to reduce the appellant’s entitlement to ongoing weekly
compensation.
Ground Two -
The Member erred in law when she considered that the
incapacity resulting from the physical injury was the same incapacity resulting
from the subject injury because they were both no current work capacity where
she found that the restrictions resulting from each
injury were different.
Ground Three -
The Member erred in law when she found that
not authorise a deduction in weekly compensation so that the total of the two
awards for compensation was equal to pre-injury
average weekly earnings.
Ground Four -
The Member erred in law when she found that a dispute
did not need to be notified in a
APPROACH TO APPEALS POST-CULHANA
17 July 2025, a five member bench of the Court of Appeal delivered its decision
State of New South Wales v
considered the nature of an appeal to a Presidential Member of the Commission
under s 352(5) of the 1998 Act, disapproving what had
been the leading authority
Raulston v Toll Pty
The Court of Appeal
rejected what it considered was the ‘narrow’ view of the appellate
function under s 352(5) of the
1998 Act that
applied, instead framing the obligation of a Presidential Member in the
following terms:
“Future appeals under s 352 should
apply the approach in
Warren v Coombes
Fox v Percy
Appropriate deference is to be given to members where their findings are based
on evidence in respect of which they have an advantage
(such as the kind
identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential member hearing an
appeal. But it is not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the basis that
an inference was ‘open’ to the member, as if the member were a jury
and there was some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential Member, after
making appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the member, would
reach a different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she should not shrink
from giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential member will be dismissing
an appeal but without fully addressing whether there is an error of fact, law or
discretion.”
parties in this matter were invited to make submissions based on the relatively
new authority of
, given that this appeal was filed before the
decision in
was delivered. I will describe those submissions
would remark that as no viva voce evidence was given in this matter, the
advantages that a first instance decision maker would have
are somewhat limited
in this appeal. This is a relatively common occurrence in the Commission when
first instance matters are heard.
There is no right for such evidence to be
given, rather leave must be sought and
LEGISLATION
46 of the 1987 Act provides:
Reduction of
weekly payments to prevent dual benefits
(cf former s 13)
(1) The Commission may, on the determination of an application for any
weekly payment of compensation or on a review under this Act
of any weekly
payment of compensation, order that the weekly payment be reduced to prevent
dual benefits of the same kind being payable
by the employer during and in
respect of the incapacity for work.
(2) Any such order shall have effect according to its tenor.
(3) This section does not affect the operation of section 49 or
78 and 79 of the 1998 Act outline the notice requirements on insurers.
Relevantly:
78 Insurer to give notice of
(1) An insurer must give notice in accordance with this Division of any
decision of the insurer—
(a) to dispute liability in respect of a claim or any aspect of a
(b) to discontinue payment to a worker of weekly payments of
compensation, or reduce the amount of the compensation.
79 How notice of decision is given
(1) A notice required by this Division must be given—
(a) to the claimant or worker concerned, and
(b) in the case of a notice of a decision to dispute liability—to
the worker’s employer, if required by the regulations.
(2) The notice must contain a concise and readily understandable
statement of the reason for the insurer’s decision and of
relevant to the decision.
(3) In addition, notice of a decision to dispute liability for a claim
for compensation must identify any provision of the workers
compensation
legislation on which the insurer relies to dispute liability.
289A of the 1998 Act provides:
289A Further restrictions
as to when a dispute can be referred to Commission
(1) A dispute cannot be referred for determination by the Commission
unless it concerns only matters previously notified as disputed.
(2) A matter is taken to have been previously notified as disputed
(a) it was notified in a notice of dispute under this Act or the 1987
Act after a claim was made or a claim was reviewed, or
(b) it concerns matters, raised in writing between the parties before
the dispute is referred to the President for determination
by the Commission,
concerning an offer of settlement of a claim for lump sum compensation.
(3) The Commission may not hear or otherwise deal with any dispute if
this section provides that the dispute cannot be referred for
determination by
the Commission. However, the Commission may hear or otherwise deal with a matter
subsequently arising out of such
(4) Despite subsection (3), a dispute relating to previously unnotified
matters may be heard or otherwise dealt with by the Commission
if the Commission
is of the opinion that it is in the interests of justice to do so.”
As to Ground One
appellant submits the following:
“13. It is well established
that a worker can be entitled to more than one award of compensation where he or
she has suffered
more than one injury which results in a different incapacity.
cases that establish this principle all focus on the restrictions that flow from
the separate injuries. Thus in [
] there were two awards because the
incapacities related to different body systems. In [
] the opposite
conclusion was reached because the two injuries caused the same restrictions.
authorities do not support the proposition that the incapacity is to be
identified by the extent of the incapacity. In this case
there are separate
restrictions as found by the Member such that section 46 does not
appellant concludes by stating that it is doubtful that s 46 applies to cases
where there are two injuries, citing
Miller v CSR Timber Products Pty
reply, the respondent says s 46 of the 1987 Act is specifically directed to the
circumstances present in this case. The respondent
relies on the Presidential
authority (from the former Workers Compensation Commission) of
and the Member’s application of that decision as representing the
correct approach. The respondent submitted:
appellant asserts at [15] that the authorities do not support the proposition
that the incapacity referred to in section
46 would not be determined by the
extent of the incapacity. But incapacity is not a complex concept. It denotes in
this context the
absence of the ability to work.
[M]ember carefully and correctly at [71] and [72] considered the objectives of
the 1987 Act, to provide compensation in accordance
with its provisions, and not
to produce an improper outcome, again correctly identified at [72]. While the
[M]ember’s consideration
of these objectives was in the context of the
question as to whether she should or should not exercise her discretion, her
observations
are equally relevant to the anterior question as to whether the
discretion exists.”
respondent says no error is established.
supplementary submissions directed to the application of
matter, the appellant stated the following, having referenced my decision in
Ferguson v Connemara Jack Pty
this case the challenge in grounds 1 and 2 is that the Member erred by asking
the wrong question with respect to what is
‘the incapacity for work’
within the meaning of section 46. The Appellant’s contention is that in
the circumstances
where there can be 2 separate awards for incapacities
resulting from separate injuries section 46 has no role to play. That is because
the two awards are for different incapacities. This arises where the injuries
result in different restrictions for work. The error
made by the Member was that
she considered that the incapacity was the same because each was sufficient to
establish no current work
capacity. The error was that she thought that the test
was whether both incapacities were incapacities for work. This ignores the
that all incapacities are by definition incapacities for
respondent in its supplementary submissions argues the
“2.2 In relation to paragraph 16 of the
appellant’s supplementary submissions, the respondent denies that Member
made an error of law or fact. Contrary to what is suggested by the
appellant, Member Homan was required to exercise the discretion
prescribed under
section 46(1) of the [1987 Act] to make orders which prevented the payment of
dual benefits of the same kind being
payable by the respondent during and in
respect of the incapacity for work.
2.3 The appellant’s contention that there can be two separate awards
for incapacities arising from separate injuries is misplaced;
and more so when
two separate injuries are said to both result in total incapacity for the
applicant to perform work. Deputy President
Bill Roche noted in [
‘The determination of whether two injuries have resulted in separate
and distinct incapacities is not done in the abstract,
but is done by looking at
the labour market in which the worker is working or may reasonably be expected
to work or to look for work.
It will be a question of fact in each case and it
should not be assumed that it will be the norm for two injuries to result in two
incapacities.’
2.4 Roche DP continued, at [61]:
‘Applying the above principles to Ms Le’s case requires the
following questions to be answered:
(a) has Ms Le received one injury or two;
(b) has she sustained one incapacity, or two separate and distinct
incapacities, and
(c) what is the appropriate compensation payable.’
2.8 The respondent submits that the effect of
on the present
case is that the Presidential Member reviewing Member Homan’s decision
ought to be satisfied that on his or
her own review of the available evidence,
that it was not only open to Member Homan to find that the incapacity arising
the appellant’s injuries was the same, but that the evidence
makes it plain that the appellant was certified as having total
incapacity for
work as a result of both her physical injury and her psychological injury during
the same period during which the
appellant has already been in receipt of the
payment of weekly benefits at a maximum assessment under and pursuant to
sections 36,
37, and 38 of the 1987 Act.
2.9 The respondent says the evidence does not support a finding that there
are different incapacities for work resulting from the
appellant’s
Consideration
are a number of matters that are not in dispute. The first is that the appellant
suffers from both physical and psychiatric
injuries, both of which incapacitate
her for work. Both were suffered while working for the respondent. Secondly, the
benefits claimed
by the appellant in respect of both injuries are the same,
namely weekly compensation payments from the respondent. Thirdly, there
contest that the appellant had suffered a physical injury on 31 August 2021 for
which she was paid and continued to be in
receipt of weekly payments of
compensation. Fourthly, that the power in s 46 of the 1987 Act is
discretionary.
the following reasons, I do not accept the appellant’s arguments in this
(a) Unlike the situation confronting the Court of Appeal in
case the benefits claimed by the appellant are “of the same kind”
and are payable by the respondent employer.
That is, the appellant claims weekly
compensation against the respondent employer under the 1987 Act for both
(b) Contrary to the appellant’s submission that s 46 does not apply
in this circumstance, the whole point of s 46 of the 1987
Act is to vest
the Commission with a discretion to prevent the payment of dual benefits. The
fact that the appellant has separate
injuries with different incapacities is not
to the point. Section 46 does not make this distinction nor require the
Commission to
make this distinction.
(c) The section directs attention to dual benefits “in respect of the
incapacity for work”. It does not direct attention
to an enquiry about
respective incapacities. In my view, the situation presenting itself in this
case is precisely the type of circumstance
that is contemplated by s 46 of
the 1987 Act. I do not accept the appellant’s contention that the Member
misdirected herself
or asked the wrong question in considering incapacity for
work. It was a relevant consideration and was the right question to posit
s 46. There is no
House v The
(d) I would also make the following remark. The appellant makes much of the
assertion that she has suffered different injuries and
thus different
incapacities. The appellant’s statement appears at pages 1–3 of the
ARD. The statement describes the problems
which created the appellant’s
psychiatric injury. The appellant states at paragraph [22], “I believe my
physical injuries
occurred due to how much pressure I was under to increase my
line per hour.” In terms of the statement, the appellant does
not give any
evidence about the different restrictions she is said to suffer as a result of
the two injuries. Indeed the whole tenor
of the statement is to attribute the
bullying type behaviour, which caused the psychiatric injury, as being causative
to the physical injury. I note that the medical evidence quite
naturally deals with the respective injuries, the appellant does not.
the appellant’s statement leads one to a conclusion that the incapacity is
a single incapacity for work. This statement
does not sit well with what has
been submitted in this ground by the appellant.
(e) The appellant complains that she suffers from different restrictions,
physical and psychiatric, and as such s 46 does not
This submission ignores
the words of s 46 which refers to incapacity for work. This submission
attempts, without warrant, to read
other matters, namely different restrictions
arising from different injuries, into a consideration of s 46. This is
wrong in principle.
Member was not in error by exercising the s 46 discretion. The various
pre-requisites for exercising the discretion were all established.
No error has
been established.
One is dismissed.
As to Ground Two
parties in their submissions in chief rely on their submissions with respect to
Ground One to substantiate their arguments in
Ground Two. Both address Ground
Two in their supplementary submissions. I will not repeat the submissions as
they are relevantly
set out under Ground One.
Consideration
the same reasons that Ground One has been rejected, this ground too must fail.
The fact that the restrictions suffered by the
appellant were different is not
germane to the exercise of the discretion under s 46 of the 1987 Act.
Two is dismissed.
As to Ground Three
appellant argues the following discrete point:
“Section 46
provides for a discretion to reduce payments to prevent double compensation. The
section does not prescribe how
the discretion is to be exercised. In
the equivalent discretion in section 40 was exercised to reduce the
combination of the payments to pre-injury earnings. There is no
warrant for
restricting the discretion in the way that the [M]ember did at paragraphs 76 and
77. The question is not what constitutes
the compensation payable for a single
injury but rather what would constitute over compensation for a person with two
injuries. The
starting point under the Act is that the Appellant was entitled to
a payment of 80% of pre-injury earnings in respect of each
response the respondent submits:
“The [M]ember dealt with this
proposition, it is submitted correctly, in her reasons at [77] ... The Act
provides a statutory
scheme for benefits. The extent of those benefits is
explicit in this scheme. Benefits are not identical with wages. As observed
above, the clear object of section 46 of the 1987 Act is to prevent dual
benefits. ‘Benefits’ clearly means the benefits
provided by the
legislation.
The [M]ember exercised her discretion to promote the object of the
legislation. There was no
Consideration
appellant calls in aid of this submission the treatment of the former s 40
of the 1987 Act. The Member dealt with this at reasons
[75]–[76]. In these
two paragraphs the Member reasons as to why the approach under the former
s 40 is not apt for the present
circumstance. The appellant criticises this
approach without saying why the approach was in error or why the Member’s
distinguishing
of the approach to the former s 40 was wrong.
appellant also says that there is no assistance in s 46 as to how the
discretion is to be exercised. Plainly the provision provides
for a Member to
exercise a discretion to prevent the payment of dual benefits. It is trite to
say that such a discretion is to be
exercised in accordance with the long
standing authority of
House v King
. I do not consider that the
Member’s remarks at reasons [76]–[77] restrict the discretion as
asserted by the appellant.
Rather, at reasons [76] the Member is distinguishing
the approach taken under the former s 40 of the 1987 Act. Reasons [77]
Member responding to a submission that had been put by the appellant. The
error alleged with respect to these two paragraphs simply
has not been
substantiated.
appellant has made no submission alleging a
House v King
error as one
would normally expect in a challenge to the exercise of a discretion.
the appellant’s submission that the starting point under the Act is that
the appellant is entitled to two awards,
one in respect of each injury, pays no
regard to the discretion under s 46 of the 1987 Act to alter that situation
to prevent the
payment of dual benefits.
complaint in this ground has no merit.
Three is dismissed.
As to Ground Four
ground is a complaint about the Member permitting the respondent to rely on a
matter that had not been raised in the s 78 notice.
The appellant
“19. Section 78 provides that notice must be given of a
decision to dispute liability in respect of a claim or any aspect of
Appellant's claim was for payment of weekly compensation at the rate prescribed
by sections 36 and 37 of the 1987 Act. The dispute
notice did not raise an issue
that the liability to pay compensation was reduced by operation of section 46.
The application of section
46 is to reduce the liability to pay and to that
extent must be a dispute about the extent of the liability to pay compensation.
The issue was one that needed to be addressed by evidence and notice needed to
Member erred by thinking that notice was not required because the Commission was
being asked to exercise the discretion. That
only occurred because the
Respondent sought that the discretion be exercised in its behaviour [sic,
favour]. The position is similar
to the exercise of the discretion under the
former section 40 where it was only exercised when its relevance was raised
by the parties.
Member’s conclusion also meant that the Member erred by allowing the
Respondent to tender the two sets of late documents
in circumstances where they
were not included in the dispute notice and were therefore inadmissible pursuant
to section 73.”
reply, the respondent argues as follows:
“26. It is clear
from Members Homan’s direction of 21 February 2025 ... that, to the extent
required, leave was granted
to the respondent pursuant to section 289A(4) of the
1998 Act to have a dispute heard as to whether the Commission can and ought
make an order pursuant to section 46 of the 1987 Act.
appellant does not challenge the granting of that leave, and accordingly, the
error asserted under Ground 4 can have no bearing
on the outcome of the
the appellant’s supplementary submissions the following is
is also relevant to ground 4.
The Member exercised a discretion [to] permit the section 46 point to be raised.
That was a decision
that was open to her however the decision was influenced by
her view that it was not necessary to raise the issue in a section 78
the circumstances the Presidential Member should consider whether the decision
was the correct decision. The matter had
been raised at a very late time with no
explanation other than a contention that notice was not required. Once the
requirement to
give notice is taken into account the prejudice to the Appellant
becomes the paramount consideration.
view that leave was not required was also pivotal to the decision to admit the
late documents filed on 18 February 2025 and 19
March 2025. In particular the
Member failed to consider whether the documents are excluded by section 73. A
proper consideration
of the matters leads to a conclusion that those documents
should not have been admitted.”
respondent in its supplementary submissions says
has no effect at
all on the Member’s decision on this issue. The respondent submits that
the issue is one of law, not one of
fact and in any event, leave was granted to
rely on s 46 of the 1987 Act under s 289A(4) of the 1998 Act, which
leave is not the
Consideration
the courts, the Commission does not possess inherent jurisdiction. Rather, the
Commission’s authority to determine a
dispute depends upon the powers
conferred by statute, relevantly in this case the 1998 Act. The combination of
ss 78 and 79 of the
1998 Act set out the requirements of the insurer to
provide notice to the claimant (in this case the appellant) of all matters that
are in dispute. Section 289A specifically prohibits the Commission from
determining matters which have not been notified as being
in dispute.
have closely read the s 78
and the result of the
appellant’s application for a
Neither document in
terms notifies the appellant that s 46 of the 1987 Act was being relied
upon. Indeed, contrary to the respondent’s
assertion to the Member that
such notice was not required for reliance on s 46 of the 1987 Act, I would
merely refer to the terms
of the s 78 notice and s 278A review issued
by the respondent. Each document lists all of the provisions of the 1987 Act
aid of the dispute of the claim. This fact alone serves to detract
from the respondent’s argument in this regard.
my view, if the respondent seeks to rely on the provisions of s 46 of the
1987 Act, it is duty bound under ss 78 and 79 of the
1998 Act to give notice of
this fact in terms that are readily
understandable.
The fact that
the power under s 46 of the 1987 Act sits with the Commission is in my view
no answer to the requirement to notify.
If injury is put in dispute under
s 4 of the 1987 Act, that is a matter that the Commission is called upon to
decide. This is just
another provision under which a decision is to be made by
the Commission.
s 289A(4) of the 1998 Act provides relief from the obligations I have just
described. A party seeking to rely on unnotified
matters may be permitted to do
so if the Commission “is of the opinion that it is in the interests of
justice to do so.”
The respondent, notwithstanding its submission that it
did not have to notify its reliance on s 46 of the 1987 Act, made an
application
to the Member for relief under s 289A(4) of the 1998
which was opposed by the
Member considered the application, including the authority on the seeking of
leave under s 289A(4) of the 1998
before deciding to grant
leave in an ex tempore decision.
Having granted leave the matter did not proceed to a hearing on 21 February
2025, the transcript records it as being adjourned and
it returned before the
Member for hearing on 26 March 2025, shortly over four weeks later.
I do not agree with the Member’s view that reliance on s 46 of the
1987 Act did not require notification, this is not
ultimately determinative. If
that was an error as asserted it could not have affected the result. This is
because the Member gave
leave under s 289A(4) of the 1998 Act for s 46
of the 1987 Act to be relied upon.
appeal, the appellant has taken no issue with the Member’s reasoning
regarding the granting of leave under s 289A(4) of the
1998 Act. For the
reasons expressed orally, the Member determined that it was in the interests of
justice to grant leave. There being
no aspect of this ground directed to the
grant of leave, by definition the Member was not in error.
I have considered the Member’s reasoning in dealing with the
s 289A(4) application. Not only is there no error in the
reasoning, I agree
with the approach taken by the Member. I am also fortified in this view by the
following. The Member weighed the
respective prejudice that could accrue to both
Obviously the appellant
could have been at a disadvantage had leave been granted and the matter
proceeded to a finality on 21 February
2025. The matter did not proceed, it
was adjourned and heard over a month later on 26 March 2025. Any prejudice that
may have arisen
because the appellant could not contend with the s 46 issue
was ameliorated by the adjournment. The Member was right to grant leave.
is no merit in this ground. No error has been established (or asserted) with
respect to the granting of leave under s 289A(4)
of the 1998 Act. Ground
Four is dismissed.
Certificate of Determination dated 16 April 2025 is confirmed.
Judge Phillips
5 November 2025
Date of injury recorded in the
certificates of capacity, Application to Lodge Additional Documents dated
19 March 2025.
Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD).
Freeth v Volvo Group
Australia Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPIC 153
[2022] NSWPIC
[2008] NSWWCCPD 125
[2007] NSWWCCPD
[2015] NSWCA 270
Reasons, [74]–[76].
Reasons, [77]–[78].
Reasons, [79]–[82].
[2025] NSWCA 157
NSWWCCPD 25
34 of the PIC Rules 2021; Procedural Direction PIC 1,
(1993) 29 NSWLR
[2025] NSWPICPD 55
Appellant’s
supplementary submissions 19 August 2025,
[1936] HCA 40
House v King
Appellant’s submissions 14 May 2025,
Appellant’s
submissions 14 May 2025,
Respondent’s
submissions 17 June 2025,
Respondent’s supplementary submissions 25 August 2025,
[2.14]–[2.18].
Section 278A review
notice, 25 October 2024, ARD, p
See my remarks in
Dent v Coles Group Supply Chain Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWPICPD 81
–[53] regarding the s 78
requirements.
Transcript of
proceedings 21 February 2025 (T),
Zodune Pty Limited t/as Tempo Cleaning Services
[2007] NSWWCCPD
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.58 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter