URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2006/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sawan [2006] NSWPB 6 (10 May 2006)
[2006] NSWPB 6
Health Care Complaints Commission v Ahmed Sawan
10 May 2006
The complaint of professional misconduct alleged that between 5 July 1999 and
19 June 2000, the pharmacist dispensed supplies of oral
female contraceptive
drugs pursuant to prescriptions written for a male patient, in circumstances
where the pharmacist knew or ought
to have known that such supplies were in
quantities or for a purpose that did not accord with appropriate recognised
therapeutic
standards. The pharmacist also failed to make adequate enquiries of
the prescribers as to the authenticity of such prescription.
The pharmacist and
his employed pharmacist(s) had not accurately recorded the name of the
pharmacist who supplied the restricted
substances in this period. The
pharmacist is the sole registered proprietor of the pharmacy. The pharmacist had
thought that the
male customer had been using the contraceptives for gender
reassignment and questioned the customer who indicated that the tablets
being sent overseas for aid. The pharmacist admitted that he did not attempt to
he should have done so. He also
accepted responsibility for his employed pharmacist dispensing the oral
contraceptives during the
complaint period. The pharmacist was first registered
some three years before the conduct occurred.
Although the customer was an
effective con man, the breaches took place over a significant period of time and
are objectively very
serious. In failing to make any enquiry of a male
presenting a prescription, made out in this name for the oral contraceptive
the pharmacist made a grave error of judgment and has acted improperly.
The pharmacist should have immediately recognised the inappropriateness
prescription and taken action to determine the authenticity of it.
All the particulars of the
complaint have been proved to the Board’s reasonable satisfaction and that
conduct amounts to professional
misconduct. The pharmacist has engaged in
conduct that demonstrates a lack of adequate judgment and care in the practice
of pharmacy
and other improper conduct.
The pharmacist was
reprimanded and ordered to complete educative requirements at his expense,
including a presentation of a tutorial
on the legal and professional
responsibilities of a pharmacist in dispensing Prescription Only medications,
showing how procedures
in place in his pharmacies comply with these
responsibilities.
(Editorial note: for related cases see Ho [2006] NSWPB4 and Metlege
Findings of a Professional Standards Committee ("the Committee") held on 20
October 2005 into a complaint of professional misconduct
made under the
provisions of the
Pharmacy Act
") by Judge Kenneth V
Taylor AM, RFD, nominal complainant and Acting Commissioner of the Health Care
Complaints Commission,
Ahmed Sawan of Wollongong City Pharmacy 237 Queen
Street, Wollongong in the State of New South Wales being a pharmacist registered
in this State.
THE COMPLAINT
That Ahmed Sawan has been guilty of professional misconduct within the
section 19D(1)(c)
in that the pharmacist
has demonstrated
a lack of adequate judgment and/or care in the practice of pharmacy and/or
engaged in improper
or unethical conduct
related to the practice of
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
Between 5 July 1999 and 19 June 2000, the
pharmacist dispensed supplies of oral female contraceptive drugs on the dates
shown in the
attached schedule, Schedule A, pursuant to prescriptions written in
the name of a male patient, Patient A, in circumstances where
the pharmacist
knew or ought to have known that such supplies were for a purpose that did not
accord with the recognised therapeutic
standard of what was appropriate in the
circumstances, contrary to the requirements of Clause 57,
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
1994 ("the regulation").
Between 5 July 1999 and 19 June 2000, the
pharmacist dispensed supplies of oral female contraceptive drugs to Patient A on
and in the quantities shown in Schedule A in circumstances where the
pharmacist knew or ought to have known that such supplies were
in quantities
that did not accord with the recognised therapeutic standard of what was
appropriate in the circumstances, contrary
to the requirements of Clause 57 of
the regulation.
Between 5 July 1999 and 19 June 2000, the
pharmacist failed to make adequate enquiries of the medical practitioners who
had purportedly
written the prescriptions in the name of Patient A on the dates
shown in Schedule A, as to the authenticity of the prescriptions
appropriateness of the supplies of medication directed thereon, prior to
dispensing the medications.
Between 5 July 1999 and 19 June 2000, the
pharmacist failed to ensure that, when dispensing prescriptions for restricted
substances,
he and his employed pharmacist/s complied with the statutory
requirement under Clause 58 of the regulation to accurately record the
the pharmacist who supplied the restricted substance.
The following documents were tendered by consent:
1. Bundle of complainant’s documents;
Section 37 Certificate in relation to the registration of the Respondent;
Tape Recording of Record of Interview
between Bruce Battye, Ken Thomson and the Respondent conducted on 8 May
Report from Mr Paul Mahoney numbering
5 pages dated 26 July
Statutory Declaration
by Mr David Hughes dated 29 April
Testimonials.
The Respondent made certain admissions through his counsel.
The Respondent admitted that he was guilty of professional misconduct in that
his conduct demonstrated a lack of adequate judgment
and/or care. The Respondent
did not admit that he engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the
practice of pharmacy.
The essential facts were not in issue. At the outset, counsel for the
Respondent told the Committee that the Respondent’s case
was that Mr
Hughes, the customer to whom the medication was provided had conspired with Dr
Weatherlake (Dr W) and/or Dr Spencer (Dr
S) to defraud the Respondent and to
unlawfully obtain the medication.
The investigating officer from Pharmaceutical Services Branch (PSB) Mr
Thompson, gave evidence. The report prepared by Mr Thompson
dated 5 November
2001 and a Statutory Declaration signed by Dr W and dated 8 August 2001 were in
evidence. Mr Thompson was cross
examined on these documents:
1. The report of 5 November 2001 contained, amongst other things, evidence of
two telephone conversations he had with Dr W and the
full text of the Statutory
Declaration of 8 August 2001. In the first telephone conversation Dr W said that
he had issued prescriptions
in the name of D Hughes for oral contraceptives. He
asked for the prescriptions to be faxed to him.
2. A subsequent telephone conversation took place in which Dr W said he had
not issued the prescriptions which had been faxed to
him. At a meeting on 8
August 2001 Dr W was shown the originals of the faxed prescriptions and in a
statutory declaration signed
that day he said, when referring to the faxed
prescriptions:
I did not issue any of those prescriptions
." Further in the Statutory
Declaration he said:
To the best of my knowledge I cannot recall ever writing a prescription
for Mr Hughes
While this last statement does not, on the face of it, contradict the earlier
ones, Mr Thompson said in cross examination, that Dr
W had admitted to him on 29
May 2001 that he had issued prescriptions in the name of David Hughes. When
asked if they were for oral
contraceptives he said that he was not sure whether
Dr W had used the words oral contraceptives but he said he had issued
prescriptions
for Mr Hughes. This appears to contradict what is in the Statutory
Declaration.
Mr Thompson then gave evidence that Dr S had told him that he had issued
prescriptions in the name of David Hughes for oral contraceptives
Hughes had represented to him that the drugs were going to Bangladesh.
Dr W gave evidence and was cross examined. Dr W said that he first met Mr
Hughes in 1991 or 1992 at a political meeting. He agreed
that he was in the same
political party as Mr Hughes and that Mr Hughes had stayed at his home.
He said that he still has:
no recollection of ever writing a prescription for Mr Hughes
When asked about what he had said to Mr Thompson he said:
Now, what I said to Mr Thompson, I don’t recall that either.
It’s a while ago but I can only assume that what he has said
say, that I wrote the prescriptions for Mr Hughes, is correct but I don’t
recall doing so
Dr W denied conspiring with Mr Hughes to obtain large quantities of oral
contraceptives that he could resell. He denied a close association.
He said that
Mr Hughes could have taken the prescriptions from his home without his consent.
He said that he thought that Mr Hughes
had a terrible character and that that
character emerged over the years. He said that he had had prescription pads
stolen. The Committee
finds that there is a cloud over the issue of how the
prescriptions issued from Dr W’s prescription pad came to be in the
of Mr Hughes.
Mr Mullan gave evidence. He is a pharmacist and holds a law degree. He does
not practice law and is the owner of a pharmacy in Thirroul.
He graduated in
pharmacy in 1981. He gave evidence that the Respondent has worked for him and
that he knows him professionally. He
has attended the Respondent’s
pharmacy on a number of occasions. He spoke highly of the Respondent and said
is not a money hungry person
Mr Mullan went on to describe the Respondent as a consummate professional. Mr
Mullan said that Mr Hughes had presented him with a
prescription for oral
contraceptives and seemed plausible. The prescription was for Anne Hughes but he
said that Mr Hughes told him
it was not for Anne Hughes it was for an overseas
mission. He called Dr W about the prescription and said that Dr W said:
I can’t claim that one
Mr Mullan said that he felt something was not quite right. He said that Dr W
did not disclaim ownership or say it was a forgery.
He said his conversation
with Dr W was a matter of fact doctor to pharmacist conversation and that he
could have dispensed it but
he felt something was wrong and so he did not. He
said that the Respondent was of tender years. Dr W denied the words that Mr
attributed to him of:
I can’t claim that one."
The Committee is satisfied that Dr W did say the words Mr Mullan attributed
The Respondent gave evidence and was cross examined. The Respondent was first
registered as a pharmacist in 1996. He agreed that
he had dispensed
prescriptions in the names of Dr Hughes, D Hughes and D R Hughes. He said that
he thought that Mr Hughes had been
using the large quantities of the oral
contraceptives for gender reassignment but that:
when I spoke to him he told me that it was being sent overseas for aid."
The Respondent said that he thought Mr Hughes was telling him the truth the
whole time and that when he told him that he was sending
it overseas for aid he
felt that he could contribute in some way. He said:
I was completely unaware of my roles and responsibilities with regards to
Pharmacy Act
and I made it a point to sell it to him
at near cost
He went on to acknowledge that even if the medications were to be used to
been unlawful to
dispense the prescriptions to Mr Hughes.
He said that he enjoyed very little commercial advantage from the sales. He
said his actions demonstrated a lack of knowledge and
care. He said that it
would not have occurred to him that the drug would have been resold. He agreed
he dispensed prescriptions issued
from Dr W, Dr S and Dr Chan. He said that he
did not try to contact Dr S or Dr Chan as he felt he was doing the right thing.
that he should have contacted the doctors. He said that when he called
Dr W he did so not to verify the prescription but because
Mr Hughes had asked
for a greater quantity than was on the prescription and that Dr W said:
yes, that’s fine, give him the quantity that he has asked for
He said that he employed Mr Metlege and that he accepted responsibility for
Mr Metlege dispensing the oral contraceptives over the
period of the complaint.
He said he first found out that he had been misled by Mr Hughes when he saw a
television program on Win
TV and that he was shocked to learn that Mr Hughes was
selling the oral contraceptives over the internet. He said that he was sincerely
apologetic for doing the wrong thing and that he is ashamed of having done it.
He said that it was a relief to appear before the
Committee to get some closure
to the matter. He said that he was less experienced with less developed judgment
and assertiveness
at the time and that it could not happen again. He has
developed a protocol for dispensing of all medication in the pharmacies of
he partly owns 3, with his business partner. He gave evidence of maintaining
professional memberships and reviewing Pharmacy
Board Bulletin 4 in regard to
patient counselling. He said that he does now accurately record the initials of
the dispensing pharmacist.
The Committee notes that through his counsel he did
not dispute the accuracy of Schedule A to the complaint.
In cross examination the Respondent said that he was happy to present a paper
he prepared and presented to his business partner to
a wider audience. He said
that he has attended a CMI workshop and a course by the PSA on the proper
procedures with regard to the
supply of Schedule 2 and 3 medications. He does
not attend meetings of professional organisations on a regular basis.
He said that he failed to tell Mr Battye about what Mr Hughes had said to him
because he was young and afraid of what he had done.
He said that he relied on
advice from others and that he regretted that.
He is an accredited pharmacist with the Australian Association of Consultant
Pharmacy and that his pharmacies have maintained their
accreditations.
Counsel for the Complainant submitted that the actions by the Respondent
demonstrated a lack of adequate judgment or care and were
improper and
unethical. The Complainant sought a caution and reprimand with no conditions
having accepted that Mr Mahoney, the peer
reviewer, is now of the view that no
conditions are required. The Complainant however, sought that a fine be imposed
of 40 penalty
units to convey to the rest of the profession both the seriousness
of the conduct and a deterrent effect to other pharmacists.
The Respondent through counsel said that he would accept a reprimand but that
he would not accept a fine as that would be punitive.
The Respondent tendered a number of testimonials and certificates which were
considered by the Board.
Counsel for the Respondent submitted at the conclusion of the evidence, that
Dr W, Dr S, Mr Mullan, Mr Ho (another pharmacist) and the respondent and that
a hide like an elephant and an ego to match"
There appears to be no doubt that Mr Hughes was a rogue in the highest order
and an effective con man. That goes some way to explaining
how the dispensing
without any proper attempts at authenticating the prescriptions took place over
such a lengthy period or at all
but does not excuse it.
The Respondent, like all other pharmacists, has a privileged place in the
community and a responsibility to it and the profession.
This is a position of
trust and it commences when a pharmacist first practices. The Respondent has and
had a responsibility to ensure
that these sorts of breaches did not occur and to
enquire into prescriptions that seem and seemed out of the ordinary. Mr Mullan
looked further into it, he says, because he was more experienced. The Respondent
was registered some three years prior to the breaches
and he has told the
Committee that he would now deal differently with a similar set of facts.
The Committee accepts that:
the Respondent’s degree of
experience was relevant to his decision making at the
the Respondent did not think that the
prescriptions were stolen or forged;
was not the motivator;
the Respondent
thought he was assisting an overseas mission and that this made him a fine
target for Mr Hughes;
the Respondent is
contrite and accepting of his errors of
the Respondent would now deal
differently if faced with similar
the Respondent has developed
protocols and work practices that should avoid a repetition of the
the Respondent has carried out CPE
and other steps to improve his practices as a pharmacist.
The Committee finds however, that the breaches took place over a significant
period of time and are objectively very serious. The
Committee finds that in
failing to make any enquiry of a male presenting a prescription, made out in his
name for the oral contraceptive
pill, the Respondent has made a grave error of
judgment and has acted improperly. The Respondent should have immediately
the inappropriateness of the prescription and taken action to
determine the authenticity of it.
Having considered the totality of the evidence, including the admissions of
the Respondent and the objective seriousness of the breaches,
the Board is
comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities"
Bannister v
(1993) 30NSWLR699) that all the particulars of the complaint have
been proved to its reasonable satisfaction and that the conduct
constitutes
professional misconduct, in that the Board finds that the Respondent has engaged
conduct that demonstrates a lack of adequate judgment and care in the
practice of pharmacy and ;
other improper conduct related to the
practice of pharmacy.
This is not a punitive jurisdiction, it is a protective one. The Board is
concerned to protect the public, to deter other pharmacists
from committing the
same breaches and to engender public confidence in the profession. The Board
does not consider that the imposition
of a fine in this case is appropriate.
The Board finds that conditions in respect of continuing professional education
are appropriate
and that a significant part of that education be carried out in
Accordingly, the Board makes the following orders pursuant to
Pharmacy Act
That Ahmed Sawan is
reprimanded;
That Ahmed Sawan is required to complete,
in each of the years 2006, 2007 and 2008 at least 30 hours of continuing
professional education
(CPE) of which at least 15 hours of each year is to be in
lecture, seminar, workshop or other contact activity.
At the conclusion of each year the Respondent is to submit to the Pharmacy
Board a report of the CPE he has completed during that
That Ahmed Sawan is required to present,
within three months of the date of these Orders, to the satisfaction of a panel
of pharmacists
nominated by the Pharmacy Board, a one hour tutorial on the legal
and professional responsibilities of a pharmacist in dispensing
Prescription
Only medications, showing how procedures in place in his pharmacies ensure that
these responsibilities are met at all
The costs of complying with these Orders are to be met by Ahmed Sawan.
The effective date of these Orders will be one month from the date on which
Ahmed Sawan is notified by registered post at his address
as it appears on the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (246 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter