URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2009/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Austin v Chiropractors Registration Board of New South Wales [2009] NSWCHT 2 (9 September 2009)
CHIROPRACTORS ACT 2001
CHIROPRACTORS TRIBUNAL OF NSW
APPEAL UNDER
MATTER NUMBER: CH01/2009
REGISTRATION NUMBER: CP
GRAHAM NEIL AUSTIN
(Known as Neil
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: Austin v Chiropractors Registration Board of New South Wales
[2009] NSWCHT 2
PARTIES: Mr Graham Neil Austin
(Appellant) self- represented.
Chiropractors Registration Board of New South Wales (Respondent)
represented by Mr Stanley Benson (of Counsel), instructed by Mr Geoffrey
Boyd, Solicitor, Crown Solicitor’s Office.
FILE NUMBER: CH1/2009
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne Muller (Deputy
Chairperson)
Dr Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
Ronald Duncan (Chiropractor Member)
Ms Sue-Ellen McKelvey
(Chiropractor Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 30 and 31 July 2009
DATE OF DECISION: 9 September 2009
FINDINGS (in summary): Appeal dismissed. Appellant not to apply for
re-registration for a period of 5 years. The Appellant to pay
the costs of the
CATCHWORDS: Chiropractor - Appeal against decision of Board refusing
registration – previous finding of professional misconduct
convictions for indecent assault.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Chiropractors Act
, schedule 5 – clause 6.
Osteopaths Act 2001
Child Protection (Offenders Registration) Act
CASES CITED:
R v Neil Austin
DCt of NSW 17 January
Ex-parte Tziniolos: Re: Medical Practice Act
1966 67 SR 448;
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR
Richter v Walton
(NSW Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993,
unreported);
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
McBride v Walton
(unreported 15 July 1994)
Melbourne v The Queen
(1999) 198 CLR 1
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
Society of South Australia v Rodda
[2002] SASC 274
(2002) 83 SASR 541
Health Care Complaints Commission v Meyer
[2008] NSWNMT 22
Health Care Complaints Commission v Gillett
[2007] NSWNMT 7
Solicitor v Council of the Law Society of NSW
[2004] HCA 1
(2003) 216 CLR 253
R v O'Neill
[1979] 2 NSWLR 588B
Chow v Director of Public
Prosecutions
(1992) 28 NSWLR 593
[2000] NSWCCA 209
112 A Crim R 466
Health Care Complaints Commission v
(2009) NSWNMT 3
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
HCCC v Franks
Health Care Complaints C v Bryan
[2009] NSWPST 1)
Health Care Complaints Commission v T
[2008] NSWNMT 9
Ziems v Prothonotary of the Supreme Court (NSW)
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
A Solicitor v Council of the Law Society of
[2004] HCA 1
(2003) 216 CLR 253
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2007] NSWNMT 7.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Chiropractors Tribunal (Tribunal) convened at the Health Professionals
Registration Boards’ (HPRB) Tribunal Hearing Room
in Sydney on 30 and 31
July 2009 to determine an Appeal lodged by Mr Graham Neil Austin (Appellant) by
way of his letter dated 6
January 2009. This is an appeal against a decision of
the Chiropractors Registration Board of New South Wales (Board) made 2 December
2008 to refuse the Appellant’s application for re- registration as a
chiropractor.
Appellant had previously held registration as a chiropractor and osteopath in
New South Wales (NSW). When the Appellant moved
to Victoria in 2004, he allowed
his registration as a chiropractor in NSW to lapse as he had become registered
as a chiropractor
in Victoria.
Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal made a finding of professional misconduct
with respect to the Appellant in 2003 and he was
convicted in 2008 on criminal
charges relating to incestuous conduct with his stepdaughter (
DCt of NSW, 17 January 2008 (Murrell SC DCJ)).
Board was of the opinion that the circumstances of the offences were such that
the Respondent was rendered unfit in the public
interest to practise
chiropractic (letter from the Board dated 9 December 2008 – exhibit
Relevant Law
Appellant is provided with a right of appeal against the decision of the Board
not to register him as a chiropractor by section
17(1) of the Chiropractors Act
2001 (Act). Section 17 provides (emphasis added):
17 Appeals concerning registration
(1) A person who is aggrieved by any of the following decisions of the
Board may appeal to the Tribunal against the decision:
(a) the Board's refusal to grant the person full registration,
(b) the Board's refusal to grant the person temporary registration,
(c) the Board's decision to refuse to register the person under section 14 or
to grant the person registration subject to conditions
under that section,
(d) the Board's cancellation of the person's provisional registration or
temporary registration,
(e) the Board's refusal to register the person under clause 28 (Entitlement
to re-registration if fee paid) of Schedule 1.
(2) An appeal must be made within 28 days (or such longer period as the
Chairperson may allow in a particular case) after notice of
the decision is
given to the person. The appeal is to be lodged with the Registrar who is to
refer it to the Tribunal.
(3) If the decision in respect of which an appeal is made was made as a
consequence of an inquiry held by the Board, the appeal is
to be dealt with by
way of rehearing and fresh evidence or evidence in addition to or in
substitution for the evidence received at
the inquiry may be given.
(4) An appeal does not affect any determination with respect to which it is
made until the appeal is determined.
(5) When it determines an appeal, the Tribunal may dismiss the appeal or
order that the decision of the Board be revoked and replaced
by a different
decision made by the Tribunal and specified in the order. The Tribunal may also
make such ancillary orders as it thinks
(6) The Tribunal's decision is taken to be a decision of the Board (but this
does not confer a right of appeal under this section
in respect of the
Tribunal's decision).
(7) No appeal lies under this Act against a decision of the Board under the
Mutual Recognition laws in relation to its functions under
3 of the Act provides that the object of the Act is to protect the health and
safety of members of the public by providing
mechanisms to ensure that
chiropractors are fit to practise. Primarily these mechanisms are achieved by
the establishment of the
Board and the empowerment of it to facilitate, under
the Act, the registration of chiropractors.
of the important functions of the Board is to ensure that registered
chiropractors are of good character.
indicated by section 17, set out above, when hearing and determining an appeal
against a decision of the Board, the Tribunal is
required to conduct a rehearing
of the evidence and, if it does not dismiss the appeal, may make a decision
of a person that is taken to be a decision of the
Codes of Conduct
Chiropractors
registered in New South Wales (NSW) have been subject to three ‘Codes of
Conduct’ since registration was
introduced in 1991. The first Code
introduced by the Board (then called the Chiropractors and Osteopaths
Registration Board) published
the ‘Chiropractic Code of Professional
new ‘Chiropractic Code of Professional Conduct’ was approved in
October 2000.
February 2004, when the next edition of the ‘Chiropractic Code of
Professional Conduct’ was published there was a separate
Chiropractors
Registration Board. Clause 17 of this Code required chiropractors to immediately
advise the Board of a criminal conviction
of the nature of the offence(s) for
which the Appellant was convicted.
Standard of proof required
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
satisfied’ that the particulars
of the Complaint have been established. In
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was), at 362–363, said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
dealing with a complaint, is protective, not punitive.
There are dual reasons
for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201-202, a case concerning a barrister, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
trust placed in chiropractors is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client to
come into physical
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
Bannister v Walton
(30 April 1992 – Court of Appeal –
unreported) Mahoney JA said:
The right to practice [medicine] affords to a practitioner
privileges and opportunities which are not available to others. He is expected
to maintain a relationship with patients who are affected by his character. The
relationship is one which touches matters such as
trust, confidence,
confidentiality and right conduct. Clinical capacity is by no means the only
consideration to which regard is
to be had in determining whether a person is
appropriate to practice medicine. It is necessary that the public be protected
those who, through having the appropriate skills do not have the
character for the opportunities and privileges which the right to
the Matter of Dr. Roderick Doyle Motum and the
Medical Practice Act 1992
(Medical Tribunal of New South Wales, 2 August 2000, unreported), involved a
consideration of character and conviction (and impairment)
by the Medical
Tribunal. The following comments provide assistance:
Of course the conduct of Dr. Motum was not directly concerned
with his practice of medicine and the Tribunal has therefore given thought,
(applying the words of Walsh JA in Tziniolis), as to whether such conduct,
although deserving of disapproval, should be regarded
as having any bearing on
whether Dr. Motum is of good character for the purpose of practising as a
registered medical practitioner.
However the Tribunal has come to the
determination that the conduct of Dr. Motum was so grossly contrary to the norms
of all right
thinking members of our society that it shows that not only is he
not of good character generally but that he is not of good character
purpose of the practice of medicine as a registered medical practitioner.
decision in Motum also drew together comments made in other matters regarding
character (commencing at page 9):
The concept of "good character" was discussed by the Court of
Appeal of New South Wales in Ex parte Tziniolis (1966) 84 WN(NSW)
In that case Walsh JA said at page 277:-
- - - I am of opinion, in deciding this question, [ie. as to whether the
applicant is of good character] the court is required to
consider matters
affecting the moral standards, attitudes and qualities of the applicant and not
merely to consider what is his general
reputation. I think, further, that we are
entitled to inquire into what may be described as personal misconduct as
distinct from
professional misconduct, in determining in this case whether or
not the applicant is a man of good character, whilst recognising
that there may
be some kinds of conduct deserving of disapproval which have little or no
bearing on the question whether or not it
is shown that an applicant for
registration as a medical practitioner is a person of good character.
Again Holmes JA said in the same case at page 300:-
It is not "good character" in some particular sense developed in the
criminal law or in the law of defamation but "good character"
of a person
seeking to practice medicine as a registered medical practitioner with which we
are concerned. c/f In re Davis
[1947] HCA 53
(1947) 75 CLR 409
at 426. Reputation is obviously
relevant to the solution of the problem but cannot be the exclusive test. "Good"
is used also in
the sense of "moral strength". I do not propose to substitute
for the terms of the section some other words .... A man's conduct
in respects
known only to his intimates can evidence his character. Medical practitioners
occupy positions of trust. An inability
to withstand the importunings of the
evilly disposed would disqualify, as would the propensity to exploit the
gullible. These and
other defects in moral fiber may not be parts of a man's
reputation but evidence of these traits must be weighed in estimating character.
Even these characteristics cannot be looked at in isolation. The judgment as to
character must be arrived at by giving due weight
to all features. Finally, the
judgment must be made of the man at the time when the court is asked to consider
the application. "Good
character" is not a summation of acts alone but relates
rather to the quality of the person. The quality is to be judged by acts
motives, that is to say, behaviour and mental and emotional situations
accompanying that behaviour. However character cannot
always be estimated by one
act or class of act. As much about a person as is known will form the evidence
from which the inference
of good character or not of good character is
In dismissing an application for a stay in Bannister v Walton (30 April
1992, unreported) Mahoney JA. (as he then was) said at page
The right to practice [medicine] affords to a practitioner privileges and
opportunities which are not available to others. He is expected
to maintain a
relationship with patients who are affected by his character. The relationship
is one which touches matters such as
trust, confidence, confidentiality and
right conduct. Clinical capacity is by no means the only consideration to which
to be had in determining whether a person is appropriate to practise
medicine. It is necessary that the public be protected against
those who, though
having the appropriate skills do not have the character for the opportunities
and privileges which the right to
practice gives.
See also the judgment of Handley JA in McBride v Walton (Court of Appeal
15 July 1994 unreported) especially at pages 5-7 and 13-16.
Suppression Orders
Deputy Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in accordance with
Schedule 5 Clause 6 of the Act in relation to the
names of the victim of the
indecent assaults and her mother and the name of the patient involved in the
finding of professional misconduct
made against the Appellant by the Tribunal on
12 March 2003 -see Annexure F hereto. Any information that may identify these
is not to be published.
documents in evidence are set out in Annexure ‘A’ hereto. The tender
of a number of character references was withdrawn
by the Appellant as he was
unable to have the authors thereof available for cross-examination.
Dawood Latif (by telephone), Mr Ronald Curtin (by telephone), Mr David Ross (in
person), Dr Andrew Lawrence (by telephone), Mr
John Thomson (in person) all gave
evidence, having been required for cross-examination by the Crown. The
Respondent also gave evidence.
Appellant (DOB 3/1/47) commenced practice in 1973 and was first registered as a
chiropractor on 21 November 1979. This registration
lapsed on 30 June 2005, and
his name was administratively deleted from the Register on 1 July 2005. In early
2004 he moved to Victoria
with his second wife and gained registration as a
chiropractor in Victoria on 23 April 2004.
Appellant was refused renewal of his registration as an osteopath by the NSW
Osteopaths Registration Board in 2008 (exhibit 12).
Appellant initially trained as an electrical engineer. After receiving treatment
for migraine headaches from a chiropractor with
good effect he was inspired to
train as a chiropractor. The Appellant stated in his evidence that his area of
specialisation was
migraines because of his personal interest. The Appellant
graduated from the Sydney College in 1972.
Appellant served as a Justice of the Peace from 1967 to September 2004.
Appellant met his first wife when she attended his practice as a patient. Miss A
became the stepdaughter of the Appellant by virtue
of his marriage to the mother
of Miss A in 1974. Miss A was five years of age at the time.
is some evidence before the Tribunal regarding the volatile nature of the
relationship between the Appellant and his first wife.
Appellant established a chiropractic practice in Pennant Hills, New South Wales,
which successfully operated until about 2003.
Appellant’s has had a strong involvement in the Christian faith,
stretching back to his childhood when his father served
as an elder in the
church. The Appellant is recorded in the references in evidence on his behalf as
having involvement in the following
organisations, Vice President CAA (NSW
Branch), CAA National Insurance Chair (nine years), CAA National Board Member,
Zone Area Organiser for Men (Sydney Billy Graham Crusade –
1981), member of Rotary, Convenor of Men’s Weekly Breakfast
clinic), Honorary Secretary Navcast Charity (a Christian Charity), and various
other church committees.
after the Appellant’s second marriage, that is to his current wife, he
moved to Victoria. After working in several locum
positions, including one for
Dr Lawrence, he purchased a practice in Rosebud. The Appellant reports that he
was unable to maintain
this practice in light of his increasing legal expenses
(from the criminal proceedings), the requirement for him to reside in NSW
his incarceration.
Appellant has not been able to find work since his release from prison on parole
in August 2008 and currently has debts of over
Finding of Professional Misconduct – March 2003
Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal (as it was then called - differently
constituted from the current Tribunal) made a finding
of professional misconduct
against the Respondent on 12 March 2003 (a copy of this decision is annexed
hereto and marked B). It is
clear from the ‘Determination’ document
that the Tribunal did not have any knowledge of the conduct of the Appellant,
subject of the later criminal convictions.
finding of professional misconduct (see paragraph 23 of Annexure B hereto)
related to the Appellant entering into a personal and
sexual relationship with a
female patient from 1997 to 1999. Sexual intercourse occurred during a treatment
session in the professional
rooms of the Appellant and he subsequently
co-habited with the patient for a number of months. The relationship apparently
badly. The Appellant stated that at the time this relationship occurred
his first marriage had broken down.
considering the appropriate order(s) to be made in the circumstances, the
Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal looked to evidence
presented by the
Appellant to the effect that he had reformed since the commission of his
conduct, noting the principle in
Ex-parte Tziniolos: Re:
Medical Practice
(1966) 67 SR 448 that ‘clear proof’ of reformation was
Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal took into account the admission of the
Appellant to the conduct, his acknowledgement that
his behaviour was
‘reprehensible’, his involvement in mentoring, his seeking of
medical treatment (including psychiatric
treatment) and his community
involvement. Significant regard was also given to personal references tendered
on behalf of the Appellant
‘to establish his good character and confirm
his community activities’ (paragraph 27 annexure B). The references
a number from female patients supporting the Respondent’s claim
that he had a professional approach to his work, from receptionists
worked for him attesting to his ‘excellent moral character’ and his
quality of being a ‘caring employer’
and from people who had contact
with the Respondent through his community work.
paragraph 28, the Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal concluded (being mindful
of the principle in
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186)
the Appellant had ‘taken the appropriate steps in his day to day and
professional life to ensure that he will not engage
in like behaviour’ to
that which brought him before the Tribunal. Further, the Chiropractors and
Osteopaths Tribunal was satisfied
that the Appellant was ‘truly
contrite’ and that there had been a ‘reformation of character so
that he can be trusted
with the high standard of conduct required of a
chiropractor and osteopath’.
Criminal Convictions – 29 October 2007
Appellant was arrested in August 2006 in relation to the offences to which he
ultimately pleaded guilty on 29 October 2007. The
Appellant pleaded guilty to
three counts as follows:
(1) Between 31
December 1980 and 15 February 1981 at [location], he assaulted a female, [Miss
A], who was under the age of sixteen
years, i.e. eleven or twelve years, and at
the time of the assault he committed an act of indecency upon her.
(2) Between 1
October 1981 and 6 October 1981 at [location], he assaulted [Miss A], and at
that time of the assault committed an act
of indecency upon her, she being under
sixteen years, namely twelve years.
(3) Between 30
November 1988 and 1 January 1989 at [another location], he assaulted [Miss A]
and at the time of the assault committed
an act of indecency upon her.
further acts of indecent assault were taken into account in a ‘Form
1’ with respect to the second count listed above.
At the relevant times,
Miss A was the Appellant’s stepdaughter. Further, these counts were
‘representative’. The
meaning of ‘representative’ in
this context is that the conduct particularised in the charges was
representative of the
course of conduct of the Appellant.
Remarks on Sentence made by Her Honour Judge Murrell SC (annexure C hereto),
note that when Miss A had disclosed the conduct of
the Appellant many years
previously the family had attended counselling with a psychiatrist. Her Honour
noted that the Appellant
had admitted his conduct during the counselling. Miss A
ultimately reported the conduct of the Appellant to the Police on 7 January
(the delay in reporting is explained in annexure C and is not relevant to this
matter). Her Honour noted that Miss A was a ‘vulnerable
person and the
[Appellant] abused his position of authority and trust’ with respect to
the only person in relation to whom
he had ever stood in ‘loco
parentus’ (sic).
Remarks on Sentence referred in detail to the references tendered by the
Appellant ‘attesting to his apparent excellent
character’. Murrell
SC DCJ notes the references describe the Appellant as a ‘strong
Christian’, that he had been
actively involved in chiropractic
professional organisations, community groups and Christian mens’ groups.
The references also
noted that the Appellant had provided
‘counselling’ to patients, was kind and generous, was trusted and
respected and
appeared to have a good relationship with Miss A.
Appellant offered as the explanation for his conduct his sexual frustration
because of ‘his turbulent and sexually unsatisfying
relationship’
with Miss A’s mother (his then wife). Her Honour remarked that she found
the Appellant’s explanation
of his conduct to be ‘offensive’
and demonstrating ‘a lack of insight and a lack of acceptance of
fundamental responsibility
for the conduct in question’.
Judge had favourable regard to the evidence of the Appellant that he had two
periods of counselling with respect to his misconduct
and that he considered the
issue had been ‘dealt with’. Her Honour was of the view that there
was no need to protect
the community from the Appellant as he had been
‘fully rehabilitated’; she took into account the Appellant’s
good character and his significant remorse and contrition.
summary, Murrell SC DCJ sentenced the Appellant to a non-parole term of
imprisonment of seven months, followed by a parole period
of a further 13 months
on the second count, an 18 month good behaviour bond for the first count and a
three year good behaviour bond
for the third count. The Appellant is therefore,
as at the date of this Inquiry, still serving his sentence which will expire on
15 September 2009 and will remain on a good behaviour bond until September 2010.
Tribunal notes there is no mention of the Misconduct finding of the
Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal in the Judge’s
remarks. The
Appellant confirmed that this matter had not been drawn to the Judge’s
attention as it had not been considered
relevant by his legal advisers. Some of
the character witnesses who provided letters of support for the criminal
proceedings and
who gave evidence in this Appeal confirmed that they either did
not know of the professional misconduct finding or had not mentioned
their view that it was not relevant.
Statement of Agreed Facts from the District Court proceedings forms exhibit 7 in
this matter.
appears the Appellant did not notified the Board of his convictions and remained
at the time of the hearing of this Appeal firmly
of the view that his legal
advisers should have attended to this on his behalf despite the fact that he
remained at liberty for a
period of about three months after he entered a plea
of guilty and that he had telephone contact with his wife shortly after being
taken into custody.
The evidence before the Tribunal
Application
for Re-Registration
Appellant lodged an Application for Re-Registration (Application) with the Board
on 29 September 2008. The Application is accompanied
by a Statutory Declaration
to the effect that the information provided ‘is complete and true’.
The Tribunal notes the
Application records the Appellant’s correct name
– Graham Neil Austin, however, the criminal proceedings all refer to
‘Neil Austin’. In a letter dated 11 May 2008, the Appellant signed
his name as ‘Neil Austin’ and then advised
his legal adviser (in the
criminal proceedings) that he was known as “Graham Neil Austin’ by
Appellant answered question 4 on the Application - ‘Have you been
convicted of any offence in or outside of New South Wales,
except an excluded
offence?’ by placing a cross in the ‘No’ box. The Appellant
did however place a cross in the
‘Yes’ box for the question -
‘Has a criminal finding for a sex/violence offence been made against
the explanatory notes provided with the Application, the following submission is
made by the Appellant (part of exhibit 10):
At the pre trial hearing my Counsel advised me to plead guilty
to the most serious of the 3 allegations which purportedly occurred
October 1981 long weekend, because with the passing of time I was unable to
substantiate my attendance at the UCAA National
Conference in Adelaide. As I
then had no means of contesting the other 2 charges, Counsel advised that I
accept a plea bargain and
to plead guilty to all 3 charges.
Appellant also advised that the Registrar of the Chiropractors Board of Victoria
was keeping his file open until such time as
he could attend a
‘Registration Board Panel Hearing’. Presumably this would be after
the Appellant had served out his
Appellant also attached a letter from Ms Amanda Coultas-Roberts, Senior
Solicitor, Legal Aid Commission confirming that they act
on his behalf with
‘respect to his proposed appeal to the NSW Court of Criminal
Letter from the Respondent to the Board dated 20 October
response to the Board’s request for further information the Appellant
provided a letter dated 20 October 2008 (exhibit 13).
This letter included the
following passage:
In August 2006 I was surprised by my arrest on allegations
brought by my step daughter of sexual impropriety dating back 26 years.
extradited to Sydney for a pre trial hearing 29 October 2007 and on Counsel
advice plead guilty to the 3 allegations the most
serious of which purportedly
occurred on the Labour Day holiday weekend October 1981 when I was in Adelaide
at the UCAA National
Conference. Due to the passing of time I was unable to
substantiate my attendance at the Conference and on Counsel advice self perjured
for a plea bargain and no means to contest the 2 lesser charges. Counsel advised
against my making defence to Judge Murrell.
letter also stated that the Appellant was sentenced to a parole period of 11
months (not 13 months).
Letter from the Respondent dated 19 November 2008
response to a letter from the Board dated 14 November 2008, the Appellant
indicated he was still in the process of preparing ‘material
to present to
Legal Aid for my intended appeal to the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal’
which he indicated Legal Aid had advised
him may take ‘four or five
years’ to be heard (exhibit 14).
Letter from the Board dated 9 December 2008
Board advised the Appellant by letter dated 9 December 2008 (exhibit 15) that at
its meeting on 2 December 2008, his Application
had been refused on the grounds
that the circumstances of the offences for which he had been convicted rendered
him unfit in the
public interest to practise chiropractic (and referred to the
powers of the Board under section 14 of the Act).
Letter from Appellant to HCCC dated 29 April 2009
Appellant wrote to the HCCC on 29 April 2009 (exhibit RB6) in response to its
letter dated 17 April 2009 (which is not in evidence).
The letter relates to the
Respondent’s registration as an osteopath.
letter states that the Appellant is ‘unable to afford another estimated
$200,000 for a full judicial hearing’. The
Appellant clarified in his oral
evidence that by ‘full judicial hearing’ he meant a trial by jury.
The Tribunal confirmed
with the Appellant he no longer intends proceeding with
any appeal of his criminal convictions. The letter repeats the
Appellant’s
claim that he ‘self convicted’ and was denied an
opportunity of defending himself before the District Court ‘and
consequently my sentence is not reflective of all the facts’. This is a
position he maintained throughout the Inquiry.
Appellant states in this letter (a position maintained in his evidence during
the Inquiry) that he had intended to lodge an appeal:
...on the grounds of complicity under threat upon my life by my
former wife to accept responsibility for her father’s inappropriate
behaviour upon herself and my step daughter to appease my former wife of
continued (documented) threats upon my life and continued
phone calls into my
present marriage due to her ongoing psychiatric illness of diagnosed MPD and
associated schizophrenic behaviour
concealed before marriage 11 May
letter continues (emphasis as per the original letter):
Legal Aid NSW in advice 6 April 2009 is of the opinion that
these facts are significant however because
I self convicted
has no prospect of success as the Court of Criminal Appeal will
not permit a
reversal of plea
. I am also seeking other legal opinion
Appellant indicates he has made complaints about the conduct of his legal
representative to the Law Society’s Professional
Standards Committee.
Exhibit AE 1 is a letter from the Professional Standards Department of the Law
Society of New South Wales which
appears to confirm that the Appellant has made
a complaint of this nature. The Tribunal notes that the address for Mr Austin
on this letter dated 31 March 2009 is ‘C/-‘ an address in
Victoria. In evidence the Appellant provided details of some
of the issues
raised in his complaint (see below).
Professional Reports
Dr Robert Fischer
Appellant was referred to Dr Fisher, Consultant psychiatrist and Pain Management
Specialist, by his general practitioner (Dr Cahill).
Dr Fisher reported to Dr
Cahill in writing on 22 June 1999. The report records that the Appellant
attended with his ‘estranged
wife’ and that the Appellant
‘wished to address... the reasons for and consequences of the molestation
of [his stepdaughter]
when she was 10 or 11 years old’ and ‘wished
to receive help to find a path for reconciliation with [her]’.
Appellant reported that he had an affair with a woman about 10 years previously
and had recently separated from his wife ‘to
take up a relationship with
another 55 year old woman on 6
November 1998’.
By the time of the report this relationship had broken down and the Appellant
was living in the back of his
chiropractic surgery.
Fisher records that the Appellant felt that he was ‘repeating
“inappropriate behaviour”, that is closing off
from [his wife] and
engaging in alternative sexual relationships with other people, much as he had
done in the past’. Further,
the report records that the Appellant asked Dr
Fisher, ‘Why do I do what I do?’.
Fisher records that both the Appellant and his then wife recounted to him the
family history of paedophilia in each of their families.
report confirms that the Appellant’s wife was of the view that the
Appellant had not ‘taken responsibility for his
molesting’ her daughter. The Appellant’s wife also confirmed to Dr
Fisher that she suffered from multiple
personality disorder.
Fisher noted that the Appellant’s wife was ‘markedly
ambivalent’ about reconciliation with the Appellant, although
she still loved him, she feels he does not treat her
‘empathetically’.
Fisher records that he informed the Appellant and his wife that he ‘could
only help them to look at trying to establish some
form of marital contract and
provide them with a structure which could permit realistic reconciliation but
only on the basis of [the
Appellant] truthfully acknowledging the ways in which
he has harmed his wife over the years, as well as having harmed his
stepdaughter’.
the ‘sexually related problems’, Dr Fisher referred the Appellant to
Dr McConaghy as he is ‘an established expert
in the area of treatment for
these problems and would be best suited to help Mr Austin if that is at all
the issue of the conduct towards the Appellant’s stepdaughter, Dr Fisher
makes the following comments (on page 2 of his report
– exhibit 9):
He said that he now felt that the whole concept of paedophilia
was repugnant to him. He said that he didn’t believe that he
paedophile. He said that the molestation of [his stepdaughter] had occurred
because of problems that existed in his relationship
with his wife and that
perhaps he had a fantasy that he could have children with [his stepdaughter]
that he could not have with [his
It was apparent that [his wife] had quite a different view of what had
actually happened and believes that some activities had continued
years, probably of the order of a further eight years and that [her daughter]
had gone through a period of great fear and
had wanted to keep a knife under her
pillow to protect herself.
She says that when she had caught the two of them in bed together on one
occasion, her husband had said to her several days later
that he thought that
she [his wife]’ might like to watch him having a sexual relationship with
her daughter. He subsequently
admitted that he had stimulated her clitoris and
brought her to orgasm.
[The Appellant’s wife] said that she had come to the conclusion that
her husband would sacrifice anyone to protect himself and
that he was regularly
deceitful. She said that she suspected that there may have been other instances
of paedophilia but that she
does not definitely know of any.
Tribunal notes at this point that the Appellant gave evidence before the
Tribunal that this medical report accurately recorded
what was said to Dr Fisher
during the consultation.
Prof Neil McConaghy
McConaghy (psychiatrist) treated the Appellant in 1999. A report dated 29 June
1999 (exhibit RE 15) addressed to Dr Fisher formed
part of the evidence before
Murrell SC DCJ.
report reads as though the Appellant and his wife were still a couple, or at
least a potential couple, as it mentions ‘further
marital therapy’.
report records Prof. McConaghy’s view that the conduct (which appears to
have become the subject of one of the offences)
was ‘...motivated by the
poor sexual relationship he had with his wife’.
McConaghy also expressed the view that he ‘...did not feel convinced that
he [the Appellant] had any real problem now
with controlling inappropriate
sexual urges’. The Tribunal notes the conduct with Patient A occurred in
1997 and 1998. It
is unclear whether this conduct was considered by Dr
McConaghy, and as he is now deceased further evidence was not sought.
Mr Jeffrey Cummins
Cummins (psychologist) prepared a report dated 21 December 2007 for the District
Court proceedings after consulting with the Appellant
on two occasions (exhibit
report records the Appellant told Mr Cummins that his conduct towards his
stepdaughter was first disclosed during a ‘round
table’ with both
his stepdaughter and his wife. The Appellant recounted his desire to actively
take ‘responsibility for
his offending behaviour’ prompted his
attendance upon a psychologist/counsellor for ‘approximately four
consultations’,
accompanied by his wife.
the report records that the Appellant did not consider himself to be a
paedophile and that the molestation occurred because
of the problems he
experienced in the relationship with his wife and his ‘sexual
frustration’. The Appellant stated to
Mr Cummins that he had never been
satisfied with his sexual relationship with his wife. The report then recounts
what is recorded
in the report of Dr Fisher that the Appellant suggested that
‘perhaps’ the molestation was a result of a ‘fantasy’
that he could have ‘children with [his stepdaughter] that he could not
have with [his wife]’. The Tribunal notes that
the report also records the
Appellant advising Mr Cummins that his wife was unable to have children during
their marriage.
report records that Mr Cummins thought there was no indication that any sexual
offences against the stepdaughter occurred after
the ‘counselling
process’ had commenced. Mr Cummins must have been referring to the
counselling undertaken by Dr Hunter,
as there were instances of abuse that
occurred after the first period of counselling that occurred sometime in the
late 1980’s
and/or early 1990’s.
Cummins expresses the view that the Appellant is, by definition, assessed as
paedophilic (incest) because of the age difference,
the familial relationship
and the age of the victim at the time of the offences.
Character references
indicated above, the Appellant provided a number of character references to the
Tribunal. The legal representatives of the Board
objected to the tender of any
reference where the author was not available for cross-examination (either in
person or by telephone).
After consideration of the content of the references,
the Chairperson decided only to allow in those references where the authors
available for cross-examination on the basis of relevance and the weight that
could be put to references that did not make reference
to the convictions, to
the Statement of Agreed Facts or to the 2003 Tribunal Determination and were, in
many cases, not addressed
to the Tribunal. By way of example, the Appellant
tendered a reference from Mr Dennis Richards, chiropractor, dated 30 December
As this reference is addressed to ‘The Presiding Judge, Sydney
District Court’, the Tribunal assumed it was tendered
at the sentencing
hearing. This was confirmed by the Appellant. Without putting to Mr Richards the
further facts and circumstances,
the Tribunal was of the view that the reference
did not have sufficient probative value to be admitted into evidence. A total
five people were called to give evidence and their references were admitted
into evidence.
Mr Ronald Curtin
Curtin gave evidence by telephone. He had provided two references to the
Appellant. The first dated 10 December 2007 is addressed
to the District Court,
the second dated 27 March 2009 is addressed to the Tribunal.
Curtin is the CEO and Director of a company, Courage Enterprises International
Pty Ltd, which provided ‘Business Consultancy
Services’; he
confirmed that he had known the Appellant for over 25 years, having first met
him when he consulted the Appellant
to treat his back pain. Thereafter, they
grew to be close personal friends. This friendship involved significant amounts
between their two families.
the first reference, Mr Curtin wrote, ‘I am concerned that a man of this
calibre is under any form of investigation’
and went on to express his
shock and surprise at the indecent assault charges.
Curtin recounted the same details as are set out in other referees’
evidence with respect to the Appellant’s community
involvement,
particularly within the Christian community, stating that he had an
‘unblemished character’ in these areas.
The references also record
that the Appellant had been a ‘Christian Counsellor’, an Area
Co-ordinator for Neighbourhood
Watch and ‘an excellent provider for his
first reference contains the following towards the end (noting that no
information was provided by Mr Curtin regarding his counselling
qualifications):
In summary, I have studied human behaviour and counselled many
and these types of studies highlight certain traits in human beings
which alert
the counsellor if behaviour patterns are different to the norm.
At no time or under any circumstances has Neil ever exhibited any traits
or behaviours of which, he is being accused.
It would seem apparent to me that these events for which Neil is charged
must have been confined well into the past as they are not
consistent with the
man I know and respect.
Mr David Ross
Ross provided two references for the Appellant. One dated 8 January 2008
(exhibit AH – 1) is addressed to the District Court
and the other, dated
18 May 2009 (exhibit AH-2) is addressed to the Tribunal. Mr Ross practises as a
solicitor under the practice
name of Northside Law.
Ross attended before the Tribunal to give evidence. Mr Ross confirmed that he
had only recently received a copy of the Remarks
on Sentence and the 2003
Tribunal Determination, but that he had read them.
Ross gave the following oral evidence (T64. 13 - 49, 30/7/09):
I have known Neil Austin for quite a number of years - over nine
years - when he became a member of the church to which I attend.
I formed the
opinion because we spent time together at various groups, church groups, for the
purpose of advancing our biblical
knowledge and our interest in the teachings of
Christ that he was a decent man and I didn't know at that time about these
but I've since having examined the record of the proceedings before the
tribunal and the judgment of her Honour .... I still conclude
that Neil is a fit
a proper person to be registered as a chiropractor and to practise and for these
reasons: The subject matter
of his conviction related to something which
occurred many, many years ago. It was - I mean there are other things which go
but I won't go behind, attempt to go behind the guilty plea, and the
judgment of Murrell J, simply to say that it happened many,
many years ago
and even before I knew Neil and I think he has - he was - he made some serious
errors of judgment in his relationship
with his daughter.
I think he allowed his affection for her to exceed the bounds of propriety
and he would certainly have learnt a great lesson from
that. It's a very
serious thing to be sentenced to a term of imprisonment for the connection that
he had with his stepdaughter,
which was not - which didn't reach the heights of
seriousness, such as, by penetration. It was principally about fondling and I
don't resile from the fact that he went too far in that and for that he was
heavily sentenced, he was heavily dealt with, but it
was many years ago.
And the subsequent offence, the subsequent misconduct, occurred with a
woman with whom he had sincere partnership intentions and he
did in fact form a
partnership with her and there is other - to my knowledge there is no other
impropriety and had he been somebody
who was predatory and preyed on patients I
would have not given my reference. I would not speak for him but this man I
basically a good man and if he were in practice here in Sydney I would
send my daughter, my teenage daughters, to him for chiropractic
because I have a
high opinion of him as a man of integrity and rectitude.
cross-examination Mr Ross acknowledged that he had not been aware of the exact
nature and extent of the charges faced by the
Appellant, he had not received a
copy of the Indictment or the Statement of Agreed Facts when he wrote the first
reference. He confirmed
he was not aware of the Form 1 offences or the fact that
the charges faced by the Appellant were ‘representative’.
Ross confirmed that criminal law was not an area of law in which he practised.
He confirmed with obvious regret that he had advised
the Appellant to retain the
particular solicitors in the criminal proceedings. Mr Ross also confirmed he had
advised the Appellant
solicitors and the current Inquiry before the Tribunal. In this last regard,
Ross confirmed that he had given pro bono assistance to the Appellant a few
weekends before the Inquiry and that he had used the
terms ‘offences
indicated serious errors of judgment’ and ‘affection exceeding the
bounds of propriety’.
following exchange occurred during cross-examination (T69.12-20, 30/7/09):
Q. And you would agree, would you not, that the factual
circumstances in particularly count 2 certainly cannot be properly
characterised
as affection, can you?
A. Well, I think I said that he exceeded the bounds of affection. I mean
kissing is in order for a child but starting to undress
her for a purpose is not
and if that purpose was to kiss her breasts and touch her on the outside of her
vagina, no, it's not appropriate
but I'm saying it went beyond the bounds of
affection but it didn't reach the point of penetration which would be the
ultimate indecent
Tribunal notes at this point that if the Appellant’s conduct had involved
penetration, it would not have constituted ‘the
ultimate indecent
assault’, rather, it would be a sexual assault.
following exchange occurred during cross-examination (T70.21-30, 30/7/09):
Q. And what I am suggesting to you that you may have been
misled by Mr Austin as to the specific nature of the offences such that
they represent a less serious characterisation of the wrongdoing which might
have then--
A. Only to the extent - I mean he has told kiss and rub breasts, which
is the height of that seriousness. He hasn't told me - he
hadn't told me about
touch her on the outside of her vaginal area and which we know is something
else. It's not specific enough
to know whether touching her on the outside of
her vaginal area is around the stomach or between the belly button and vagina
- but I'm not trying to make excuses for him I'm just saying that I wasn't
following exchange occurred during cross-examination (T70.43-71.23,
Q. Do I take it that in his discussion with you was he in any
way resiling from his plea of guilty?
A. Well, he had great difficulty in - I mean I think not to put too fine
a point on it, he was regretting that he pleaded guilty
because he had run out
of money, he had intended to defend the claim because he claimed at the time of
the serious allegation that
he was elsewhere than on the date on which it was
alleged he committed the offence and - but it was a long time ago and he was
to find any evidence to corroborate the fact that he was there. Records
have been destroyed of the chiropractic conference that
he was at and the people
who were there he wasn't able to obtain any evidence from them, that's what he
told me, and it wasn't -
but I think part of the persuasion to plead guilty was
that he was given to understand that the penalty would be non-custodial and
once he got a custodial sentence he was regretting having done it.
Q. And in the discussion was he resiling from the factual issues in
respect of one matter or all matters?
A. Well, up until the time I had the meeting with him and I said, "Look,
you can't go behind this decision, you pleaded guilty -
you have pleaded guilty
and the judge has given her decision and that is the matter on which the
tribunal must address its attention
and there's no point in living in the past
you've got to address the present and the future," and so after our conversation
he came to the conclusion that it was futile to hold any regret about
having pleaded guilty and so he's accepted that what he's been
charged with is
what has happened and he can't go back on it.
Q. But it is fair to say he has expressed no remorse for any
A. Yes, he has. Yes, he did. Yes, he expressed remorse for the general
way in which he dealt with his stepdaughter by exceeding
the bounds of his
propriety with her and I think certainly - because this is many, many years ago,
1998 (as said), it's over 20 years ago and
I think he's not let it go.
following exchange occurred during cross-examination (T72.35-73.5, 30/7/09):
Q. Is that matter
[the 2003 Tribunal Determination]
you would have liked to have known about prior to writing your reference of
8 January 2008?
A. Well, had I known about it would not have greatly affected my
reference for him in that it is my understanding that it occurred
after he was
separated from his wife, he was going through a very difficult period including
loneliness and he was attracted to this
person and from a professional point of
view it was wrong of him to have and that's been dealt with by the tribunal but
though account has to be taken anyhow of the circumstances that he was
in at the time when this happened and the fact that it was
a bona fide, it
was a genuine forming of a relationship. Quite often professional people don't
get a lot of time to meet - speaking
as a professional - meet other members of
the opposite sex and of course lawyers are not under the same constraint but
health professionals
are and should be but I can understand how it occurs that
if you meet somebody when you have little other time than meeting in your
professional circumstances that you might form an attraction for her.
Q. So a finding of professional misconduct and a professional reprimand
are not matters that you consider were important for you
to know when you wrote
that reference?
A. Yes, they should have been disclosed but it wouldn't have changed my
Dr Andrew Lawrence
Lawrence practises as a chiropractor in Victoria, and has been actively involved
in the Australian Chiropractors’ Association
(ACA) and the
Chiropractors’ Association of Australian (CAA), being the immediate past
president of the latter in 2002. He
provided the Appellant with a reference
addressed to the ‘Presiding judge’ dated 13 January 2008.
this reference, Dr Lawrence indicates he had known the Appellant for a period of
approximately 25 years, having first met him when
they were both directors of
the ACA. In his oral evidence by telephone before the Tribunal, Dr Lawrence
indicated that this close
association was for a period of about 10 years and
thereafter they have kept in touch, although he was not aware that in early 2004
the Appellant had moved to Victoria. Subsequently, the Appellant asked him to
witness some documents and Dr Lawrence then employed
the Appellant as a locum
for a period of about two weeks.
the first page of the reference, Dr Lawrence wrote:
I crossed paths with Neil from time to time over the years and
have never heard a bad word spoken about his character or negative
regarding his dealings with colleagues.
cross-examination Dr Lawrence indicated that by December 2007 he was aware, only
by way of a verbal report from the Appellant,
of the finding of professional
misconduct made by the 2003 Tribunal. The following cross-examination then took
place (T29.29-30.6,
Q. You make no reference to that determination and how you
dealt with it in your reference?
A. I didn't think it was relevant.
Q. You didn't think being reprimanded for professional misconduct in
relation to sexual activities with a patient in a professional
clinic setting
was relevant?
A. Not relevant to the proceedings that were being heard, sorry, in
regards to the Regina v Austin, that's what I was asked to write
a reference
for, so that why I haven't - that's why I didn't mentioned it so, no, I didn't
think it was relevant in that particular
Q. But you understood that you were being asked to provide a reference as
to his character?
Q. And you understood did you not that the expectation of a referee would
be that they would provide a balanced analysis both of
the positive and negative
aspects of the person for whom the reference was being provided - didn't you
understand that?
A. I understand what you're saying and my response to that is that I was
asked to write a character reference for a specific purpose
and I didn't - I've
never seen a reference that has referred to something which is not relevant to
the proceedings.
Q. With respect, the issue of relevance to the proceedings was the issue
of Mr Austin's character. Don't you think professional misconduct
something referrable to character?
A. I imagine so. Yes.
Lawrence agreed he did not have knowledge of the full extent of the
Appellant’s conduct both with respect to the criminal
matters as well as
the professional misconduct matter at the time he wrote his reference.
asked by the Tribunal about his understanding of the role of the Tribunal Dr
Lawrence gave the following evidence (T31.18-21,
Q. So what is your understanding of the role of a
A. Of a tribunal of the board or a tribunal of - my understanding of a
tribunal is to assess the circumstances and I think that to
make recommendations
in regards to overturning or upholding a ruling.
Tribunal notes that both this Tribunal and the equivalent tribunal in Victoria
(VCAT) have the power to make orders (including
an order for de-registration)
and do not act by way of making recommendations.
Lawrence also gave the following evidence (T 30.45-48, 31/7/09):
Q. If I ask you to assume that Mr Austin was a person
whose word could not be trusted, would that cause you to change your
A. If I knew that he was a person not to be trusted then I wouldn't have
written a reference.
reference includes the following information:
Neil resigned from the board [ACA] to take up a position as the
endorsed insurance agent for the ACA and he carried out the duties
position with his customary diligence. When the contract period expired there
were some difficulties with the finalization
Lawrence gave the following evidence to the Tribunal (T33.19-34.20,31/7/09):
Q. If I can take you to the third paragraph of your
13 January 2008 reference, the second paragraph there, "When the contract
expired there was some difficulties with the finalisation of it," can you
tell me what contract period were you talking about there?
A. There was a period of time - the contract was let for I think or I
couldn't be specific - maybe for two or three years and at
the end of that
period of time the position was then thrown open and Neil was not reappointed
because we went with a larger agency
and there was some, as there often is in
commercial arrangements, there was some discussion about moneys owing but it was
Q. Moneys owing to whom or from whom?
A. To Neil.
Q. From whom?
A. From the association in commissions and that sort of stuff. There was
some discrepancy between the - there was some disagreement
between the two
parties about what was owing but it was all settled quite amicably in the
Q. Can you tell me what was the role of the endorsed insurance agent, can
you tell me - explain?
A. That role was to contact members and to offer them insurance policies,
which the association had endorsed through I think Guild
Insurance it was at the
time. I'm not quite sure. My recollection is not a hundred per cent on that
but I think that's probably
Q. And was that a full-time position for Mr Austin?
A. No, it was not I don't think. I think it was a part-time position for
him. He was still practising at the time as I recall but
Q. And so that was an appointment made by the Australian Chiropractors
Association?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. So they appointed him as their endorsed insurance agent?
Q. And he then undertook on a commission to contact members of the
association and offer them insurance policies?
A. That's correct.
Q. And he received some sort of commission for that?
Q. Did the association receive some commission for that?
Q. Did the commission - the difficulties over commission did it relate to
more general financial difficulties of the association
or was it a dispute
merely between Mr Austin and the association?
A. No, just specifically between Mr Austin and the
association.
is convenient at this point to recount the evidence of the Appellant to the
Tribunal on this matter (T23.23 – 24,31/7/09):
Q. And then at one stage you became the endorsed insurance
agent for the ACA is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. What does the endorsed insurance agent do - what was that
A. Primarily sussing out the best deal and - should I not say it -
getting a kick back for the association in the process.
Q. So you are talking about indemnity insurance?
A. No, I'm talking about - well, professional indemnity and/or general
insurances too, so that the insurer was willing to pay the
association for a bit
of a promotion.
Q. And in Dr Andrew Lawrence's reference of 13 January 2008 he
said something about difficulties with finalising that position when
contract period came up. Do you know--
A. I'm sorry.
Q. I'll read it to you, it said you "resigned from the board to take up a
position as the endorsed insurance agent for the ACA and
he carried out the
duties of that position with his customary diligence. When the contract period
expired there were some difficulties
with the finalisation of it. Neil's
willingness to cooperate enabled the matter to be settled amicably and
promptly," and it goes
on. Was he talking about your contract period or the
contract period with the insurer?
A. No, it was politics basically in terms of the deal I had achieved for
the association at the time that the association, had we
have maintained that
path, the association could have been its own insurer within a five year period
which I think would have been
a first for any professional body, other than the
Pharmacy Guild, it would have become its own insurer and it would have had the
capacity and the reserves to do so. Somehow and I'm getting into politics here
but somehow the Federal body got into the red in
a big way and the whole thing
got junked because they needed the cash for something else and members insurance
fees increased and
the increase unfortunately was not a reflection of the
premium increase but rather the cream the top the association charged to offset
a deficit they had in another area.
And consequently they said, "Thanks, Neil, but no thanks. We'll take it
from here." Yeah, I just let it go as experience. I didn't
- my objection was
on principle I thought it was morally wrong for the association to cream off the
top from members and not state,
"Hey, the association's cream off the top is
going from 1% to 5 per cent," or something. I think at the time there was some
stiff opposition to it from even like the likes of Stanley Bolton who gave
the Federal body a very hard time and said it was just
wrong that they were
charging such exorbitant fees for insurance. Now what was happening was the
insurer was still charging the
same amount but because of mismanagement or some
financial problem that the Board had got themselves into they needed funds
and that was the easiest way was just to put a service fee on top of
the members and keep that difference for themselves.
Mr John Thomson
Thomson gave evidence that he had provided two character references. The first
in time was a report to the ‘Presiding Judge’
dated 16 November 2007
(exhibit AH – 3) and the second was for the current Inquiry and is dated
23 March 2009 (exhibit AH –
Thomson confirmed that he had received and read the Remarks on Sentence and the
2003 Tribunal Determination and when asked if there
was any further comment he
wanted to make, Mr Thomson read the following response from a document that came
into evidence as exhibit
I would just like to say to the tribunal that having now read
the determination of the tribunal in Neil Austin v Chiropractors and
Board 2003 and the decision of Regina v Neil Austin I have no reason to change
or withdraw my reference for Neil Austin.
Thomson came to know the Appellant through a mutual friend some twenty-five
years ago and had subsequently consulted him in his
professional capacity.
Although semi-retired, Mr Thomson remains working in a family business, Finance
Group Pty Ltd.
Thomson was impressed with the Appellant’s financial support of his
stepdaughter, paying for education at a private school
and for a university
education ‘as if she was his own daughter’. After his separation
from his first wife, the Appellant
had confided in Mr Thomson that she had
suffered from ‘multi personality disorder’, and revealed the
financial burden
of having counselling provided to her on an ongoing basis
throughout the marriage. Mr Thomson also witnessed the Appellant’s
behaving badly at his practice on one occasion.
reference written for the District Court includes a statement that the Appellant
had an ‘unblemished clinical practice record’.
The 2009 reference
contains a similar statement to the effect that the Appellant enjoyed ‘a
good reputation’ among his
peers. This was clearly not true as at 2007 or
2009 given the finding of professional misconduct that was made by the 2003
The Tribunal accepts that Mr Thomson was not aware of the 2003
Determination, however, it must be seen as reflecting badly on the
that he allowed this reference to go before the court when he knew it was based
partially on a false premise.
Thomson confirmed that he knew of the roles the Appellant had played in
chiropractic professional associations as well as the charitable
work (Rotary
and Navcast) and church work undertaken by the Appellant. The Appellant had
convened ‘weekly mens’ breakfasts’
for the church. In
particular Mr Thomson confirmed that he was aware that the Appellant was
involved in organising the Billy Graham
Crusade in 1980/1981. There was then the
following exchange in cross-examination (T 84.32 – 85.11, 30/7/09):
Q. So were you aware that the first occasions of his
molestation of his daughter was effectively concurrent with that?
A. No, not at all.
Q. If that was in fact the case would that call into question your
understanding as a member of the Christian community his character?
A. If I had been aware of those matters I think I would have urged Neil
to seek counsel. I would have urged Neil to seek counsel.
Q. Do you see anything duplicitous about on the one hand in his private
life molesting his daughter and in his other life being a
church leader?
A. I find it very confusing.
Q. In neither of those references do you make any reference to
Mr Austin expressing any remorse for his behaviour. Is that because
didn't express any remorse to you?
A. No, he certainly did. He certainly did by ways of saying, "I've got
these problems now and I've just got to face them."
Q. Did he express any expression of regret to the trauma he caused his
A. Not to me.
Q. Did he express any regret to the trauma he caused his wife when she
became aware of the course of conduct?
Q. Would you agree that seems inconsistent with his Christian
commitment?
A. To me, yes, but then I'm not privy what his actions and words were to
his family.
reference states that the Appellant’s behaviour was ‘completely out
of character and would never be repeated’.
balance of the statement prepared by Mr Thomson for the Tribunal reads as
The events as outlined in the documents provided to me will in
my view never be repeated, and are so out of character from the Neil
know, but I can understand the upheaval and turmoil in Neil’s life caused
by the volatile separation and subsequent
divorce from his first wife, and the
relationship with [Ms B] would have been a difficult time. Neil truly loved his
stepdaughter,
providing for her every material need, including a private school
education. He allowed his paternal affection to exceed the normal
daughter relationship for which he has paid a high price. As Judge Merrell
stated in his
remarks on sentence, the offender is unlikely to
re-offend and has good prospects of rehabilitation. Indeed, One can go further
than that. There really is no prospect of re-offending, given that all of the
offences were directed against one person, and a long
period has passed since
the last of the offences. The offender admitted the offences. His family and
acquaintances are all now
very well aware that the offences occurred. Those
factors indicate that there really is no chance that the offender will
He is fully rehabilitated. As far as remorse and contrition is
concerned, I accept that the offender has show significant contrition
remorse. He made admission to improper conduct in the course of counselling,
both in 1990 and in 1999. When matters came to
light, he ceased the offending
behaviour. The psychologist’s report tendered on behalf of the offender
refers to contrition
and remorse. The offender made admissions to police at the
outset. All these matters as well as the plea of guilty, support the
that the offender is contrite and remorseful. I would just like to say I
support these remarks by Judge Murrell and trust
the tribunal in its wisdom will
see fit to restore Neil’s registration.
number of aspects of the evidence of the Appellant were put to Mr Thomson under
cross-examination (interrupted by clarification
by the Deputy Chairperson of the
Tribunal) the following exchanges, with appropriate editing, occurred (T85.23 -
88.15,30/7/09):
Q. And I take it that Mr Austin did not provide you, in
disclosure of the outcome of the proceedings, with a copy of the sentencing
judge's decision?
Q. Nor with a copy of the Determination relating to his professional
misconduct that was handed down in 2003?
Q. And you would agree, would you not, that they provide some very
disquieting insights into very serious and reprehensible conduct
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Which are serious matters that would need to be taken in any
assessment of his character?
Q. Did you feel misled when you read those two documents as to why they
hadn't been provided to you previously?
A. I was disappointed, yes.
Q. You would agree, as a referee, you were entitled to have such
disclosure if you were to make a fair and informed opinion as to
A. Yes, I would say that it would have been it was my error that I did
not probe deeper to find the result of the decisions of the
Q. And it is fair to say that when you made this second reference you had
very limited information about the offences that were before
the court or their
Q. Or the impact they had on his stepdaughter?
Q. Now you are maintaining your position as to your assessment of his
character in part on the comments of Murrell J that the offender
unlikely to re-offend and has good prospects of rehabilitation, is that
A. Correct.
Q. And you go on to say that, "There is really no prospect of
re-offending given that the offences were directed against one person
period has passed since the last of the offences."
Q. Of course that is based on there being an acceptance of those offences
having occurred and Mr Austin taking remedial action, do
you agree with
A. Yes, they are the remarks of Murrell J.
Q. Yes, and you were adopting those?
A. Yes. I thought that was a fair and accurate assessment.
Q. And you were influenced by the fact that the offender, Mr Austin,
admitted the offences to the judge?
Q. Took full responsibility for them?
Q. And that is your understanding of his position?
Q. And of course you say that, "As far as remorse and contrition is
concerned you accept that the offender has shown significant
contrition and
remorse and you base that on the fact that he has made admissions to improper
conduct in the course of counselling"?
Q. And you took that from the judge's decision?
Q. Both in 1990 and 1999. If it was to be suggested that he misled and
lied to his treating counsellors, would that concern you?
Q. And that would be an insight into his character that you were not
aware or you are not aware that he is a person whose word cannot
be accepted, is
that correct?
A. Correct. If that were the case I mean you—
Q. If I was to ask you to assume that Mr Austin has informed this
Tribunal that he in fact lied to the counsellors in 1990 and 1991
admissions he made, that would trouble you would it not?
A. That would trouble me.
Q. And would that cause you to reconsider your evidence that he would be
a fit and proper person to practise?
A. I don't know the nature of what you are referring to.
CHAIRPERSON
Q. I think if you just accept for the purpose of the question that
Mr Benson has said that if it was the case that Mr Austin lied
counsellors, I think it was in 1990 and 1999 .... just making an assumption that
that was the evidence would that cause you
to have concerns?
A. Yes. Okay. It would cause me to have concerns.
Q. And would it cause you to rethink the references that you provided to
the Tribunal?
A. I think they'd need to be couched in a different manner.
Q. And if I ask you to assume that he lied to other people, such as, the
arresting police officers, would that cause you concern?
Q. And cause you to reconsider your reference?
Q. Because you rely on indeed you refer to the psychologist's report
tendered on behalf of the offender refers to contrition and
remorse, again that
is taken from Murrell J's decision?
Q. And that is an important matter that you have relied on in forming the
opinion that Mr Austin has rehabilitated himself?
A. Rehabilitated. That's exactly right. Yes.
Q. And if I ask you to assume that that opinion was based on the lies by
Mr Austin in the interview with that psychologist, would
that be a matter
that caused you to reconsider your reference?
Q. And also you have been influenced by the plea of guilty?
Q. And you say you support those remarks by Murrell J?
Q. And you are aware that those remarks were based on admissions by
Mr Austin in those legal proceedings?
Q. And if I ask you to assume that Mr Austin was now resiling from
those admissions, would that cause you concern?
A. It would.
Q. If that was the case, in what way would it cause you to reconsider
what you said in your reference?
A. I would need to sit down and think carefully about how I would
approach it again, yes.
Mr Dawood Latif
Latif gave evidence by telephone from New Zealand where he is the Director of 3E
Energy Limited, a Justice of the Peace and a prison
chaplain. Mr Latif states in
his reference that he is of the view that ‘becoming a recidivist is a
chain that appears to be
broken through Bible teaching’.
Tribunal received two references from Mr Latif into evidence. The first dated 16
November 2007 is addressed to the District Court
and the second dated 26 March
2009 is addressed to the Tribunal.
Latif states that he had known the Appellant since 1970 when they were work
colleagues as well as spending considerable periods
of time together when
attending Christian activities such as Church and Bible Study. He considered
the Appellant to be his friend
and ‘Christian brother’.
the first reference, Mr Latif expressed his ‘surprise and shock’ and
his ‘awe’ with respect to the ‘accusations’
observation of the Appellant in the role of father to his stepdaughter. This
reference also records the numerous community
and professional activities with
which the Appellant had been involved as well as noting the Appellant had a
‘very successful
career with 33 years of unblemished clinical
practice’. The Tribunal does not need to repeat the observations made in
of the evidence of Mr Thomson as to the patent inaccuracy of this
Latif stated he was aware of the Appellant’s first wife’s
‘past’ and her ‘Psychiatric problem’
and stated he was
‘very touched’ to see the Appellant was ‘willing to take on a
person with complex problems’
who ‘did not show appreciation for the
Appellant’s]
the first reference, which was prepared for the District Court, Mr Latif
confidently expressed the view that the Appellant would
not repeat his
behaviour. Presumably, Mr Latif meant behaviour characterised as sexual
impropriety rather than incest as the Appellant
did not have any other daughter
or stepdaughter at the time. This referee makes no mention of the 2003 Tribunal
Determination as
he gave evidence he was not aware of it at the time.
the later reference, Mr Latif also recounts that the Appellant had had ’30
years plus of unblemished clinical practice’.
Once again, Mr Latif has not
had the benefit of the 2003 Tribunal Determination prior to preparing the
Oral evidence – the Appellant
Appellant commenced giving evidence by reading a prepared statement. A copy of
this statement is annexed hereto and marked D.
Appellant agreed in his evidence that he should have deleted the title
‘Dr’ from the letterhead he used to write to
a solicitor at Legal
Aid NSW on 10 October 2008 (exhibit RD3), understanding that the title
‘Dr’ was not available to
chiropractors registered in NSW (unless
they hold the relevant doctorate qualification and have approval from the
for the best part, the subject matter of the complaints made by the Appellant
regarding his legal representatives during
the criminal proceedings have no
relevance to this Appeal, the Tribunal notes the evidence of the Appellant
regarding his allegation
that they failed to notify the relevant Boards of his
convictions as required by both section 21 of the Act and section 21 the
Osteopaths Act 2001
. The Appellant confirmed in his evidence that he was at
liberty for a period over 3 months after he entered a guilty plea to the
offences set out above. He further agreed that he was able to speak to his wife
(being his current wife) after he was taken into
custody. The Appellant gave
evidence as to the unreliability of the mail service within the prison system,
although did not deny
he had access to it. Finally, the Appellant agreed that
whilst incarcerated there were ‘Welfare Officers’ working within
system but by way of a rider, indicated that the waiting time for appointments
were significant. The Tribunal notes that handwritten
letter addressed to his
legal advisers were posted from the prison and are in evidence.
Tribunal has conflicting evidence regarding the status of the marriage of the
Appellant and his first wife at the time he commenced
the relationship with
Patient A (2003 Tribunal finding). The Tribunal notes the Particulars of
Complaint found proven by the 2003
Tribunal indicate that ‘hugging and
kissing’ had begun in July 1997 and that sexual intercourse occurred
August 1997. The Appellant provided a copy of an email
dated 16 May 2007 (exhibit RC 5) addressed to his legal adviser (with respect
the criminal proceedings) which records a history of his marriage to his first
wife. The email recounts that the Appellant moved
out of the family home in
November 1997. The report of Mr Cummins records the Appellant told him that the
separation from his first
wife was ‘final’ in November 1998, with
the divorce occurring in 2000. The 2003 Tribunal Determination records the
gave evidence that he had moved out of the family home in September
1997. However, in his oral evidence to the Tribunal the Appellant
stated (T12.
21-23, 30/7/09) :
...the relationship occurred during my loneliness and turmoil
following separation with my wife some months prior...
Appellant stated emphatically that for the first time he was giving evidence of
the explanation for his criminal conduct. The
relevant part of his evidence is
as follows (T17.45-19.32, 31/7/09):
Today is the first day I am making it public. I am making the
history public of my wife and her behaviour. It's the wrong setting
I believe it should be done in the Court of Criminal Appeal of which now I
believe I have no access because of poor advice,
that if I accept a plea bargain
I am disqualified in mounting a defence. Legal Aid advised me that. I have no
money to seek private
lawyers. In fact I had no money for this today. A
walk-up fee for a lawyer here was $26,000. So I'm sorry to be green and I know
I'm not presenting this well but I'm quite prepared for the chips to fall where
they will and I just thank you that I can have a
I was very annoyed that I had no voice at the court hearing because that
would have been the appropriate venue. What my concern is
today is just as my
ex held me to ransom with threats upon my life, with even phone calls currently
into our marriage, which my current
wife can assess and speak to, she is married
to someone else and she still calls into my marriage today and asks me to come
It's pretty hard. When will she go away? I struggle - I struggle with
this. I have to live with that. I struggle with it. I
struggle with the plea
process. They didn't get an answer straightaway. It took a week before I could
come at it.
I've stated to this court, this hearing that I was at the united
chiropractors’ convention at Adelaide on that weekend. My
daughter knows
that. I struggle with the other major thing that I was drunk or something and
manhandled her. I was not drunk.
I've never been drunk in my life. I'm sorry
I don't drink. My daughter knows that. I can only surmise and this is
conjecture but
I can only surmise that one day there is going to be a lot of
weeping with my daughter and I and I believe her life's under threat.
this stuff here is motivated by my ex-wife. I really do. I mean it's too
shiny. It doesn't fit the pattern. It doesn't
fit our relationship. It
doesn't fit the events. I just doesn't fit. She's all gooey-gooey.
current wife]
and I are in her family three or four nights - we have meals
together. We go out socially. We go.... we get married. I remove
the chairs.
Bang. It doesn't work.
I can't communicate with my daughter. I'm under restrictions of not to.
I'm seen as a predator. I'm seen as a child molester.
Can you imagine what
it's like to live under a sentence for you have not been guilty? Can you
imagine that? Can you imagine living
under a label, being ostracised and
bearing the guilt and the shame and the sentence for some things not committed -
for things not
committed. I can. I've served my time to the community for
stuff I haven't done. Yeah, I'm hostile toward my legal team because
they should have the capacity to forsake a few bucks and say, Listen pal, go
down there unrepresented to the court and
get appointed a barrister and you go
for it," rather than, "You'd better stay here. No, no, it won't work you'd
better have this
plea bargain plea process," and the truth be
suppressed.
Well, the truth is out. I take full responsibility as I did at the time,
and I accept my behaviour in the clinic toward a patient,
reprehensible, it was wrong, it was morally wrong, it was wrong by the conduct
and the profession and I accept full responsibility
for that. I do not accept
in any way, shape or form any of the charges that were brought maliciously
against me in the process of
this recent court case. I am not quite sure of the
history or the motivation or whatever. I will find out one day. I will find
out and I suspect I will find out when my former wife passes away then things
might come into focus.
The conflict I have and I alluded to earlier yesterday was I didn't want
to bring my daughter into a state of being exposed because
I believe her life is
under threat as I talk and that's not an emotive statement. I believe my
daughter's life is under threat as
I speak because she is being held not to say
a word about the facts and you would have to understand the power that a person
MPD and schizophrenia has over someone else particularly in a marital
situation. It is horrendous and I suspect she has a big wand
over my daughter.
That's speculation because I have no proof but things point to it. There are
certain little glitches in here
that show me there is a sinister plan right
behind this whole thing.
I have submitted to you photographs of my stepdaughter, I call her my
daughter, my daughter at my wedding. I ask you does she look
like a daughter
who is molested, a daughter who volunteered to make a cake for the wedding, who
did all she could for our wedding.
It doesn't fit the picture. Sorry. It
doesn't fit. I would suggest to you that a daughter who claimed to be molested
nothing to do with her stepfather. Nothing. To the contrary - to
the contrary - and I suspect that if it wasn't for this recent
restriction maybe
I'd be getting some truth but I cannot contact her I am disallowed.
I would like to speak if I may, just leaving that for a minute, I would
like to speak to some points that were raised yesterday and
I said I am green in
all of this and I want it to be fairly clear that in respect of me asking
referees to write a reference there
was no deliberate withholding of
information. I emailed them all I could. When they were asked, I omitted, what
could I say, I
admit that there wasn't a substantive report at the time and I
suggest to you that I asked them for a reference as an indication
would be willing to stand with me and they were supplied material subsequent to
that. But not one of them, not one, objected
and they had ample time to say,
"Oh, hang on, look sorry I can't. You'd better destroy that reference. I can't
stand with you,"
and I think yesterday during procedures here all of them
attested to the fact that they still supported me.
Appellant then described how he had maintained this façade as follows
(T19.47- 20.4, 31/7/09 ):
Yes, I maintained it right through and I kept the story fairly
consistent right from the first time there was early counselling.
counsellors know the family well. Unfortunately Laurence Banks was one of those
counsellors who is overseas and could not be
present here today. He knows the
family well. He knows the situation well and he would attest to what I am
saying. I kept that
story right through to my own cost and downfall and I'm
just grateful to be able to speak to that in a public domain. They say truth
stranger than fiction, well, hey.
Appellant declared forcefully in his oral evidence that he was giving a truthful
account of his conduct and the circumstances
for the first time in
‘public’. He declared that the statements regarding sexually abusing
his stepdaughter made to numerous
psychiatrists and the police were untrue and
that they were part of a ‘deal’ struck with his ex-wife. The essence
the ‘deal’ was that the Appellant would admit to the abuse and
his ex-wife would admit that she had serious psychiatric
problems that required
treatment. On a number of occasions the Appellant asserted that he had only
discovered that his first wife
had significant mental health issues that had
precipitated admissions into mental health facilities in the past after they had
married for about 12 months.
Appellant confirmed to the Tribunal in his evidence on the second day of the
Inquiry that he had told lies in accordance with
the ‘deal’ to Dr
McMurdo (psychiatrist), Dr Cahill (G.P.), Dr Hunter (psychiatrist), Dr Fisher
(psychiatrist), Prof.
McConaghy (psychiatrist), the arresting police officers,
Mr Cummins (psychologist), the District Court and this Tribunal on the first
of the Inquiry. The first of these doctors being consulted in around 1989 and
the last representation being made on the first
day of the Inquiry.
Tribunal notes that exhibit AC 12 is an email to the Appellant from his legal
adviser (in the criminal matter) dated 14 October
2007, wherein the legal
adviser confirms that the Appellant had provided an ‘explanation’
that the comments made to Dr
Fisher, Dr McConaghy, and Dr Hunter were to
‘appease’ his first wife. The email recounts that the Appellant had
informed the legal adviser that the comments to the same effect made to the
arresting police were a result of the Appellant’s
confusion’ at the time.
the Appellant gave evidence that he had lied for twenty years about the sexual
abuse of his stepdaughter, he was asked during
cross-examination what conduct he
now admitted with respect to his stepdaughter. The Appellant gave the following
evidence (T 21.47
–22.9, 31/7/09):
Look, I acknowledge I would have given
[my stepdaughter]
a kiss. I know I'm quite aware of nights, as an aside, of tucking her in at
nights and it started to get to me a bit because she'd
always usually grab me by
the tie and pull me down and wiggle her mouth until she met my lips. I guess
kids do things like that.
I know that in here it refers to me - my touching her
vagina and I'm saying to you there was no willful - there was no premeditated
was just - that's repugnant. The whole thing's repugnant but I remember clearly
on an occasion where I was pulled down and overbalanced
and my hand went between
her legs to sort of steady and get my balance and I brushed her vagina and I'm
dealing with that in the
context of this. I admit to kissing
[step-daughter]
, not in a sexual way, no way. No, just as a
father-daughter may. I'm struggling - I'm struggling with the undertone of
- sexual predatorial suggestion with this.
, the Appellant stated (T22.24-28, 31/7/09):
Yes, I admit I have kissed her. I admit to scraping her vagina
when gaining balance on the bed. I admit to kissing her in bed goodnight.
admit to - I think there was one thing alluded here - I admit to something
around the pool and we were - and I admit to touching
her breast as a
consequence of wrestling and a hose in a shower and her togs slipped. I admit
following exchanges occurred when Tribunal questioned the Appellant (T 39.1-17
& 39.47-40.7, 31/7/09):
Q. I'm just wondering if you can explain the situation where you
were facing serious criminal charges and you now tell the tribunal
accepted responsibility for those things when in fact you had not done them as
they were. Can you explain why when faced
with that situation with a criminal
conviction why you would accept responsibility for that conduct?
A. Why I would accept responsibility?
A. For fear of my life at that time.
Q. As at that date had you made any complaints to the police with respect to
threats on your life?
Q. And did you inform those acting for you at the time of those reports to
the police?
A. It would have been mentioned.
Q. As part of the criminal proceedings a victim's impact statement was
provided to the court and no doubt provided to you. Is that
Q. Can you tell me what your reaction was to the - when you read the
victim's impact statement?
A. Well, disbelief.
Q. Why was that?
A. Distorted, fabricated, exaggerated, taking the norm and putting it into a
context of predatorial behaviour.
evidence given by the Appellant is mentioned elsewhere in this document.
Submissions made by the Appellant
Appellant made the following submission:
In relation to the 2003 Chiropractors and Osteopaths
Registration Board I have acknowledged and expressed my abhorrence. I was out
of line. My conduct was wrong and I accepted full responsibility for that.
That hadn't been a situation prior nor has it been repeated.
It seems as if
through lack of information, through lack of disclosure by lawyers retained in
the case of Regina v Austin, 2008,
that had it been disclosed fully the
consequences of accepting a plea bargain I would not have pled guilty. I think
it is tragic
that a person's life can be so sullied through no cause of his own
and his reputation lost and his destiny lie, as it were, in the
skill of a legal
practitioner. I really have nothing further to add.
The Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent outlined the nature of the Appeal, the powers of the Tribunal and the
fundamental requirement of ‘fitness’
character’.
respect to the evidence in this matter the Respondent submitted:
Extensive evidence has been placed before the tribunal. A
significant body is not contentious but in this case a significant body
evidence is contentious. So far as the non-contentious evidence is concerned
the appellant does not dispute that on 17 January
2008 he was formally
convicted and sentenced by Murrell J in the District Court of New
South Wales. The tribunal has before it a
certificate of the convictions, which
is in the respondent's material at tab 3. That is evidence of the
essential elements of the
offence, which are binding on the appellant and on
this tribunal.
If one turns to those then one can see that there are three counts and
they have specifics as to the elements of each of those offences.
when Mr Austin's stepdaughter was eleven or twelve and the most serious one
is count 2 when his daughter was twelve and
then the third one was when she
was about 20. The certificate of conviction, which is not disputed, sets out
the terms of the sentences
for each. Quite clearly, Murrell J in
imposing a prison sentence of twenty months with a non-parole period of seven
months indicates
the seriousness under the criminal law of those
The sentencing process was based on a premise. The basic premise was a
plea of guilty entered by the defendant, Mr Austin, on 20
2007, which was supported by an agreed statement of facts, also signed by the
respective representatives of the respective
parties on 20 October 2007.
The import of the process the tribunal should appreciate was that there was an
indictment of a greater
number of offences and one particular offence involving
an assertion of sexual intercourse between Mr Austin and his stepdaughter
when she was only twelve. On any view an extremely serious allegation.
What the charges relate to in lay language were charges of a paedophilic
nature; they involve incest and certainly Mr Austin's own
psychologist in
the pre-sentencing psychology report made the characterisation of the conduct as
paedophilic. This characterisation
is not to overly dramatise the nature of the
offending conduct but to ensure that the tribunal appreciates the proper lay
characterisation
and indeed professional characterisation of the offending
behaviour. In his materials in Mr Cummins' report, which is E16 at
Dr Cummins states, "By definition Mr Austin's offending
behaviour would be assessed as paedophilic (incest) because of the age
difference."
We know from the materials the age difference was substantial, I
think in the order of 22 years, the familial relationship as stepfather
stepdaughter and the age of the victim at the time that the offending conduct
commenced, which was eleven or twelve.
The Macquarie Dictionary 3rd Edition defines "paedophile" as a person who
engages in sexual activities with children. "Paedophilia"
is sexual attraction
in an adult towards children. So there does not need to be sexual intercourse
as a prerequisite but a sexual
attraction in an adult towards children. One can
infer the sexual attraction from the conduct inherent in the offences. If it
assist the tribunal I will hand up a copy of that definition.
So far as the proceedings before Murrell J in the District Court
were concerned they commenced through the indictment process. There
of guilty on 20 October and, as I have indicated, that was supported by an
agreed statement of facts, I have included
in the authorities which I will not
take you to, that by a plea of guilty a person admits the essential legal
ingredients of the
offence charged and no more. A copy of the decisions in the
R v O'Neill and Chow v Director of Public Prosecutions are the two authorities
for that proposition.
So by the plea of guilty Mr Austin admitted the essential legal
ingredients of the offence charged and that is what he is convicted
of but this
case goes further than that because in this case there was an agreed statement
of facts and by that process Mr Austin
made admissions of fact which are
binding, in my submission, upon him. Those facts were then represented to his
forensic psychologist
for the purposes of the pre-sentencing psychology report.
In that context it is clear, as one would expect, there to be the provision
the defendant's position on the fact and when one peruses the report of
Dr Cummins in the second paragraph he refers to the agreed
statement of
facts and other documents that were provided to him including Dr Fisher's
report and Professor Neil McConaghy. Those
reports are also before the
Dr Cummins also had the benefit of two interview sessions with
Mr Austin for the purpose of forming an opinion as to his psychological
state and the need for rehabilitation issues and the prospect of recidivism and
whether he understood and accepted the import of
his offending behaviour and had
taken remedial steps. What Mr Austin amazingly, in my submission, has now
admitted to or would have
the tribunal believe is that he engaged in a course of
conduct to deceive and mislead his own forensic psychologist by making adverse
admissions of wrongful conduct towards his stepdaughter with the expectation of
obtaining a favourable report to help mitigate his
sentence. Pausing there,
Mr Austin would have the tribunal believe that he was under an expectation
that he might avoid a custodial
sentence and presumably the inference to be
drawn is that he was prepared to do anything to mislead the court and his
qualified psychologist.
Mr Cummins notes in quite specific detail how Mr Austin readily
acknowledged he committed sexual offences against his stepdaughter.
how Mr Austin stated he had an understanding he allowed himself to offend
against his stepdaughter in circumstances where
he was feeling sexually
frustrated because he never had a satisfactory sexual relationship with his
first wife and that is the core
of it. When his daughter was quite young,
eleven or twelve, Mr Austin's marriage had its difficulties and he
succumbed to the temptation,
a situational temptation, of dealing with his
sexual frustration on the most vulnerable person under his control. That is at
top of p 5, Madam Chair.
Mr Cummins goes on to say that Mr Austin spoke in a remorseful
manner concerning his offending behaviour. He goes on to say, "In
Mr Austin has already taken appropriate steps to understand what motivated
his offending behaviour and in the course of
treatment consultations he
discussed what is not referred to as 'relapse prevention strategies'." In other
words, there was Mr Austin
conferring with Mr Cummins and telling
Mr Cummins, "I fully understand what I've done and I'm involved in relapse
prevention strategies."
It is breathtaking.
Mr Austin now attempts to resile from all that and says, "Well, that
was just all a charade because my lawyers gave me certain advice
and if I knew
what I knew today then, gee, I wouldn't have involved in that charade," and
indeed he had the audacity to say he has
continued that charade up until
yesterday when he perjured himself before this tribunal. What one should take
from Mr Cummins' report
is the admissions of wrongdoing and what one should
take from what has transpired is that he certainly misled Mr Cummins as to
remorse or contrition or accepting of any responsibility for his behaviour.
Of course Mr Austin tendered a copy of that report to
Murrell J in the sentencing proceedings to mitigate the penalty or
sentence that was to be imposed upon him and now since it did
not achieve the
full objective for which he was seeking he seeks to resile from its
The offences are clearly set out in the decision, that is the factual
background to the offences, are clearly set out in the decision
Murrell J and if I can respectfully make this observation, her
judgment on sentence is highly commendable in setting out in clear
language the
nature of the offences, the factual circumstances that surrounded them, the
impact on the victim and the legal process
in the sentencing process. Now the
point that arises from the agreed statement of facts which is then relied on by
her Honour, and
this is an extremely important matter in determining the
objective seriousness of the offences, are the fact that the offences on
indictment and the separate two offences on the next form 1 are, and I
quote Murrell J at para 8 of her decision, "representative
broader course of conduct."
She notes that, "Although Mr Austin is only to be sentenced on the
charged acts, and they are three counts, taking into account the
matters on the
form 1, it cannot be submitted that the charged acts were isolated
incidents." In other words, for a period between
1980-81 to December 1988
Mr Austin in his role as stepfather where he was the head of the family,
engaged in conduct, a course of
conduct that involved indecent acts against his
stepdaughter including kissing, touching her breast and touching her near the
In my respectful submission, it is offensive to describe the conduct as
set out in counts 1, 2 and 3 as examples of paternal affection.
characterisation is as Mr Cummins indicated at p 5 of his decision
that they were exploitive following feeling sexually
frustrated.
In the decision of the R v JCW, a copy of which I have included in the
materials, the New South Wales Court of Appeal addressed a
question of whether
representative counts were permissible to be taken into account in the
sentencing process. The court held an
omission of this general character was
appropriate to be taken into account for purposes of rejecting any claim to
mitigation and
attendant reduction of an otherwise appropriate sentence and
beside the headnote I also refer the tribunal to paras 67 and 68.
In other words, the whole point about the form 1 process and
representative counts is that to avoid having a defendant having to deal
say, a multiple number of indictments and the evidence having to deal with
those. I should also point out that that was the
basis on which the admission
was made which could be found on the top line of p 2 of the agreed
statement of facts and there is a
foot note making reference to the judgment by
Spigelman CJ in the R v JCW, so very clearly that was the basis
for the agreed statement
of facts and the basis for the plea of guilty, so this
was not something sprung on Mr Austin by surprise in the sentencing
It was an integral part of that process.
Now in this case we have got a series of admissions. The agreed statement
of facts in the legal proceedings are the most compelling
and cogent evidence
but we have also got a whole series of admissions of wrongdoing going back to
1990 with the consultation of Dr
Hunter. What Mr Austin has said, he
does not dispute where there is an account of representations or a history given
or a description
of the basis of the consultation, he does not contend that that
is what he represented or was represented in his presence before
a number of
people. But he now says that he did so for a misconceived reason, which I must
admit I do not fully understand. But
what is not in contention is that he did
make the representations of and admissions that are found in the report of
Dr Hunter in
1990, of the reports of Dr Fisher, which I commend the
tribunal to read very carefully, the report of Dr McConaghy and then the
to the police when he was arrested and then we have the admissions to
Mr Cummins.
So all through that process and even up to yesterday with the tender of
C15 there are admissions of wrongful conduct, even to a number
of the referees
he made admissions. In a breathtaking about face, akin to an epiphany,
Mr Austin today presents to the tribunal
and says, "Disregard all that I'm
presenting truthfully for the first time a version of events where you will see
that I'm a victim
of circumstances, a victim extending back to the early 1980s
and in my naivety I let myself enter a course of deception and created
multitude of lies which I now wish to cleanse from the slate." In my respectful
submission, Mr Austin's mendacity is also breathtaking.
complete denial of any wrongdoing and, in my respectful submission
Mr Austin at this point in time probably does not
know the difference
between the truth and a falsehood and that is a great pity.
Mr Austin's character has been exposed. His revelation of an alleged
molestation by his wife's father of his then new stepdaughter
when she was only
five or six, a scandalous assertion, without a skerrick of evidence to support
it other than hearsay from this
gentleman, and what does he do, having found all
this blood upon the return of his stepdaughter and the purported allegation by
wife that his stepdaughter had been sexually assaulted by her grandfather,
he did nothing. That is truly, in my respectful submission,
when we are talking
This tribunal ought be scrupulous in avoiding making any finding of an
adverse nature against parties that are not represented here
revelation of a scandalous accusation against his former wife's father is
something that was proper to be dealt with
many years ago and in a different
place. His failure to take any action reflects poorly on his character. What
is clear is that
Mr Austin had two personas, a public persona which was of
respectability, of a professional, of a devoted family man, of a person
committed to Christian beliefs and involvement in Christian works. On the other
side is the private persona and that was
of a person with a very dark side, a
sexually frustrated male who was prepared to abuse a position of trust, a power
imbalance between
father and daughter for an extended period of time.
In character terms it is difficult to put in words the contrast. I am
minded of Jane Austen book Pride and Prejudice where she made
reference to the
character Liz Bennett made reference to the character of Captain Wickham wherein
his outward appearance he was a
man of utmost respectability but in his private
life he was quite the reverse. Here is a similar situation and he made friends.
It is extraordinary that he makes reference to his involvement as an organiser
in the Billy Graham crusade at a time concurrently
he was abusing his daughter.
They are very difficult to reconcile.
The facts also are quite clear that his conduct had an extraordinary
impact on his stepdaughter. The victim's statement I invite
the tribunal to
read carefully and the analysis of that by Murrell J They have left a
lasting scar. They have left a young lady
confused about true feelings,
evaluating true feelings and coming to grips with, on the one hand, having a
loving relationship with
a father and being the subject of abuse. In other
words, there are consequences, which are continuing.
So far as the subsequent misconduct which have been brought in to the
proceedings but in 1997 the tribunal has another insight into
a breach of
professional and appropriate boundaries between a chiropractor and a patient.
What is disquieting, in my submission,
is the way in which the proceedings
before the Chiropractors and Osteopaths tribunal unfolded in 2003. From a
reading of the proceedings
the inference is to be drawn that that tribunal was
misled as to the nature of the medical treatment he received and it was clearly
misled as to the nature of his character.
Bearing in mind what this tribunal now knows from the judgment of
Murrell J and the agreed statement of facts that supported it and
course Mr Austin managed to get through those proceedings with limited
damage apart from a reprimand, which in normal circumstances
ought to have been
sufficient, but one can only surmise what might otherwise have been if the
tribunal had had a true insight into
his character.
Mr Austin has sought to put forward today a completely different
state of affairs where, as I understand his evidence, he does not
responsibility for any wrongdoing to his stepdaughter. He has been asked on a
number of occasions very specifically, when
he started to resile from his
admissions before the District Court and they effectively started with the
supporting documents to
the application for restoration, in that there is an
expression of comments where he sought to submit that he had not had the
opportunity
to properly put a defence and that was the basis on which he pleaded
And of course in the document he submitted yesterday, in exhibit C15,
at the top of p 2 having admitted wrongdoing in the immediately
paragraphs then said, "To be candid", here we are to be candid. He had a
defence to the allegation that he sexually assaulted
her on the occasion when he
complained that he touched the exterior of her vagina because he was then at a
conference in Adelaide
but he just could not prove it, so that was the thin end
of the wedge from which he was seeking to resile from the conviction of
serious offence and of course having opened that up and explored that he then
sought to resile in various stages in what
I describe as an incoherent
presentation and evidence that he finally convinced himself and sought to
convince the tribunal that
he had not molested his stepdaughter at all. He
could not understand why she would make such dreadful accusations against him
than that she was the puppet of some malicious scheme from his former
If he believed that he had an opportunity to test that in the criminal
proceedings before Murrell J but he chose not to do so and
tribunal can draw the inference that he chose not to do so for some very good
reasons. There was from his own solicitor's advice
to him and Mr Austin
included the email from his solicitor, Mr Stewart, where Mr Stewart
said, "Well, in effect I know you might
get out of it but, hey, an objective
appraisal is you have to appreciate that you have made all these admissions,"
and of course
this tribunal does not have it but one can surmise that there
would have been a police statement from his stepdaughter, his former
was there in regard to the admissions, all those professional people, all those
police and there is all those historic reports,
so by any view he had a
formidable case to meet in respect of very serious allegations or
indictments.
So in my submission, his revisionist presentation today, which he admits
was a retraction of his perjury yesterday, constituted a
complete denial and
included the extraordinary proposition he had lied to a whole range of people in
the past, which I have already
taken you through. In other words,
Mr Austin is on his own evidence is now asking the tribunal to accept that
he was a skilled liar
who was able to fool a series of doctors and police by
making admissions and manipulating them for his ulterior purpose, that is
incredible as to be, in my respectful submission, rejected with some distain by
this tribunal.
I then turn to the question then is, is the appellant unfit in the public
interest to practise chiropractic as that phrase is used
in s 14(1)(b) of
the Chiropractors Act. Based on the folder of materials the leading decision of
this area of Health Care Complaints
Commission v Martin
(2009) NSWNMT 3
Madam Chair was also the chair of that tribunal. In that decision there is a
detailed analysis of the principles applicable
to dealing with matters of
character and on the issue of the test to be applied is unfit in the public
interest to practise. In
that case it was a situation involving a nurse but
there is no difference in respect to its application to chiropractors.
I think it is para 27 though the numbers are a bit hard to find but
there is a subheading "Circumstances of offence render a nurse
practise" and makes reference to a decision of Collins where the tribunal
"The term 'unfit in the public interest' is not defined in the
As is the case in the present Act:
"--as the tribunal has noted in a previous decision that the term is taken
by us to refer to the policy of the Act and the protective
nature of the
tribunal's jurisdiction as being the relevant factors. It is the protection of
the public and the need to maintain
public confidence in the nursing profession
which must be taken into account in determining what the public interest is in
In this case:
"--a nurses fitness to practise."
And the starting point is the fact of the conviction and then the tribunal
must look beyond the conviction to the circumstances of
the conviction and the
factual situation.
What is clear is that the facts and circumstances of the conviction are
very clearly before the tribunal. That what the tribunal
now has is a
demonstration by Mr Austin that he was not a person who accepted
responsibility for his criminal conduct. He was and
is not a person that has
been remorseful for his conduct and is a person who was not and is not contrite
for his conduct and in that
regard he has no remorse or sympathies for his
stepdaughter and her mother. They are aggravating factors, in my submission, as
the circumstances that the tribunal ought have regard to in determining the
issue of fitness.
The proposition was at one time put I think that and the import of a
number of the statements and references were that the criminal
offences occurred
many years ago, between 1981 and 1989, and therefore Mr Austin was a
reformed character notwithstanding there was
one slippage in 1997. And when I
say "one slippage" I do not mean one single event because the evidence is clear
that in 1997 it
was 1997-1998 that Mr Austin had put aside his professional
responsibilities in dealing with that female patient. But it was interesting
the determination of the Chiropractors and Osteopaths tribunal decision of 2003
at para 24 the tribunal made reference to:
"In terms of reformation the tribunal has been guided by the statement of
appellate Walsh J in the decision of Ex parte Tziniolos;
Medical Practitioners Act. Reformations of character and behaviour can
doubtless occur but their occurrence is not the usual
but the exceptional thing.
One cannot assume that a change has occurred merely because some years have gone
by and it is not proved
that anything of a discreditable kind has occurred. If
the man has exhibited serious deficiency in his standards of his conduct
attitude it must require clear proof to show that some years later that he has
established himself as a different man."
And over the page there is reference to the further judgment in The Law
Society of New South Wales v Forman, "Character involves inter
things; the acceptance of high standards of conduct, and, acting in accordance
with those standards under pressure." Mr
Austin has demonstrated that he
does not have nor does he accept high standards of conduct and he does not act
in accordance with
high standards under pressure.
On that basis I submit it is appropriate for the tribunal to be
comfortably satisfied that, firstly, the conviction has been established
secondly, the tribunal ought come to the opinion that circumstances of the
offence are such as to render Mr Austin unfit in
the public interest to
practise chiropractic.
The only matter I now need to deal with is the orders that might be
appropriate under
Chiropractors Act 2001
which deals with
the powers of the tribunal and, in our submission, it would be appropriate for
the tribunal to dismiss the appeal
as the first order. Secondly, the tribunal
is empowered to make ancillary orders and in that regard we would seek ancillary
to the effect that the appellant be prohibited from reapplying for
restoration to the register of chiropractors in New South Wales
for at least
five years. The next ancillary order we would seek would be an order that a
copy of the decision of the tribunal be
forwarded to health bodies throughout
Australia, which deal with the registration of chiropractors and/or
osteopaths.
The final order we would seek from the tribunal is an order for costs and
that is pursuant to the tribunal's power under Schedule
Those are the submissions on behalf of the board.
Submissions in reply made by the Appellant
Appellant declined the opportunity to make submission in reply, relying on his
Tribunal is of the view that the Appellant is not a reliable witness. The
Tribunal looks to his admissions of lying and ‘perjury’,
representations he has made to referees, the references that he has allowed to
come into evidence that contained assertions he
knew to be untrue, and his
account of the facts and circumstances of the 2003 finding of professional
misconduct as well as the criminal
proceedings.
the best part, the assertions made by the Appellant are uncorroborated by
reliable evidence.
all five character witnesses gave evidence of an extremely supportive nature, it
is of significant concern that none of them
had understood the full extent of
the criminal conduct and the professional misconduct of the Appellant. Even
though the Appellant
had provided the Remarks on Sentence and the 2003 Tribunal
Determination to each witness in the weeks leading up to the Inquiry,
little accommodation for the findings made therein in the opinions they
subsequently expressed in oral evidence. There
was an extraordinary level of
forgiveness of the conduct which, for the most part relied upon the fact that
the Appellant had been
punished for his conduct and thereby dealt with his
conduct. Significantly, the witnesses had up until the last few weeks relied
upon discussions with the Appellant for information regarding his conduct. The
Tribunal observed that each witness was less than
objective, to the point that
their opinions can be of little value. Another matter that impacts upon the
appropriate weight to be
placed on the character evidence is the fact that they
gave evidence prior to the Appellant giving his evidence which included the
revelation that he perjured himself and had lied in various forums.
outlined above, this Tribunal must determine whether or not the Appellant is fit
in the public interest to practise chiropractic.
The Tribunal would be
comfortably satisfied that the Appellant’s convictions and the
circumstances of the offences render him
unfit in the public interest to
practise chiropractic (
HCCC v Franks
[2007] NSWNMT 4:
[2009] NSWNMT 3
HCCC v Bryan
[2009] NSWPST 1).
Tribunal accepts the views expressed by the Tribunals in the matters of
Franks, Martin
that it is possible to imagine
circumstances in which a person’s conviction for a criminal offence would
not render them unfit
in the public interest to practise in their professions.
The actions, for which the Appellant was convicted however, compel a finding
unfitness to practice chiropractic.
Health Care Complaints Commission v T
[2008] NSWNMT 9
the Tribunal held:
.....the Tribunal notes that the objective criminality of the
offence is relatively low. The Tribunal notes however that a 12 month
imposed on the Respondent by the magistrate.
Criminality is not the sole
determinative factor in the question before the tribunal. The Tribunal must
determine if the circumstances
of the offence render her unfit in the public
interest to practice nursing
. It is of significant concern that the
Respondent stole the drugs for the purpose of committing suicide.
Respondent’s conduct brings the profession into disrepute. A registered
nurse is in a position of trust
and is expected to be honest in all their
The conduct of the Respondent on this occasion offended those
. The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Council provide national
Standards and Codes of Conduct which are an integral component of
the regulatory
framework to assist nurses and midwives to deliver safe and competent care.
Further the Code of Professional Conduct for Nurses in Australia (Jan 2003)
states “that a nurse must not bring discredit upon
the reputation of the
nursing profession, the actions of a nurse in their personal life may have an
adverse impact on their reputation
and on the profession and may have adverse
therapeutic outcomes, the conduct of a nurse must at all times maintain and
build public
trust and confidence in the profession.” “A breach of
the Code may constitute professional misconduct or unprofessional
. (emphasis added).
Tribunal is of the view that the comments apply equally to a registered
chiropractor.
is evidence before the Tribunal that the Appellant has misconducted himself in a
serious manner on numerous occasions over many
years. Initially with respect to
his stepdaughter back in 1980/1981 and continuing in 1989, and then in 1997/1998
with respect to
a patient. Even if satisfied that he would not in the future
misconduct himself as he did in the past the Tribunal must have regard
need for chiropractors to be persons in whom the public and fellow practitioners
can have confidence (
Bannister v Walton
(1993) 30 NSWLR 699
Tribunal is entitled to, and should, take into account the effect of allowing
this Appeal and making an order permitting the Appellant
to practise would have
on the understanding, in the profession and amongst the public, of the standard
of behaviour required of chiropractors
Ziems v Prothonotary of the Supreme
Court (NSW)
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
at 298.7-8).
Appellant’s conduct is of such a nature that it requires the Tribunal to
conclude that he is not a fit and proper person
to practise as a health
professional (
A Solicitor v Council of the Law Society of NSW
[2004] HCA 1
, [21]). This is so even without regard to the fact that the
Appellant is currently still serving a term of imprisonment and will
remain on a
good behaviour bond until 2011.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that he currently does not possess the
requisite good character required for Registration i.e.
good character of a
person seeking to practise chiropractic (
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re The Medical
Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR(NSW) 448
at 475.4). Anyone seeking the
privilege of Registration must not only hold the relevant academic
qualifications, but must also be
able to demonstrate competency to practise,
English competency, good character and be free from an impairment that affects
likely to affect their ability to practise.
Tribunal is of the view it is entitled to have regard to past conduct in making
an assessment of current fitness and character
In re Davis
[1947] HCA 53
(1947) 75 CLR
at 416.2-9).
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re The Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR(NSW)
at 475.9 – 476.1 Holmes JA stated:
“Good character” is not a summation of acts alone, but
relates rather to the quality of the person. The quality is to
be judged by acts
and motives, that is to say, behaviour and the mental and emotional situations
accompanying that behaviour. However
character cannot always be estimated by one
act or one class of an act. As much about a person as is known will form the
from which the inference of good character or not of good character is
Health Care Complaints Commission v Gillett
[2007] NSWNMT 7
Tribunal set out matters relevant to an assessment of whether a person was of
good character (See similarly,
Health Care Complaints Commission v Meyer
[2008] NSWNMT 22
.). The Tribunal in
The New South Wales Court of Appeal in
McBride v Walton
(unreported 15 July 1994)
set out the following relevant tests on the issue
of whether a finding of proven misconduct should be followed by the finding that
a practitioner is not of good character in the context of fitness to practice
(i) Whether the misconduct can be satisfactorily explained as an error of
judgment rather than a defect of character;
(ii) The intrinsic seriousness of the misconduct qua fitness to practice
(iii) Whether the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated episode and hence
atypical or uncharacteristic of the practitioner’s
normal qualities of
(iv) The motivation which may have given rise to the proven episode of
misconduct;
(v) The underlying qualities of character shown by previous and other
misconduct;
(vi) Whether the practitioner’s conduct post the proven episode of
misconduct demonstrates that public and professional confidence
may be reposed
in him to uphold and observe the high standards of moral rectitude required of a
medical practitioner;
(vii) Good character is not to be determined by reference to acts alone, but by
reference to the quality of a person judged not by
reference to one act or class
of acts but by reference to “as much as is known about a person”;
Tziniolis per Holmes
JA at 475/6 adopted in
Melbourne v The Queen
at 25 per Gummow J.
characterisation of the above matters as being ‘relevant tests’
perhaps overstates the position. They are however
useful reference points in
that they provide ‘guidance by way of a checklist’ (
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
reference to the above checklist, the Tribunal makes the following
observations:
criminal conduct engaged in by the Appellant cannot be satisfactorily explained
as an ‘error of judgment’. It
was criminal conduct that took place
over an extended period of time, from when his stepdaughter was approximately 11
years of age
until she was approximately 19 years of age. To engage in serious
criminal conduct over an extended period such as this is demonstrative
defect in character.
criminal conduct engaged in by the Appellant is ‘intrinsically
serious’. It involved an egregious breach of
trust. There can be no
doubt that a chiropractor is in a position of trust and responsibility with
respect to patients and the Appellant
has breached the boundaries in this regard
(iii) Not only
was the conduct, subject of the criminal convictions, committed over a long
period of time, the Appellant breached
appropriate boundaries in a serious
manner some nine years later.
(iv) There can
motivation or justification proffered for the criminal
conduct engaged in by the Appellant.
Tribunal has evidence of misconduct by way of breaching appropriate sexual
boundaries over a lengthy period of time. The Tribunal
is not satisfied that the
Appellant’s conduct post the proven episodes of misconduct demonstrates
that public and professional
confidence may be reposed in him. Rather, his
conduct demonstrates that he lacks moral rectitude to the point of claiming to
lied to a court, to medical practitioners, to police, to his referees and
to this Tribunal.
(vi) What is
now in evidence before the Tribunal demonstrates that the Appellant is not a
person of good character. A person of good
not have engaged in the serious criminal conduct that the Appellant did,
not have been engaged in professional misconduct, and
not claim to have lied to medical practitioners, a psychologist, police
officers, the court, and this tribunal about an incestuous
relationship with his
stepdaughter.
considering this matter the Tribunal is concerned with questions of public
confidence. Public confidence in the profession of
chiropractic would be
damaged if a person with the serious criminal convictions that the Appellant has
was permitted to practise
Law Society of South Australia v Rodda
[2002] SASC 274
83 SASR 541
is clear from the character references relied upon by the Appellant both in the
criminal proceedings and the current Tribunal Inquiry
that the referees had no
awareness of the criminal activity of the Appellant at the times he was
committing the offences. This also
appears to be the case with the references
provided to the 2003 Tribunal.
of the referees held the Appellant in high repute and had confidence in him.
However, this is not the test (
Ex parte Davis
[1949] NSWStRp 59
(1949) 50 SR (NSW) 158
161.7). To this extent it is wrong to confuse reputation with character (
[1947] HCA 53
(1947) 75 CLR 409
at 426.2). In assessing character the Tribunal
looks for objective proof of change (
Ex parte Evatt
(1969) 71 SR (NSW)
Appellant pressed the relevance of the nature of his relationship with his first
wife as a general mitigating factor with respect
to just about all of his
conduct. The Tribunal notes that the Appellant is recorded as making complaints
in this regard to Mr Cummins
in particular. There is also evidence of an
Apprehended Violence Order (AVO) being made to protect the Appellant from his
first wife.
A copy of the AVO granted on 20 October 2000 was provided by the
Appellant (exhibit AG 1). A copy of a facsimile transmission sent
Appellant to Eastwood Police reports that his first wife had breached the AVO by
having made numerous telephone calls to him
and that he had erased the telephone
messages. The Appellant goes on to state:
However as she is aware, I am not prepared to further subject my
, property, staff or patients to any further potential threats
or wilful damage and accordingly request that you warn her of the legal
implications and subsequent penalty should she continue with this
This information is for your record. I would ask that you take no action
before first discussing this matter with myself.
remorse, insight and contrition attributed to the Appellant by his character
witnesses, the 2003 Tribunal, the health professionals
who provided reports and
the judge in the District Court all dissolved when the Appellant withdrew his
account of having perpetrated
the conduct on his stepdaughter. When the
additional evidence of the Appellant regarding matters such as his inaction
after finding
blood on his stepdaughter’s bed when she returned from a
visit to her grandfather’s home and the ‘deal’ made
ex-wife to tell lies, the Tribunal is left with the conclusion that the
Appellant currently presents as erratic, and his
current judgment and balance
are doubtful. His past judgment has also been demonstrably and seriously
are some other disturbing aspects of the Appellant’s evidence. In exhibit
AC 6 and in oral evidence, the Appellant described
how he derived reassurance
from a television documentary program that indicated to him that females from
the age of three desire
male touch. The Appellant suggested by this evidence
that it would in some way explain the conduct of his stepdaughter towards him.
In exhibit AC 5 the Appellant provided a description of telephone calls he
received from his ex-wife after their separation which
in many respects is
mirrored by his descriptions of the conduct of Patient A. At the very least,
this demonstrates the Appellant
has been involved with two relationships with
women he met in his practice which were far from harmonious.
Tribunal does not accept the explanations of the Appellant for his failure to
notify the Osteopaths Board of his conviction. The
attempt to offload his
responsibilities in this regard to his legal representatives is an abdication of
his professional responsibilities.
is evidence before the Tribunal that indicates the Appellant is a
‘registerable person’ in accordance with the
Child Protection
(Offenders Registration) Act 2000
. It is difficult to see how it would be
appropriate for a Tribunal to allow the Appellant to be restored to the Register
time as he is no longer subject to the provisions of the
Protection (Offenders Registration) Act 2000
. The question of fitness to
practise and the defects in character revealed in this Reasons for Decision
document would also have
to be addressed by the Appellant.
Tribunal is of the view that the defects in the character of the Appellant
revealed during this Inquiry are such that it will
be many years before he could
be considered for registration as a health professional. Admissions of perjury
and lies over a substantial
period were made to this Tribunal. Other aspects of
the Appellant’s conduct would be of deep concern to any registration
There would need to be significant and substantial reformation of
character for registration to ever be contemplated again.
Tribunal hereby orders:
Appeal is dismissed.
Appellant is not entitled to apply for re-registration for a period of five
years from the date hereof.
Appellant is to pay the costs of the Respondent as agreed or assessed. If
agreement cannot be reached between the parties, leave
is granted for the
parties to re-list the matter for determination.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for
Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry to:
2) The Respondent and its legal advisers;
3) The HCCC;
Registration Boards in every State and Territory of Australia and New
5) Others, as the Board sees fit; and
6) In accordance
with statutory requirements.
Dated: 9 September 2009
__________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Noel Greenaway
___________________
Sue-Ellen McKelvey
___________________
Ronald Duncan
Annexure A – Schedule of documents in evidence
Annexure B – Determination of Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal 12
Annexure C – Remarks on Sentence – Murrell SC DCJ 17
January 2006
Annexure D – Opening address of Appellant 30 July
Annexure E – Statement of Agreed Facts – District Court
proceedings
Annexure F - Chronology prepared by Counsel for Respondent
Annexure G - Schedule of names suppressed
Austin v Chiropractors Registration Board of NSW
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS IN EVIDENCE
DOCUMENTS TENDERED BY THE APPELLANT
AA – 1 Sentence
Chiropractors Act 2001
Chiropractors
Chiropractors Act 2001
4 CRB NSW advices 9 December 2008
AB – 5 ORB NSW advice 2 April
AB – 6 Graham Austin/Health Care Complaints Commission 29 April
AC – 1 email James Elliott 5 October 2006
2 email Mark Davidson 18 October 2006
AC – 3 email Alex Blaszcynski 2
November 2006
AC – 4 email Neil Austin 26 February 2007
5 email Neil Austin 16 May 2007
AC – 6 email Neil Austin 22 May
AC – 7 email Horace Lyttle 31 May 2007
AC – 8 email
Philip Stewart 1 June 2007
AC – 9 email Neil Austin 11 June
AC - 10 email Neil Austin 14 June 2007
AC – 11 email Neil
Austin/Julie Bjonberg 30 July/May 31 2007
AC – 12 email Philip Stewart
14 October 2007
AC – 13 email Neil Austin 19 October 2007
– 14 email Neil Austin 18 December 2007
AC – 15 Opening address
Neil Austin
AD -1 Neil Austin/CRB 19 November 2008
AD – 3 Neil Austin/Legal Aid 10 October 2008
October 2008
AD – 5 Health Care Complaints Commission
AD – 6 ORB 30 April 2008
AD – 9 CRBV 12 May
AD – 11 AGD NSW 22 May 2008
AE – 1 Professional
Standards 31 March 2009
AE – 2 Professional Standards 24 March
AE – 3 Professional Standards 30 June 2008
5 Professional Standards 30 June 2008
AE – 7 Neil Austin 11 May
2008/attach CB Re-registration
AE – 12 Legal Aid 15 July 1999
AE – 13 Legal Aid/Health Care
Complaints Commission 15 July 2008
AE – 15 Neil McConaghy 29 June
AE – 16 Jeffrey Cummins21 December 2007
AF – 1 Photos Marriage Neil Austin 31 December 2003 (3)
– 4 Eva Pilowsky 7 October 2005
AF – 5 David Brennan 9
November 2005
AF – 6 Robyn Brass 22.09.05
AF – 7 Robyn
Brass 20.7.05
AG – 1 AVO Protected Graham Neil Austin 20 October 2000
2 Facsimile Neil Austin/Eastwood police 9 October 2000
AG – 3 AVTIO
Neil Austin
AG – 4 Decree Nisi 23 June 2000
AH - 1 Mr David Ross reference dated 8 January 2008
AH -2 Mr David
Ross reference dated 18 May 2009
AH -3 Mr John Thomson reference dated 16
November 2007
AH -4 Mr John Thomson reference dated 23 March 2009
-5 Mr John Thomson statement prepared for 31 July 2009
AH -6 Mr Ron Curtin
reference dated 10 December 2007
AH -7 Mr Ron Curtin reference dated 27
AH -8 Dr Andrew Lawrence reference dated 13 January
AH-9 Mr Dawood Latif reference dated 16 November 2007
Dawood Latif reference dated 26 March 2009
DOCUMENTS TENDERED BY
THE RESPONDENT
Chiropractors & Osteopaths Tribunal Determination
Transcript – R v Austin
Subpoenaed District Court File
Certificate of Conviction
Form 1 and Indictment
to Comply with conditions – Count 1
of Commitment – Count 2
to Comply with Conditions – Count 3
Parole Order Made by Court
Agreed Statement of Facts
Victim Impact Statement
Report of Dr Robert Fisher
Chiropractors Registration Board Documents
Application for re-registration as a Chiropractor
Computer Registrant Details
Osteopaths Registration Board Notice to Registration Boards
Letter from Board to Austin seeking further documentation and reply
01.10.08 & 20.10.08
Letter from Board to Austin and reply
14.11.08 & 19.11.08
Letter from Board to Austin advising decision
Letter from Austin to the Board and reply
06.01.09 & 14.01.09
Letter from Austin advising appeal
Code of Professional Conduct for Chiropractors
Page 6 of Dr J. Cummins Report
Austin v Chiropractors Registration Board of NSW
Determination of Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal
12 March 2003
CHIROPRACTORS AND OSTEOPATHS TRIBUNAL
CHAIRPERSON
: Mr Cedric B Vass
Ms Christine McColl
Ms Sue Taylor
Mr Ron Whitaker
DETERMINATION AND ORDERS CONCERNING COMPLAINT RELATING TO MR NEIL
Health Care Complaints Committee (HCCC) complaint to this Tribunal that Mr Neil
Austin (the Chiropractor) being a person registered
as a Chiropractor under the
Chiropractors and Osteopaths Act 1991
(i) Has been found guilty of professional misconduct within the
meaning of Section 3 of the Act in that he demonstrated a lack of
experience, skill, judgement or care in the practice of chiropractic and
osteopathy and he/she engaged in the improper
and unethical conduct relating to
the practice of chiropractic and osteopathy.
2. The particulars of the complaint are:
(i) On or about 26 July and 2 August 1997 during consultations with a patient
[Ms X] the Chiropractor failed to maintain appropriate
professional boundaries
in that he inappropriately hugged and kissed [Ms X] (the patient).
(ii) In or about August 1997 the Chiropractor entered into a personal and
sexual relationship with the patient.
(iii) The practitioner inappropriately sought to continue his treatment of
the patient following the commencing of his personal and
sexual relationship
with the patient.
CONDUCT OF THE PROCEEDINGS
the commencement of the Hearing Mr Sexton, Senior Counsel appearing for the
Chiropractor admitted “that there was a personal
and sexual relationship
with the Complainant during the period from 2 August 1997 to 1 September 1998
when the Complainant was a
patient of the practitioner.
He further admitted that the practitioner admits that the sexual
relationship commenced in the practitioner’s clinic. The practitioner
admitted that on 26 July and 2 August 1997 during a consultation the
practitioner hugged and kissed the Complainant.
Importantly
Mr Sexton indicated to the Tribunal that there were two issues which may be
relevant to the Tribunal and they were firstly
whether there was a sexual
encounter in the practitioner’s clinic on one or two occasions and
secondly whether the sexual relationship
or the sexual and personal relationship
was first initiated by the practitioner or the Complainant (T.P.4).
Saidi who appeared for the HCCC submitted to the Tribunal that where the
Chiropractor makes admission which are not complete admissions
necessary for the Tribunal to make a finding of fact as to whether it was the
Chiropractor or the patient who was the
instigator because that finding would be
a very important consideration for the Tribunal when it comes to making
appropriate orders
at the end of the hearing.
Sexton again submitted to the Tribunal that the particulars of complaint have
been fully dealt with by the admissions that were
made. (T.P.7) The Tribunal
in fact is of the opinion that a full admission of the particulars of the
complaints had been made.
However the Tribunal determined that it is necessary
for the Tribunal to be aware of the factual circumstances which lead to the
conduct complained of and to have before it evidence as to whether the
Chiropractor and indeed when the Chiropractor became aware
of the fact that his
conduct amounts to unethical conduct and also evidence as to contrition and
reformation.
Mr Saidi completed his opening he then sought to call the Complainant to give
evidence. Mr Sexton sought and obtained a short
adjournment to obtain
instructions from his client and after the adjournment indicated to the Tribunal
that he did not propose to
cross-examine the Complainant (T.P.14). Mr Saidi
therefore did not call the complaint, but did indicate that he proposed to
cross-examine
the Chiropractor.
THE COMPLAINANT’S EVIDENCE
patient first consulted the Chiropractor on 5 May 1997 for relief of back and
neck pain as a result of carrying heavy boxes.
She had follow up treatments on
6 May, 8 May, 12 May, 22 May, 26 May, 30 May, 3 June, 6 June and 10 June
9. The patient next attended the clinic on Saturday 26 July
The Chiropractors told her to lay on the table where he placed a heat lamp
over the affected area followed by an ice pack. When she
stood up she felt
light headed and dizzy and momentarily lost her balance. She states the
Chiropractor caught her and began to hug
and kiss her calling her darling.
Later on that day when she was waiting to pay the receptionist the Chiropractor
called her back
into the office and closed the door and he and the patient
hugged and kissed passionately (exhibit 2 page 1). The patient next saw
Chiropractor on 2 August 1997 and she says “more of the same
occurred”. Then she states that some days later the
Chiropractor called
her to say his receptionist had gone home early because she was unwell and he
was lonely. The patient apparently
went to the clinic and a passionate session
occurred and a sexual relationship began. On this occasion the patient states
I was leaving, he became sombre and asked me if I would report him. I
was a little taken back by his comment as I believed he genuinely
cared about me
and the idea hadn’t entered my head”.
patient stated that the relationship continued while she remained a patient and
continued to consult him on the following dates:
2 August 1997, 24 October 1997,
30 October 1997, 13 November 1997, 13 March 1998, 4 June 1998, 27 August 1998
and 1 September 1998.
She states “on each occasion we greeted with a
passionate embrace and kiss, he would also kiss me while I was lying on the
table. He did say ‘it wasn’t correct to go any further in the
clinic’. However on another occasion, I don’t
remember the date
except it was an afternoon appointment following the treatment we were both
deeply aroused again. I was lying
on the table and he was standing in a
convenient position with an erection, I obliged and gave him oral
patient moved into a flat at Balmoral in September 1997 and the clear evidence
in exhibit 2 is that the Chiropractor continued
his sexual relationship with the
patient. She states: “mostly in Lane Cove National Park or he would visit
me at home”.
The Chiropractor eventually moved in to the flat with the
patient on 5 November 1998. The Chiropractor and patient ceased to live
together on 10 March 1999 (exhibit
and after that date the relationship
soured and ended.
Chiropractor’s response to the complaint is contained within a letter
addressed to the HCCC and dated 29 September 2000
which is exhibit 7. in
paragraph 2 of that letter the Chiropractor had said that in order to comfort
the patient he had asked her
to let him give her a hug which he did in a
platonic friendly fashion and then kissed her lightly on the top of the head and
that she quickly turned her head and kissed his lips.
then states that she appeared to be anxious about what she had done and said
words to the effect: “you won’t report
me, will you, for I too am a
professional and nursing is my only means of income”. The evidence is
that the patient in fact
had not worked as a nurse since 1976 and was not
working as a nurse at that time and was certainly not relying upon nursing as
means of income as at 10 June 1997. The Tribunal finds it difficult to
accept that the patient who it is said makes an advance to
the health worker
would then turn around and say to the health worker words to the effect that
“you won’t report me”.
It is more likely that the health
worker, namely the Chiropractor, would be more concerned about being
sub-paragraph (f) of paragraph 11 in exhibit 7 the Chiropractor stated the
following: “I ceased living with [Ms X] because
I found her behaviour
erratic, bizarre and manipulative. In the endeavour to persuade me to remain
with her she at times threatened
to report me to the HCCC and at times indicated
that she would not press the complaint if I continued to live with her”.
cross examined by Mr Saidi (T. 96) the Chiropractor stated that he
didn’t recall “anytime during which I was co-habitating
that she verbally threatened to report me but this refers to subsequently after
co-habitation both by phone and by email
she threatened to report me to the
(b) The Chiropractor’s evidence in relation to sub-paragraph
(h) in paragraph 11 of exhibit 7 was that “she also complained
not being sufficiently attentive to her and threatened to press her complaint to
the HCCC unless I behaved towards her
as she wished”. When cross-examined
(T.P. 98-99) the Chiropractor again admitted that this particular threat was
separation.
Tribunal has given consideration to the evidence referred to in paragraphs 13
and 14 above. The letter (exhibit 7) was written
by the Chiropractor on 29
September 2000. It is important to look to exhibit 7 in its entirety. There is
no attempt to deny in
that letter that there was sexual activity in the
Chiropractor’s clinic and no attempt to deny the improper sexual conduct.
The Tribunal believes that the Chiropractor by correcting the statements in
exhibit 7 has revealed an understanding by him that
any threat to report him to
the HCCC is not an excuse for his breach of professional standards.
THE CHIROPRACTOR’S CLINICAL NOTES
Chiropractor was questioned in relation to his clinical notes and cross
examination commenced on page 27 of the Transcript. The
cross examination
established the following matters:
(a) He firstly stated that the dated copy with his hand date on it
was made contemporaneously and he agreed that the originals remained
possession during the period when he was aware that a complaint had been made
against him by the Complainant.
(b) He was then asked to refer to page 2 of Tab 7 and to look at the last
four lines in which he referred to his habit to make quickly
scrawled notes out
on A4 clinic paper and then in the evenings transcribe them more neatly into
permanent records (T29).
(c) At T30 he said that he made quickly scrawled notes on A4 paper and then
in the evenings transcribe then more neatly permanent
records”. The loose
sheet of paper did not become part of the Chiropractor’s records.
(d) He was then shown a document and asked to look at the entry for 5 May
1997 and it was put to him that that document could not
be a piece of paper in a
shape or form that could be described as an A4 scrap piece of paper. His answer
to that question was that
the piece of paper was a joke and that it came into
existence because he had observed the Complainant reading his clinical notes
an earlier occasion.
(e) On paragraph 1 on page 2 of Exhibit 7 the Chiropractor stated “it
was my habit to make quickly scrawled out notes on A4
clinic paper then in the
evenings to transcribe them more neatly into permanent records”. At page
40 of the transcript Mr
Saidi asked the Chiropractor:
Saidi: “On drawing a very clear distinction between version of events
given by you which was to the effect that it was your
habit in relation to this
patient to make quickly scrawled out on A4 clinic paper then in the evenings to
transcribe them more neatly
into permanent records as compared to a version of
events given today that one piece of paper was maintained by you more in the
of a giggle, do you understand that?
Austin: “I hear what you are saying.”
Saidi: “Why didn’t you refer to the fact that you were
maintaining a record in relation to this patient in the form of
a giggle when
telling us how you maintained her records as you did in paragraph 1 on page
Austin: “I suspect that wasn’t appropriate language to
(f) There is a photostat copy of the clinical notes annexed to exhibit 8
which is a letter from the Chiropractor to the HCCC dated
8 February 2001. It
is obvious to the Tribunal that the entry for 5 May 1997 has been altered. It is
also clear to the Tribunal
that under the entry for 4 June 1998 the original
entry has been over written. The Chiropractor would not agree that the entry
4 June has been changed but did agree that the entry for 5 May had been
changed. In that regard he said “No, I can see that
I have put something
probably in script and made it clearer in the writing I am more familiar
with”. (T. 45). The particular
document however was the giggle document
and he was asked why he would take the trouble to make something clearer in
relation to
a giggle document. His response was “My writing sir at any
time is not brilliant and I have to take time to make it so”.
MR SAIDI’S SUBMISSION IN RELATION TO THE CLINICAL NOTES
the Tribunal had the opportunity to compare the original pages with the later
entries Mr Saidi submitted as follows:
“and you have had an opportunity for yourself to compare the
so called original pages with the latter entries made and to see
what I am going
to suggest is that the explanations given by him were indeed a nonsense so you
have to ask yourself this question,
why were we hearing that story from him in
the witness box? These notes were vital to his case because let me remind you
part of his cross examination, he needed to rely substantially on the
contemporaneous notes in terms of his memory and indeed in
terms of the
presentation of his defence. In many respects he didn’t have a good
memory or indeed a failed memory in relation
to other matters and you would
recall his request to refer to the contemporaneous notes made on a couple of
occasions at least during
the course of cross examination. Why are these notes
so important? Why were they so important to him? Why are they so important
us? We say they are they’re falsified and if you accept they’re
falsified it would mean the respondent was prepared
to engage in a course of
conduct at a point in time after the complaint was made against him in order to
mislead this Disciplinary
Tribunal as to the truth of the matter and if you
accept that, he has continued to engage in that conduct right up until yesterday
when he gave sworn evidence.
That’s something that you would have to take into account on the issue
of contrition, on the issue of reformation of character,
on the issue of
rehabilitation and can I remind you just one more time that if you look at the
entry for 2 August 1997 where he alleges
oral sex occurred for the first time,
compare that to the version of events put forward by the Complainant, if you
accept her version
of events, which is unchallenged, oral sex could not have
occurred and did not occur on 2 August 1997 this document has to be
falsification.
There is simply no other answer and as to the keeping of the
documents during the course of cross examination the respondent was
when he said it was from the very first consultation that he developed concerns
the very first consultation that he
determined to keep what could be described as duplicate records. That is one
set of records
being the giggle sheet and one set of records, which are
allegedly the correct record. That’s a significant event in my respectful
submission because if a person from the very first consultation determined for
whatever reason that a patient either could not be
trusted or had to have a
second set of records maintained, why was there no entry made to that effect in
any document? The giggle
sheet makes no reference to it and the so called real
records make no reference to it and not only do they make no reference to it
there is no document brought into existence similar to the entries made for 10
June, 2 August etc in which a narrative is given
as to the events or the event
which was supposed to have occurred.”
Mr Saidi went on to submit that there is sufficient ammunition for the
Tribunal to make a finding that the Chiropractor’s records
were falsified.
He submitted that if we were not prepared to go that far then the alternate
submission was that we would have no
trouble in making a finding that we could
not accept the records as presented by the Chiropractor at face value (T22). He
then submitted
that “if you are not prepared to accept those records what
does that say for the character of the practitioner in the way in
which he has
conducted himself before his own disciplinary board or Tribunal. The answer in
his word cannot be accepted”.
Sexton denied on behalf of the Chiropractor that the clinical notes had been
falsified. He makes the point that there might be
over writing to correct or
make the original writing more clear and there might be some additions to the
notes and what is very clear
is that any overwriting or additions can’t in
the Tribunal’s view be alterations or additions which in any way assist
the Chiropractor’s defence. In relation to the documents which appear
behind Tab 8 he submitted: “Putting it shortly
if what appears behind Tab
8 is a fabrication or falsification its not a very good job and its not a very
effective job. It is certainly
not very helpful in terms of whether or not the
practitioner is guilty of misconduct and its not very helpful in terms of the
of culpability so far as the complaints are concerned.”
some respects the challenge made by Mr Saidi in relation to the clinical notes
is a peripheral issue because the clinical notes
are not the subject of a
specific complaint. Therefore any finding as to the allegation of falsification
or that the Tribunal cannot
rely upon the notes could only go to the
Chiropractors character and the question of contrition. In relation to
falsification Mr
Sexton went on to submit at T 39.
“and in my submission the Tribunal cannot be satisfied on the
basis of the material both from cross examination to which I’ll
a moment and the face of the document itself that there has been falsification.
Now in terms of what my learned friend
talks about and on the face of the
document it seems to be a reference as I understand it for the entry for 5 May
and the entry of
4 June. An explanation has been given about the changing of
the date on 4 June which is entirely likely namely that a date which
put in that column using a date stamp was wrong and was overwritten. Nothing has
been put forward as to why there should
be any significance in the change of
what ever date was there to 4 June. Why would that have been done. Why would
that falsification
have occurred unless there was some significance? So far as
the entry in the body on 4 June is concerned, it looks like the same
been written in two pens. How is that a falsification? So far as the entry for
5 May is concerned its not clear precisely
what has been over written. Nothing
has been put as to the significance of it. Nothing has been put as to why this
may have occurred
later as opposed to simply being what occurred on the day
itself. It is certainly not unheard of for an entry to be immediately
or changed. It was suggested that in these documents there’s ... I
can’t remember the precise words but it
was suggested that writing was all
the same. Just looking at the original at page 1, one can’t see the basis
for that submission.
So far as the remaining pages are concerned, different
pens have been used and one would need to be hand writing expert in order
comfortably satisfied that all of this was written in the one pen at the same
time which is really what’s implied in
that submission.
Tribunal after consideration of the records themselves and the cross examination
by Mr Saidi of the Chiropractor does not find
that those records have been
falsified. Clearly there have been some changes but they are not changes of a
vital nature and in the
Tribunal’s view do not reflect in any adverse way
on the character of the Chiropractor.
THE ALLEGATION THAT THE COMPLAINANT WAS A VICTIM
Saidi at T12 submitted that it was a significant factor and that at no time
during which the Chiropractor gave evidence which was
approximately three hours
was there any expression of sorrow towards the Complainant. He went on to say:
“that I would submit
is a significant factor. One would expect and one
should expect that a professional person who was under an obligation and his
standards prevent him from engaging in any wrongful conduct with any
member of the community would at least when expressing sorrow
or purporting to
express sorrow or contrition to acknowledge even to a minimum degree what ever
harm he may have caused the Complainant.
That was not forthcoming in this case.
Now it can be argued that on the one hand, that alright, the respondent formed a
later relationship
with the complainant that relationship obviously soured and
in the normal course of human events that a man when he’s gone
sound relationship with another party may not as a natural human reaction ....
may not be particularly forthcoming in expressing
sorrow for that other party as
a result of the break up of a relationship but that is not entirely the case
here. The association
arose out of a professional relationship and one would
expect even in some slight form a recognition that independently of anything
else that by engaging in that conduct at a professional level that there would
have been some indication given that the practitioner
understood the effect that
may have had on the victim.
is evidence however to suggest that this particular case is not a case of
predatory sexual conduct on the part of a health worker
abusing power in respect
of a patient who was particularly vulnerable. The Complainant in the letter
dated 8 March 2000 which is
part of exhibit 2 in the second paragraph makes the
statement: “I certainly wasn’t in victim mode”. Also the
Complainant
in paragraph 2 on page 2 of exhibit 2 after having earlier in that
paragraph stated that some days after 2 August 1997 a passionate
occurred and a sexual relationship began, said she was leaving and the
Chiropractor asked her if she would report him. She
went on to say: “I
was a little taken back by the comment as I believed he genuinely cared about me
and the idea hadn’t
entered my head. I though our situation was
different, as we were both professional people and intelligent
Tribunal however wishes to make it clear that should the Chiropractor have
perceived the Complainant to be a willing party that
is not a justification to
entering into a sexual relationship. “Mutually” in the relationship
can never truly exist.
The position of power occupied by a treating
Chiropractor, like a doctor is such that a relationship with a patient can never
“be equal”. The Chiropractor has the ethical and professional
obligations to avoid such relationships. As Denning L
J observed in
DeGregory –v- Medical Council
[1961] AC 957
at 966 “Even if
she sets her cap at him, he must in no way respond or encourage her”.
into account the admissions made by the Chiropractor and the evidence of the
Complainant which was tendered the Tribunal is
satisfied that the particulars of
the complaint as set out in the complaint dated 4 March 2002 have been made out
and finds that
the Chiropractor is guilty of professional misconduct.
of the admissions made by the Chiropractor and the finding made by the Tribunal
in relation to professional misconduct the
law is that these proceedings are
analogous to a reinstatement application. In the determination made by the
Medical Tribunal in
the matter of Dr V K Mehta delivered on 29 November 2002
after having stated that those particular proceedings were analogous to
reinstatement application said “the onus borne by the practitioner at
least in an evidentiary sense, is to establish that
he should not be
deregistered because either:
(a) The circumstances were such as to not justify such an order;
(b) Because he has reformed since the commission of his conduct (re: Angus.
Medical Tribunal 24/10/2000 unreported).
In terms of reformation the Tribunal has been guided by the Statement of
Walsh JA in ex-parte Tziniolos; re: Medical Practitioners
Act (1966) 67 SR 448
“Reformations of character and behaviour can doubtless occur but their
occurrence is not the usual but the exceptional thing.
One cannot assume that a
change has occurred merely because some years have gone by and it is not proved
that anything of a discreditable
kind has occurred. If the man has exhibited
serious deficiency in his standards of conduct and his attitude it must require
proof to show that some years later that he has established himself as a
different man.”
In that determination it was also stated at page 17 “as to character
Mahoney JA observed in Law Society of New South Wales –v-
[1994] NSWCA 69
34 NSW LR 408
“Character involves inter alia two things: the acceptance of high
standards of conduct; and acting in accordance with those
standards under
CHIROPRACTORS CONTRITION AND REFORMATION
25. The Chiropractor gave the following evidence (T 15):
(a) “My position in this point in time is that I have seen my behaviour
as reprehensible. I recognise my error and lack of
judgment both morally and
specifically as a trusted practitioner. I have taken medical counsel on that
area. I have engaged in
a mentoring programme subsequent to the advice of a
medical practitioner being a psychiatrist. I believe I’ve reformed
I have taken on board the instruction and I have expressed that in my
own life. I do meet currently now with two senior men one
of whom is a
practising Minister of Religion. I meet with them in a mentoring capacity and I
am accountable to them on a weekly
basis. This is of my own volition to do and
having done that I believe that my life has changed.”
(b) The Chiropractor described the mentoring process as one involving active
participation of any number of men, but ideally a small
number for the purposes
of accountability and communication and dialogue. He said that in the group
that he meets there are three
men, two his senior in years and he believes in
experience and he believes he is physically and actively accountable to them on
weekly basis. He tells them of the highs and lows of the previous week and of
difficult situations that he encountered and seeks
input from them.
(c) The Chiropractor is also involved in a project to assist men who have
been maritally displaced. The project will be a short term
live-in situation
whereby they have all resources available to them to help them progress through
the very difficult period after
separation from a marriage. In relation to that
programme he is a board member and he said at T. 18. “I’m primarily
the mover of the programme and the programme has been as a direct result of my
recognition of my own deficit and moral bankruptcy
in this particular situation
that I am now attending.”
Chiropractor gave evidence that he was seeing a psychiatrist Dr Robert Fisher
back in 1999 and he also saw a consultant psychiatrist
a Dr Neil McConnathy
(sic). The Chiropractor was then asked by Mr
Saidi: “If you were seeing a psychiatrist back in 1999
being a period of more than 3 years ago, why wasn’t it that it
first commenced to see these psychiatrists you didn’t develop the insight
into your own conduct from that period of
time onwards rather than perhaps only
from the last couple of years onwards? Do you follow my question?
Austin: “I hear what you are saying. I wasn’t as clear then.
Subsequent consultations with the psychiatrists made that
very clear to me and
in fact it was the psychiatrist who told me to cease all contact with the
Complainant.”
The Chiropractor also gave evidence of having seen his general practitioner
and that the consultations with his general practitioner
assisted him in gaining
insight into the fact that his conduct with the Complainant was
unacceptable.
No reports have been tendered on behalf of the Chiropractor from any of the
doctors seen by the Chiropractor. Mr Sexton submitted
(T 35) “there would
be little practical value in our submission in obtaining reports from treating
doctors who have not been
seen for nearly 3 years and once again there is an
element of unreality in getting a report on some of sort of medico-legal basis
at the time of the hearing”. It would have been helpful if the
Chiropractor had continued over a period to be counselled by
psychiatrists so that the psychiatrist could then present a report expressing an
opinion as at to whether the Chiropractor
had developed true contrition and
indeed reformed his character.
Chiropractor tendered a number of statements from witnesses to establish his
good character and confirm his community activities.
In particular a number of
female patients have given statements supporting him in that they each say that
he was very professional
in his approach to their treatment. There are also a
number of statements produced by past receptionists and his present receptionist
who attest to the Chiropractor being of excellent moral character and a caring
A Mr Peter West provided a statement dated 30 October 2002 in which
“I meet together with Neil every couple of weeks for mutual
encouragement and discussion of personal issues and I continue to
depth of character and concern for his fellow man are exemplary, and I know of
many instances of where he has provided
free treatment for patients in financial
difficulties. I also know of many instances, totally unconnected with his
professional
capacity where he has reached into his own pocket to provide others
with temporary financial relief.
Neil is the Secretary, and a Trustee of a fund, which provides financial
assistance to Christian missions and missionaries both in
Australia and
overseas. For quite sometime he was a member of his local Rotary chapter.
Neil is a regular church goer and has been deeply upset by his moral lapse.
He is totally committed to the highest ethical standards
and, but for the
vulnerability caused by an almost loveless marriage of 28 years there is no
question in my mind that he would never
have succumbed to the sexual
encouragement of the plaintiff. My personal opinion is that he is carrying a
disproportionate amount
of self-criticism which in turn has affected his self
The Tribunal also considered that the Chiropractor by not requiring the
Complainant to be cross examined has given a clear indication
that he is not in
any way blaming the Complainant for what took place. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the Chiropractor was genuine
when he said that he has seen the error in
what he has done and he accepted full responsibility for his action.
The Tribunal must now consider the appropriate orders to be made under
Chiropractors and Osteopaths Act 1991
The Tribunal is mindful that disciplinary proceedings are not punitive, their
purpose is purely protective. In
Clune –v- NSW Bar Association (1960)
at 201/2 the Court said:
“Although it is sometimes referred to as “the penalty of
disbarment” it must be emphasised that a disbarring order
is in no sense
punitive in character.
When such an order is made, it is made from the public point of view, for the
protection of those who require protection, and from
the professional point of
view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to loss of
privilege”.
The Tribunal is also concerned to be satisfied that the profession is
protected and in particular that a high standard is maintained
so that the
public can have confidence in the profession.
Tribunal is satisfied that the Chiropractor has taken the appropriate steps in
his day to day and professional life to ensure
that he will not engage in like
behaviour to that which brings him before this Tribunal.
After taking all the evidence into account the Tribunal is
satisfied that the Chiropractor is truly contrite and that there has been
reformation of character so that he can be trusted with the high standard of
conduct required of a chiropractor and osteopath.
29. The Tribunal orders that:
(i) The Chiropractor is reprimanded.
(ii) The Chiropractor is to pay the costs of the Health Care Complaints
Commission. The amount of costs should be agreed between
the Health Care
Complaints Commission and the Chiropractor and if agreement can not be reached
then the party has liberty to apply
to this Tribunal on three (3) days
Austin v Chiropractors Registration Board of NSW
Remarks on Sentence – Murrell SC DCJ 17 January
THE DISTRICT COURT
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
CRIMINAL JURISDICTION
JUDGE H G MURRELL SC
THURSDAY 17 JANUARY 2008
06/11/0805 – Regina v Neil AUSTIN
1. On 29 October 2007, the offender pleaded guilty
to three counts.
(1) Between 31 December 1980 and 15 February 1981 at Westleigh, he assaulted
[name omitted]
, who was under the age of sixteen years, ie
eleven or twelve years, and at the time of the assault he committed an act of
(2) Between 1 October 1981 and 6 October 1981 at Westleigh, he assaulted
[name omitted]
, and at the time of the assault committed an act of
indecency upon her, she being under sixteen years, namely twelve years.
(3) Between 30 November 1988 and 1 January 1989 at Turramurra, he assaulted
[name omitted]
and at the time of the assault committed an act of
indecency upon her.
maximum available penalties are six years, six years and four years
respectively. No standard non-parole period applies to any
of the offences.
relation to count 2, when sentencing the offender I will take into account two
further matters on a Form 1.
(1) Between 31 October 1986 and 1 January 1987 at Sydney, assaulted
[name omitted]
and commit an act of indecency upon her
(2) Between 31 December 1986 and 1 January 1988 at Turramurra, assault
[name omitted]
and commit an act of indecency upon her.
the date when the matter was listed for trial, the offender entered pleas of
guilty. He had indicated a preparedness to enter
pleas of guilty a short time
before the trial date. In the period leading up to the trial date, the Crown
and the offender’s
legal representatives were in discussion regarding
appropriate charges, and there was a prospect of pleas being entered. There is
a significant utilitarian value to the pleas, something in the order of 15%, or
perhaps a little more.
offender has spent one day in custody in relation to these matters.
relevant facts are agreed. They form Exhibit A. I will summarise those facts,
interposing references to other dates which are
of some relevance.
victim was born on 15 February 1969. She is the daughter of the
offender’s former wife,
[name omitted]
. The offender and
were married in 1974. Their relationship was turbulent. They
separated on a number of occasions between 1988 and 1998, and were
divorced in
2000. The victim was about five years old when her mother married the offender.
She did not know much of her natural
father and regarded the offender as her
the period around 1981 when the complainant was eleven or twelve years of age,
and again during the period around December
1988 when she was nineteen or twenty
years of age, there were a number of occasions when the offender committed
indecent acts against
her, including kissing, touching her breast and touching
her near the vagina. The offences on the indictment and the Form 1 are
representative of a broader course of conduct. Although the offender is only to
be sentenced on the charged acts, taking into account
the matters on the Form 1,
he does not receive any benefit as a result of the charged acts being the only
acts. It cannot be submitted
that the charged acts were isolated incidents.
facts of the offences are as follows.
Count 1. When the complainant
was aged eleven years, during the summer school holidays she approached the
offender, who was working
on his car in the garage. The offender leaned down
and kissed her on the lips. He put his tongue in her mouth. He asked her if
she liked it. The victim was shaking.
Count 2. On the October long weekend in 1981, the victim’s mother was
away and the victim stayed at home with the offender.
On the Saturday night,
the offender came into her bedroom and started to kiss her. He played with her
hair and started to undress
her. He undressed her down to her underwear. He
kissed her breasts and touched her on the outside of her vaginal area.
Count 3. In December 1988, when the victim was nineteen years old, she was
watching television in the TV room. The offender came
into the room, sat behind
her and started to caress her and kiss her on the hair and neck. He tried to
turn her around, but she
pointedly continued to watch TV. The offender kept
kissing her. He started to touch her breast. The victim’s mother walked
into the room.
Form 1 Offence 1. In November 1986, the victim was seventeen years of age and
had just finished her Higher School Certificate. The
family was staying at the
Hilton Hotel in Sydney to celebrate the end of the HSC. When they were walking
along the street, the offender
has his arm around the victim and rubbed her
breast. The victim’s mother continued shopping, and when the victim and
the offender
entered the hotel lift, the offender kissed her and fondled her
Form 1 Offence 2. The victim was eighteen years of age. The offender came
to the victim in the
loungeroom and kissed her. She was frightened. The victim started to go to her
room. In the hallway, the
offender pushed her up against the wall and kissed
her very aggressively. She told him “you’d better not come into my
room tonight” and he did not do so.
1990, there was a disclosure by the victim. The victim, her mother and the
offender attended counselling with a psychiatrist to
address the issue of abuse
and other problems in the family. In the course of counselling, the offender
admitted to the nature of
his relationship with the victim. After the
counselling, there were no incidents of abuse. The victim and the offender were
reasonable terms over the ensuing years, up to 2004. At times, the victim
lived with the offender. She was involved in the preparation
for his wedding to
his current wife. He married his current wife in 2003.
1999 when they separated, the offender and the victim’s mother received
counselling. They were counselled by two psychiatrists.
In the course of the
counselling, the offender made admissions regarding his abusive relationship
with the victim.
2002, the victim gave birth to her first child. The birth traumatised and
unsettled her because it brought to the fore her recollections
of childhood
sexual abuse. She was referred to counselling. She received counselling in
2003 and 2004.
Fortuitously,
in 2004 the offender moved to Victoria with his current wife. From mid-2004,
the victim had no contact with the offender.
7 January 2005, the victim attended the Hornsby Police Station and made a
complaint and statement about the offences. On 11 July
2006, the offender was
He stated that he had recognised
his problem and thought that it was all
finished as he had undergone counselling. He disclosed to his then wife that he
touched the
victim inappropriately, and he informed a bail justice that he had
acted inappropriately with the victim and had received counselling.
offender waived his right to a committal hearing and was committed for trial.
The trial was twice vacated, once because the offender
had problems with his
legal representative, and again because of an application by the prosecution.
Pleas was entered on 29 October,
the third date fixed for commencement of the
trial. A number of preliminary legal issues had been foreshadowed. The trial
two week estimate.
turn to the objective seriousness of the individual matters. Count 1, the
offence against s 76 of the
1990, carries a maximum available
penalty of six years’ imprisonment. At the time s 76 encompassed a wide
range of conduct,
including all sorts of sexual assaults, other than
penile/vaginal intercourse. In the context of the wide range of criminal
that was encompassed by the provision at that time, the conduct in
question was very much towards the low end of the range. Further,
the section
covered misconduct towards children of any age up to sixteen years. As the
victim was aged eleven or twelve, the offence
does not gain any particular
seriousness by virtue of her being at a very young age, such as, for example,
five or six years. A
further matter which is significant is that there was no
criminal conduct prior to this incident. In respect of this matter, the
offender has the benefit of prior good character. The position can, for
example, be contrasted with that in
where the child was significantly
younger and the conduct in question involved stimulated intercourse while the
victim and the offender
were half naked. The Crown does not submit that a s 9
bond is outside the Court’s discretion in relation to this matter.
3 is an offence against s 61E(1). It carries a maximum available penalty of
four years’ imprisonment because the victim
was over sixteen years at the
time. She was an adult, being nineteen years of age. The conduct in question
was towards the lower
end of the range in terms of objective seriousness,
involving caressing, and a kiss on her hair and neck, as well as “starting
to touch the breasts”. It is not to the offender’s credit that the
conduct was only terminated because the victim’s
mother walked into the
room. However, having regard to the nature of the conduct in question and the
wide range of conduct caught
up in an offence of this type, the offence is
towards the lower end of the range. I note that the offence was not isolated.
fact does not aggravate the penalty to be imposed. It simply disentitles
the offender to a reduction which might apply if an episode
was an isolated
episode. In my view, it is appropriate to deal with this matter under s 9.
most serious offence before the Court is count 2. That is objectively serious
in itself, and the sentence must take into account
the two significant offences
of a similar type, on the Form 1. Count 2 describes an indecent assault of some
seriousness because
it occurred when the victim’s mother was away. The
victim was in the sole care of the offender. She was twelve years old
time. While she was not particularly young – this offence deals with
transgressions against children of all ages up
to the age of sixteen – nor
was she towards the upper end in terms of her age. The offence occurred in her
bedroom. In other
words, the offender took advantage of the fact that she was
at home in her bedroom in bed, in his sole care. His conduct therefore
constitutes a very significant breach of trust. She was entitled to regard her
and a place where she was
protected, but on this occasion that entitlement was seriously transgressed.
Not only did the offender
start to kiss the victim, but he also succeeded in
undressing her down to her underwear. He then proceeded to kiss her breasts and
touch her on the outside of the vagina. The conduct included a variety of acts
which were indecent. Having said that, the conduct
the subject of other cases
to which I have been referred is significantly more serious than that which is
the subject of count 2.
For example, the conduct in
was significantly more serious than that in the present case. Taking
into account the offences on the Form 1, I regard Count 2 as
of significant
objective seriousness.
relation to the Form 1 matters, I note that the offences involved conduct in
relatively public locations. That cuts two ways.
First, the victim was not
approached when she was in a particularly vulnerable situation, isolated from
other people. On the other
hand, the whole purpose of the visit to the Hilton
Hotel was to celebrate the victim’s release from schooling and for a girl
of that age to have been molested in the manner described must have been highly
embarrassing and extremely offensive. In relation
to offence 2 on the Form 1,
the victim was not only embarrassed and ashamed of the conduct, but was actually
frightened in a physical
sense because of the associated aggression.
victim read a victim impact statement in which she articulated the many serious
consequences flowing from the offender’s
misconduct. She was a young
adolescent girl when of counts 1 and 2 occurred. That was not isolated conduct.
She was nineteen or
twenty when the last episode occurred. The conduct was
perpetrated by someone whom she considered to be her father. Most of the
incidents occurred in her own home. By virtue of her age and relationship to
the offender, she was a vulnerable person, and the
offender abused his position
of authority and trust. In her victim’s impact statement, the victim
spoke of how the pleasures
that would normally attached to adolescence were
overshadowed by the abuse perpetrated against her. She felt socially and
emotionally
isolated. She felt ashamed and different. She developed a
self-loathing. She sought solace in food. She contemplated suicide.
left with a distrust of people in authority, especially men, a general feeling
of anxiety and a tendency to depression.
She found it difficult to develop
relationships with men and had no boyfriend until she was in her twenties. The
abuse perpetrated
by the offender has a continuing impact on her sexual
relationship. She suffered from serious feelings of depression pre and post
natal. The Court takes into account the matters of which the victim has spoken.
However, because the charges are merely representative,
the impact of the
offender’s conduct generally is only indicative of the impact of the
particular offences. Further, one of
the matters that impacted on the victim
was her mother’s diffidence about interventing, and that is not something
the offender can be held responsible. It can be said that the offences
had a very serious impact on the victim, an impact of the
sort which one would
expect in relation to offences of this type, considering the period over which
the offences were perpetrated
and the relationship between the persons in
question. The count acknowledges the serious impact of the offences on the
offender is now sixty years of age, (date of birth 3 January 1947). In December
1980/1981 he was thirty-three or thirty four
years old. In late 1988/early
1989, he was forty-one years of age.
are no prior or subsequent convictions recorded against the offender. Other
than in relation to these matters, he has not come
to the adverse attention of
the criminal justice system.
offender has been married twice. He has no children of his own. It is
regrettable that he perpetrated these offences against
the only person in
relation to whom he has ever stood in loco parentus.
offender has an excellent employment history. After leaving school, he obtained
an electrical engineering diploma. He worked
in that industry for about five
years. He had suffered from migraines and was treated by a chiropractor, with
dramatic improvement
in his migraines. He decided to retrain as a chiropractor.
In 1973, he commenced practising as a chiropractor. He developed a very
successful practice in north-west Sydney. While he was practising as a
chiropractor, he met the victim’s mother. He continues
registration in New South Wales as a osteopath and as a chiropractor. He
purchased a chiropractic business in Victoria.
He is building up that business,
working about three days a week. He is registered in Victoria. The registration
bodies in Victoria
and New South Wales will be advised of the convictions and
the offender’s professional registration may well be in jeopardy.
offender tendered a number of references attesting to his apparent excellent
character. The references emanate from friends and
acquaintances, people who
knew the offender at the time of the offences, and people who have come to know
him more recently. The
references describe him as a strong Christian. He has
been involved administratively with the Australian Chiropractors Association.
He has been involved in community groups, including Christian mens’
groups. In the course of his chiropractic work, he has
provided counselling to
patients. So far as his friends and acquaintances are concerned, there has been
no hint of impropriety.
They perceived that, back in the 1980s he had a very
good relationship with the victim. The offender is described as a kind and
generous man who has, for example, treated impoverished patients for a reduced
fee. He has been trusted and respected by his friends
and colleagues. The
referees are universally amazed by the offending conduct. They describe the
offender as contrite and remorseful.
to why the offences occurred, there is no real explanation. Reference is made
in a psychologist’s report to the offenders
vague recollection of himself
being a victim of sexual abuse as a young child, but this is not raised as a
significant explanation
for the conduct in question. The offender has sought to
explain his conduct on the basis that he was sexually frustrated because
turbulent and sexually unsatisfying relationship with the victim’s mother.
I would have to say that I regard that “explanation”
explanation at all. Indeed, I find it offensive. It shows a lack of insight
and a lack of acceptance of fundamental responsibility
for the conduct in
question. Attitudes to sexual abuse of children may have hardened considerable
over the last twenty years, but
it has never been acceptable to abuse
one’s stepdaughter because one felt a sense of sexual frustration.
Crown and Mr Hamill have referred me to a number of decisions of the Court of
Criminal Appeal. I would like to thank counsel
for their assistance, both in
terms of their submissions and the matters to which they have referred me. The
cases in which the
facts were, to some extend, analogous to those in the present
AJB v Regina
[2007] NSW CCA 51
Regina v O’Sullivan
(Court of Criminal Appeal 20 October 1989),
Regina v Humphries
Regina v Baxter
(Court of Criminal Appeal, 26 May 1994).
sentencing the offender, I must have regard to the sentencing practice
applicable at the time when the offences occurred, ie the
early and late 1980s.
At that time, it was common for non-parole period to be about one third to half
of the head sentence. Courts
were not constrained in terms of the relationship
between non-parole period and head sentence. The maximum available penalties at
the time when the offences were committed were, by present day standards,
extremely low and the sentences which were imposed in those
days were almost
incredibly low by today’s standards.
relation to the delay between the 1980s and the present, or, more particularly,
between the 1980s and 2005, when the matter was
brought to the attention of
police, and 2006 when police first approached the offender, I will make a couple
of observations. This
case differs from most cases involving very old childhood
sexual assaults in that a disclosure was made many years ago and some action
taken at the time. In this case, there was a disclosure by 1990, and the victim
and the offender participated in counselling
at that time. In 1999 the offender
participated in further counselling. He considered that the misconduct had, in
effect, been
dealt with. Those circumstances tell somewhat in favour of the
offender, not only because of the demonstrated rehabilitation that
has occurred
in the intervening period, but also because he underwent some form of treatment.
In a way, the misconduct was in addressed
many years ago, albeit by means
outside the criminal justice system.
sentencing the offender, I am required to consider the sentencing objectives in
s 3A of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedures) Act.
A number of those
objectives are relevant. It is necessary to impose sentences that ensure that
the offender is adequately punished.
Considerations of general deterrence are
important, although, frankly, I doubt that persons who commit secretive crimes
nature are much deterred by hearing that others have received
significant sentences. In this case, there is no need to protect the
from the offender because he is fully rehabilitated. Nor is there any need to
promote the rehabilitation of the offender,
although one does need to recognise
that rehabilitation. He is fully rehabilitated, so the concept of promotion is
not relevant.
He does need to be made accountable for his actions. His conduct
must be denounced. And there needs to be a recognition of the
harm done to the
victim and to the community.
sentencing the offender I am required to have regard to the relevant aggravating
and mitigating features under s 21A of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act.
I believe that I have referred to the features, but I will reiterate the
relevant features. The relevant aggravating factor is that
the offender abused
a position of trust or authority in relation to the victim. The factor is of
particular relevance in relation
to count 2, because he was the only person who
had responsibility for the victim at that time.
relation to mitigating factors the relevant factors, are (e), that the offender
does not have any record of previous convictions,
and (f), that the offender was
a person of good character. Those considerations are particularly relevant in
relation to Count 1.
They are of less relevance in relation to the other
counts, first, because the offender had committed criminal acts prior to the
later offences, and second because it is frequently the case that persons of
apparently exemplary character commit offences of this
difficult to detect and often remain undetected for many years, enabling
perpetrators to display a veneer
of fine citizenship while at home they commit
terrible offences against family members. Other matters that are relevant
features are (g) and (h), that the offender is unlikely to re-offend
and has good prospects of rehabilitation. Indeed, one can go
further than that.
There really is no prospect of re-offending, given that all the offences were
directed against one person, and
a long period has passed since the last of the
offences. The offender admitted the offences. His family and acquaintances are
now very well aware that the offences occurred. Those factors indicate that
there really is no chance that the offender will re-offend.
He is fully
rehabilitated. As far as remorse and contrition is concerned, I accept that the
offender has shown significant contrition
and remorse. He made admissions to
improper conduct in the course of counselling, both in 1990 and 1999. When
matters came to light,
he ceased the offending behaviour. The
psychologist’s report tendered on behalf of the offender refers to
contrition and remorse.
The offender made admissions to police at the outset.
All these matters, as well as the plea of guilty, support the submission
the offender is contrite and remorseful. It may be that the offender does not
accept full responsibility, blaming the situation
on sexual frustration, but
that is a somewhat different proposition from a proposition that he lacks
contrition and remorse. I accept
that he is highly contrite and remorseful.
There is a plea of guilty, to which I have already referred. That is taken into
both as a matter demonstrating and supporting contrition and remorse,
and as something which has had a utilitarian value so far as
the criminal
justice system is concerned.
have been referred to Judicial Commission statistics. The statistics indicate
that, generally speaking, persons who have committed
offences of this type do
not receive sentences of full-time imprisonment. However, statistics have
serious limitations. I believe
that their limitations are clearly reflected in
this case. It may be that the statistics indicate that full-time imprisonment
an unlikely outcome, because in the case of serious incidents, there is often
a prosecution for a more serious charge, such as a
charge of sexual intercourse
or sexual assault.
accept the submission that, for offences of this general type, a sentence of
full-time custody is not necessarily required. Indeed,
a custodial sentence is
not necessarily required: see
Regina v Baxter
(Court of Criminal Appeal,
26 May 1994).
regard to the objective seriousness of the conduct the subject of count 2, and
taking into account the seriousness of the conduct
on the Form 1 and the other
relevant features, it is my view that the only appropriate sentence for count 2
is a sentence of full-time
imprisonment. I am well aware that a sentence of
imprisonment is a sentence of last resort, but in my view only a term of
imprisonment
would reflect the objective gravity of this matter.
offender has submitted that it would be appropriate to suspend any sentence of
imprisonment under s 12 of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
considered the submission, I acknowledge that, a sentence imposed under s 12 is
a sentence of imprisonment and is a very
significant penalty. However, because
of the gravity of count 2, I have decided that it is not appropriate to suspend
of the sentence under s 12.
will backdate the sentence by one day because the offender spent one day in
have already convicted the offence of each matter. In relation to count 2,
taking into account the matters on the Form 1, I would
have sentenced the
offender to a two year term of imprisonment, but I discounted that by
approximately 15% to twenty months. I have
decided that the minimum term which
should be served before release to parole is a term of seven months. I fix a
non-parole period
of seven months commencing on 16 January 2008 and expiring 15
August 2008. There is a balance of term of thirteen months. The
sentence will
expire on 15 September 2008. I direct the offender’s release to parole at
the end of the non-parole period.
Parole is subject to the conditions that the
offender accept the provision of the New South Wales Probation and Parole
Service for
as long as the Service considers appropriate. He is to report to
the Service within two working days of release.
relation to Count 1, under s 9, instead of imposing sentence of imprisonment I
make an order directing the offender to enter into
a good behaviour bond for a
term of eighteen months.
relation to Count 3, instead of imposing a sentence of imprisonment, I make an
order directing the offender to enter into a good
behaviour bond for a term of 3
good behaviour bonds is subject to the conditions that the offender accepts the
supervision of the New South Wales Probation
and Parole Service for as long as
the Service considers necessary, and reports to the Service within two working
days of release
from custody.
Austin v Chiropractors Registration Board of NSW
Opening address of Appellant 30 July 2009
CRB NSW TRIBUNAL HEARING
30-31 July 2009
Madam Chair
Members of the tribunal, Mr Boyd
I thank you for the opportunity to present my application for re-registration
as a chiropractor in NSW.
There are 2 principal matters to consider in relation to my application
I of the character which accepts the high standards of conduct of the
chiropractic profession?
2 Am I fit to act in accordance with these standards under
I first address the decision of the Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal on
12 March 2003 regarding a complaint that I had been guilty
of professional
misconduct by engaging in a sexual relationship with a patient
(a) That I conducted the relationship in breach of proper and ethical
standards of the practice of chiropractic and osteopathy was
never disputed.
(b) The relationship occurred during my loneliness and turmoil following
separation from my wife some months earlier.
(c) The relationship matured as a husband and wife for a period. It was not
indicative of a course of such conduct and such conduct
has never been repeated
nor was there any such conduct beforehand. I was reprimanded.
(d) I moved on. This matter was put out of mind until recently reminded by
the Osteopaths Registration Board of my incorrect statement
of 30 years of
blemish free practice. This was a genuine oversight and one of omission and not
one of intent to deceive.
I address the decision of Justice Murrell in Regina v Neil Austin on 17 January
(a) The first 2 charges to which I pleaded guilty occurred 9 months
apart in 1980-81 and the third charge occurred 7 years later in
December 1988.
There were 2 other charges dealt with in the plea process which occurred in late
1986 and during 1987.
(b) I express contrition and remorse about the offences. I was extremely
fond of my step-daughter particularly as my first wife and
her mother was unable
to have children. Not to put to find a point on it I adored her. I realise
that I let my affection exceed
the bounds of propriety and paternal affection to
a point which left a lasting impact on her for which I am profoundly regretful.
One of the reasons I decided on a plea of guilty was to spare her the personal
humiliation of court cross-examination and exposure.
I am only comforted by the
fact that I restrained myself beyond kissing and contact with her breasts except
on one occasion when
she complained that I touched the exterior of her
(c) To be candid, I had a defence to the allegation that I sexually assaulted
her on the occasion when she complained that I touched
the exterior of her
vagina, namely that I was on the date when the offence was alleged attending a
Chiropractic Conference in Adelaide.
Because I was unable after the lapse of 26
years to find records to corroborate or persons to verify my attendance at the
and because I had exhausted my financial resources, my lawyers urged
me to plead guilty to the charge, on which basis they expected
me to receive a
non-custodial sentence. I did so with great reluctance but I realise that
having plead guilty, I cannot go behind
the conviction. I was disappointed that
I could not present my defence, but realise now I must accept it as part of the
package of retribution for my transgressions.
I ask the Tribunal to see the transgression of unprofessional conduct toward
a patient in isolation from the transgression of exceeding
the bounds of
paternal affection with my step daughter.
The first was a
mature persons’ lonely hearts relationship not characteristic of a
flagrant or repetitive disregard for professional
The second was a
number of expressions of affection beyond the allowable bound of kissing and
touching as I admit and for which I
wish I had never been so familiar and
The impact of both transgressions when the learning experience was
driven home did not occur until well after both episodes were over.
counselling for the second in 1990 but the first was a relationship of an
entirely different kind.
I am not 62 years old. I have suffered enormous financial penalties and as a
result of my conviction:
i. I lost my practice in Rosebud Victoria
ii. I am in default of
outstanding rent for $10,000
iii. The bank foreclosed on my
iv. I have lost my life savings
v. I am default to the bank for
in excess of $1.5 million
vi. I am in default to a credit company for
vii. I have an outstanding legal debt of some $10,000
in debt to my account for $4,000
to parole constrictions and geographic rental affordability I have been unable
to find work since release 15 August 2008
shock and stress from my detention on my wife and the full burden of my
financial affairs and legal responsibilities has severely
affected her health
our marriage and her ability to work full time
in respect of apportioned costs of this hearing I ask the Tribunal
to take into account my financial situation.
I need to return to active practice for my personal resurrection and support
my wife and myself. I am a person who can after the
lessons learned able to be
trusted to care for members of the community.
I have had a long and noteworthy service to the community and to
chiropractic.
Justice of the
Peace NSW 35 years
CAA National
Insurance Chair 4 consecutive terms of 2 years
Insurance Chair 1 term of 2 years
CAA NSW Vice
President 1 term of 2 years
Rotary Club
Pennant Hills
Medical Practitioners Group
Pennant Hills
Professional & Businessmen’s Breakfast (convened weekly in clinic 8
Billy Graham
Crusade Sydney North West Zone Area Men’s Convenor
I therefore ask that I be entrusted with restoration to
registration.
Neil Austin
Austin v Chiropractors Registration Board of NSW
Statement of Agreed Facts – District Court
proceedings
In the District Court
Of New South Wales
Downing Centre,
R v Neil Austin
1. Antecedents
Austin (‘the offender’) is a 60 year old married man who works as
chiropractor in sole practice in Victoria near
Melbourne. He has no prior or
subsequent convictions and is not otherwise known to police.
2. Background and surrounding facts.
[name omitted]
(‘the victim’) was born
[date omitted]
1969 and is the
daughter of the offender’s ex-wife,
[name omitted]
broke up with
the victim’s father when the victim was around 2 years of age.
The offender and
[name omitted]
were married in May 1974. Their
relationship was a turbulent one and they separated several time between 1988
and 1998. They were
divorced in 2000. During the period from around 1981 (when
the complainant was 11 or 12 years of age) and December, 1988 (when the
complainant was 19 or 20 years of age) there were a number of occasions when the
offender committed indecent acts on the victim.
These acts included kissing,
touching on the breasts and touching on the outside of her vagina. The offences
on the indictment
are representative of a broader course of conduct. The counts
in the indictment are representative.
In 1990, the family attended family counselling at the Northside Clinic (Dr
Ernest Hunter, psychiatrist) to address this and other
problems in the
relationship. In the course of that counselling the offender admitted to nature
of the relationship with the victim.
There were no incidents of abuse after
this counselling and the victim and the offender remained on reasonable terms
over the ensuing
Again, in 1999, the offender and
[name omitted]
received counselling
(Dr Robert Fisher, psychiatrist and Dr Neil McConaghy, psychiatrist).
The complainant remained in close contact with the offender including living
with him and attending and being involved in the preparation
for his wedding to
[his second wife].
[date omitted]
the victim gave birth to her first child. In the
course of counselling she confided to a Social Worker that she felt quite
traumatised
and unsettled about the birth, being reminded of childhood sexual
assault. She was referred to counselling services and received
counselling in
2003 and 2004.
The victim has not had any contact with the offender since July 2004. On 7
January 2005 the victim attended Hornsby Police Station
and made a statement in
relation to the offences.
The offender was contacted by police in Victoria on 11 July 2006. He
attended Rosebud Police Station later that day. He was confronted
allegations and admitted that he had acted inappropriately with
and that he had done thing he should not have done. He also stated
that he had recognised his problem and that he thought it as
all finished and
had since. His wife
Austin, then came into the interview room and
the offender admitted to her that he had touched the victim inappropriately. He
before a bail justice and commented that he had acted inappropriately
with the victim but had received counselling.
The offender was charged with a number of offences and was refused bail. He
appeared in Frankston Magistrate’s Court on 12
July 2006. He was
extradited to New South Wales; there was no contest in relation to the
extradition. He was in custody from 11
July 2006 to 12 July 2006 when he was
entered a conditional bail undertaking. He was accordingly spent 1 day in
The offender waived his rights to a committal hearing on 28 September 2006
and was committed for trial. His trial was originally
listed on 12 March 2007
but the trial date was vacated, on the application of his current solicitors,
when his original lawyers
withdrew and Legal Aid was refused. The trial was
again listed on 28 May 2007 but the trial date was vacated on the application
the prosecution. The trial was then listed to commence on 29 October with a two
week estimate. A number of preliminary issues
were foreshadowed including the
admissibility of (i) tendency/coincidence or relationship evidence (ii) the
confidentiality of communications
with counsellors and psychiatrists (s. 126B
Evidence Act
), (iii) the admissibility of admissions in a police
interview room which were not recorded (s. 281
Criminal Procedure Act
(iv) spousal privilege (s. 19
Evidence Act
Once a Crown Prosecutor was appointed for the re-listed trial, discussions
commenced between the Crown Prosecutor and counsel for
the offender. These
resulted in the pleas of guilty in relation to the three counts on the
indictment, the admissions relevant to
the form 1 and this agreed statement of
3. The offences on the indictment.
Count 1. Indecent assault between 31 December 1980 and 15 February 1981 at
Westleigh. Section 76 Crimes Act (repealed 14 July 1981),
maximum penalty 6
When the complainant was aged 11 years during the summer school holidays she
approached the offender who was working on his car in
the garage. The offender
lent down and kissed her on the lips and put his tongue in her mouth. He asked
her if she liked it. The
victim was shaking.
Count 2. Indecent assault on a person under the age of 16 years between 1
October 1981 and 6 October 1981 at Westleigh. Section
61E(1)(amended 1986,
repealed 1991), maximum penalty 6 years.
On the October long weekend in 1981 the victim’s mother was away and
she stayed home with the offender. On the Saturday night
the offender came into
her bedroom and started to kiss the victim. He played with her hair and started
to undress her. He undressed
her down to her underwear. He kissed her breasts
and touched her on the outside of her vagina.
Count 3. Indecent assault between 30 November 1988 and 1 January 1989 at
Turramurra. Section 61E (repealed 1991), maximum penalty
December of 1988, when the victim was 19 years old, the victim was watching
television in the in the TV room. The offender came
into the room, sat behind
the victim and started to caress her and kiss her on her hair and neck. He
tried to turn her around but
her neck was turned while she tried to continue to
watch TV. The offender kept kissing her and started to touched her breasts.
The victim’s mother walked into the room.
4. The offences on the Form 1.
Offence (1). Indecent assault between 1986 and 1987 at Sydney. Section
61E(1), maximum penalty of 4 years.
In November 1986 the victim was 17 years of age and had just finished her
Higher School Certificate. The family were staying at the
Hilton Hotel in
Sydney to celebrate the end of the HSC. When they were walking along the street
the offender had his arm around
the victim and was rubbing her breast. The
victim’s mother continued shopping and when the offender and the victim
the hotel lift the offender kissed her and fondled her breasts.
Offence (2). Indecent assault in 1987 at Turramurra. Section 61E(1),
maximum penalty of 4 years.
The victim was 18 years of age. The offender came home drunk from dinner and
was aggressive. He came up to the victim in the lounge
and kissed her and she
was frightened of him. The victim went to go to her room and in the hallway the
offender started to push
her up against a wall and kissed her really
aggressively. She told him ‘you better not come into my room
tonight’ and
he did not do so.
Austin v Chiropractors Registration Board of NSW
Chronology prepared by Counsel for Respondent
CHIROPRACTORS TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
GRAHAM NEIL AUSTIN
NSW CHIROPRACTORS REGISTRATION BOARD
CHRONOLOGY – Aid Memoire
Description of Event
Appellant’s date of birth (now aged 62)
Stepdaughter born: Agreed Facts; E[16]
Appellant awarded Diploma of Osteopathy and commenced practice as an
osteopaths.
Appellant married stepdaughter’s mother. Stepdaughter was then aged
21 November 1979
Appellant placed on Register with the NSW Chiropractors Registration
31 December 1980-
15 February 1981
Appellant sexually assaulted stepdaughter (then aged 11 or 12) and
committed act of indecency.
Appellant was the organiser for the 1981 Billy Graham Crusade to
1 October 1981-
6 October 1981
Appellant sexually assaulted stepdaughter (aged 12) and committed act of
30 November 1988-
1 January 1989
Appellant sexually assaulted stepdaughter and committed act of
26 July 1997
Appellant fails to maintain appropriate professional boundary with female
patient: see Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal Determination
dated 12 March
2 August 1997
Applicant again failed to maintain appropriate professional boundaries with
patient: see Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal Determination
dated 12 March
August 1997
Appellant entered into a sexual relationship with a patient yet
inappropriately sought to continue his treatment of that patient between
August 1997 and 1 September 1998: see Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal
Determination dated 12 March 2003
5 November 1998
Appellant separated from his wife and moved into a flat with the female
patient he had developed a relationship with.
22 June 1999
Report of Dr Fisher, consultant psychiatrist regarding appellant
29 June 1999
Letter of Professor McConaghy regarding appellant
24 July 2000
Appellant divorced his then wife and mother of his stepdaughter:G[4]
31 May 2002
Stepdaughter gave birth to first child: Agreed Facts.
12 March 2003
Determination of Chiropractors and Osteopaths Tribunal found appellant
guilty of professional misconduct and formally reprimanded
the appellant. In
those proceedings the appellant tendered statements to establish that he was of
“good character” (see
para 27) but there is no indication that he
had disclosed his past inappropriate conduct towards his stepdaughter.
Appellant met lady me married in December 2003: E[16]
31 December 2003
The appellant entered into a second marriage.
The appellant and his wife moved to Victoria
7 January 2005
The stepdaughter filed complaint alleging sexual assault against the
appellant at Hornsby police station
30 June 2005
The appellant’s registration as a chiropractor in NSW expired because
of non-payment of fees.
15 August 2005
The appellant commenced practice as a chiropractor in Rosebud, Victoria
which practice he maintained until imprisoned in NSW on 16
January 2008
11 July 2006
Appellant contacted by Police in Victoria to answer allegations of sexual
assault against stepdaughter
August 2006
Appellant arrested on counts of alleging sexual assault against
stepdaughter
29 October 2007
Appellant entered plea of guilty to 3 counts of sexual assault against
stepdaughter on basis of Agreed Statement of Facts.
21 December 2007
Pre sentence report by clinical psychologist (Mr Cummins): E[16]
17 January 2008
Sentencing hearing by Judge Murrell in the District Court in which he
sentenced the appellant to 20 months imprisonment with 7 months
period as well as requiring the appellant to enter good behaviour bonds.
15 August 2008
The appellant was released from prison on parole
9 September 2008
Notice issued by Osteopaths Registration Board of NSW to (amongst others)
NSW Chiropractors Registration Board advising of resolution
not to renew the
name of the appellant to the Register of Osteopaths pursuant to
Osteopaths Act, 2001
. The notice also advised the appellant had not
appealed that decision.
29 September 2008
Appellant applied to be restored to the Register of Chiropractors in
1 October 2008
The respondent wrote to the appellant requesting further documentation
relating to his application for re-registration (including
a copy of the
judgement handed down on his conviction).
20 October 2008
Appellant wrote to respondent in reply enclosing copy of the judgement of
Judge Murrell. The appellant also indicated that on counsel’s
had “self perjured for a plea bargain” and indicated an intention to
appeal the decision of Judge Murrell.
14 November 2008
Respondent wrote to the appellant requesting advice on the outcome of the
previously foreshadowed appeal to the NSW Court of Appeal.
19 November 2008
Appellant replied to the respondent indicating that he had not as yet
lodged his intended appeal but also advised that Legal Aid had
indicated it may
be 4 to 5 years before any appeal was heard.
2 December 2008
The respondent resolved to refuse the appellant’s application for
re-registration to the Register of Chiropractors in NSW
9 December 2008
The respondent wrote to the appellant notifying him of the decision to
refuse his application for re-registration as a chiropractor
7 January 2009
Letter from respondent dated 9 December 2008 received by appellant.
21 January 2009
Appellant wrote to the respondent appealing its decision to refuse his
registration.
2 April 2009
Osteopaths Registration Board of NSW confirmed its decision to refuse the
appellant’s registration as an osteopath in NSW: E[5]
16 July 2009
Expiry date of good behaviour bond in relation to offence of commit an act
of indecency on female under 16 years
15 September 2009
Parole sentence imposed on appellant expires (appellant is now on
16 January 2011
Expiry date of good behaviour bond in relation to conviction of offence
(assault female and commit act of indecency age under 16 years).
12 June 2009
The Crown accepts
that the accused will only be sentenced on the charged acts. The evidence that
the charges are representative
is relied upon by the Crown only to demonstrate
that the charged events were not isolated incidents in accordance with the
set out by Spigelman CJ in
[2000] NSW CCA 209
paragraphs 11 to 69).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (941 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter