URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/576.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hodges v State of NSW (Western Sydney Local Health District) [2025] NSWPIC 576; (24 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION OF MEMBER
Hodges v State of NSW (Western Sydney Local Health District) [2025]
Gretel Hodges
RESPONDENT:
State of NSW (Western Sydney Local Health
Rachel Homan
DATE OF DECISION:
24 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workers Compensation Act 1987
; claim for
weekly compensation in respect of accepted 2010 back injury; injury assessed as
resulting in 40% whole person impairment
in 2024 following multiple surgeries
commencing in 2020; whether sufficient evidence of incapacity resulting from
injury during a
4-year period between 2014 and 2018; incapacity resulting from
non-work related conditions;
– work injury materially
contributed to the applicant’s incapacity in the relevant period;
Calman v Commissioner of Police
McCarthy v Department of Corrective
; applicant had no current work capacity at all relevant times;
award for the applicant.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
The Personal Injury Commission (Commission) determines:
the period from 13 May 2014 to 26 April 2018, the applicant had no current work
capacity as a result of the injury on 23 August
Commission orders:
respondent to pay the applicant weekly compensation from 13 May 2014 to
April 2018 pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act
based on a pre-injury average weekly earnings (PIAWE) rate of $899.37,
as periodically indexed.
A brief statement is attached setting out the Commission’s reasons
for the determination.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Gretel Hodges (the applicant) was employed by the State of NSW (Western Sydney
Local Health District) (the respondent) as a registered
23 August 2010, the applicant sustained an injury to her lower back during the
course of her shift at Blacktown Hospital, while
lifting the body of a deceased
patient. Liability for the injury was initially accepted by the
respondent’s insurer.
May 2020, the applicant underwent a pelvis stabilisation and spinal fusion
surgery performed by Dr Brian Hsu. Unfortunately, the
applicant was required to
undergo further surgeries, performed by Dr Hsu in July 2020 and March 2021,
following complications resulting
from falls at home.
the applicant’s third surgery, she developed sepsis and was admitted to
hospital, during which time she was taken to back
to theatre multiple times to
clean up the infection and close the wound. The applicant underwent a fourth
surgery performed by Dr
Hsu in October 2021 to replace the metalwork in her
the commencement of proceedings seeking lump sum compensation pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act) in 2023
(W3409/23), a Member of the Personal Injury Commission (Commission) determined
that the applicant had sustained
an injury to her lumbar spine in the nature of
an aggravation of a disease pursuant to s 4(b)(ii) of the 1987 Act as well as
consequential
conditions at her lumbar and thoracic spine up to and including
T9. The matter was remitted to the President for referral to a Medical
for an assessment of the degree of permanent impairment resulting from the
injury on 23 August 2010.
7 March 2024, Medical Assessor Drew Dixon made an assessment of 40% whole person
impairment (WPI) resulting from the injury on
23 August 2010.
applicant subsequently forwarded a claim for weekly compensation to the
respondent’s insurer on 2 April 2024. On 22 April
2024, the insurer
disputed liability to pay weekly compensation in a notice issued pursuant to s
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act). That decision was maintained following internal review on 2
August 2024 and 6 November 2024.
present proceedings were commenced by an Application to Resolve a Dispute lodged
in the Commission on 31 July 2025.
PROCEDURE BEFORE THE PERSONAL
INJURY COMMISSION
parties appeared before the Commission for conciliation conference and
arbitration hearing on 21 October 2025. The hearing was
conducted in a hybrid
format via MS Teams and in person in Sydney. The applicant was represented by Mr
Bruce McManamey of counsel
instructed by Mr Mohammad. The respondent was
represented by Mr Paul Rickard of counsel, instructed by Mr Lee. A
representative from
the insurer was available during the proceedings.
the conciliation phase of the proceedings, leave was granted to the applicant to
amend the Application to Resolve a Dispute
to seek weekly compensation for the
period commencing 13 May 2014 to 26 April 2018. The parties agreed that the
applicable pre-injury
average weekly earnings rate (PIAWE) was $899.37. The
parties also agreed that the 2012 legislative amendments applied to the
am satisfied that the parties to the dispute understand the nature of the
application and the legal implications of any assertion
made in the information
supplied. I have used my best endeavours in attempting to bring the parties to
the dispute to a settlement
acceptable to all of them. I am satisfied that the
parties have had sufficient opportunity to explore settlement and that they have
been unable to reach an agreed resolution of the dispute.
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
parties agree that the following issue remains in dispute:
(a) the extent and quantification of incapacity resulting from the injury on
23 August 2010 in the period from 13 May 2014 to 26 April 2018.
Documentary evidence
following documents were in evidence before the Commission and considered in
making this determination:
(a) Application to Resolve a Dispute and attached documents;
(b) Reply and attached documents, and
(c) wages schedule filed by the respondent on 9 October 2025.
party applied to adduce oral evidence or cross-examine any
Applicant’s evidence
applicant’s evidence is set out in statements made by her on 27 July 2022,
18 April 2023 and 27 June 2023.
applicant stated that she was born in 1952 and obtained registration as a
qualified nurse in April 1973.
January 1980 to 1984, the applicant worked at the neurology ward at Hornsby and
District Hospital. The applicant worked at the
Sydney Adventist Hospital from
1984 to 2004. The applicant commenced employment with Blacktown Hospital
Intensive Care Unit in 2004
and worked there from 2004 to 2013.
applicant described feeling an intense, sharp pain in her lower back accompanied
by muscle spasms whilst handling a deceased body
on 23 August 2010. The
applicant said she treated her back pain conservatively with heat packs,
massage, physiotherapy and
anti-inflammatory medication on the advice of her
medical practitioners, however, the pain steadily worsened over time and she
to experience intense bilateral leg pain.
applicant said that as a result of her physical limitations she was forced into
an early retirement. This had devastated the applicant
as she thoroughly enjoyed
her job as a registered nurse and found it a distraction from times of hardship
in her personal life.
the work injury, the applicant had been performing restricted duties limited to
clerical work. The applicant’s mechanical
lower back pain was exacerbated
when leaning forward or sitting or standing for long periods of time.
applicant was given cortisone injections by neurosurgeon, Dr Brian Owler, and
referred to a pain management specialist. The applicant
was also referred to Dr
Randolph Gray to review her ongoing sciatic pain, back pain and back spasms. Dr
Gray could not guarantee
that operating on her back would resolve the
applicant’s chronic pain.
1 May 2013, the applicant’s employment with Blacktown Hospital was
terminated due to her restricted capacity. The applicant
“I was offered a clinical position at Mt Druitt
Hospital as a registered nurse performing ECGs, managing histories, educating
patients and taking blood samples. I accepted the position and continued to work
there. I subsequently ceased working at Mt Druitt
hospital as driving to work
was too painful for my back and it was aggravating my symptoms so I decided to
retire out of my own free
On 13 May 2014, I consulted with Dr Therese Roberts at Hills Family General
Practice and she issued me with a certificate of incapacity
stating that I was
totally unfit to continue working as the result of my chronic and debilitating
pain caused by my work injury on
23 August 2010.”
Treating evidence
a report dated 1 May 2013, orthopaedic spinal surgeon, Dr Randolph Gray,
“Her right leg symptoms continued to be fluctuating.
She reports increasing symptoms down her right leg in the L5 distribution
activity. She also continues to have quite severe back symptoms.
I have described to her once again the pathology that I have seen on an MRI
scan, which is lateral recess stenosis, and we should
have also discussed the
possible response to surgery with regard to her symptoms in her right leg, which
should be that of improvement.
However, I have reiterated, once again, that her
lower back spasms will not respond to surgery and, in fact, can possibly get
after surgery.
I have steered her away from surgical intervention and advised her to pursue
a more conservative approach, at this stage, given that
her symptoms are
somewhat fluctuating and there are times where she is reasonably
comfortable.
Currently she takes Endone 1 – 2 tablets at night.
I also understand that her employment has currently been temporarily
terminated and her employer is looking for suitable employment
13 May 2014, general practitioner (GP), Dr Therese Roberts, issued a certificate
“This is to certify that Ms Gretel Hodges is totally
unfit to continue working as the result of her chronic and debilitating
pain which is the result of a workplace injury. This advice is effective
immediately from 13 May 2014.”
a report dated 23 November 2016, rheumatologist, Dr Ana Ananda, prepared a
report which stated:
“She has also been evaluated for a recent
flare of lower back and right hip pain. Fortunately, the MRI scan of the lumbar
did not demonstrate any new changes on 27.09.16 with possibly only a small
focal posterior annulus tear at L4/5 with a synovial cyst
from the inner margin
of the left L3/4 facet joint.”
psychiatrist, Dr Richa Rastogi, prepared a report on 11 July 2017, which
“She sustained a work related back injury and had to
retire on medical grounds in 2014. She continues to persistent chronic
This functional restriction has impacted her sense of self and she has always
been house proud and her inability to maintain
this functioning is the last
straw for her emotional decline. She is stuck with resentment and disappointment
and feeling of failure.
She has self-loathing thoughts and loss of her job has
left her with no avenues to escape.”
notes of a consultation on 31 October 2019 made by adult and paediatric spine
surgeon, Dr Brian Hsu recorded a history as follows:
been experiencing significant back and leg pain since 2010 after lifting a
deceased patient. Back pain is rated 6-9/10
in severity and leg pain is rated
6-9/10 in severity in both legs, but more so on the right than the left. Her non
operative treatment
has included physiotherapy, medications, TENS machine, hot
packs, ultrasound and previous spinal injections. She denies any bowel
bladder disturbance, fevers, weight loss or loss of appetite. Her main complaint
is difficulty with ambulation due to the back
and leg pain.”
8 August 2023, Dr Hsu responded to a questionnaire from the applicant’s
solicitor regarding the surgical procedures he had
performed. Dr Hsu
“Mrs Hodges had been experiencing significant back and
leg pain since 2010 after lifting a deceased patient. I felt that she
exhausted non operative treatment and surgical intervention was reasonably
necessary.”
12 July 2024, the applicant’s GP, Dr Nuwan Dharmaratne, issued a
certificate certifying the applicant as having permanent
incapacity from 27
January 2013.
12 October 2024, Dr Dharmaratne responded to a questionnaire from the
applicant’s solicitor. Dr Dharmaratne was asked for
an opinion on the
applicant’s incapacity for work in the period from 23 August 2010 to 26
April 2018. Dr Dharmaratne responded:
“Please note I have been
Mrs Hodges' GP from July 2020. On review of her file, I can see that other
practitioners had assessed
she did have capacity to work (with restrictions) for
some of this period. From my understanding of the notes available to me, Mrs
Hodges was unable to continue any form of work from May 2014.”
Applicant’s submissions
applicant referred to the Certificate of Determination issued in matter W3409/23
and submitted that it had been determined that
there was a continuous chain of
causation from the date of injury until time the applicant underwent the series
of surgical procedures
that resulted in the assessment of 40% WPI.
applicant referred the Commission to her statement evidence with regard to the
nature of the injury. The applicant’s employment
at Blacktown Hospital was
terminated in May 2013 as suitable duties were no longer available. Thereafter
she continued with lighter
work at Mount Druitt Hospital.
applicant submitted that the performance of modified duties was consistent with
a continuing injury. The applicant made every
effort to remain at work
notwithstanding her injury. Eventually, the applicant found that driving to work
was too painful for her
back and aggravated her symptoms. The applicant decided
to retire and, on 13 May 2014, consulted Dr Roberts at Hills Family General
Practice who issued her with a certificate of capacity stating that she was
totally unfit to continue working as a result of the
work injury on
August 2010.
applicant noted that the certificate was attached to the Application to Resolve
a Dispute. The opinion expressed by Dr Roberts
in that certificate was adopted
by Dr Dharmaratne who said it appeared that the applicant had not had any
capacity to work since
May 2014. The applicant submitted that this was the only
direct evidence with regard to the applicant’s incapacity and there
evidence to contradict it.
applicant referred the Commission to other treating evidence from around the
period of weekly compensation claimed and submitted
that it was consistent with
the applicant having no current work capacity.
applicant referred to the report of Dr Gray, dated 1 May 2013, in which he
referred to the applicant continuing to have quite
severe back pain and
increasing symptoms down the right leg. The applicant submitted that Dr
Gray’s report identified significant
pathology and symptomology and was
consistent with the applicant reaching a point of no capacity approximately one
year later.
applicant also referred to the report of Dr Ananda, dated 23 November 2016,
describing a recent flare of lower back pain and right
hip pain. The applicant
submitted that this was evidence of significant, persisting symptoms in the
lower back.
Rastogi prepared a report on 11 July 2017 referring to the back injury, noting
that the applicant had to retire on medical grounds
in 2014. The applicant
continued with persistent chronic pain and functional restrictions so severe as
to impact her mental health.
applicant submitted that her own evidence was that she was unable to continue
working due to her back injury. The applicant was
certified as having no current
work capacity at the commencement of the period of weekly compensation claimed.
Ongoing symptoms were
reported in the treating medical evidence thereafter. The
pathology at the applicant’s lumbar spine was found to have continued
until the time of the surgeries commencing in 2020.
applicant submitted that the Commission would be satisfied that she had no
current work capacity for the entire period of the
claim. Although the medical
evidence described other medical conditions, they were not relevant to the
claim. There was no evidence
of a novus actus interveniens and no countervailing
Respondent’s submissions
respondent referred to the applicant’s statement evidence and noted that
the applicant had indicated that in 2013 driving
to work became too painful for
her. The respondent noted that this was not a complaint about the
applicant’s ability to perform
the work itself. The problem was driving to
respondent submitted that the certificate issued by Dr Roberts in 2014 was the
only medical evidence specifically dealing with
the applicant’s back
injury and the incapacity resulting from it. Over the next four years, there was
no evidence from any
of the applicant’s doctors regarding her capacity for
work in light of the back injury.
respondent submitted that the applicant had sought to make out a case of
“no current work capacity” during those four
years by inference from
evidence of doctors treating the applicant for non-work-related conditions. The
applicant relied on reports
from a psychiatrist and rheumatologist, neither of
whom were in a position to comment on incapacity resulting from a back injury.
respondent submitted that there was a multiplicity of conditions affecting the
applicant’s capacity to perform work.
respondent referred to the report of an MRI scan on 27 September 2016 and
submitted that it did not demonstrate any significant
changes. The respondent
submitted that the incapacity the applicant now experienced did not manifest
until the multiple surgeries
performed by Dr Hsu.
were multiple reasons why the applicant could not continue with employment
including, osteoarthritis affecting multiple body
parts, inflammatory poly
arthropathy, osteoporosis and carpal tunnel syndrome. The respondent submitted
that the Commission would
not be able to discern from the treating evidence
incapacity resulting from the back injury.
respondent submitted that the references to ongoing complaints relating to the
lower back identified by the applicant’s
submissions fell short of
satisfying the evidentiary onus of establishing that there was a total
incapacity resulting from the 2010
injury in the relevant period.
respondent submitted that no comfort would be gained from Dr Robert’s
certificate as it was expressed in the present tense.
Dr Roberts gave no
indication that the applicant’s condition would continue indefinitely into
the future.
respondent submitted that the applicant had failed to discharge her evidentiary
onus and there should be an award for the
respondent.
Applicant’s submissions in reply
applicant submitted that the respondent’s submissions were founded upon an
inaccurate view of the law. It was not necessary
for the applicant to
demonstrate that her incapacity resulted “solely” from the work
injury. The entirety of her incapacity
resulted from the work injury provided
that there was a material contribution from the injury. The applicant referred
to the decision
Murphy v Allity Management
in this regard.
applicant submitted that if it was established that the applicant had a
condition, the evidentiary onus shifted to the respondent
to establish some
change to that condition. No evidence of any change in the applicant’s
condition had been presented by the
respondent. The applicant referred to the
decision in
Crittenden.
AND REASONS
9 of the 1987 Act provides that a worker who has received an
‘injury’ shall receive compensation from the worker’s
in accordance with the Act.
33 of the 1987 Act provides that if total or partial incapacity for work results
from an injury, the compensation payable
shall include a weekly payment during
the incapacity.
applicant in this case claims weekly compensation from 13 May 2014 to 26 April
2018, pursuant to ss 37(1) and 38(6) of the 1987
Act, on the basis that
throughout that period she was totally incapacitated as a result of her work
Consistently
Hochbaum v RSM Building Services Pty Ltd; Whitton v Technical and
Further Education Commission t/as TAFE
the parties have agreed
that as a result of the assessment of 40% WPI by Medical Assessor Dixon, s 39 of
the 1987 Act does not apply
to bring the applicant’s entitlement weekly
compensation to an end after 260 weeks. The applicant’s entitlement to any
weekly compensation did, however, cease 12 months after reaching retirement age
pursuant to s 52 of the
1987 Act, on 26
April 2018.
the assessment of impairment occurred after the period of weekly compensation
claimed, consistently with
Meat Carter Pty Ltd v
the applicant was not,
during the relevant period, a “worker with highest needs”.
37(1) of the 1987 Act as it applies in this case
“The weekly payment of compensation to which an
injured worker who has no current work capacity is entitled during the second
entitlement period is to be at the rate of:
(a) (AWE × 80%) − D, or
(b) MAX − D,
whichever is the lesser.”
s 38(6) of the 1987 Act provided:
“The weekly payment of
compensation to which an injured worker who has no current work capacity is
entitled under this section
after the second entitlement period is to be at the
(a) (AWE × 80%) − D, or
(b) MAX − D,
whichever is the lesser.”
expression “no current work capacity” was defined in s 32A of the
1987 Act as follows:
no current work capacity
in relation to a worker, means a present inability arising from an injury such
that the worker is not able to return to work, either
in the worker’s
pre-injury employment or in suitable employment.”
expression, “suitable employment” was also defined in s 32A of the
1987 Act as:
suitable employment
, in relation
to a worker, means employment in work for which the worker is currently
(a) having regard to—
(i) the nature of the worker’s incapacity and the details provided in
medical information including, but not limited to, any
certificate of capacity
supplied by the worker (under section 44B), and
(ii) the worker’s age, education, skills and work experience, and
(iii) any plan or document prepared as part of the return to work planning
process, including an injury management plan under Chapter
3 of the 1998 Act,
(iv) any occupational rehabilitation services that are being, or have been,
provided to or for the worker, and
(v) such other matters as the Workers Compensation Guidelines may specify, and
(b) regardless of—
(i) whether the work or the employment is available, and
(ii) whether the work or the employment is of a type or nature that is
generally available in the employment market, and
(iii) the nature of the worker’s pre-injury employment, and
(iv) the worker’s place of residence.”
Wollongong Nursing Home Pty Ltd v
Roche DP commented on
this definition:
“However, while the new definition of
suitable employment has eliminated the geographical labour market from
consideration,
it has not eliminated the fact that ‘suitable
employment’ must be determined by reference to what the worker is
(and psychologically) capable of doing, having regard to the
worker’s ‘inability arising from an injury’. Suitable
employment means ‘
employment in work
for which the worker is
currently suited’ (emphasis added).
The word ‘employment’ is not defined in the legislation. Its
common meaning is ‘the state of being employed’.
‘worker’ is defined. It means, subject to specified exclusions,
‘a person who has entered into or works
under a contract of service or a
training contract with an employer’ (s 4 of the 1998 Act). In context, the
phrase ‘employment
in work’, in the definition of suitable
employment, ‘in relation to a worker’, must refer to real work in
market. That is, it must refer to a real job in employment for which
the worker is suited.
Therefore, the determination of whether a worker is ‘able to return to
work in suitable employment’ is not a totally theoretical
or academic
exercise and Mason P’s reference to the ‘eye of the needle’
test may still be relevant in many cases.
To use his Honour’s example, a
labourer who is rendered a quadriplegic may well be able to perform tasks using
only his voice.
However, whether, under the new provisions, he or she would be
found to have no current work capacity will depend on a realistic
assessment of
the matters listed at (a) and (b) of the definition of suitable employment.
Depending on the evidence, it is difficult
to see that work tasks that are
totally artificial, because they have been made up in order to comply with an
employer’s obligations
to provide suitable work under s 49 of the 1998
Act, and do not exist in any labour market in Australia, will be suitable
employment.”
is the applicant who bears the onus of establishing, on the balance of
probabilities, that she had no current work capacity throughout
the period of
weekly compensation claimed.
of the primary challenges for the applicant in discharging her onus is the lack
of contemporaneous evidence regarding the extent
and nature of any incapacity
resulting from the injury on 23 August 2010 during the period in question. The
respondent has submitted
that the state of the evidence is such that the
applicant is unable to discharge her evidentiary onus.
considering this question, I have borne in mind the requirements of r 73 of the
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
, which provides:
appropriate decision-maker for applicable proceedings must, when informing
itself or themselves on any matter in the proceedings,
have regard to the
following principles—
(a) evidence should be logical and probative,
(b) evidence should be relevant to the facts in issue and the issues in
(c) evidence based on speculation or unsubstantiated assumptions is
unacceptable,
(d) unqualified opinions are unacceptable.”
have also considered the comments of Keating J in
Department of Education and
the Arbitrator wrongly directed himself that the matter could be decided based
on the credit of Ms Ireland alone. The task
before the Arbitrator was to weigh
the evidence of Ms Ireland together with other objective evidence, or the
absence of it. The Arbitrator
erred in failing to give due weight to Ms
Ireland’s failure to make any report of injury to her back on the day of
the accident.
The absence of any documentary evidence from Dr Epps or Dr Baker
to support any complaints of back pain, either contemporaneous to
the accident
or at least at intervals during the period between the accident and when it was
first reported to Dr Wallace, is a significant
omission in Ms Ireland’s
is not, however, a case where there is no logical or probative evidence to
support the applicant’s claim. The applicant
has drawn the
Commission’s attention to her statement evidence which confirms that prior
to the period in question the applicant
had been performing light duties to
accommodate her back injury. By May 2013, the applicant was terminated from her
role at Blacktown
Hospital due to the absence of suitable duties. The applicant
was offered an alternative position at Mount Druitt Hospital, which
light duties including performing echocardiograms, managing histories, educating
patients and taking blood samples. The
applicant continued to perform that work
until May 2014.
applicant’s statement evidence was that she ceased work as driving to the
hospital was too painful for her back and was
aggravating her symptoms. As the
respondent observed, this evidence does not by itself suggest that the applicant
lacked capacity
to perform the light duties she was given at Mount Druitt
Hospital. Rather, it suggests that the drive to work was the problem.
applicant’s evidence must, however, be read together with the treating
evidence from the applicant’s doctors. On 13
May 2014, the
applicant’s GP, Dr Roberts, certified the applicant as totally unfit to
continue working as a result of the chronic
and debilitating pain caused by the
work injury on 23 August 2010.
certificate from Dr Roberts may be read together with the report of Dr Gray
prepared a year earlier. Dr Gray, at that time, described
fluctuating but
increasing radicular symptoms, particularly with activity, and continuing
“severe” back symptoms. The
applicant was noted to be taking Endone
each night. Dr Gray referred to MRI scans which showed lateral recess stenosis.
Dr Gray suggested the applicant should avoid surgical intervention,
this evidence generally confirms that the applicant continued
with significant
symptoms that were increasing and which worsened with activity.
flare of lower back pain and persisting pathology on an MRI scan were reported
by rheumatologist, Dr Ananda in late 2016. In mid-2017,
the applicant’s
psychiatrist, Dr Rastogi, referred to the applicant having to retire on medical
grounds following her work
related back injury. Dr Rastogi described persistent
chronic pain and functional restrictions which had impacted upon the
applicant’s
mental health.
than these reports, there is no medical evidence regarding the nature of the
applicant’s back condition in this period
to which I have been referred.
The respondent has noted that neither Dr Ananda nor Dr Rastogi are spinal
specialists. Neither doctor
had commented directly on the impact of the
applicant’s back condition on her capacity to perform work.
applicant was eventually referred to a spinal surgeon, Dr Hsu in late 2019. At
the time of his initial consultation, Dr Hsu reported
that the applicant had
been experiencing “significant” back and leg pain since 2010. By
that time, the applicant was
experiencing radicular symptoms in both legs. The
applicant reported difficulty with ambulation due to her back and leg pain.
2024, the applicant’s GP since 2020, Dr Dharmaratne, after reviewing the
applicant’s file, expressed an opinion that
the applicant was unable to
continue any form of work from May 2014 onwards.
the evidence on which the applicant relies to support her claim is minimal,
importantly, it is not contradicted by any expert
opinion or other evidence
tendered by the respondent. I am satisfied on the evidence that the
applicant’s usual GP considered
her to be totally incapacitated for any
form of work on 13 May 2014. I am further satisfied that the applicant continued
to experience
symptoms of back pain and radiculopathy in the period that
followed up until the time the applicant was seen by Dr Hsu and advised
undergo surgery. I accept the applicant’s symptoms resulted in functional
restrictions and, in particular, affected her
mobility and ability to perform
physical activity. The evidence indicates that the applicant’s symptoms
gradually worsened
over time. There is no suggestion in any of the evidence
before me of any improvement in the applicant’s symptoms or functional
abilities at any time in the period following the cessation of work.
the time the applicant ceased work in May 2014, she was 62 years old. The
applicant’s statement evidence is that she qualified
as a nurse in 1973
and had worked as a nurse since 1980. There is no indication that the applicant
holds any other qualifications
or has any other work experience.
appears from the applicant’s statement evidence that she was unable to
injury at any time, although
she did return to work performing suitable, light duties. In early 2013,
Blacktown Hospital, where the
applicant had been employed for approximately nine
years, could no longer offer her suitable duties. Although a light role was
at Mount Druitt Hospital, the travel to work aggravated the
applicant’s symptoms.
am satisfied on the evidence referred to above that the applicant was, at no
time in the period of weekly compensation claimed,
able to return to work in her
pre-injury employment as a registered nurse. The question that remains is
whether the applicant was
able to return to work in “suitable
employment.”
the evidence suggests that the applicant was physically capable of performing
the light duties that had been found for her
at Mount Druitt Hospital for a
period of approximately one year prior to the cessation of work, I accept on the
statement evidence
and the evidence from Dr Roberts that the work injury
rendered her physically unable to travel to the hospital in order to perform
that work. The applicant was approaching retirement age and her education skills
and work experience were confined to work as a nurse
in a hospital or clinical
setting. I accept that the roles, which the applicant’s education, skills
and work experience qualified
her to perform, required her to travel in order to
perform them.
only medical opinion before me as to the nature of the applicant’s
capacity for work at the commencement of the claim indicates
that she was
totally unfit to perform any work. There is no evidence of any improvement but
rather a continuation and deterioration
of the applicant’s condition in
the four years that followed.
are no return to work plans or any evidence from any occupational rehabilitation
service before me.
have considered the respondent’s submissions that the medical evidence
indicated that during the relevant period, the applicant
was incapacitated by a
number of concurrent
non-work-related medical conditions. These included a
psychological condition, carpal tunnel syndrome, osteoporosis and
osteoarthritis.
the applicant’s submissions noted, however, incapacity may arise from
multiple causes. In
Calman v Commissioner of
High Court referred to a passage in
Salisbury v Australian Iron and Steel
“It is not necessary that the employment injury should be the
sole cause of disability. It is sufficient if it is a contributing
cause. It may
be the catalyst which precipitates disability in a medium of disease. But when
the stage is reached at which the employment
injury ceases to produce effects
and could therefore no longer be a contributing cause to any incapacity which
may then exist, the
right to compensation ceases.”
was referred to in
McCarthy v Department of Corrective
where Roche DP made
observations concerning the appropriate test on causation for establishing an
entitlement to weekly compensation:
“It is trite law that a
loss can result from more than one cause (
ACQ Pty Ltd v Cook
[2009] HCA 28
(2009) 83 ALJR 986).
The authority of
is also instructive on this issue. The Court held (at [38],
excluding footnotes):
‘Once the appellant established that his underlying anxiety disorder
was an injury within the meaning of the Workers Compensation
Act, he was
entitled ‘to compensation ... under [that] Act’ upon proof that his
total or partial incapacity for work
resulted from that injury. The question
then for the Tribunal was whether the appellant’s incapacity was causally
to the underlying anxiety disorder. It has long been settled that
incapacity may result from an injury for the purposes of workers’
compensation legislation even though the incapacity is also the product of other
- even later - causes. Indeed, death or incapacity
may result from a work injury
even though the death or incapacity also results from a later, non-employment
cause. Thus, in
Conkey & Sons Ltd v Miller
, Barwick CJ, with whose
judgment Gibbs, Stephen, Jacobs and Murphy JJ agreed, held that it was open to
the Workers’ Compensation
Commission to find from the medical evidence in
that case ‘that the death by reason of myocardial infarction when it did
occur, ‘resulted’ from the work-caused injury of the
first infarction, even if it could not be said that the final infarction
itself caused by work-caused injury’.”
Accident Compensation Commission v CE Heath Underwriting and Insurance
(Australia) Pty Ltd
Brennan J said:
“Similarly, liability under the Act to make
weekly payments during incapacity or to pay a lump sum in redemption of that
arises from each of the injuries which caused or materially
contributed to the incapacity. Any employment in the course of which
sustained an injury causing or materially contributing to his incapacity
attracts liability to the employer and to the
insurer on risk at the time of the
injury ....”
careful consideration of the evidence and submissions, I am satisfied that the
work injury on 23 August 2010 materially contributed
to the applicant’s
incapacity in the period from 13 May 2014 to 26 April 2018.
accept that during the relevant period, the applicant had a continuing inability
to work in any employment for which she was suited
as a result of the work
injury. As a result, I am satisfied that, at all relevant times, the applicant
had no current work capacity.
follows that the applicant is entitled to weekly payments of compensation in
accordance with s 37(1) of the 1987 Act for the balance
of the second
entitlement period based on the agreed PIAWE rate, as periodically indexed.
the reasons given above, after the second entitlement period, I am satisfied
that the applicant had no current work capacity and
was likely to continue
indefinitely to have no current work capacity. It follows that the applicant is
entitled to weekly payments
of compensation in accordance with s 38(6) of the
1987 Act, until that entitlement terminated in accordance with s 52(2)(a) of the
will be awards for the applicant
accordingly.
[2015] NSWWCCPD
[1965] HCA 34
(1965) 114 CLR
[2020] NSWCA
[2020] NSWCA
[2014] NSWWCCPD
[2008] NSWWCCPD
[1999] HCA 60
[1943] NSWStRp 50
(1943) 44 SR (NSW)
NSWWCCPD 27.
[1994] HCA 68
(1994) 121 ALR 417.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.11 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter