URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2013/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Draper v The Psychology Board of Australia [2013] NSWPST 3 (24 October 2013)
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL
Appeal against Decision of the National
Citation: Draper v The Psychology Board of Australia
[2013] NSWPST
Respondent:
The Psychology Board of
Ms Diane Robinson
(Chairperson)
Dr William Warren (Psychologist member)
Haigh (Psychologist member)
Ms Leanne Wrightson (Lay member)
Date and Place
: 8 April 2013 at Sydney
Date of Orders and
Reasons for Decision
: 24 October
Representation:
Appellant: Ms Fiona Roughley of
Respondent: Ms Donna Ward of counsel, instructed by Ms Amanda Lye, Crown
Solicitor’s office
Catchwords:
Section 175 Appeal
area of practice endorsement;
clinical psychology; section 98; meaning of ‘substantial
equivalence’ and ‘qualification’;
effect of standards and
guidelines; section 98 discretion
Legislation cited:
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
Cases cited:
Camacho v Psychology Council of NSW
[2011] NSWPST 1
Medical Board of Australia
[2012] NSWMT 21
; McMahon v Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia
[2013] NSWNMT 4
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1936) 60 CLR
; R v Sir William Refshauge, Director General of Health for the Commonwealth
and Others; Ex parte Thomson
; Stockland Developments Pty. Ltd v Manly
City Council (2004) LGR ERA 254
Reasons for Decision
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal, having considered Ms Draper’s appeal against the decision of the
Psychology Board (the Board) to refuse her endorsement
as a clinical
psychologist, determined to confirm the decision of the Board and to dismiss the
Tribunal ordered that the parties pay their own
Draper completed her academic training in psychology in South Africa in 2008.
She later moved to Australia and was registered as
a general psychologist by the
Board on 10 November 2010.
5 July 2012 Ms Draper applied to the Board for endorsement as a clinical
psychologist. On 9 October 2012 the Board wrote to Ms
Draper informing her that
it proposed to refuse her application. Ms Draper was invited to and did provide
additional material for
consideration and the Board made its final decision in
December 2012, which was to refuse Ms Draper's application for
endorsement.
Draper wrote to the Psychology Tribunal on 31 January 2013 to appeal the
decision of the Board. She asked the Tribunal to substitute
a different decision
and endorse her registration as a clinical psychologist.
of the appeal
Draper's appeal is made under section 175 of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) (the National Law). Section
175 relevantly
175 Appellable decisions [NSW]
(1) A person who is the subject of any of the following decisions (an
appellable decision
) may appeal against the decision to the appropriate
responsible tribunal for the appellable decision –
(b) a decision by a National Board to refuse to endorse the person’s
registration
175C Decision
(1) After hearing the matter, the responsible tribunal may –
(a) confirm the appellable decision; or
(b) amend the appellable decision; or
(c) substitute another decision for the appellable
(2) In substituting another decision for the appellable decision, the
responsible tribunal has the same powers as the entity that
made the appellable
was some discussion at the hearing as to the exact nature of an appeal under
section 175. The section itself is silent on this
matter. Counsel for Ms Draper
referred to the decision in
Camacho v Psychology Council of NSW
[2011] NSWPST
, where the Psychology Tribunal (differently constituted) determined that
section 175 appeals are appeals de novo.
Barratt v Medical Board of Australia
[2012] NSWMT 21
the Medical
Tribunal stated:
It was submitted on behalf of the Board that an appeal under section 175
of the National Law should be conducted as a de novo hearing
and that at the
conclusion of that appeal it should determine for itself, after having regard to
all of the evidence which is available
to the Tribunal at the time of the
hearing and the submissions made, whether the appellant applicant was suitable
for registration.
It was further submitted in this context that it was not
necessary for an appellant in the position of Dr Barratt to establish error
the decision of the Board.
The Tribunal accepts those submissions as a correct statement of the
question was also considered in the recent decision of the Nursing and Midwifery
Tribunal in
McMahon v The Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
. This case concerned an appeal under section 175 (1) (a) of the
National Law. After reviewing the different categories of appeal
available under
the National Law, the Tribunal also concluded, albeit with some reservations,
that a section 175 appeal is an appeal
was no dispute between the parties in relation to this matter. Both the
appellant and the respondent accepted that the appeal
should be conducted as an
appeal de novo. On the basis of the reasoning in
, the Tribunal
concurs with this view and notes the helpful summary provided in that
In summary, if the appeal is an appeal de novo, then a tribunal hearing an
appeal under s 175:
the law in force at the date of the hearing of the appeal, not the date of the
NSW Board's decision;
is required
to conduct proceedings by determining the appellant's application.......
account the evidence adduced by the respondent;
account facts which must be established by the appellant, who bears the onus of
proof, to the requisite civil standard at
the date of the hearing of the appeal,
and apply those facts to the relevant provisions of the National Law;
account all relevant considerations, and exercise any discretion as if hearing
the original application; and
bear in mind
that, should for any reason the appeal be withdrawn, the original decision of
the NSW Board will remain the relevant
Standard of Proof
appellant bears the onus of proof. Accordingly, it is incumbent on Ms Draper to
persuade the Tribunal that her application for
endorsement as a clinical
psychologist should be approved and that a decision, different from that made by
the Board, should be made
by the Tribunal.
proceedings are civil proceedings and the standard of proof is on the balance of
probabilities. Because of the nature of the appeal
and the consequences for Ms
Draper’s professional registration, the standard of proof is to the
Briginshaw standard (see
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1936) 60 CLR
Preliminary/Procedural matters
Tribunal considered the documents provided by Ms Draper which were received
without objection.
Board provided several documents and relied on the affidavit of Mr Simon Milton,
with its Annexures A – G. Counsel for Ms
Draper objected to Mr
Milton’s affidavit. The Tribunal accepted the affidavit, not as expert
evidence, but as evidence of how
the Board generally deals with applications for
endorsement and as a submission on behalf of the
Draper was the only witness to give evidence to the
Legislation
Draper’s appeal requires consideration of the statutory provisions in the
National Law, the application of approved standards
and the effect of various
guidelines.
The National Law
is important to begin with a consideration of the objectives and guiding
principles of the National Law as set out in section 3
and section
3 Objectives and guiding principles
(1) The object of this Law is to establish a national registration and
accreditation scheme for-
(a) the regulation of health
practitioners; and
(b) the registration of students undertaking--
(i) programs of study that provide a qualification for registration in a
health profession; or
(ii) clinical training in a health
profession.
(2) The objectives of the national registration and accreditation scheme
(a) to provide for the protection of the public by ensuring that only health
practitioners who are suitably trained and qualified
to practise in a competent
and ethical manner are registered; and
(b) to facilitate workforce mobility across Australia by reducing the
administrative burden for health practitioners wishing to move
participating jurisdictions or to practise in more than one participating
(c) to facilitate the provision of high quality education and training of
health practitioners; and
(d) to facilitate the rigorous and responsive assessment of overseas-trained
health practitioners; and
(e) to facilitate access to services provided by health practitioners in
accordance with the public interest; and
(f) to enable the continuous development of a flexible, responsive and
sustainable Australian health workforce and to enable innovation
education of, and service delivery by, health
practitioners.
(3) The guiding principles of the national registration and accreditation
scheme are as follows—
(a) the scheme is to operate in a transparent, accountable, efficient,
effective and fair way;
(b) fees required to be paid under the scheme are to be reasonable having
regard to the efficient and effective operation of the
(c) restrictions on the practice of a health profession are to be imposed
under the scheme only if it is necessary to ensure health
services are provided
safely and are of an appropriate quality.
3A Objective and guiding principle [NSW]
(4) In the exercise of functions under a NSW provision, the protection of the
health and safety of the public must be the paramount
consideration.
98 of the National Law is the provision directly applicable to Ms Draper’s
appeal. It provides:
S98 Endorsement for approved area of practice
(1) A National Board established for a health profession may, in accordance
with an approval given by the Ministerial Council under
section 15, endorse the
registration of a registered health practitioner registered by the Board as
being qualified to practise in
an approved area of practice for the health
profession if the practitioner -
(a) holds either of the
following qualifications relevant to the endorsement -
(i) an approved qualification;
(ii) another
qualification that, in the Board's opinion, is substantially equivalent to, or
based on similar competencies to, an approved
qualification; and
(b) complies with an approved registration standard relevant to the
endorsement.
Section 98 (1) (a) – Approved Qualification
Legislative
provisions relevant to section 98 (1) (a) are as follows. An approved
qualification is defined in section 5 of the National
approved qualification -
(a) for a health profession, means a qualification obtained by completing an
approved program of study for the profession; and
(b) for endorsement of registration in a health profession, means a
qualification obtained by completing an approved program of study
relevant to
the endorsement.
An approved program of study is also defined in section 5:
approved program of study, for a health profession or for endorsement of
registration in a health profession, means an accredited
program of study
(c) approved under section 49 (1) by the National Board established for the
health profession; and
(d) included in the list published by the National Agency under section 49
5 defines an accredited program of study to mean:
a program of study accredited under section 48 by an accreditation
An accreditation authority is also defined in section 5 of the National Law.
For the purposes of this appeal, the Australian Psychology
Accreditation Council
(APAC) is the relevant accreditation authority.
Section 98 (1) (b) - Approved Registration Standard
Legislative
provisions relevant to section 98 (1) (b) are as follows. Section 5 of the
National Law defines approved registration
standard to mean:
(1) a registration standard -
(a) approved by the
Ministerial Council under section 12; and
(b) published on the website of the National Board that developed the
Australian Health Workforce Ministerial Council approved an Area of Practice
Endorsements Registration Standard on 17 February
2011, with approval taking
effect from 9 March 2011. This standard sets out nine approved areas of practice
for endorsement of registration
as a psychologist and states the requirements
for endorsement as follows:
Requirements
(1) To be eligible for endorsement in one of the approved areas of practice,
a registered psychologist must have:
(a) an accredited doctorate in one of the approved areas of practice, and a
minimum of one year of approved, supervised, full-time
equivalent practice with
a Board approved supervisor; or
(b) an accredited Masters in one of the approved areas of practice, and a
minimum of two years of approved, supervised, full-time
equivalent practice with
a Board approved supervisor; or
(c) another qualification that, in the Board's opinion, is substantially
equivalent of to (a) or (b).
3 of Part 5 of the National Law relates to registration standards. Section 38
(1) provides that a National Board must develop
certain registration standards
and section 38 (2) allows a Board to develop additional standards. In addition,
sections 12 and 15
of the National Law provide the mechanisms by which a
registration standard about the endorsement of a registered practitioner can
developed and approved.
Tribunal was referred to several guidelines. APAC’s
Accreditation and Accreditation Standards for Psychology Courses
guidelines on the nature of approved courses -
College Course Approval
Guidelines for Postgraduate Professional Courses.
Together these documents
set out the requirements a course of study must meet to gain course approval.
Other guidelines -
Guidelines on Area of Practice Endorsements -
to obtaining and maintaining endorsement.
3 of Part 5 of the National Law refers to codes and guidelines. Section 39
A National Board may develop and approve codes and
guidelines-
(a) to provide guidance to the health practitioners it registers;
(b) about other matters relevant to the exercise of its functions
40 and 41 prescribe consultation in relation to the content of a registration
standard or guideline and its publication on
the Board’s website. Section
41 makes explicit the fact that an approved registration standard or an approved
code or guideline
is admissible in proceedings against a health practitioner as
evidence of what constitutes appropriate professional
Ms Draper’s appeal
Draper has undergraduate qualifications in psychology from Varsity College and
the University of South Africa. She has a Masters
of Social Science (Counselling
Psychology) from the University of KwaZulu-Natal in South Africa. She is
registered with the Australian
Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA) as
a general psychologist.
Draper’s application to be endorsed as a clinical psychologist must
address the requirements of both section 98 (1) (a) and
section 98 (1) (b) of
the National Law.
98 (1) (a) relates to her qualifications. Ms Draper does not assert that she has
an approved qualification but she does assert
that her South African
qualifications are substantially equivalent to, or based on similar competencies
to, an approved qualification.
98 (1) (b) requires compliance with the registration standard. Ms Draper does
not assert that she has an accredited doctorate
or Masters with the required
supervised practice, but she does assert that she has qualifications that are
substantially equivalent
to an accredited Masters with the required supervision.
Draper's application for endorsement as a clinical psychologist was rejected on
the basis that she was not qualified for endorsement.
The letter to Ms Draper,
dated 9 October 2012 states,
Your Master of Social Science (Counselling) from the University of
KwaZulu-Natal was not considered as being equivalent to an APAC
Masters Degree in clinical psychology. The Australian Psychology Accreditation
Council's Accreditation Standards and
the Australian Psychological Society
College Approval Guidelines set out the requirements a course of study must meet
to gain course
approval. Your Master of Social Science (Counselling) did not
include coursework in psychopharmacology. As such, your qualifications
meet the registration standard.
Draper was invited to provide additional information and she did so, providing
amongst other things, evidence of her enrolment
in 2012 in two workshops on
psychopharmacology. On 11 December 2012, Ms Draper received further
correspondence which advised her,
Your Master of Social Science
(Counselling) did not include coursework in pharmacology that was integrated
with the professional placements
and research activities. As such, your
qualifications do not meet the registration standard.
Any activities such as workshops or courses undertaken subsequent to the
Higher Degree are not considered part of the original qualification.
Draper submits that the Board misdirected itself as to the proper inquiry,
considering only her eligibility under the registration
standard and not
considering section 98 (1) (a). Having considered the Board’s
correspondence, it is not entirely clear to
the Tribunal whether a determination
has been made on the basis of section 98 (1) (a) or (1) (b). It may be the
Board’s decision
relates to section 98 (1) (a) but is expressed in terms
of section 98 (1) (b) or it may be that the Board has conflated the two
provisions.
any event the Tribunal is not focused on errors which may or may not have been
made by the Board. Rather the Tribunal is considering
Ms Draper’s
application for endorsement afresh. Section 98 refers to a practitioner meeting
the requirements of both 1(a) and
Section 98 (1)
Substantial equivalence.
Draper submits that the relevant question is whether her South African Masters
degree is “substantially equivalent to, or
based on similar competencies
to, an approved qualification”. One of Ms Draper’s arguments
revolves around the meaning
of substantial equivalence.
contends that the words “substantially equivalent” or “based
on similar competencies to” do not mean identical
or exactly the same or
even almost exactly the same. She says the statutory requirement is not for
absolute equivalence, which is
what the Board has sought, but rather for
substantial equivalent which allows for not insignificant variation between the
qualification and an applicant’s qualification.
her written submissions, Ms Draper argues that support for her interpretation
can be found in the ordinary meaning of the words
of the statute and the context
of the National Law:
Subsections 3 (2) (b) – (d) specifically require that the National
Law be construed so as to facilitate workforce mobility and
rigorous and
responsive assessment of overseas trained health practitioners. Given the
obvious potential divergences between domestic
and overseas qualifications it
would be at odds with this overarching objectives and guiding principle to
construe s 98 as requiring
strict equivalence because to do so would not
facilitate workforce mobility, nor be a “responsive” assessment of
substance of an overseas qualification, nor provide s 98 with an
“efficient, effective and fair” operation.
Draper holds that, when considered in the light of the section 3 principles,
section 98 must permit a degree of variation. Such
variation would encompass
differences in the nature of the methods by which particular competencies are
obtained and also differences
in the substance of course content. She
The proper construction of section 98.......looks to whether an
applicant's formal academic qualifications are, in substance if not
such as to equip graduates with
competencies as those obtained by
a graduate of an approved qualification.
Approved Qualification
is not in dispute that the relevant comparison is between the applicant’s
qualification and an approved qualification. An
approved qualification is
obtained by completing an approved program of study, which is an accredited
program of study approved by
the relevant National Board and accredited under
section 48 by an accreditation authority.
is the relevant accreditation authority and in accordance with the provisions of
the National Law a number of approved qualifications
have been identified and
accepted as relevant to endorsement of registration as a clinical psychologist.
Tribunal was referred to the Rules for Accreditation and Accreditation Standards
for Psychology Courses published by APAC which
explain the assessment and
accreditation process. The courses which have been accredited as approved
qualifications consist of a
number of relevant Australian university degrees.
Tribunal was also referred to the College Course Approval Guidelines for
Postgraduate Professional Courses prepared in February
2013. These guidelines
are made by the Board:
(a) for evaluation of postgraduate education and training courses in
recognised professional areas of psychology
(b) ensure that students successfully completing an approved professional
postgraduate course in psychology display a level of professional
which meets the needs of clients, the community more generally, and enhances the
standing of the profession
(c) set out the minimum requirements for course approval
guidelines set out the requirements which postgraduate courses must meet to
equip graduates to be eligible for full membership
of a particular College and
so to qualify as, for example, a clinical psychologist or a forensic
psychologist or a counselling psychologist.
Coursework in
Psychopharmacology
Draper provided detailed information as to how her academic qualification
compares with an approved qualification in clinical psychology.
She compared her
degree with the requirements set out in the College Course Approval Guidelines.
College Course Approval Guidelines in relation to Clinical Psychology require,
amongst other things,
Basic psychopharmacology: this topic should cover principles and practices
of empirically validated psychopharmacological treatments
for psychological
disorders including their common indications, contraindications and adverse
effects [12 hours].
Draper states in relation to her academic qualification,
I did not complete formal psychopharmacology training. I have, however,
been indirectly exposed to basic psychopharmacology during
my practical
experience at the clinic during my Masters theoretical year as well as my
internship. I was recommended by my supervisor
to buy ‘The Concise
Textbook of Clinical Psychiatry’ by Kaplan and Sadock which I did buy. I
used this book, as well
as my supervisor’s more extensive book,
‘Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry’ by the same authors, to help
understand my clients who were on medication for their psychological issues.
I also discussed this book with my supervisor during
supervision. During my
practical training, during both my first year and internship year, I also worked
at a school where the children
have special needs. I often discussed (with
parent’s permission) certain client cases with the medical staff at the
centre on site at the school.
Draper’s written submission asserts,
While there was not a dedicated coursework subject in Ms Draper's Masters
titled “psychopharmacology”, the content of
that topic was part of
the substantive content of her degree, integrated in a one-on-one learning
environment using textbook resources
and practical training.
Draper also applies a quantitative analysis. In her letter to the Tribunal,
dated 31 January 2013, she states,
The variance is a 12 hour difference out of a total APS requirement of 264
hours of coursework (ie a mathematical variance of 4.5%
over one year). However
coursework is only one part of the 2-year Masters Degree. The real variance is
12 hours out of two years
of full-time study, research and practical
in her written submission,
To the extent that coverage of psychopharmacology in the Masters
undertaken by Ms Draper differed from that specified in the APS guidelines
12 hours of coursework in “basic psychopharmacology”) that variation
is not in the circumstances such as to negate
her Masters being found
substantially equivalent to, or based on similar competencies to, an accredited
The Tribunal’s Reasoning
The meaning of substantial equivalence
Macquarie Dictionary attributes several meanings to the word substantial. The
first applicable meaning relates to size or quantity
and in this context
substantial means ‘significant’. The second applicable meaning is
‘essential’, where
for example a substantial agreement means an
agreement as to essential matters.
Tribunal considers that it is this second meaning which is reflected in the
statutory provision. “Substantially equivalent”,
in section 98,
refers to essential equivalence or equivalence in substance. It is a qualitative
rather than a quantitative comparison
which is required.
statutory provisions, in accordance with the objectives and guiding principles
of the legislation, are designed to ensure that
overseas trained practitioners
are rigorously assessed and treated fairly, as well as ensuring that
health services are provided safely and are of an appropriate quality
It would be at odds with the principles of the legislation if an Australian
practitioner had to complete certain studies to qualify
as a clinical
psychologist, while an overseas trained practitioner might have to complete only
90% or even 95% of those studies to
qualify for endorsement as a clinical
psychologist in Australia. Considering that one of the key objectives of the
legislation is
to provide the public with highly trained and professionally
qualified health practitioners, and that the protection of the public
overarching consideration, the Tribunal is satisfied that essential equivalence
in terms of academic qualifications is required.
equivalence allows for differences in form – as Ms Draper asserts, this
might include differences in the nature of
the methods by which particular
competencies are obtained, or it might include differences in course names,
course structure, or
assessment techniques. However what is required is that the
courses being compared correspond in their essential nature and in their
substance. Accordingly, the constituent elements or core topics of an approved
course must be covered if students are to be provided
with comparable
competencies.
Does Ms Draper’s study of psychopharmacology
make her qualification substantially equivalent to an approved qualification?
views of the Board are clarified in paragraph 27 of the affidavit of Mr Milton.
Postgraduate students completing studies in clinical psychology will
receive instruction in basic psychopharmacology at a relatively
early stage in
their coursework. This might be taught in a dedicated subject or might be
included in a range of subjects. This allows
the student to then integrate the
learning in the course in their clinical placement in an inpatient/outpatient
setting where they
will be exposed to clients with a wide range of presenting
problems across a variety of clinical settings while working with a
multidisciplinary
team including a prescribing psychiatrist. They will have the
opportunity to observe and discuss a range of psychopharmacological
and their interaction with other medications. They then have the opportunity to
bring those observations back to the coursework
component and discuss with
supervisors and fellow postgraduate students before undertaking further clinical
placements. They are
exposed to and assessed upon topics relating to
psychopharmacology throughout their higher degree and asked to apply that
in their clinical placements.
relation to Ms Draper’s circumstances, Mr Milton submits,
The APS College Course Approval Guidelines require clinical psychology
training to cover a wide range of presenting problems across
a variety of
settings. Given the limited range of placements, it is not apparent that she
would have been sufficiently exposed to
patients in acute clinical settings
experiencing chronic mental illness such as schizophrenia, schizoaffective
disorder, delusional
disorder and bipolar disorder that require extensive
psychopharmacology management.
Draper’s evidence is that students at her university studying for either
the Masters of Social Science (Counselling) or Masters
of Social Science
(Clinical) completed the same course material save for the fact that
‘counselling students’ completed
a unit in Career Counselling while
the ‘clinical’ students completed a psychopharmacology unit.
Different placement
options were also organised.
differences are set out in the explanatory notes to her comparative analysis,
“Similarities & Difference (sic) between
an accredited Masters in
Australia and my Masters training in South Africa”,
2. Clinical students are required to complete placements in a hospital
setting during the M1 year, Counselling students will complete
placements in
suitable counselling institution (schools, student counselling centres
3. Clinical students are required to complete an internship in a hospital
setting and complete their community service before they
are eligible to
practice. Counselling students are able to complete their internship in any
registered counselling organisation (they
are not required to complete community
4. Counselling and clinical students are required to complete all modules
below. The ‘Interventions’ module includes career
counselling for
counselling students and psychopharmacology for clinical students.
Draper says that although she has not undertaken a single 12 hour unit of
coursework in basic psychopharmacology, she completed
a course in
Neuropsychology, which included some psychopharmacology, and a course on Child
Psychopathology. Together these courses
formed part of the Psychopathology
module during the first year of her Masters.
also relies on the evidence of Mr Makhaba, a Counselling Psychologist and Ms
Draper’s supervisor in 2007, who wrote, at
her request, explaining that
“students were expected to have a comprehensive understanding of
client/patient management, including
aspects of psychopharmacology interventions
and neuropsychological screening, assessment and intervention”. He also
Ms Draper successfully managed a case of an eight-year-old child with
VATERS syndrome and was able to work as part of the medical
and psychological
teams in assisting the child.
though she asserts that she discussed basic psychopharmacology with Mr Makhaba,
in the first year of her Masters, read the textbooks
by Kaplan and Sadock he
recommended, had clients who were on medication and integrated learning through
a practical placement in
a clinic, Ms Draper refers to her study of
psychopharmacology as being “informal”. Ms Draper’s primary
is that psychopharmacology was incorporated into her degree mainly
through her practical training. Accordingly, she described herself
‘indirectly’ acquiring information about
psychopharmacology.
Draper submitted copies of her Intern Progress Reports which refer to her
demonstrating familiarity ‘with current practices
psychopharmacology of clients, including when to refer’, and ultimately
she relies on the quantitative argument –
“the variance is only a
12 hour difference”
and is therefore not
significant
considered the evidence and particularly Ms Draper’s submissions, the
Tribunal is not satisfied that her qualification
involved sufficient study of
psychopharmacology to achieve substantial equivalence with an approved course of
study in clinical psychology.
Draper’s quantitative analysis i.e. her argument that a 12 hour difference
(a mathematical variance of 4.5% over one year)
is not significant, is not
are substantially equivalent
as it does not address the qualitative issue, which
is, is there essential equivalence?
Ms Draper was exposed to issues in basic psychopharmacology in her Masters
degree, she did not study psychopharmacology in
the usual way clinical
psychologists do. She did not have the benefit of direct teaching, with focused
learning and assessment and
with coursework integrated with clinical placements.
Her understanding of psychopharmacological issues was achieved by a process
assimilation or incidental learning.
Mr Makhaba’s evidence provides a general understanding of the expectations
on students, the extent to which Ms Draper
gained an understanding of
psychopharmacology remains unclear. A similar conclusion can be reached in
relation to the evidence from
the Intern Progress Reports. Reference to managing
one child with VATERS syndrome provides only limited exposure to
psychopharmacological
management.
Ms Draper’s degree and an approved qualification in clinical psychology
clearly share common coursework components, they
diverge in relation to the
study of psychopharmacology. To the extent Ms Draper studied psychopharmacology
in her degree, it is difficult
to gauge exactly to what extent that course
content has been examined or assessed. Overall the focus of the two degrees and
the working
milieus to which and in which formal training, experience, skills,
judgments and competencies will be applied or exercised, are quite
What about Ms Draper’s study of
psychopharmacology in Australia?
Draper provided information to the Board about her more recent studies in
psychopharmacology. In 2012 she enrolled in two workshops
which focused on
psychopharmacology. The first was a 6 hour workshop “The Role of
Medication in the Management of Mood Disorders”
run by the Black Dog
Institute and the second was an 8 hour workshop “Meds for Heads”
presented by Professor Iain McGregor.
stated that she also has read a number of articles focusing on
psychopharmacology and in her current employment obtains supervision
clinical psychologist on a fortnightly basis as well as peer supervision with
two clinical psychologists on a weekly basis.
Qualification
relation to section 98 (1) (a), the relevant comparison is between an approved
qualification and Ms Draper’s qualification.
It is useful to refer to the
argument Ms Draper makes about the meaning of qualification in relation to
section 98 (1) (b).
Draper submits that “qualification” can have a broad meaning, which
can include in addition to formal qualifications,
such as a degree or diploma, a
consideration of a health practitioner’s practical experience,
professional development activities,
skills, competencies and standing within
their profession. Ms Draper relies on the decision in
R v Sir William
Refshauge, Director General of Health for the Commonwealth and Others; Ex parte
11 ALR 471.
that case Dr Thomson, a general practitioner, sought to be recognised as a
specialist in surgery, given his qualifications, experience
and standing in the
medical profession. A Specialist Recognition Advisory Committee considered and
declined his request in accordance
with section 29D of the
National Health Act
. The High Court, when considering an appeal in relation to the Committee's
decision, acknowledged that the word qualification could
have two meanings. In
its narrow sense it refers to academic qualifications and training. In its wider
sense it can refer to personal
accomplishments, skills and abilities, in other
words a professional person’s experience, including the nature of their
and standing within their profession.
J, as he then was, also noted at 475:
The meaning to be given to the word where it appears in section 29D (1)
must depend on the context provided by the statute.
subparagraph (c) of the standard, “another qualification” is being
compared to (a) or (b), both of which refer to academic
degrees and practical
experience with supervision. As Ms Draper asserts,
as a matter of common sense “qualification” in the context in
which it is used in the Standard cannot be so narrowly construed
limited to mere formal academic requirements. That is because the
“qualification” required is one “substantially
equivalent to
(a) or (b)”, and (a) and (b) include both a
academic degree
and a component of practical experience. Thus “qualification” in the
Standard must bear the wider meaning
discussed in R v Refshauge.
Tribunal agrees with Ms Draper’s argument in relation to the meaning of
(1) (b). In terms of statutory construction and bearing in mind the
section 3 principles, “qualification” in the Standard
only to academic degrees but also other qualifications, including practical
training, professional development activities
and professional experience. It
follows that the workshops Ms Draper attended and the other training and
experience she has had,
could be taken into account when considering, in
relation to
(1) (b), if she has qualifications which are
substantially equivalent to an accredited Masters and the relevant period of
practical training.
Ms Draper does not raise this argument in relation to
(1) (a) and
there does not seem to be dispute that what is being compared there is her
academic qualification with an approved qualification.
An approved qualification
is generally a university degree and looking at the context in which the word
qualification is used in
(1) (a) (ii) the Tribunal is satisfied that
it refers to qualification in the narrow sense, meaning a formal academic
interpretation of ‘qualification’ in
(1) (a) has
significant practical ramifications. It means that courses of study,
professional development activities or other forms
of learning, undertaken after
the conclusion of the academic degree, cannot be considered in determining if a
practitioner has a
qualification which is substantially equivalent to an
approved qualification.
Accordingly
the workshops and other activities Ms Draper completed to improve her knowledge
of psychopharmacology cannot be considered
when assessing her qualifications
quite extraordinary consequence of this is that somebody in Ms Draper’s
circumstances (who fails to comply with
(1) (a) because her original
degree is not equivalent to an approved qualification) seems to be unable to
supplement her qualifications
in a way to achieve endorsement. It may be that in
these circumstances the only course of action available to Ms Draper is to
another qualification in psychology. This appears to the Tribunal to be
unnecessarily onerous and discordant with the section 3 principles.
that Ms Draper’s difficulty is that her efforts to supplement her
knowledge of psychopharmacology were undertaken
“independently”,
without the benefit of a program, to address academic deficiencies, approved by
the Board. Whether such
a program is available to Ms Draper, as a pathway to
endorsement, remains a matter for the Board.
are two other matters which must be canvassed in relation to
– the provision of information to Ms Draper by the Board and the status of
Standards and Guidelines.
Ms Draper’s interactions with the
must be said that over the course of Ms Draper’s interactions with the
Board and during the course of this appeal, she was
given more and more
information about why the Board declined her application for endorsement as a
clinical psychologist. She was
originally told that the absence of coursework in
psychopharmacology precluded her endorsement. To address this matter, Ms Draper
supplied information about courses and workshops she had completed on
psychopharmacology. She was then told that the study of psychopharmacology
needed to be integrated with her research and practical training. She provided
information about the integration of psychopharmacology
into her Masters
was later told that she had not completed a clinical placement in a hospital
setting and that her placements had not covered adults
or older adults to the
requisite degree. Finally the issue of assessment was raised and Ms Draper was
told that she was not eligible
as she had not been formally assessed in
psychopharmacology.
is unfortunate that the reasoning of the Board was revealed to Ms Draper in this
piecemeal fashion. However, ultimately in its
submissions to the Tribunal, the
Board did state its position in full. In submissions the Board relies on the
matters set out in
the affidavit of Mr Simon Milton. It is unclear whether all
the matters raised by Mr Milton were considered by the Board at the time
Draper’s application was refused, but as the Tribunal regards this appeal
as an appeal de novo, it considered the issues
canvassed by Mr
Board’s final position is that Ms Draper's qualifications do not meet the
requirement of being substantially equivalent
to or based on similar
competencies to, an approved qualification, as:
appellant’s qualification did not include the module in
psychopharmacology. Psychopharmacology is a core topic in the Australian
Psychological Society (APS) Clinical Psychology Guidelines, which emphases
integrating “the learning that takes place through
face to face formal
teaching into the clinical training period and then ensuring that the student's
capabilities are assessed using
objective and reliable
The appellant's
qualification did not involve placements across a variety of settings, as
required by the APS Clinical Psychology
The appellant's
qualification did not include two separate placements devoted to adult work
after the completion of the initial training
placement, as required by the APS
Clinical Psychology Guidelines.
Tribunal, having found that Ms Draper’s study of psychopharmacology is not
sufficient for the purposes of
(1) (a), does not need to canvass the
additional matters raised by the Board. However it is noted that Ms Draper
addressed all of
those matters and disputed each of
Standards and Guidelines
is not necessary for the Tribunal to make a formal determination in relation to
(1) (b) as it has determined that Ms Draper does not meet the
requirements of
(1) (a) and therefore is not qualified for
endorsement as a clinical psychologist. However the Tribunal makes the following
comments in relation to the Registration Standard.
status of a Standard and its relationship to the National Law was discussed by
the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal in
McMahon v The Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia
[2013] NSWNMT 4
. The Tribunal said,
While a standard is not a legislative instrument, its authority is
recognised under the National Law. Further, the importance of a
standard, once
approved by the Ministerial Council, is that in various situations compliance
with a standard........is mandatory
to retain or achieve registration. The
legislation contains no discretion that enables a Board, (or a Tribunal), in
particular circumstances,
not to apply a standard once approved.”
The Tribunal concurs with this reasoning and considers that as the
Registration Standard has been developed and approved in accordance
National Law and is specifically referred to in
(1) (b), the
authority of the Standard is recognised under the National Law. The Standard,
should be interpreted in accordance with
the objectives and guiding principles
of the legislation, and is binding on the Board when making a decision under
and in this instance on the Tribunal when considering this
addition to standards, a number of guidelines have been developed to assist in
the interpretation and application of the National
Law and the standards
developed in accordance with that Law. In this appeal the Tribunal has been
referred to several guidelines,
including the
College Course Approval
Guidelines for Postgraduate Professional Courses and the Guidelines on Area of
Practice Endorsements.
for Ms Draper argued that the application of these guidelines should not be
determinative in Ms Draper’s case,
“The statutory power pursuant to which the Guidelines on Area of
Practice Endorsement were developed by the Board does not entitle
the Board to
confine the discretion conferred by
of the National Law. That is, the Board
is entitled to create flexible guidelines to provide guidance to practitioners
and set out
the general policy it will take to applications for endorsement but
those guidelines cannot constitute inflexible criteria and, in
an appropriate
case, it must be possible for the Board to depart from the guidelines where the
merits of the case so warrant.”
Draper’s contention is that the guidelines can only provide flexible
guidance on the Board's general policy in considering
applications for
endorsement. Considering Ms Draper's case on its merits, the guidelines should
be put to one side and endorsement
of the registration granted.
Tribunal considers that guidelines do not have the same status as standards
which are recognised under the National Law. Guidelines
provide assistance and
guidance in the application of the law, or a standard, in individual cases and
the Board (and indeed the Tribunal
in the context of this appeal) may depart
the Tribunal notes that when guidelines have been devised by experienced
professional people with a long established relevant
knowledge base they should
not be disregarded lightly. In
the Tribunal said this about a
policy developed in relation to a Recency of Practice Standard,
“The policy was developed to be applied in conjunction with the
Standard. We infer this means the policy is designed to facilitate,
application of the standard in particular cases...... The Tribunal, should, as
explained by McCelland CJ in Stockland
Developments Pty. Ltd v Manly City
Council (2004) LGR ERA 254 have regard to such policy and should consistently,
so far as practicable,
interpret the Standard in conformity with the
College Course Approval Guidelines for Postgraduate Professional
which refer to the need for clinical psychologists to study
psychopharmacology. Ms Draper acknowledged and referred to these Guidelines
compare her qualification with an approved qualification, however she also
asserted that not all the requirements in the Guidelines
have to be met. The
Tribunal was not satisfied there was a cogent reason to disregard the Guidelines
and given its ruling on the
meaning of substantial equivalence, the Tribunal
considered the Guidelines in assessing Ms Draper’s academic
qualifications.
Draper asserted that the
Guidelines on Area of Practice Endorsement
provide little assistance as they do not,
“truncate or confine the full discretion that the Tribunal has
pursuant to
of the National Law which enables (indeed requires) the
consideration of the merits of Ms Draper’s individual case.”
is noted that the
Guidelines on Area of Practice
Endorsement
at point 2, under the general heading, ‘Qualifications for
endorsement’ appear to refer only to the requirements in the
Registration
(section 98
(1) (b)).The ‘Equivalence guidelines’ at 2.4
then explain when the Board considers qualifications to be substantially
equivalent to “an accredited Doctorate or Masters degree in one of the
approved areas of practice”. Whether these guidelines
adequately reflect
the different requirements of
(1) (a) and (1) (b) is uncertain.
the Tribunal’s determination, it has not been necessary to consider
guidelines that relate to the Registration Standard.
However the Tribunal notes
that if the consistent application of guidelines is encouraged, it is important
that the guidelines themselves
are useful, unambiguous and as comprehensive as
The Board’s discretion
Ms Draper’s central submission is that the guidelines should not be
considered in a way so as to improperly fetter the
Tribunal in the exercise of
the broad discretion conferred by
section 98.
Decision about application
(1) After considering an application for endorsement....... a National
Board must decide to endorse, or refuse to endorse, the applicant’s
registration as sought.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), a National Board may refuse to
endorse an applicant’s registration if ---
(a) the applicant is not qualified for the endorsement under a relevant
section; or
(b) the Board considers the applicant is not competent to practise the
health profession in accordance with the endorsement sought.
(c) In this section -
relevant section means
, 96, 97 or
Endorsement for approved area of practice
(1) A National Board established for a health profession may, in accordance
with an approval given by the Ministerial Council under
, endorse the
registration of a registered health practitioner registered by the Board as
being qualified to practise in an approved
area of practice for the health
profession if the practitioner -
(a) holds either of the
following qualifications relevant to the endorsement -
(j) an approved qualification;
(ii) another
qualification that, in the Board's opinion, is substantially equivalent to, or
based on similar competencies to, an approved
qualification; and
(b) complies with an approved registration standard relevant to the
endorsement.
discretion conferred on the Board under
may not be as broad as Ms
Draper infers. A National Board may endorse the registration of a practitioner
if the practitioner holds
certain qualifications and complies with certain
criteria for endorsement are stipulated in
(1) (a) and
(b). The discretion arises not in relation to the criteria but to the decision
to endorse once the criteria are established.
Accordingly,
if a practitioner has an approved qualification and complies with the
Registration Standard, the Board may or may not
endorse his or her registration.
Presumably this discretion allows considerations of health, impairment and
general suitability to
be taken into account.
discretion is not a wide-ranging one which allows a National Board to endorse
registration on any basis or even if
criteria are not
Tribunal accepts Ms Draper’s submission that while guidelines are
instructive, they do not have the same legal status as
the National Law or the
Registration Standard devised in accordance with the National Law. However,
given the nature of the discretion
, and the nature of the
guidelines in question, there is little utility in arguments about those
guidelines fettering discretion in
this context.
The Tribunal’s decision
Tribunal’s determination is that the decision of the Board is confirmed
and Ms Draper’s appeal is dismissed. The Tribunal’s
decision was not
unanimous and was arrived at in accordance with section 166 (3) of the National
Draper impressed the Tribunal as an intelligent, competent, caring and dedicated
psychologist. The Tribunal was informed that any
psychologist can undertake the
work of a clinical psychologist with or without endorsement. Ms Draper was frank
in indicating that
she sought endorsement as both an acknowledgement of her
standing in the profession and also as a means by which her remuneration
be increased.
Tribunal's decision in this appeal is not based on any concern for the
protection of public or any reluctance to acknowledge the
contribution Ms Draper
does and will make to the psychology profession. The Tribunal's decision is
and related provisions of the National Law. It may well be
appropriate, when a statutory review is undertaken, that consideration
to the operation and effect of
, given some of the practical dilemmas
Ms Draper’s application has highlighted.
Draper suggested to the Tribunal that should it be determined that her
qualifications are not substantially similar, because of
a lack of a formal
course of study in psychopharmacology, a condition could be placed on her
endorsement requiring her to undertake
appropriate study to remedy that defect.
Conditions of Endorsement
(1) If a National Board decides to endorse the applicant’s
registration under
section 102
, the Board may decide to impose on the
endorsement the conditions the Board considers necessary or desirable in the
circumstances.
(2) If the National Board decides to impose a condition on the
endorsement, the Board must also decide a review period for the
section 103
allows for the imposition of conditions, it does so after a decision
to endorse has been made. If Ms Draper fails to qualify for
endorsement, she
cannot be endorsed – with or without
conditions.
Draper’s submission in relation to cost is as follows,
Should the appeal be dismissed, the Appellant resists an order for costs
on the basis that she is an individual who has had to prosecute
a number of
matters on which there was little or no precedent and has been required to go to
substantial expense to provide assistance
to the Tribunal as to the proper
construction of
(including the Standards and Guidelines) and the
Tribunal's jurisdiction. Further, the Appellant would rely on the substantial
unnecessarily caused by the Respondent in raising for the Appeal, and
then abandoning, significant new arguments......
Board submits,
Should the appeal be upheld the respondent resists an order for costs on
the basis that the respondent appears as contradictor in
these proceedings in
the public interest. It is necessary and appropriate that the respondent
advances a consideration of
applications of endorsement in a manner
that is consistent with the National Law and the need to ensure that only those
who comply with
are endorsed for their area of practice.
is merit in the arguments advanced by both Ms Draper and the Board and the
Tribunal is satisfied, in the particular circumstances
of this case, that it is
appropriate that the parties pay their own costs.
Tribunal confirms the decision of the Board not to endorse Ms Sharon Draper as a
clinical psychologist and accordingly orders
that Ms Draper’s appeal be
Tribunal orders that the parties pay their own costs.
-----------------------------
Chairperson
For the Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (391 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter