URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARKITA MCAULEY V NURSING AND MIDWIFERY COUNCIL OF NEW SOUTH WALES [2013] NSWNMT 13 (16 August 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 027/2013
CITATION: ARKITA MCAULEY V NURSING AND MIDWIFERY COUNCIL OF
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWNMT 13
(17 AUGUST 2013)
APPLICATION
UNDER SECTION 163 (1) (a1) OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW
Artika McAuley
: Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South
The Hon. Jennifer Boland AM,
Chairperson
Date of Hearing:
28 June 2013
Appearances
Ms Pat Robinson appeared
on behalf of NSW Nurses' Association by telephone.
Complainant:
Ms Christine Campbell, Solicitor, appeared on behalf of the Health Professional
Council Authority (“the HPCA”). The
Chairperson also received
written submissions from Mr Iain Martin, Solicitor and Assistant Director Legal
Services, HPCA dated 14
Application under s 163 (1)
(a1) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law2009
for review of conditions imposed on practitioner’s registration by a
Performance Review Panel to be heard by a Health Profession
Council rather than
the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal - whether Tribunal or Council most
appropriate body to hear review. HELD
review should be determined by
Legislation cited:
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law 2009
Health Legislation Amendment Act
Cases cited:
Marks v Health Care
Complaints Commission [2012]NSWNMT 16
Coe v Health Care Complaints
[2013] NSWNMT 11.
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr
Saeid Saedlounia
[2013] NSWMT 13
(21 June 2013)
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
16 August 2013, in my capacity as Chairperson of the Nursing and Midwifery
Tribunal, I ordered that a review of conditions on
the registration of Ms Artika
McAuley, imposed by a Performance Review Panel (acting under delegation from the
Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales (“the Council”)),
should be conducted by the Council rather than the
Reasons for decision
are the reasons for my orders. In these reasons, for convenience, I will refer
to relevant persons and entities as follows:
(a) Ms Artika McAuley as “the applicant”;
(b) the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal as “the Tribunal”;
(c) the Health Care Complaints Commission as “the HCCC”;
(d) the Health Professional Council Authority as “the HPCA”;
(e) the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales as “the
(f) The New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association as “the
Association”;
(g) Ms Pat Robinson as “Ms Robinson”. Ms Robinson is a solicitor
employed by the Association;
(h) Mr Iain Martin as “Mr Martin”. Mr Martin is the Assistant
Director, Legal Services, HPCA ; and
(i) Ms Christine Campbell as “Ms Campbell”. Ms Campbell is a
solicitor in the employ of the
stated to be an allegation the following facts were accepted by me as
established to the requisite civil standard.
applicant was first registered as a nurse in New South Wales on 29 June
provided in the
Health Profession Regulation National Law 2009
(“the National Law”) on 4 August 2010, by instrument of delegation
conferred by the Council, the Executive Officer
of the Council appointed three
duly qualified assessors to conduct a review of the professional performance of
the applicant (see
s154 of the National Law).
20 September 2011 a notification was made to the Council about the applicant by
The Children’s Hospital, Westmead.
10 November 2011 the Council advised the applicant that conditions had been
placed on her registration under s150 of the National
13 April 2012, by instrument of delegation conferred by the Council, the
Executive Director appointed duly qualified professionals
Performance Review Panel” under s174A of the National Law to conduct a
performance review under s156 of the
National Law.
29 May 2012 the Performance Review Panel published its statement of decision.
The Performance Review Panel determined:
to ensure public
safety there should be further performance assessment of the applicant prior to
the review of the conditions on the
applicant’s nursing
registration;
performance of the applicant did not raise a significant issue of public safety,
prima facie
case of unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct; and
to recommend to
the Council that the then conditions imposed under s150 of the National Law
“be lifted” from the applicant’s
registration, and that 17
different conditions be placed on the applicant’s registration (see
s156C(1)(a) and s 156C(1) (b)
of the National Law). The latter provision enables
a Performance Review Panel to order a practitioner to complete an educational
6 December 2012 the Council removed three conditions from the applicant’s
registration (Conditions 10, 13 and 14). Each
of these conditions required the
applicant to undertake twelve hours of specific professional development by 30
December 2012.
7 February 2012 two further conditions were removed from the applicant’s
registration (Conditions 11 and 12). These two
conditions also required
completion of different specific professional development which was required to
be completed by 30 December
was no evidence before me which indicated whether or not, as determined by the
Performance Review Panel, a further performance
assessment had been carried out
before Conditions 10 to 14 were removed.
Procedural History
hearing of the application was conducted by me on 28 June 2013. On that
occasion Ms Robinson appeared on behalf of the applicant
by telephone. Ms
Campbell appeared on behalf of the Council and provided me with helpful written
submissions prepared by Mr Martin
dated 14 June 2013. Ms Robinson had been
served with a copy of Mr Martin’s submissions.
than a letter dated 4 April 2013 from the Association to the Council requesting
that the review be conducted by the Council
rather than the Tribunal there was
no material relevant to the background of this matter except Mr Martin’s
written submissions.
As I did not have the benefit at the hearing of any
documentation relating to the Council’s decision, and importantly, I did
not have the Statement of Decision of the Performance Review Panel which imposed
the conditions currently sought to be reviewed,
I requested a copy of that
decision. Ms Campbell subsequently provided a copy of the Statement of Decision
of the Performance Review
dated 29 May 2012 to me.
I was not aware at the time of the hearing whether the original notification, or
any notification, about the application had been
referred to the HCCC, I caused
a copy of directions made by me to be provided to the HCCC to ascertain whether
it wished to make
submissions in this matter, or would possibly be a
contradictor to the application.
15 July 2013 I was informed by the Tribunal’s Co-Ordinator that the HCCC
had written to the Tribunal advising that it did
not wish to make any
submissions in this matter. I then proceeded to determine the
application.
163A, which is found in Division 8 of the National Law, provides that a person
may apply to the appropriate review body for,
inter alia,
a review of a
relevant order made in relation to the person. Person is not defined in the
National law, but it may be implied a person
for the purpose of the section is a
person affected by an order made by “an appropriate review body”.
The definition
of appropriate review body includes the both the Council and the
s163A(3) places constraints on when an application for review may be filed.
Those constraints are irrelevant in the circumstances
of this application.
163A (4) defines the subject matter of a review in that it explains what
constitutes “a relevant order”, and immediately
after s163A(4) the
National Law defines the bodies who are a “decision making entity”.
The relevant sub-sections of
s163A to be considered in this application are
s163A (1) and (4). They provides as follows:
(1) A person may apply to the appropriate review body for a review of
(b) a relevant order made in relation to the person
(4) In this section –
............
relevant order
, in relation to a person, means any of the
orders made by a decision-making entity –
(c) an order that conditions be imposed on the person’s registration
in a health profession
“decision making entity” is defined in s163A (4) as
(4) In this section--
"decision-making entity"
means the following--
(a) a Committee;
(b) a Performance Review Panel;
(b1) a Council, but only in relation to orders made under this Division or
under Subdivision 5 of Division 3;
(c) the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson of a Tribunal;
(d) a Tribunal;
(e) the Supreme Court.
determination of the appropriate review body to deal with any properly brought
review is set out in s 163. That section was amended
Legislation Amendment Act 2012
. It provides as
Appropriate Review Body NSW
(1) For the purposes of this Division, the "appropriate review body" is-
(a) if the order being reviewed provides that it may be reviewed by a
Council, the Council; or
(a1) if the Chairperson of the Tribunal decides, on application by the person
the subject of the review or the Commission, that a
Council is the appropriate
review body, the Council; or
(b) if the Chairperson of the Tribunal decides, on application by the person
the subject of the review, that a National Board is the
appropriate review body,
the National Board; or
(c) otherwise, the Tribunal.
(2) An application for review by a person must be lodged with the Executive
Officer of the Council for the health profession in which
the person is or was
registered.
(3) The Executive Officer must refer the application to the appropriate
review body.
Marks v HCCC
[2012] NSWNMT 16
I explained:
The powers to be exercised on a review are set out in s163B. The language of
the section makes it plain that appropriate review body
is mandated to conduct
into the application for review. Inquiry is not defined in
the legislation, but in my view and without the benefit of any argument
topic, it appears the type, or perimeters of, the inquiry are guided by the
provisions set out in the s163C. As that provision
is relevant to the exercise
of discretion under s163 (a1) I now set out that section:
163C Inquiry into review application [NSW]
(1) A review under this Division is a review to determine the
appropriateness, at the time of the review, of the order concerned.
(2) The review is not to review the decision to make the order, or any
findings made in connection with the making of that decision.
(3) In addition to any other matter the review may take into account, the
review must take into account any complaint made or notified
to a Council or a
National Board, or a former Board under a repealed Act, about the person,
whether the complaint was made or notified
before or after the making of the
order that is the subject of the review and whether or not the complaint was
referred under Subdivision
2 of Division 3 or any other action was taken on the
Is s163 (1) (a1) applicable in this case?
at [29-34] I explained:
Given the terms of s163(4)(c) [where the definition of “relevant
order” is set out] .... this application raises a threshold
question of
whether or not the review seeks a review of an order that a condition be imposed
on the nurse’s registration. I
note that in her written submissions Ms
Toose refers to “the conditions” imposed by the previous Tribunal,
rather than
an order, or orders, of that Tribunal.
The application before the Tribunal is an application under s 163A of the
National Law. As discussed above, that section provides
a person may apply to
the appropriate review body for the review of “a relevant
made in relation to a person”. Section 163 also speaks of review of an
. It further provides, as has happened in the instant case, that an
application for review must be lodged with the Executive Officer
of the Council
for the health profession in which the person is or was registered.
Under separate provisions of the National Law a Professional Standards
Committee, if it finds a complaint which it investigates to
be proved or
admitted, may amongst other matters caution a practitioner (see s146B(1) (a) ,
be placed on a practitioner’s registration (see
146B (1) (c) or make
(see s146B (1) (c) (d) (e) and (f). Similar
powers may be exercised by a Council (see s148E). However the latter powers
application to a health practitioner registered in the medical
profession or the nursing and midwifery profession (see s 148).
Section s149A of the National Law sets out the general powers which may be
exercised by a Tribunal exercising its disciplinary powers.
Those general
powers are found in s149A (1) (a) to (f) as follows:
149A General powers to caution, reprimand, counsel etc [NSW]
(1) The Tribunal may do any one or more of the following in relation to the
registered health practitioner--
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) impose the conditions it considers appropriate on the practitioner's
registration;
(c) order the practitioner to seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling (including, but not limited to, psychological
counselling);
(d) order the practitioner to complete an educational course specified by the
(e) order the practitioner to report on the practitioner's practice at the
times, in the way and to the persons specified by the Tribunal;
(f) order the practitioner to seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner's practice, from persons specified
(2) The Tribunal may do any one or more of the following in relation to the
(a) caution or reprimand the student;
(b) impose the conditions it considers appropriate on the student's
registration;
(c) order the student to seek and undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or
counselling (including, but not limited to, psychological
counselling);
(d) order the student to complete an educational course specified by the
(3) If the health practitioner is no longer registered, an order or direction
may still be given under this section but has effect
(a) to prevent the practitioner being registered unless the order is complied
(b) to require the conditions concerned to be imposed when the practitioner
is registered.
(4) If the Tribunal makes an order or imposes a condition on the registered
health practitioner's or student's registration, the Tribunal
may order that a
contravention of the order or condition will result in the practitioner's or
student's registration being cancelled.
(5) The order or condition concerned is then a
"critical compliance order
or condition"
Section 150A of the National Law permits a health practitioner to apply to a
Council for a review of a decision made by a Council
under s150 (conditions
imposed for the safety of the public). That reconsideration involves
a review of any
imposed on a practitioner’s
registration (s 150A (1). Section 150C(1) (b) provides the power for a Council
to alter or remove
any condition imposed.
By contrast, the language employed in s163, 163A and 163B is directed, not to
conditions, but orders. However s163A (4) (b) defines
a “relevant
order” to include “an order that conditions be imposed on the
person’s registration in a health
profession”. The section does
not, on a literal reading, provide for a review of the imposition of a condition
s 149A(1)(b).
the conditions were imposed pursuant to s156C of the National Law. Section 156C
appears in Subdivision 4 of Division 3 of
That section provides as
(1) At the completion of the performance review, the Performance Review Panel
may make the recommendations to the Council about the
registered health
practitioner the Panel considers appropriate.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), if the Panel finds the professional
performance of the registered health practitioner, or a particular
aspect of the
professional performance of the practitioner, is unsatisfactory, the Panel may
do any one or more of the following
(a) impose the conditions, relating to the practitioner's practise of the
health profession, it considers appropriate on the practitioner's
registration;
(b) order the practitioner to complete an educational course specified by the
(c) order the practitioner to report on the practitioner's practise of the
health profession at the times, in the way and to the persons
specified by the
(d) order the practitioner to seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner's practice, from the persons
specified by the
(3) The Panel must recommend to the Council that a complaint be made against
the registered health practitioner if the Panel finds
the matter--
(a) raises a significant issue of public health or safety that requires
investigation by the Commission; or
(b) raises a prima facie case of professional misconduct by the practitioner,
or unsatisfactory professional conduct by the health
practitioner.
(4) If the Panel makes a recommendation that a complaint be made against the
registered health practitioner, the Council must act
in accordance with the
recommendation.
(5) In any other case that the Council thinks it appropriate to do so, the
Council may make a complaint in respect of a matter that
has been considered by
a Performance Review Panel, after consulting with the Commission.
relevant for the purpose of this application is s157. That section provides as
(1) Following a performance review, the Council must--
(a) monitor compliance with any decisions or orders made by the Performance
Review Panel; and
(b) from time to time, evaluate the effectiveness of those orders in
improving the professional performance of the registered health
practitioner
concerned to a standard that is commensurate with other practitioners of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
(2) The Council may take any action under this Law in respect of a registered
health practitioner that it considers appropriate as
a result of the exercise of
its functions under subsection (1).
is useful at this point to make some general observations about the review
process in respect of Nurses and Midwives:-
(a) First, it
is clear that the Council has
under the National Law when it
imposes conditions under s150 to alter or remove the conditions imposed
(b) Second, the
only decisions of a Council which are reviewable under s163 are those made under
Sub-division 5 of Division 3 (which
division has no application to the Medical
Profession or the Nursing and Midwifery Profession)
under Division 8
That is, where the order sought to be reviewed is an order which
provides the review body shall be the Council (see s163(1)(a).
(c) Third, if a
Committee, a Performance Review Panel, a Tribunal or the Supreme Court imposes
conditions and the conditions are imposed
of the Committee,
Panel, Tribunal or Supreme Court such conditions may be reviewed by the Tribunal
(s163A(1)(b)).
(d) Fourth, it
is common practice for Tribunals dealing with complaints against practitioners
under the National Law to provide in
protective orders made at the conclusion of
proceedings that any review of those orders which impose conditions should be
by a Council (see
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Saeid
[2013] NSWMT 13
(21 June 2013)). Such a provision has
legislative support in s163(1)(a).
is some ambiguity when the National Law, on the one hand, provides a power to
which order may impose a condition, and an express
provision of the National Law which empowers a Council or Tribunal to
a condition but does not specifically provide a mechanism for the review of
a condition or conditions so imposed. Thus, it is not
clear whether the
drafter intended to distinguish between an order and a condition. Giving a
purposeful interpretation to the
statute as provided in Schedule 7, and in
particular Clause 7 of that Schedule, for the purpose of this application, I
have not distinguished
between an order requiring compliance with a condition
and a condition imposed by a Council, a Performance Review Panel, or a Tribunal.
To take a strict interpretation of the legislation would lead to the absurdity
that a condition imposed by an order is reviewable,
but a condition imposed a
Performance Review Panel is incapable of review.
this case the conditions were imposed, not directly by the Council, but as
specifically authorised under s 156C(2)(a) by a Performance
Review Panel. As I
have earlier noted such a panel is a “decision making entity” as
defined in s163A(4). Again, giving
a purposeful interpretation to the National
Law, it appears to me that the broad general power afforded to the Council under
provide the power to the Council to require removal
conditions such as Conditions 10 to 14 of the relevant conditions recorded on
the practitioner’s registration maintained by AHPRA in association with
the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia.
contrary position however is supported by the reference in s163A(4) to a
Performance Review Panel as a decision making body whose
decisions made under
Division 3 Subdivision 4 of
of the National Law may be reviewed under
s163 (see s163A (4) (b)). The consequence of this provision is, that unless a
or a Council when making an order imposing conditions specifies the
appropriate review body as
provided in s163(1)(a), then an application
to the Chairperson of the Tribunal is necessary to determine that issue
otherwise, by
default, the matter must come before the Tribunal (see
s163(1)(c)).
the terms of s163A(1)(a1) and (b), I discern although the Council, Performance
Review Panel or the Tribunal has mandated the
appropriate review body in its
original order that is not the end of the matter. This is because, although an
order may nominate
the body to conduct the review, it does not preclude a
practitioner applying under s163 (1) (a1) and or s163A (1) (b) if circumstances
at the time of the proposed review support a different review body to that
initially nominated. In saying this I accept an applicant
for review by a
different review body to that nominated by a Council or Tribunal in determining
a complaint is likely to face a significant
challenge to demonstrate why there
should be a change of position from that deemed appropriate by the Tribunal or
entity ordering
the conditions on the practitioner’s
registration.
take this opportunity to note that need for an application under s163A(1) (a1)
may generally be avoided by the decision making
entity specifying in the order
imposing conditions the appropriate review body. Further, in my view,
applications under s163A (1)
(a1) are capable of being dealt with “on the
papers” provided procedural fairness is afforded to all actual and
potentially
relevant parties, and the Chairperson of the Tribunal is provided
with sufficient relevant background material, including any relevant
which led to the imposing of conditions, and written submission in support of,
or opposing, the application. Such a procedure
will be both cost and time
effective for the applicant, the Council, the HCCC (where appropriate) and the
The written submissions
Martin’s helpful written submissions were adopted by Ms Robinson.
Accordingly, there was no real contest before me as both
parties sought the
appropriate review body should be the Council. Mr Martin, most appropriately,
pointed out that it was unclear
under what provision of the National Law the
Council had authorised the removal of Conditions 10 to 14.
written submissions referred to two previous applications determined by me under
s163 (1) (a1) namely
Marks v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWNMT
Coe v Health Care Complaints Commission NSWNMT [2013] 11.
Martin noted that I had explained in
a relevant consideration is
the cost to the parties, and the proper use of the Tribunal’s resources,
if the appropriate review
body is to be the Tribunal. Mr Martin also referred
to the matters enunciated by me in
at [46-47] where I
Factors in favour of the Tribunal remaining the review body include:
The fact the
order imposing the condition restricting the nurse’s authority to possess
and supply Schedule 4D and Schedule 8
drugs was made by a Tribunal after hearing
and determination that complaints of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory
professional
conduct were proven;
proceedings before the Tribunal were not the first proceedings before the
Tribunal, the nurse having been subject of complaints
in 2001 also of
professional misconduct and unsatisfactory conduct which were conceded by the
the Tribunal did
not find the order imposing the condition in paragraph 1 should automatically
expire in 3 years (as with other conditions
imposed). This is indicative the
Tribunal thought a review by a Tribunal after a minimum period of three years
would be appropriate;
available to the Tribunal in conducting the review include the power to issue
summons for production of documents or the
calling of witnesses;
the fact the
Council was not the decision making entity who made the order now the subject of
the review;
the ability of
the Tribunal to inquire and determine whether the nurse was psychologically able
to cope at the time of her infant
son’s tragic and untimely death without
resort to illicit drugs or that she abused prescription drugs at about that
not, whether there is presently an ongoing concern about past or
potential drug addiction noting that the review is to determine,
at the time of
the review, the appropriateness of the order concerned.
I have balanced the above factors with the following matters:
involved for the nurse, the relevant bodies and the public in a review hearing
before the Tribunal compared to those before
the assertion
the matter may be dealt with in a more timely way by the Council rather than the
submissions support an order designating the Council as the appropriate review
body because costs to the parties will be less
than those which would be
incurred before a full Tribunal. The submissions also relevantly notes that the
conditions were imposed
by a Performance Review Panel, and the members of the
Council have “appropriate professional experience and knowledge to review
[the applicant’s] professional development and the ongoing need for
conditions”.
is also pointed that that a review by the Council is likely to be more timely
than a review hearing before a full Tribunal.
Mr Martin notes, having regard to the number and nature of the conditions
imposed on the applicant’s registration that
“[a] progressive
lifting or easing of conditions by the Tribunal is likely to involve multiple
applications to the tribunal
over an extended period of time resulting in even
greater costs to the parties and loss of efficiency within the
Discussion and findings
“Section 163(1)(a1) does
not set out any criteria to be take into consideration in determining if the
Council, or the Tribunal,
is the appropriate review body. In other words, the
determination of the appropriate review body is a matter of discretion, which
must be exercised judicially, having regard to the underlying factual
regard to the nature of the conditions imposed, and accepting as I do each of
the submissions made by Mr Martin, I am satisfied
this is a case where the
Council is a more appropriate review body than the Tribunal.
reaching this conclusion I have taken into account the fact that the Performance
Review Panel did not find the applicant’s
conduct constituted either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct, nor did the
Panel find there was a risk
to the public if the applicant continued to practise
with conditions.
have also placed significant weight on Mr Martin’s submission that
multiple applications to the Tribunal for progressive easing
of conditions may
be necessary. This would involve the wasteful or inappropriate use of the
Tribunal’s resources and increase
the costs of the parties. I have also
placed significant weight on the fact that the parties themselves agree the
Council is the
appropriate review body.
to s163(1)(a1) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law 2009
(NSW) the NSW Nursing and Midwifery Council is the appropriate review body
to review the conditions and orders set out in paragraph
4 of the Performance
Review Panel’s decision dated 29 May 2012.
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM
Chair, Nursing and Midwifery
16 August 2013.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (230 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter