URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2006/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Angelis [2006] NSWPB 2 (10 May 2006)
[2006] NSWPB 2
Health Care Complaints Commission v George Angelis
10 May 2006
The first complaint alleged professional misconduct, in that the pharmacist
had; supplied or permitted the supply to the public of
goods past their expiry
date; failed to record the supply of a number of drugs of addiction in the drug
register and had supplied
drugs of addiction of prescriptions that were
non-compliant with the provisions of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
1994. It was also alleged that the pharmacy had failed to retain
prescriptions for prescribed restricted substances (steroids), that
discrepancies in the pharmacy records regarding the receipt and supply of
certain prescribed restricted substances and
drugs of addiction and that the
pharmacist had permitted a pharmacy assistant to enter information into and sign
the drug register.
The second complaint concerned the conviction of the
pharmacist on 14 charges of not keeping drugs of addiction stored apart from
other substances in a separate safe. The pharmacist was the registered
proprietor of a pharmacy in partnership with one other pharmacist.
At the time
of the alleged conduct the pharmacist was dispensing about 500 prescriptions per
day and had concerns about his partner’s
practice. The pharmacist
purchased his partner’s interest in the pharmacy in May 2000. The parties
proceeded on a statement
of agreed facts and an amended complaint and the
pharmacist conceded professional misconduct. The conduct occurred in the
May 1998 to October 1999.
The pharmacist is contrite and
has suffered with the hearing of the complaint being outstanding for a number of
The risk of repeat misconduct
is not significant. The pharmacist had implemented a number of remedial measures
in his practice since
the date of the breaches and he has had substantial
rehabilitation and learnt the value of open communication with colleagues and
The Committee is not
comfortably satisfied that particular 13 has been proven. The remaining
particulars are proven. The pharmacist
is guilty of professional misconduct in
that he has demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, judgment and care in the
of pharmacy
and other improper conduct.
The pharmacist is
reprimanded, required to comply with extensive educative orders and for a period
of 3 years to submit to an annual
inspection/audit of his management of Schedule
8 drugs and he is also required to use the services of an experienced
pharmacist,
approved by the Board as Mentor. The cost of compliance with such
orders is at the pharmacist’s expense.
Findings of a Professional Standards Committee ("the Committee") held on 22
November 2005 into a complaint of professional misconduct
made under the
provisions of the
Pharmacy Act
") by Judge Kenneth V Taylor
AM, RFD, nominal complainant and Acting Commissioner of the Health Care
Complaints Commission,
George Angelis of Wal’s Pharmacy, George
Street, Warilla in the State of New South Wales, being a registered pharmacist
The following documents were tendered by consent:
Agreed bundle of documents consisting of
the Complainant and the respondent’s documents including an Amended
A report by Kim Dolan,
Pharmaceutical Adviser, Inspections and Investigations Unit of the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch undated with
Certificate under
Statement of Agreed
A non-publication order was made by the Board in respect of the patient
referred to in Particular 12 of the Amended Complaint and
the pharmacy assistant
referred to in Particular 13 of the Amended Complaint. In these findings, the
patient has therefore been referred
to as Mr X and the assistant has been
referred to as Ms Y.
The Complainant proceeded on an amended complaint and had reached agreement
with the Respondent on certain facts. It is convenient
and helpful to hereunder
set out the particulars of the amended complaint and the facts in relation to
each particular which have
been agreed between the parties:
COMPLAINT ONE
George Angelis ("the pharmacist") has been guilty of professional misconduct
within the meaning of
Section 19D(1)(c)
that the pharmacist has
demonstrated a lack of adequate judgment and/or care in the practice of pharmacy
and/or engaged in improper
or unethical conduct related to the practice of
At all relevant times the pharmacist was the registered proprietor of
Wal’s Pharmacy at Warilla ("the pharmacy") with one other
PARTICULAR 1
On 5 August 1999 the pharmacist supplied or permitted, authorised or
directed the supply of regulated goods by retail by the pharmacy,
expiry date of the goods had passed, contrary to s. 36B(1) Poisons &
Therapeutic Goods Act 1966.
AGREED FACT 1
On 5 August 1999, certain therapeutic goods regulated pursuant to the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
1966 were offered for sale
past their expiry date by the Pharmacy.
PARTICULAR 3
Between 27 May 1998 and 2 August 1999, the pharmacist failed to ensure
that all dispensings of drugs of addiction were properly recorded
in the drug
register, contrary to clause 114 PTG Reg 1994, in that 68 prescriptions for
drugs of addiction were dispensed and were
not recorded in the drug register.
AGREED FACT 3
Between the period 27 May 1998 and 2 August 1999, 68 prescriptions for drugs
of addiction were dispensed from the Pharmacy and were
not recorded in the Drug
Register of the Pharmacy.
PARTICULAR 4
Prior to August 1999, the pharmacist failed to ensure that drugs of
addiction that had been returned to the Pharmacy were entered
into a drug
register, contrary to clause 114 PTG Reg 1994
AGREED FACT 4
As at 5 August 1999 the Drug Register of the Pharmacy did not record that
certain drugs of addiction had been returned to the Pharmacy.
PARTICULAR 5
The pharmacist failed to ensure compliance with the requirements of the
PTG Reg 1994 when dispensing drugs of addiction in that prescriptions
(a) between 22 February 1999 and 24 July 1999, as a repeat, when the
intervals of repeats were not included on the prescriptions,
contrary to clause
88 (1) and (3) PTG Reg 1994,
(b) between 15 January 1999 and 15 October 1999 when the prescription
directed the supply of more than one drug of addiction or both
addiction and another substance, contrary to clause 89(3) PTG Reg 1994,
(c) at repeat intervals less than those directed by the prescriber,
contrary to Clause 89(1) PTG Reg. 1994.
AGREED FACT 5
Prescriptions for drugs of addiction were dispensed from the Pharmacy:
Between 22 February 1999 and 24 July
1999 when intervals of repeats were not included on certain prescriptions
dispensed from the
Between 15 January 1999 and 15 October
1999 when the prescription directed the supply of more than one drug of
addiction or both a
drug of addiction and another substance.
At repeat intervals less than those
directed by the prescriber.
PARTICULAR 6
Between September 1998 and August 1999 the pharmacist failed to ensure
that prescriptions for prescribed restricted substances (steroids)
were retained
by the pharmacy, contrary to clause 44 PTG Reg 1994.
AGREED FACT 6
Between September 1998 and August 1999 certain prescriptions for prescribed
restricted substances (steroids) were not retained by
the Pharmacy.
PARTICULAR 7
The pharmacist failed to personally comply and to ensure that other
pharmacy staff complied with the requirements of the PTG Reg 1994
dispensing prescribed restricted substances (steroids) in that between 1 October
1998 and 21 October 1999 prescriptions for
prescribed restricted substances
(steroids) were dispensed where the prescriptions were not in a form required
by Division 3 of
PTG Reg 1994 as the prescriber had failed to indicate the
interval of repeats, contrary to clause 37(1) PTG Reg 1994.
AGREED FACT 7
Between the period 1 October 1998 and 21 October 1999 prescriptions for
prescribed restricted substances (steroids) were dispensed
from the Pharmacy in
circumstances where the prescriber had failed to indicate the intervals of
repeats in respect to those medications.
PARTICULAR 8
The pharmacist failed to personally comply and to ensure that other
pharmacy staff complied with the requirements of PTG Reg 1994
when dispensing
drugs of addiction in that between 1 January 1999 and 5 August 1999
prescriptions for drugs of addiction were dispensed
where the medication was
supplied apparently in an emergency on the direction of a medical practitioner
and the name of the ordering
medical practitioner was not recorded.
AGREED FACT 8
Between 1 January 1999 and 5 August 1999 prescriptions for drugs of addiction
were dispensed where the medication was supplied by
the Pharmacy at the
direction of a medical practitioner and the name of the practitioner was not
PARTICULAR 10
Between 1 October 1998 and 21 October 1999, the pharmacist failed to
ensure that proper systems were employed at the pharmacy to record
and account
for the receipt, supply and disposal by the pharmacy of the following prescribed
restricted substances and drugs of addiction:
Dexamphetamine;
Lignocaine (The Committee notes that
lignocaine is neither a drug of addiction nor a steroid)
AGREED FACT 10
Between 1 October 1998 and 21 October 1999 there was a discrepancy in the
records of the Pharmacy in relation to the recording and
accounting for the
receipt, supply and disposal by the Pharmacy of the following prescribed
restricted substances and drugs of addiction:
Dexamphetamine;
PARTICULAR 12
On 7 June 1999 the pharmacist dispensed, or purported to dispense by
making an entry in the pharmacy register, a prescription written
for the patient
Mr X for 50 ampoules of Pethidine, a quantity that did not accord with the
recognised therapeutic standards, contrary
to clause 57 of the PTG Reg
AGREED FACT 12
On 7 June 1999 the Pharmacy dispensed a prescription for the patient Mr X for
50 ampoules of Pethidine.
PARTICULAR 13
Between 13 April 1999 and 2 August 1999, the pharmacist instructed,
authorised and/or permitted a pharmacy assistant, Ms Y, who was
not a registered
pharmacist,
to complete the pharmacy
drug register and sign as the administrator or dispenser of the drug of
addiction and
to insert dates of dispensing
and/or supply of drugs of addiction that were not the dates on which those drugs
were dispensed or supplied.
COMPLAINT TWO
The Pharmacist has been convicted of offences in New South Wales.
PARTICULAR 1
On 17 June 2002 the pharmacist was convicted in New South Wales of
fourteen offences of failing to keep drugs of addiction stored
apart from other
substances or goods in a separate safe, contrary to clause 78(1) of the PTG Reg
AGREED FACT 1
a. On 17 June 2002 in the Burwood Local court the Respondent entered pleas of
guilty and was convicted of fourteen charges of not
keeping drugs of addiction
stored apart from other substances or goods in a separate safe, contrary to
clause 78(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
1994, ("the convictions").
b. In relation to the first of the fourteen convictions he was fined four
hundred dollars ($400.00). In relation to the remaining
thirteen convictions no
fine or other penalty was imposed.
c. On 17 June 2002 in the Burwood Local Court the Respondent pleaded guilty
to twenty six (26) charges of selling goods past their
expiry date. The charges
were dismissed without proceeding to conviction pursuant to section 10 of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
. The conduct alleged in support of
those charges is the same as the conduct referred to in Complaint One Particular
1 of this Complaint.
At the commencement of the hearing, the Respondent made certain admissions
through his counsel. He accepted that the facts amount
to conduct that
demonstrates a lack of adequate care by him in the practice of pharmacy. He
further agrees that he has been convicted
of offences relating to Clause 78(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
No 4365 of 1994. The
Respondent’s counsel indicated that the Respondent accepted that these
facts lead to a conclusion that
the Committee should report back to the Board
that he has committed professional misconduct.
The Respondent gave evidence.
He is a registered pharmacist having been registered in 1989.
He elaborated on each of the particulars and agreed facts set out above.
In relation to Particular 1, he said the items had been inadvertently placed
in the wrong bin being the specials basket. He has put
systems in place to avoid
that happening again consisting of the purchase of a dump bin for expired goods.
He has also put in place
in the dispensary expired tags for anything that is
short dated.
In relation to Particular 3, he said that that was the result of owing
prescriptions for medical practitioners when servicing aged
care facilities. A
lot of them were missed and inadvertently not written in the drug register. To
prevent this from happening again
he has a structure in place where the
pharmacist is assisted by administrative staff who correlate all the information
for the pharmacist
who then acts on writing them up in the drug register. The
same system is in place for Particular 4.
In relation to Particular 5 (a) and (b), the Respondent acknowledged that he
should have been more aware of the interval of repeats
on certain prescriptions.
In relation to Particular 5(c), he understood and acknowledged that that was
not a short coming by the prescriber. The Respondent
said he has installed a
system where each patient is actually given a card on dispensing the repeats of
medication advising the patient
of the interval so the patient is aware of the
legal concerns in respect of drug intervals and repeats on DD prescriptions and
prescriptions. He has basically two systems in place where they issue
one card to the patient so they are aware of the restrictions
on supply of
repeats of the drug and secondly a red card is attached to the prescription so
the staff are aware of the restrictions
on supply of the drug. This is
basically their call card for a red flag.
In relation to Particular 6, the Respondent said they were retained by the
pharmacy but were not filed correctly. He acknowledged
the error on this part.
He said subsequently they found some prescriptions. Now he has allocated a
separate drawer for those steroid
prescriptions.
He acknowledged bad filing practices.
In relation to Particular 7, the Respondent said he should have notified a
doctor regarding the intervals of repeats. He acknowledged
he should have been
more aware of the repeat intervals.
In relation to Particular 8, the Respondent admitted the Particular. He said
that on occasion he did not provide the medical practitioner’s
name on the
register. He would write the organisation or leave it blank. He expressed
In relation to Particular 10, the Respondent said he accepted responsibility
for the accounting and recording and that he now has
a system in place which he
explained in respect to Particular 9 and Particular 4.
In relation to Particular 12, the Respondent denied that he had ever, on one
occasion, dispensed 50 ampoules of pethidine. He said:
That was a reconciliation of your drug register and the doctor provided
the prescription for 50 ampoules to reconcile the total amount
dispensed and not – on that occasion there were no – there was no
dispensing of 50 ampoules at once. It was
purely a reconciliation over time of
what was missed.
He said that the 50 ampoules were possibly dispensed over a six month period
and they were dispensed under doctors’ authorisation.
He acknowledged he
was responsible for the supply of those injections over that due course. He
said he was not the pharmacist on
duty at the time of all of the supplies. He
said there was a lack of communication between partners and he failed in the
in the data entry. He had to reconcile the 50 ampoules in one entry.
He acknowledged an accumulation of errors over a period amounting
ampoules. He called the doctor and asked for a prescription to cover the
discrepancy. It was the same doctor and the same
The Respondent was unable to say whether or not the reconciliation took place
after the PSB were looking into these matters.
In relation to Particular 13(b) the Respondent said that he did not authorise
his staff member between April and August 1999 to insert
dates which at that
time he knew to be incorrect. The Respondent said his staff member reconciled a
number of prescriptions in order
so the drug register was "fine". He
acknowledged he had made an error in not picking that up and repeated that only
the pharmacist
is allowed to make entries into the drug register. This
particular was not admitted by the Respondent.
The Respondent went into considerable detail in his evidence as to the
implementation by him of remedial measures in this practice
since the period of
the breaches. He has storage space organised. The pharmacist is responsible for
the receipt of medication and
for the putting of the medication away in the
safe. He is responsible for the paperwork of the Schedule 8 medication. The
is not on the staff. The Respondent explained in considerable detail the
systems he now has in place and the various safes used.
He confirmed he has an
audit trail with regard to when he dispenses to a patient in a facility.
His pharmacy is accredited through the QCPP and expects to be re-accredited
in June of this year. His pharmacy also gets accreditation
Commonwealth bodies which are accredited by the Aged Care Facilities and
Accreditation Agency. He said he received a high
distinction on one of the risk
facilities that was audited one week prior to the hearing.
The Respondent said he was a junior partner at the time and he probably was
not communicating that well but accepts that is no excuse.
The Respondent
admitted to lack of adequate judgment and care.
In cross-examination, the Respondent said he entered the partnership in March
of 1995. The purchase price was around $600,000 and
he borrowed 80% of the
purchase price. He was working 13 hour days, 7 days a week. He was studying
law prior to going into the
partnership. Around that time he was reading the
Pharmacy Bulletin. He understood the actions of his partner became his
responsibility.
The relationship with Mr Fuller became difficult in the middle
of 1998. Prior to that there were some issues of disagreement but
was not there in the pharmacy at the same time. He said his concerns commenced
possibly at the beginning of 1998.
The Respondent said he was intimidated by his partner and that the focus of
his partner was on retirement and doing things his way.
In or around 1998 he
became concerned about the way his partner was running the business. He said
that his concerns went to administrative
oversights by the partner such as not
entering items in the dangerous drugs register and leaving it for the Respondent
to do on his
week. His concerns continued until the respondent paid his partner
out on 1 May 2000. During the partnership they did not have regular
meetings to
discuss the practice or professional matters. He could not recall if he read
the Board’s Bulletin of July 1996
in respect of pharmacist’s
workload. He said that there was a shortage of pharmacists in the area and he
felt that one week
on and one week off allowed for him to recuperate. However,
the Committee notes that he was studying law as well. He agreed that
that sort of workload:
may have been a danger, but I don’t think I would endanger
He said he was dispensing around 500 prescriptions per day around the time of
the complaints. He acknowledged some anxiety around
that time because of the
difficult relationship he was having with his partner. He did not speak about
that to anyone. He said that
he would now speak to his colleagues or other
pharmacy professionals. He said that he would speak to a mentor.
He is a member of the Pharmaceutical Society, Pharmacy Guild, the Association
of Consultant Pharmacy, The American Association of
Consultant Pharmacists and
he is on the Illawarra Division of General Practice for Aged Care Facility
Policy. He does not however,
attend meetings with these organisations. He reads
professional publications. He sees a lot of representatives, a few specialists
and does research on the internet. He has attended few seminars and conferences.
He does give a lot of talks. He has spoken to the
Arthritis Foundation, aged
care facilities, to the private hospitals and local organisations.
He now has five pharmacists including himself and has regular meetings with
his staff. He said that through the process of accreditation
he has learnt the
value of open communication both personally and professionally. He said that if
someone wants some medication ahead
of time in extraordinary circumstances he
requests a letter from the doctor and attaches that to the prescription. He
regularly reads
the incident reports of the QCP, pharmacists only enter the DD
register, he destroys all medication which has been returned from
the nursing
fax and adjoining medication chart and
confirms it with the doctor on supply.
The prescriptions are forwarded within a week. He said that he was not aware of
any difference
between the allowable interval under the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act
for the supply of S4 and S8 medications.
In submissions counsel for the Complainant made the following points:
That the Respondent should be reprimanded
and conditions imposed;
That consideration
should be given to a mentor for the
Respondent;
That the Respondent is to some
degree still suffering some professional isolation although this has
That the Respondent has displayed
contrition and has learnt the importance of open
communication;
That the delay in having this
matter heard has been of itself a form of sanction and
punishment;
That the risk of the Respondent
repeating any misconduct is not
significant;
That the Respondent may have
some deficiency in his knowledge in relation to some of the
regulations;
That in light of the
Respondent’s evidence that he has done most of what is proposed by the
Complainant, the imposition of orders
along the lines of those suggested by the
Complainant should not prove too onerous and would have the effect of auditing
his performance
for three years.
Counsel for the Respondent made the following points:
The Respondent has recognised his
shortcomings and admitted professional
misconduct;
The Respondent is contrite and
has gone to great lengths to see that the conduct is not
The Respondent accepts that he
must maintain professional associations and associate with
colleagues;
That orders including the
maintaining of professional associations and accreditation are not necessary as
the Respondent is already
doing this;
the Respondent should be ordered to report to the Board annually for three years
of the continuing professional education that
he has carried out without laying
down something which may turn out not to be practicable to any particular
That the Respondent’s
implementation of the policies and procedures relating to the receipt, handling,
storage and dispensing
of Schedule 8 drugs should survive scrutiny of audit and
that it is open to the Board to consider whether the Quality Care Pharmacy
Program accreditation could be adapted to include a supplementary report to the
Board of those matters of the exercise rather than
a blanket order for auditing
for three years as proposed by the
Complainant;
That although the Respondent
acknowledges that his conduct is such as to warrant a reprimand, that a caution
would be appropriate
in light of the delay and the respondent’s
rehabilitation;
That the Respondent has
shown an understanding in detail of what he has done
That the Respondent now understands
the disparate power relationship of the previous
partnership;
That the responsibilities of
the partners in a pharmacy business are as set out in the cases of Beck
and the Victorian decision of Loewy (Supreme Court of Victoria,
unreported).
The Committee accepts that:
The Respondent is contrite and has
suffered with the matter being outstanding for the past number of
The risk of repeat misconduct is not
significant;
The Respondent has had
substantial rehabilitation;
The Respondent
has learnt the value of open communication with peers and colleagues and a
The Committee is not comfortably satisfied on the
Particular 13 has been proved by the Complainant.
The Committee considers that the appointment of a mentor would be valuable to
the Respondent as well as him maintaining all of his
professional memberships
and actively participating in them. The active participation would help overcome
a degree of isolation that
the Committee feels the respondent continues to
The Respondent, with the consent of the Complainant wished to place before
the Committee prior to the delivery of the findings and
after the hearing some
material. The material shows that the Respondent has circulated a Practice
Memorandum in November 2005 to
facility manager and staff in relation to
dispensing dangerous drugs/schedule and medication. The Committee notes the
material but
while it is pleased to see these actions taken by the Respondent,
cannot place any weight on it in these proceedings.
Having considered the totality of the evidence, including the admissions of
the Respondent and the objective seriousness of the breaches,
the Board is
comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities"
Bannister v
(1993) 30NSWLR699) that all the particulars of the complaint except
for Particular 13 have been proved to its reasonable satisfaction
and that the
conduct constitutes professional misconduct in that the Board finds that the
Respondent has engaged in:
Conduct that demonstrates a lack of
adequate knowledge, judgment and care in the practice of pharmacy and
Other improper conduct related to the
practice of pharmacy.
This is not a punitive jurisdiction, it is a protective one. The Board is
concerned to protect the public, to deter other pharmacists
from committing
similar breaches and to engender public confidence in the profession.
The Board orders pursuant to
Pharmacy Act
George Angelis is
reprimanded;
George Angelis is to complete, for the
years 2006, 2007 and 2008 at least 30 hours of continuing professional education
which at least 15 hours of each year is to be in lecture, seminar,
workshop or other contact activity.
At the conclusion of each year the Respondent is to submit to the Pharmacy
Board a report of the CPE he has completed during that
George Angelis is to do all things
necessary to obtain and/or maintain professional memberships with the Pharmacy
Guild of Australia
and the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia or such other
professional organisations approved by the Pharmacy Board for a period
years following the date of these Orders.
The Respondent is to submit to the Pharmacy Board, on an annual basis,
evidence of his continuing professional memberships.
For a period of 3 years following the
date of these Orders, George Angelis is to obtain and/or maintain Quality Care
Pharmacy Program
Accreditation for Wal’s Pharmacy and any other pharmacy
in which he acquires a pecuniary interest.
As part of that ongoing Quality Care Pharmacy Program Accreditation the
Respondent is to submit to an annual Standards Maintenance
Assessment and is to
provide the results of those assessments to the Pharmacy Board annually.
For a period of 3 years following the
date of these Orders, George Angelis is to submit to an annual inspection/audit
of the policies
and procedures relating to the receipt, handling, storage and
dispensing of Prescription Only medicines and, in particular, Schedule
in Wal’s Pharmacy and any other pharmacy in which he acquires a pecuniary
Such annual inspections/audits are to be undertaken by a pharmacist approved
by the Pharmacy Board. The approved Pharmacist is to
provide a report of the
annual inspections/audits to the Pharmacy Board within 1 month of the
inspection/audit taking place.
6. For a period of 3 years from the date of these Orders, George Angelis is
to agree to utilise
the services of an experienced pharmacist, approved by the Board, as a
Mr Angelis is to agree to the Mentor visiting him at a mutually suitable
time, at Wal’s Pharmacy on at least three occasions
in each of the three
The Mentor is to provide a report to the Pharmacy Board of the issues
discussed at each visit, within 1 month of each visit taking
The costs of complying with these Orders are to be met by the pharmacist.
The effective date of these Orders will be one month from the date on which
George Angelis is notified by registered post at his address
as it appears on
the Register.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (435 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter