URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Owners of Strata Plan 55035 & Ors v Fair Trading Administration Corporation [2000] NSWFTT 14 (6 August 2000)
Owners of Strata Plan 55035 & Ors v Fair Trading
Administration Corporation [2000] NSWFTT 14 (20 November 2000)
File No. BU 1999/267
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL
: Owners of Strata Plan 55035, Brentnall,
Hummerston & Hummerston
: Fair Trading
Administration Corporation
APPLICATION
: Review decision of
FTAC for compensation under the BSC Comprehensive Insurance
APPEARANCES
: Mr. Pike of Counsel for Applicant
E Kennedy of Counsel for Respondent
: 30 October
Legislative Provisions:
Building Services Corporation
Review decision of FTAC
for compensation under the BSC Comprehensive Insurance Scheme
Legione v Hateley
1983 152 CLA 406 at
The Tribunal finds that each of the Applicants
acquired within the meaning of clause 9(h) of the Building Services Corporation
the dwelling prior to the receipt of the reports by DNR Building
Consultants Pty Ltd on 19 and 25 June 1997.
Comprehensive Scheme Clause (9), insurance
rights, meaning of
The Tribunal finds that each of the Applicants acquired within the meaning of
clause 9(h) of the Building Services Corporation Scheme
the dwelling (the
subject of these proceedings) prior to the receipt of the reports by DNR
Building Consultants Pty Ltd on 19 and
25 June 1997.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
The Decision herein relates to the
determination of a threshold issue.
substantive claim is an action by the Applicants seeking a review of a decision
of the Fair Trading Administration Corporation
to reject the claim made by the
Applicants for compensation under the BSC Comprehensive Insurance Scheme arising
out of defective
building work.
Applicants are owners of units in the Strata Plan number
Following an agreement between the
parties the Tribunal directed that a threshold issue be determined by the
Tribunal at hearing prior
to the commencement of the substantive action.
The threshold issue was agreed to be
Did each of the Applicants acquire within the meaning
of clause 9(h)of the Building Services Corporation Scheme the dwelling (the
subject of these proceedings) prior to the receipt of the reports by DNR
Building Consultants Pty Limited on 19 and 25 June 1997
The parties provided an agreed bundle of
documents, five in number. Central to the issue of determination are the terms
of the document
Notice of Insurance Rights Comprehensive
”. This document known as form 4 is a document created under
(formerly the Building Services
Corporation Act
The issues essentially relate to
the following relevant clauses of the Comprehensive Scheme clause 1(1) in this
Definitions
”, in relation to land, means a person who
individually, jointly or in common, either at law or in equity:
has a freehold interest in the
has a leasehold
interest in the land in perpetuity
..................................................................
Beneficiaries
(1) Subject to subclause (2)
beneficiaries in respect of residential building work are
the owner of land on which
the residential building work was done or was contracted to be done, except
........... and
.............................................................
the successor in title to the owner of the land on which the residential
building work is done.
The Corporation is not liable
under this scheme in respect of
...............................
visible defects in insured
building work or a kit home or compulsory or optional IOB of work of which the
beneficiaries should reasonably
have been aware when acquiring the dwelling
.................
The Applicant homeowners argued that they
did acquire the dwellings within the meaning of the Comprehensive Scheme prior
to the receipt
of the reports by DNR Building Consultants Pty Limited, while the
Respondent Corporation argues that the Applicants did not acquire
the dwellings
prior to the receipt of the reports.
and 2 in the Agreed Bundle of Documents annexes two real estate contracts in the
standard 1996 edition format for the purchase
of land in New South Wales. Item
1 discloses that Mr. Brentnall entered into a contract to purchase a unit in the
Strata Plan (at
the time not registered) on 23 January 1997. Item 2 Discloses
that Mr. Hummerston and Ms. Hummerston entered a contract to purchase
the unregistered plan on 11 April 1997. The Strata Plan was agreed to have been
registered on or about 17 June 1997 and
both owners settled the purchase of
their sales on 27 June 1997 and on 1 July 1997. In each case it is agreed that
these dates are
after the dates of the relevant building reports prepared by DNR
Building Consultants Pty Limited.
The Applicants’ Arguments
The Applicants’ argument is
straight forward. They say that the question should be answered in the
positive. It is proposed
that the meaning of the word “acquiring”
in clause 9(h) of the BSC Comprehensive Scheme should be interpreted as
legislation and in particular should be construed in a way which
gives effect to the objects of the Scheme. In the present instant
it is argued
that clause 9(h) should be given a narrow
construction.
The Applicants argue that
acquisition of the units occurs not upon registration of the
Real Property Act
Transfer document at the Land Titles Office but rather at the date upon which
the present Applicants entered their contracts to purchase
and were thereby
bound by contracts which were specifically enforceable in equity. True enough
it is that each of the contracts
was not enforceable between the date of
exchange and the date upon which the Strata Plan was registered. But upon
registration the
contracts could thereafter be specifically enforced.
The Strata Plan was registered on 17 June
1997 and it is the argument of the Applicants at the latest that at this time
both contracts
became specifically enforceable.
To give further weight to the
Applicants’ argument, the Tribunal’s attention is taken to clause 1
of the Comprehensive
Scheme in respect of the definition of owner quoted earlier
in this Decision. The definition of “
” ..........
means a person ..............., either in law or in
by the insertion of the reference to a recognition of equitable rights the
scheme, it is argued, necessarily accepts that acquisition
can exist even where
a full legal estate has not crystallised.
This argument is developed to assert the
proposition that “
a person has ‘acquired’ the property when
they have done so in equity
”. See [Applicants’ submission page
5 paragraph 17]
If this proposition be
accepted by the Tribunal, acquisition crystallised on the 17 June 1997 which was
before the date of either
of the reports by DNR Building Consultants Pty
Limited. Similarly in respect of the owner’s corporation upon this
acquisition of the common property took place when the strata plan was
registered – namely 17 June 1997.
In support of the argument that
acquisition took place at the latest on the date of registration of the Strata
Plan on 17 June 1997,
Counsel for the Applicants relied on
Legione v Hateley
1983 152 CLA 406 at 423, quoting His Honours Gibbs CJ and Murphy J as
There is no doubt that when the purchasers
execute the contract and paid the deposit beneficial ownership of the land
passed to them
subject to the payment of the purchase money”.
The Respondent’s Case
The Fair Trading Administration
Corporation argues that the question posed for determination by the Tribunal
should be answered in
the negative.
Respondent argues that the Applicants’ submission is misconceived on two
The acquisition of an equitable
interest is not a relevant interest for the purposes of clause 9(h); and
Clause 9(h) is not concerned with the
actual knowledge of the Applicants.
It is argued that clause 9(h)
of the Comprehensive Scheme focuses on what the purchaser should reasonably have
known when “
acquiring the dwelling
”. The Respondent argues
that the term “
when acquiring
” is a process not complete
until the registration of the legal title of the purchasers. It is only then
that the Purchaser
can incur a loss in rectifying defective work. Shortly put,
for the purposes of the Scheme the Respondent argues that acquisition
legal acquisition. In the instant case legal acquisition in both cases occurred
after the dates referred to in the question
for determination.
The Respondent further argues that the
language in clause 9(h) clearly points to an objective rather than subjective
state of mind
of the Applicants at the time of acquisition. This argument is
succinctly put at clauses 21 and 24 of the Respondent’s submissions
21. Clause 9(h) is directed to ascertaining what
defects the Applicants ought to have reasonably been aware of when acquiring the
dwelling, whether or not the Applicants’ actually made any enquiries.
........................................
It is irrelevant to the
operation of clause 9(h) if the Applicants had no actual knowledge of the
defects until they received the
reports of 19 and 23 June
In respect of the claim of the owners
corporation, the Respondent argues that, again, the knowledge involved was
objective and not
the actual knowledge of a purchaser.
At clause 36 of the Respondent’s
submissions it is said :
On 17 June 1997 the Strata
Plan was registered by the developer. As the developer was the sole holder of
lots in the strata plan
at the time, its knowledge is imputed to the body
On the Respondent’s interpretation of the Strata Scheme (Freehold
Development) Act it is the proprietor of the lot, not the
body corporate, who
ultimately bears the cost of rectifying defective building work [see clause 27
page 6 Respondent’s submissions].
As a consequence, it is argued that the
claim made by the body corporate with respect to each proprietor should
therefore be assessed
by reference to the circumstances of the individual
proprietor “
when acquiring the dwelling
It was agreed between the parties that
the issue of whether or not the defects, the subject of the substantive claim,
were or were
not visible at the time of acquisition was not relevant to the
threshold issue agitated before the Tribunal and the subject of this
The nub of the argument is therefore simply a question of the time at which each
purchaser acquired, for the purposes
of clause 9(h) of the Comprehensive Scheme,
their respective dwelling. The Applicants argued that the date of acquisition
date upon which each of them entered a contract to purchase the property
or at latest the date of registration of the strata plan.
This later date being
the date upon which the contracts for purchase of land became unconditional and
enforceable.
The Respondent argues to the
contrary , that “
acquisition
title passes
”. It is not a matter of contention that legal title
in these two cases occurred after the critical date outlined in the question
determination.
The Applicants rely on
High Court authority in respect of arguing the date of acquisition as the date
of exchange of contracts for
purchase of an interest in land. This is contested
by the Respondent.
However, the issue is
clear for the purpose of the Comprehensive Insurance Scheme by reference to the
definition of “
” contained in clause 1.
The drafter went to pains to provide that
an owner could be either an owner “
”. The intent therefore cannot reasonably be otherwise than to
recognise rights under this scheme at a time prior to the passing
of the legal
interest. In the present cases this is the date upon which the Registrar-General
effects registration of the legal interest
Based on general principles of
equity and supported by
Legione v Hateley,
it is recognised that an
” comes into being upon the formation of
contractual liabilities. At the earliest this is the date of exchange and at
the latest,
it is when the real estate contract becomes unconditional and is
enforceable in equity by way of an application for specific performance
It is therefore the finding of
the Tribunal that the BSC Comprehensive Insurance Scheme, in recognising an
a person either at law and equity ..........
therefore must recognise the existence of an entitlement by the Applicants upon
exchange of contract or at the latest on
the 17 June 1997.
An alternative analysis is that
“ownership” either at law and equity is irrelevant to the operation
of clause 9(h).
The Respondent submits at
Clause 21 that Clause 9(h) is directed at ascertaining what defects the
Applicants ought to have reasonably
been aware of “when acquiring”
the dwelling. It is further argued for the Respondent that the term “when
is a process not complete until the registration of the legal
title of the purchasers.
The Tribunal
accepts that and concludes that the purpose of clause 9(h) is to relieve the BSC
Comprehensive Insurance Scheme from
responsibility to insure defects which were
manifest or ought reasonably to have been known during the process of
acquisition (“when
acquiring”).
That process begins when
the purchasers execute the contract and pay the deposit and is completed when
legal title is registered.
Until that time the purchasers cannot be
beneficiaries under the Scheme but the BSC Comprehensive Insurance Scheme is not
of responsibility unless it can be shown that the defects, the subject
of the substantive claim, were manifest and ought reasonably
identified by the purchasers during this
It is common ground that the
property inspection reports prepared by DNR Building Consultants Pty Limited had
not become available
to the purchasers until after the settlement of the
It is therefore the finding of
the Tribunal on the first analysis that the BSC Comprehensive Insurance Scheme
in recognising an owner
as “a person either at law and equity .....”
therefore must recognise the existence of an entitlement by the Applicants
exchange of contract at the latest on 17 June
The same finding is made for
different reasons on the alternative
As a consequence, the Tribunal
finds that the threshold issue should be answered in respect of all applicants
Ian McDonell Dr Phillip Briggs
Deputy Chairperson Member
Fair Trading Tribunal Fair Trading Tribunal
Date : 20 November 2000.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (39 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter