URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Corrective Services NSW v Mauganui Isaako [2025] NSWIC 14 (25 September 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
Corrective Services NSW v Mauganui Isaako
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 14
Hearing Date(s):
25 September 2025
Date of Orders:
25 September 2025
Decision Date:
25 September 2025
The proceedings are dismissed generally pursuant to UCPR
r 13.4(1)(b)
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE — summary disposal — dismissal of proceedings
— no reasonable cause of action disclosed
EMPLOYMENT AND
INDUSTRIAL LAW — Industrial Relations Commission — jurisdiction
— order sought for Commission to
be reconstituted as the Commission in
Court Session for the purpose of taking evidence on commission — whether
Evidence on Commission Act 1995
(NSW) invests the Commission
in Court Session with jurisdiction to make orders to take evidence for use in
unfair dismissal proceedings
and in the absence of extant proceedings within the
Legislation Cited:
Evidence on Commission Act 1995
Industrial Relations
(NSW), Ch 2
Convention on the Taking
of Evidence Abroad in Civil or Commercial Matters
[1992] ATS 37
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules, Pt 13, r 13.4(1)(b)
Cases Cited:
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Eubanks for the United
States of America
[2004] NSWCA 158
(2004) 60 NSWLR 483
Cerrafon v Health Secretary in Respect
of Healthshare NSW
[2025] NSWIRComm 8
Cox v Journeaux (No 2)
[1935] HCA 48
(1935) 52 CLR
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
Indochina Medical Co Pty Ltd v Nicolai
[2013] NSWCA 436
Industrial Relations Secretary in respect of the Department of Communities and
Justice (Corrective Services NSW)
[2025] NSWIRComm 1076
Packer v The Greater
Murray Area Health Service
[2000] NSWIRComm 149
Principal judgment
Corrective Services NSW (Applicant)
Mauganui Isaako (Respondent)
Representation:
J Wydell (Applicant)
D Nagle and A Guy
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
NSW Department of Communities and Justice
(Applicant)
McNally Jones Staff Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/354465
Publication Restriction:
REVISED EX TEMPORE JUDGMENT
is an application (the Application) to the Industrial Relations Commission of
New South Wales in Court Session (Industrial Court)
by the applicant, Corrective
Services NSW, for orders to facilitate the examination of witnesses in a foreign
country for the purposes
of an ongoing unfair dismissal proceeding under Ch 2
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW) (IR Act) before Senior
Commissioner Constant in the Industrial Relations Commission constituted other
than in Court Session
(the Commission proceedings).
substance of the Commission proceedings relates to the alleged unfair dismissal
of Mauganui Isaako, a former correctional officer.
have determined to dismiss the proceedings brought by the Application. The
Application fails to invoke the jurisdiction of the Industrial
Procedural background
The genesis of the Application
3 September 2025, the Senior Commissioner delivered a decision dealing with two
notices of motion in the Commission proceedings:
Isaako v Industrial
Relations Secretary in respect of the Department of Communities and Justice
(Corrective Services NSW)
[2025] NSWIRComm 1076.
The first notice of motion
sought an order allowing the admission of evidence in the form of written
statements from two witnesses
who were unavailable for cross-examination, and
the second sought urgent non-disclosure orders in relation to the identities of
who were and are incarcerated at the Long Bay Correctional Complex.
Senior Commissioner made directions relating to the filing of evidence before
the hearing on 14 October 2025. The Senior Commissioner
(at [82]-[83])
(1) the suppression and non-publication of the identities of witnesses to the
Commission proceedings, as identified in the notice
of motion filed on 21 August
(2) that the balance of the notice of motion dated 29 July 2025 be dismissed.
Senior Commissioner was not satisfied of the probative value of the evidence of
two witnesses, pseudonymised as W03 and W05, who
live in India and New Zealand,
respectively. She noted:
As for W03 and W05, I am not satisfied that the IR Secretary has taken adequate
steps to establish their current whereabouts or availability.
In light of the
serious nature of the misconduct allegations and the evidence in the statements
which go to these, and the inability
of Mr Isaako to test this evidence through
cross-examination, I am not persuaded that admitting it would be fair in all of
the circumstances.
Without more recent and substantive efforts to locate
these witnesses, the probative value of their evidence is insufficient to
its admission without cross-examination.
this decision, on 12 September 2025, the applicant filed a notice of motion in
the Commission proceedings seeking the following
(1) Pursuant to
section 176(3)
Industrial Relations Act
the Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales in proceedings
2025/00192804 be reconstituted by a judicial member or
judicial members as the
President of the Industrial Relations Commission and Justice of the Industrial
Relations Commission in Court
Session so determines.
(2) The Industrial Relations Commission in Court Session being a superior court
within the meaning contained in
Evidence on Commission Act 1995
(NSW) ('the Act'); and pursuant to
section 6(1)(c)
of that Act issue a letter of
request to the judicial authorities of New Zealand to take evidence of the
person (with the assigned
pseudonym W05) or cause it to be taken on oath or
affirmation.
(3) The Industrial Relations Commission in Court Session being a superior court
within the meaning contained in
Evidence on Commission Act 1995
(NSW) pursuant to
section 6(1)(c)
issue a letter of request to the judicial
authorities of India to take evidence of the person (with the assigned pseudonym
cause it to be taken on oath or affirmation.
(4) In the event that the Industrial Relations Commission in Court Session makes
Order 2 above, the Industrial Relations Commission
in Court Session include in
the order a request relating to the taking of the evidence of W05, that:
(i) a subpoena be issued by the New Zealand judicial authority to W05 to appear
for examination by the New Zealand judicial authority
to be examined before the
Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales as constituted by Senior
Commissioner Constant.
(ii) the Australian Legal Practitioners for the Applicant and the Respondent be
permitted to appear in person before the New Zealand
judicial authority, and
(iii) that the legal representative of the Respondent be permitted to examine,
and/or re-examine W05; and that the legal representative
of the Applicant be
permitted to cross-examine W05.
(5) In the event that the Industrial Relations Commission in Court Session makes
Order 3 above, the Industrial Relations Commission
in Court Session include in
the order a request relating to the taking of the evidence of W03, that:
(i) a subpoena be issued by the Indian judicial authority to W03 to appear for
examination by the Indian judicial authority to be
examined before the
Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales as constituted by Senior
Commission Constant,
(ii) W03 appear via Audio Visual Link (AVL) to the Industrial Relations
Commission of New South Wales in Court Session in Sydney
Australia, and
(iii) that the legal representative of the Respondent be permitted to examine,
and/or re-examine W03; and that the legal representative
of the Applicant be
permitted to cross-examine W03.
(6) An order that transcript be taken of the examinations referred to in orders
4 and 5 above.
(7) An order pursuant to
of the Act, that the Respondent be permitted
to tender as evidence, the transcripts taken pursuant to order 6, in the
before the Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales.
(8) Having regard to the Non-Disclosure Orders made by the Industrial Relations
Commission of New South Wales on 2 September 2025,
in respect of the Industrial
Relations Secretary's motion filed on 21 August 2025, at [82] in
NSWIRComm 1076
; leave be granted to the Respondent to provide the Commission and
the relevant judicial authority in New Zealand and/or India any
identification details relating to W0S and W03 respectively.
(9) An order or direction that pursuant to section 5B(1)
Evidence (Audio and
Audio Visual Links) Act 1998
(NSW) W03 give evidence to the Industrial
Relations Commission in Court Session by way of video link from a place outside
of Australia.
(10) Such other orders as the Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales
in Court Session considers necessary.
(11) The Respondent shall pay into the Registry an amount of money determined by
the Commission associated with the examination to
be conducted by the Commission
in New Zealand.
notice of motion was ventilated at a hearing before the Senior Commissioner on
16 September 2025. Ultimately, when asked whether
the applicant would move the
motion, the applicant withdrew the motion and stated that it would instead seek
“that the application
be heard before a judicial member [of the Industrial
The Application
15 September 2025, the applicant filed the Application in the Industrial Court,
the substance of which is in identical terms to
the motion referred to at [
] that was filed in the
Commission proceedings and subsequently withdrawn. The orders sought in the
Application are set out in Annexure
matter was listed for directions on 25 September 2025 before me. Initially Ms
Shankar, solicitor, appeared for the applicant.
Mr Nagle of counsel, and with
him Mr Guy of counsel appeared for the respondent.
the initial hearing, Ms Shankar was unable to identify the cause of action in
respect of which the Application is made, or the
precise nature of the
Court’s jurisdiction that the applicant seeks to invoke. The
respondent’s counsel asked the Court
to dismiss the proceedings for want
of jurisdiction.
light of this, I stood the matter down to 2pm later that day to enable the
applicant’s counsel, Mr Wydell, to attend and
make submissions on the
threshold jurisdictional issue. I indicated that I would need to be satisfied of
an arguable basis for invoking
the jurisdiction of the Industrial Court before I
would be prepared to progress the Application. I indicated at that time that if
I was not so satisfied, I would be inclined to dismiss the
proceedings.
Consideration
the following reasons I determine that the Application is misconceived and is
doomed to fail.
purported application is said to be “related to proceedings 2025/00192804
being an application by Isaako for an Unfair Dismissal
Remedy pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW)”. It further
states that it “relates to Orders Sought for the taking of evidence on the
Grounds set out herein”.
is clear from the orders sought that the subject evidence is intended to be
taken for the purpose of the Commission proceedings.
Order 7 seeks an order
enabling the applicant to tender the evidence in “the proceeding before
the Industrial Relations Commission
of New South Wales” (see also Orders 4
purported application relies on two statutory bases for the relief that it
the Application purports to invoke s 176(3) of the IR Act, in that it seeks
that the Commission as it is presently constituted
by the Senior Commissioner
for the purpose of the Commission proceedings be “reconstituted by a
judicial member or members
as the President of the Industrial Relations
Commission and Justice of the Industrial Relations Commission in Court Session
so determines”.
176(3) enables the Commission (when constituted otherwise than as the Industrial
Court) to deal with a matter as the Industrial
Court, but only when the relevant
matter that arises in the Commission is also within the jurisdiction of the
Industrial Court.
this Application, the matter that arises is the issue of taking evidence from
W05 and W03 who are located in foreign jurisdictions.
in respect of this matter, the Application seeks orders to be made by the
Industrial Court pursuant to
Evidence on
Commission Act 1995
(NSW). These provisions are in the following
6 Orders for taking evidence abroad
(1) In any proceeding before a superior court, the court may, if it
appears in the interests of justice to do so, on the application
of a party to
the proceeding, make an order relating to a person outside Australia—
(a) for examination of the person on oath or affirmation at any place
outside Australia before a judge of the court, an officer
of the court or such
other person as the court may appoint, or
(b) for issue of a commission for examination of the person on oath
or affirmation at any place outside Australia, or
(c) for issue of a letter of request to the judicial authorities of a
foreign country to take the evidence of a person or cause
it to be taken.
Use of evidence taken in an examination
(1) The superior court may, on such terms (if any) as it thinks fit,
permit a party to the proceeding to tender as evidence in the
proceeding—
(a) a person’s evidence taken in an examination held as a
result of an order made under
(b) a record of that evidence.
(2) Evidence of a person so tendered is not admissible if—
(a) it appears to the court’s satisfaction at the hearing of
the proceeding that the person is in the State and is able to
hearing, or
(b) the evidence would not have been admissible had it been adduced
at the hearing of the proceeding.
Application seeks that a letter be issued requesting the judicial authorities of
the foreign countries to take the evidence of
the relevant individuals,
including an order that a subpoena be issued to them to appear for examination
before the Commission as
constituted by the Senior Commissioner, and for
transcripts of the examinations to be tendered as evidence in the Commission
proceedings.
first observation is that the matter that is said to arise that justifies the
reconstitution of the Commission must be taken to
be the discrete matter of
taking evidence from the relevant individuals under the
Evidence on
Commission Act
. It cannot be the Commission proceedings generally, since it
seems the applicant envisages those proceedings to remain before the
Commissioner, and thus the Commission when constituted otherwise than as the
Industrial Court. The applicant explicitly conceded
that the Industrial Court
has no jurisdiction to hear or determine the unfair dismissal proceedings before
the Senior Commissioner.
then, is the matter of taking evidence from these individuals under the
Evidence on Commission Act
“within the jurisdiction of the
Commission in Court Session” for the purposes of s 176(3) of the IR
only basis put to me by counsel for the applicant is the assertion that the
Industrial Court is a “superior court”
invested with the power to
make orders under
Evidence on Commission Act
s 176(3) of the IR Act
enables an application to be made to the
Industrial Court to reconstitute the Commission for the purpose of making those
I understand the applicant’s submission, the Industrial Court’s
Evidence on Commission Act
is enlivened by the mere fact that it has made
the Application under s 176(3) of the IR Act and under
Evidence on Commission Act
. The applicant relies on these provisions,
together with s 153(1)(l) of the IR Act, as providing the Industrial Court
with jurisdiction
to determine its purported application.
submission is misconceived for three reasons.
the Industrial Court is not a court of general jurisdiction:
Health Secretary in Respect of Healthshare NSW
[2025] NSWIRComm 8
. Its jurisdiction is set out in s 153 of the IR Act. The
Application does not fall within any of the Industrial Court’s
as provided in s 153.
153(1)(l) invests the Court with functions including “other proceedings
that are, by this Act or another Act, required
to be taken before the Commission
in Court Session”. Neither s 176(3) of the IR Act nor
Evidence on Commission Act
answer that description.
s 176(3) “support[s] the proposition that there is a clear
distinction to be drawn between the powers and functions
of the Commission on
the one hand and the Commission in Court Session on the other and that they need
to be kept separate”:
Packer v The Greater Murray Area Health
[2000] NSWIRComm 149
. It does not invest the Industrial
Court with any jurisdiction over the question of taking evidence on commission
in the context
of unfair dismissal proceedings. The reconstitution of the
Commission by a judicial member under this provision presupposes that
has arisen in proceedings before the Commission when constituted other than as
the Industrial Court which is otherwise within
the jurisdiction of the
Industrial Court. For s 176(3) to apply, one must go searching in this
matter for a matter that is within
the Court’s jurisdiction. The only
other option raised by the applicant for this purpose is
Evidence on Commission Act
the power to make orders under
Evidence on Commission Act
presupposes extant proceedings before the relevant superior court, in this
case the Industrial Court. The
Evidence on Commission Act
is part of the
statutory mechanism by which Australia's domestic law implemented the provisions
of the Hague Convention on the Taking
of Evidence Abroad in Civil or Commercial
847 UNTS 231
(dated 18 March 1970), which entered into force for
Australia on 22 December 1992 ([1992] ATS 37):
British American Tobacco
Australia Services Ltd v Eubanks
for the United States of America
(2004) 60 NSWLR 483
[2004] NSWCA 158.
The Hague Evidence Convention is thus
relevant to the interpretation of
Evidence on Commission Act
Indochina Medical Co Pty Ltd v Nicolai
[2013] NSWCA 436
terms of this Convention make it clear that proceedings in the initiating
must have been
commenced in the superior court in New South Wales for the purpose of the
operation of s 6:
Indochina Medical Co Pty Ltd v Nicolai
fundamental misconception underlying the Application is exemplified by the order
that is sought under
Evidence on Commission Act
7 as sought in the Application is in the following terms (see Annexure
An order pursuant to
of the [Evidence on Commission] Act, that the
Applicant be permitted to tender as evidence, the transcripts taken pursuant to
6, in the proceeding before the Industrial Relations Commission of New
South Wales.
applicant submitted that the reference to “the proceeding” in
s 8 is not the same as the proceedings before the superior
court referred
to in s 6(1), but rather, in this context, extends to the Commission
proceedings. This construction is rejected. It
is clear from the terms of
s 8(2) that the purpose of the taking of evidence facilitated by
s 6(1) is to enable its use as evidence
in the hearing of the proceedings
before the superior court
in which the examination orders were made, and
not any other proceedings before any other court (or tribunal).
construction is reinforced by the provision for a party to a proceeding in an
“inferior court” to apply to a superior
court to make examination
orders under
Evidence on Commission Act
. There was no
suggestion that the applicant relies on
as a party to any proceeding before
an “inferior court”.
Evidence on Commission Act
does not invest
the Industrial Court with any jurisdiction to make the orders sought in the
Application. The powers under this provision
presuppose extant proceedings
within the jurisdiction of the Industrial Court. There are none.
am cognisant that the power to dismiss proceedings under Uniform
Civil Procedure
(UCPR) r 13.4(1)(b) in respect of proceedings in which no reasonable
cause of action is disclosed, is exceptional in nature, and
that its exercise is
restricted to appropriate circumstances.
the reasons I have given above, I am satisfied that the Application filed in the
Industrial Court on 15 September 2025 is so clearly
deficient that it would be
inappropriate to allow the proceedings to continue:
Cox v Journeaux (No
[1935] HCA 48
(1935) 52 CLR 713
(per Dixon J);
General Steel Industries Inc
v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Accordingly,
pursuant to UCPR r 13.4(1)(b), the proceedings are dismissed
Orders sought in the Application filed on 15 September 2025
(1) Pursuant to
section 176(3)
Industrial Relations Act
(NSW) the Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales in proceedings
2025/ 00192804 be reconstituted by a judicial member
or judicial members as the
President of the Industrial Relations Commission and Justice of the Industrial
Relations Commission in
Court Session so determines.
(2) The Industrial Relations Commission in Court Session being a superior
court within the meaning contained in
Evidence on Commission Act 1995
(NSW) ('the Act'); and pursuant to
section 6(1)(c)
of that Act issue a letter of
request to the judicial authorities of New Zealand to take evidence of the
person (with the assigned
pseudonym W05) or cause it to be taken on oath or
affirmation.
(3) The Industrial Relations Commission in Court Session being a superior
court within the meaning contained in
Evidence on Commission Act
(NSW) pursuant to
section 6(1)(c)
issue a letter of request to the
judicial authorities of India to take evidence of the person (with the assigned
pseudonym W03) or
cause it to be taken on oath or affirmation.
(4) In the event that the Industrial Relations Commission in Court Session
makes Order 2 above, the Industrial Relations Commission
in Court Session
include in the order a request relating to the taking of the evidence of W05,
(5) a subpoena be issued by the New Zealand judicial authority to W05 to
appear for examination by the New Zealand judicial authority
to be examined
before the Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales as constituted by
Senior Commissioner Constant.
(6) the Australian Legal Practitioners for the Applicant and the Respondent
be permitted to appear in person before the New Zealand
judicial authority,
(7) that the legal representative of the Applicant be permitted to examine,
and/or reexamine W05; and that the legal representative
of the Respondent be
permitted to cross-examine W05.
(8) In the event that the Industrial Relations Commission in Court Session
makes Order 3 above, the Industrial Relations Commission
in Court Session
include in the order a request relating to the taking of the evidence of W03,
(9) a subpoena be issued by the Indian judicial authority to W03 to appear
for examination by the Indian judicial authority to be
examined before the
Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales as constituted by Senior
Commission Constant,
(10) W03 appear via Audio Video Link (AVL) to the Industrial Relations
Commission of New South Wales in Sydney Australia, and
(11) that the legal representative of the Applicant be permitted to examine,
and/or reexamine W03; and that the legal representative
of the Respondent be
permitted to cross-examine W03.
(12) An order that transcript be taken of the examinations referred to in
orders 4 and 5 above.
(13) An order pursuant to
of the Act, that the Applicant be
permitted to tender as evidence, the transcripts taken pursuant to order 6, in
the proceeding before
the Industrial Relations Commission of New South
(14) Having regard to the Non-Disclosure Orders made by the Industrial
Relations Commission of New South Wales on 2 September 2025,
in respect of the
Industrial Relations Secretary's motion filed on 21 August 2025, at [82] in
[2025] NSWIRComm 1076
; leave be granted to the Applicant to provide the
Commission and the relevant judicial authority in New Zealand and/or India any
necessary identification details relating to W0S and W03 respectively.
(15) An order or direction that pursuant to section 5B(1)
Evidence (Audio
and Audio Visual Links) Act 1998
(NSW) W03 give evidence to the Industrial
Relations Commission of New South Wales by way of video link from a place
outside of Australia.
(16) Such other orders as the Industrial Relations Commission of New South
Wales in Court Session considers necessary.
(17) The Applicant shall pay into the Registry an amount of money determined
by the Commission associated with the examination to
be conducted by the
Commission in New Zealand.
Isaako v Industrial Relations
Secretary in respect of the Department of Communities and Justice (Corrective
Services NSW)
[2025] NSWIRComm 1076
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (268 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter