URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/229.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mars Australia Pty Limited v Knight [2025] NSWCA 229 (20 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Mars Australia Pty Limited v Knight
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 229
Hearing Date(s):
23 September 2025
Date of Orders:
20 October 2025
Decision Date:
20 October 2025
Adamson JA at [1];
Stern JA at [2];
Ball JA at [93]
(1) Appeal dismissed.
Mars Australia Pty Limited is to file and serve submissions as
to costs, of no more than three pages, by 4 pm on 27 October
(3) Mr Knight is to file and serve responsive
submissions as to costs, of no more than three pages, by 4 pm on 3 November
(4) The issue of costs will be determined
on the papers.
Catchwords:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – proceedings before Commission – appeal
against decision of presidential member – Presidential
member dismissed
appeal on basis that findings made at first instance were “open”
prior to decision in State of New South
Wales v Culhana
[2025] NSWCA 157
whether the error was material – where there was no realistic possibility
that appeal would have been upheld had the
correct standard of review been
WORKERS COMPENSATION – proceedings before Commission
– appeal against decision of presidential member – alleged
constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction – where no constructive
failure to exercise jurisdiction
Legislation Cited:
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
Cases Cited:
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
77 ALJR 1088
Fisher v Nonconformist Pty Ltd
(2024) 114 NSWLR 1
[2024] NSWCA 32
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
Toll Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156
State of New South Wales v
[2025] NSWCA 157
Warren v Coombes
(1979) 142 CLR 531
Principal judgment
Mars Australia Pty Limited (Appellant)
Anthony Knight (Respondent)
Representation:
J Emmett SC, K Bones (Appellant)
D Lloyd SC, R Goodridge
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Bartier Perry (Appellant)
Compensation Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/472383
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Personal Injury Commission
[2024] NSWPICPD 78
Date of Decision:
2 December 2024
Acting Deputy President G Parker
File Number(s):
A 1-W5655/23
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
Mr Knight claimed that his employment by Mars Australia Pty Limited
(Mars) as an operations technician over a 19 year period resulted
development of osteoarthritis in both of his knees.
Prior to commencing employment with Mars, Mr Knight had no problems with
his knees. In his role at Mars, he was required to fix machinery,
palletiser, which involved him getting into the machine on his hands and knees
in order to unjam it about 30 times per day
and also performing electrical work
in awkward positions involving squatting and kneeling.
Mr Knight developed pain in both his right and left knees in association
with activities away from his work, respectively in 2008
and 2011, following
which arthroscopies were performed. Meniscal tears and arthritic changes were
reported on each arthroscopy.
Mr Knight gave evidence that by 2018, his left knee pain had worsened to
the point that it was a regular pain at the end of each working
day and that he
accepted an offer of voluntary redundancy as he was having difficulties
performing his duties because of the pain.
His last day of employment with Mars
was 13 September 2019.
In November 2020, Mr Knight secured employment with Tip Top Bakeries
operating a packing machine. He conducted that work from a seated
After about ten weeks, a supervisor noticed that Mr Knight was limping and
he was shortly thereafter advised that his services
were no longer required. In
November 2021, Mr Knight obtained work with Stephen Smith Contracting Pty
Limited driving a light commercial
van and doing some light cleaning work. He
did that work until July 2022 when his knee condition deteriorated and he was
continue. Mr Knight then worked with Agrana Fruit driving a
forklift from 4 to 17 July 2022. He said this was “very light
but he found that he was not able to continue in the role as a
result of his knee injuries.
Mr Knight relied upon expert evidence from an occupational physician,
Dr Dias, and two letters from his treating orthopaedic surgeon,
Dr Lyons. Mars relied upon expert evidence from an orthopaedic surgeon,
Dr Dias canvassed Mr Knight’s medical and employment history
in some depth and concluded that Mr Knight’s symptoms and
consistent with a persistent aggravation of tricompartmental knee osteoarthritis
as a result of the nature and conditions
of his job with Mars. Dr Dias said
he did not believe that any other employment contributed to
Mr Knight’s injuries. At one
part of Dr Lyons’ second
letter, Dr Lyons said that he believed that Mr Knight’s work for Mars
“which involved
getting in and out of forklifts, working machinery in
tight spaces, precipitated Mr Knight’s meniscal tears and has
subsequently
been a substantial contributing factor to the development of his
arthritic process”. Dr Breit diagnosed Mr Knight with bilateral
knee arthritis but concluded that his employment, both with Mars and subsequent
employers, was unrelated to this injury.
A member of the Personal Injury Commission (the Member) determined that
Mr Knight had sustained injuries to both knees as a result
employment with Mars and that Mars was to pay compensation to Mr Knight. As
regards Dr Lyons’ reports, the Member found
that notwithstanding that
Dr Lyons’ said that the specific injuries suffered by Mr Knight in 2008
and 2011 were “precipitated”
by his work when the evidence was that
they were caused by events outside his work, this was “not fatal” to
his opinion
as to the deterioration of Mr Knight’s condition during
his employment. Mars appealed against this decision.
The Acting Deputy President of the Commission (the Acting DP) rejected
all of Mars’ grounds of appeal save for an amendment
to the deemed date of
injury. As regards the Member’s reading of Dr Lyons’ report,
the Acting DP concluded that “[o]thers
may have adopted a different
interpretation, but it does not follow the Member was in error in his view of
the doctor’s intention”.
Mars appealed against this decision on two grounds, both of which contended
that the Acting DP failed to perform the statutory task
required under
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
(NSW) (1998 Act).
The key issues before the Court were:
(i) whether the Acting DP erred in applying the wrong standard of
appellate review when considering whether the Member erred in his
treatment of
the evidence of Dr Lyons by finding that Dr Lyons’ report did not
intend to imply that the meniscal tears had
been caused by the work with Mars;
(ii) if the Acting DP erred in not finding that the Member had erred in
his conclusion as to Mr Knight’s incapacity.
(Stern JA, Adamson and Ball JJA agreeing)
dismissing the appeal:
(1) An appeal to a presidential member of the Commission under s 352(5)
of the 1998 Act, is limited to a determination of whether
the decision appealed
against was or was not affected by any error of fact, law or discretion, and to
the correction of any such
error. The standard of appellate review to be applied
is the correctness standard: [
State of New South Wales v Culhana
[2025] NSWCA 157
(2) Even if the wrong standard of appellate review had been applied, it must
be shown that the error was material, which turns on
whether there was a
realistic possibility that the error could have made a difference to the result.
Where the appellate court finds
that there is only one legally correct
conclusion on a particular legal or factual issue, that finding may be of
determinative significance
on the issue of materiality if the substantive
outcome in the case depends upon that particular issue: [
Fisher v Nonconformist Pty Ltd
(2024) 114 NSWLR 1
[2024] NSWCA 32
State of New South Wales v Culhana
[2025] NSWCA 157
As to issue (i)
(3) The Acting DP, having identified the ambiguity in
Dr Lyons’ report as regards the causation of the meniscal tears,
that the Member’s “reading of the reports” was open
to him. In so reasoning, the Acting DP erred in point of law:
(4) The Member rejected Dr Breit’s evidence and accepted the
evidence of Dr Dias. That analysis did not depend upon the terms
Dr Lyons’ report. The Acting DP held at [182] of his reasons
that there was no error in the Member’s conclusions as
to incapacity
“based as they are on acceptance of [Mr Knight’s] and
Dr Dias’ evidence”. That reinforces the
conclusion that this
was the critical evidence upon which the outcome of the appeal turned. However
it was interpreted, Dr Lyons’
report could not have undermined the
force of that evidence. There is no realistic possibility that the
Acting DP would have upheld
Mars’ appeal if he had applied the
correct standard of appellate review: [
As to issue (ii)
(5) A constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction depends upon there having
been a substantial, clearly articulated, argument relying
upon established facts
which the relevant decision-maker failed to consider or engage with. The
Acting DP did engage with Mars’
submissions that challenged the
Member’s conclusion that Mr Knight suffered incapacity as a result of
his employment with Mars.
Mars’ submissions before the Acting DP fell well
short of directly raising a challenge to the Member’s acceptance of
credibility of Mr Knight’s evidence and other matters of facts: [
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 26
77 ALJR 1088
(6) In any event, the Acting DP engaged with many of the matters Mars
contended were not substantively considered. Further, in large
measure the
matters raised went to the credit of Mr Knight and as the Acting DP
observed, these contentions went nowhere given the
Member’s acceptance of
the evidence of both Mr Knight and Dr Dias: [
ADAMSON JA:
I agree with Stern JA.
This appeal under
Workplace Injury Management and
Workers Compensation Act 1998
(NSW) (1998 Act) arises out of a claim
for compensation, including for the cost of bilateral knee replacements, under
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) (1987 Act) submitted by the
respondent, Mr Knight, against the appellant, Mars Australia Pty Limited
(Mars), in November 2021.
Mr Knight claimed that his employment by Mars as
an operations technician, over the period 4 September 2000 to 13 September 2019,
was the main contributing cause, or was the main contributing factor to the
aggravation and exacerbation, of osteoarthritis in both
of his knees such that
he had sustained a disease injury within the meaning of either ss 4(b)(i)
or (ii) of the 1987 Act. These subsections
provide that an injury includes a
“disease injury” which means:
(i) a disease that is contracted by a worker in the course of his employment but
only if the employment was the main contributing
factor to contracting the
disease, and
(ii) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration in the course
of employment of any disease, but only if the employment
was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of the disease...
disputed this claim. Mars also contended that even if Mr Knight had
suffered a disease injury within s 4(b) of the 1987 Act,
it was an employer
subsequent to Mars, either Tip Top Bakeries (who employed him from 23 November
2020 until 4 February 2021) or
Agrana Fruit (who employed him from 4 to 17 July
2022), and not Mars, that was liable to pay compensation under s 16(1) of
Act. That subsection relevantly provides:
(1) If an injury consists in the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of a disease—
(b) compensation is payable by the employer who last employed the worker in
employment that was a substantial contributing factor
to the aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration.
Certificate of Determination dated 1 December 2023, following a hearing on 30
October 2023 and the giving of oral reasons on 27
November 2023 by a member of
the Personal Injury Commission (the Member and the Commission, respectively),
the Commission determined
(1) under ss 4(b)(ii) and 16 of the 1987 Act, Mr Knight had
sustained injuries to both knees as a result of his employment with Mars,
the deemed date of those injuries was 20 September 2021 and that
Mr Knight’s employment with Mars was the main contributing
the aggravation of the disease process in Mr Knight’s knees; and
(2) Mars was to pay weekly compensation to Mr Knight under ss 36 and
37(1) of the 1987 Act and was also to pay for the costs of and
to bilateral knee replacements, including the surgery on 4 April 2023, under
s 60 of the 1987 Act.
appealed against this decision under s 352(1) of the 1998 Act, seeking
to have the Certificate of Determination and award of
compensation revoked or,
alternatively, seeking remittal for redetermination. Under s 352(5), such
an appeal is limited to a determination
of whether the decision appealed against
was or was not affected by any error of fact, law or discretion, and to the
correction of
any such error. Recently, in
State of New South Wales v
[2025] NSWCA 157
”), this Court held
that the standard of appellate review to be applied is the correctness standard,
applying the approach in
Warren v Coombes
(1979) 142 CLR 531
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22.
As explained in
Appropriate deference is to be given to members where their findings are based
on evidence in respect of which they have an advantage
(such as the kind
identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential member hearing an
appeal. But it is not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the basis that
an inference was “open” to the member, as if the member were a jury
and there was some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential member, after
making appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the member, would
reach a different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she should not shrink
from giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential member will be dismissing
an appeal but without fully addressing whether there is an error of fact, law or
discretion.
so holding, this Court found that the first “general principle”
concerning the operation of s 352 of the 1998 Act,
as set out by the
Workers Compensation Commission constituted by Deputy President Roche in
Raulston v Toll Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156
”) and applied in a series of ensuing decisions
(including, in one respect in the present case), was wrong.
2 December 2024, prior to the decision in
Parker SC, an Acting Deputy President of the Commission (the
Acting DP), rejected all of Mars’ grounds of appeal
and confirmed the
Certificate of Determination save that he amended the deemed date of injury to
18 July 2022 (so as to correctly
reflect the Member’s oral reasons).
now appeals against this decision on two grounds, both of which contend that the
Acting DP failed to perform the statutory task
required under s 352(5)
of the 1998 Act. Mars’ two grounds of appeal correspond to two of the
grounds of appeal relied upon
by Mars before the Acting DP. The first
alleged error, reflected in ground one on this appeal, is that the Member erred
in his treatment
of the evidence of Dr Matt Lyons, orthopaedic surgeon, to whom
Mr Knight had been referred for surgical review in December 2021,
turn, the Acting DP erred in applying the standard of appellate review as
, which was found, in
, to be wrong. The
relevant evidence of Dr Lyons was comprised in letters dated 14 December 2021
and 13 December 2022, both of which
were before both the Member and the
Acting DP. The second alleged error, reflected in ground two on this
appeal, is that the Acting
DP erred in not finding that the Member erred in
his conclusion as to Mr Knight’s incapacity. This ground of appeal
in part upon the standard of appellate review applied, but beyond this
Mars contends that the Acting DP simply did not deal with
the substantive
submission advanced by Mars.
the reasons set out below, the appeal should be
relied upon three written statements before the Member and was also
cross-examined. The Member accepted Mr Knight’s
evidence generally,
rejecting Mars’ contentions as to his credit. Before the Acting DP,
Mars contended that some of the Member’s
findings in this regard were
erroneous, but the Acting DP rejected those contentions. As discussed in
more detail below, there was
no express challenge before the Acting DP to
the Member’s acceptance of Mr Knight as a generally reliable witness,
number of the Member’s findings consequent upon his acceptance of
Mr Knight’s evidence. Those findings which were expressly
before the Acting DP are noted below.
Mr Knight’s
evidence, accepted by the Member, was that prior to commencing employment with
Mars he had no issues, difficulties
or disabilities with his knees. In his role
at Mars, Mr Knight was required to fix machinery, namely a palletiser,
which involved
him getting into the machine on his hands and knees in order to
unjam it. This would take between five and ten minutes and Mr Knight
estimated that he would have to do this about 30 times per day. The machines
were located at the top of a stairway with 14 to 15
stairs and Mr Knight
was required to ascend and descend the stairs each time he had to conduct this
repair. Mr Knight was also required
to perform electrical work on the
machines. He said that this work had to be done in awkward positions involving
squatting and kneeling.
He estimated that this work would take on average about
15 minutes and he would have to do it at least three times per day. The Member
noted that Mr Knight was not challenged in respect of the duties that he
performed whilst employed by Mars.
entry dated 22 October 2008 in a “Register of Injury/Illness Form”,
signed by Mr Knight, recorded “Exercising
at home, right knee became
swollen post jog on 21/10/2008. Today painful and swollen at work”. In
oral evidence Mr Knight said
he recalled hurting his knee when exercising
at home. Mr Knight said in his statement that prior to this he had been
experiencing
“intermittent aches and pains” but that the symptoms
deteriorated whilst jogging. An arthroscopy was performed on 20
April 2009. A
medial meniscal tear and arthritic changes in the knee were noted. A file note
dated 25 May 2009 reported that the
knee was fine, although he continued to have
pain in the side of the knee when he went for a run.
Subsequently,
in 2011, Mr Knight had an arthroscopy on his left knee. Again, a meniscal
tear and arthritic changes were reported.
In oral evidence Mr Knight said
that he thought that he felt a popping sensation in his left knee when he was
walking the dog. Mr
Knight said he had intermittent pain in his knees
between 2011 and 2018. By 2018, he said that his left knee pain had worsened to
the point that it was a regular pain at the end of each working day. The Member
accepted that Mr Knight sustained bilateral knee
pain in the course of his
employment with Mars well prior to September 2019.
were only limited references in the notes of Mr Knight’s general
practitioner, Dr Cavanagh, to Mr Knight complaining about
his knees. The
Member accepted Mr Knight’s evidence that from 2016 (or perhaps even
earlier) he had intermittently consulted
Dr Cavanagh complaining of
bilateral worsening knee pain but that Dr Cavanagh had not recorded this in
his notes. The Member found
that Mr Knight had “complained of
symptoms which I’ve accepted in his knees over the years up until he
ceased employment
with [Mars]”. Mars unsuccessfully sought to challenge
some aspects of this finding before the Acting DP, but did not contend
this Court that the Acting DP erred in rejecting that challenge. Mr
Knight’s evidence, which the Member also accepted, was
“that those
symptoms continued after ceasing” that employment.
Knight took voluntary redundancy, and 13 September 2019 was his last day of
employment with Mars. Mr Knight said that he took the
offer for voluntary
redundancy as he was having difficulties performing his duties due to his knee
injuries. Again, the Member accepted
this evidence. A medical exit assessment
was conducted on 19 August 2019, at which it was noted that he had bilateral
“OA” [osteoarthritis], and “Mild/Moderate OA both
knees severe [L]. [L] side > [R]”. Left sided low back
pain was also
noted. As for general health, the assessment noted that he was “fit no
major issues”. The Member found
that Mr Knight’s declaration in
this form should be understood by reference to the fact that he did not at that
time realise
that “the ongoing persisting pain that he felt over the years
in his knees amounted to an injury”. The Member also found
that this was
the reason why Mr Knight had not, for some time subsequently, provided notice of
his claim to compensation to Mars.
taking voluntary redundancy, Mr Knight was admitted to Wyong Hospital for a
psychological condition. There was no mention of
any problem with his knees in
the medical records from this hospital admission. On appeal to the
Acting DP, Mars contended that the
Member had erred in his treatment of
this evidence. The Acting DP rejected that ground of appeal and it was not
contended before
this Court that the Acting DP had erred in so finding.
8 October 2020, Mr Knight completed a pre-employment questionnaire for
Forsythes Recruitment. In this questionnaire he indicated
that he did not have
any prior difficulties engaging in work that might aggravate injuries, such as
lifting awkward objects or engaging
in repetitive manual work. Mr Knight
said that he provided this response because he believed that if he disclosed his
injury he would
not get employment. The Member accepted this explanation.
November 2020, Mr Knight secured employment with Tip Top Bakeries through
Forsythes Recruitment. He was employed to work full-time
operating a packing
machine and he conducted this work from a seated position from which he only
needed to rise if the machine became
blocked or jammed. If this occurred, he
would then stand beside the machine to clear the blockage. This happened about
per day. After about ten weeks, a supervisor noticed that
Mr Knight was limping and he was shortly thereafter advised that his
were no longer required.
said that the Tip Top Bakeries work was the lightest employment he could
possibly find.
on both of Mr Knight’s knees dated 21 September 2021 were reported by Dr
Lannan (Dr Lannan’s report) as showing:
[M]arked degenerative changes in both knee joints, especially involving the
medial compartments. There is mineralisation of the meniscus
bilaterally.
There is some synovial thickening or fluid bilaterally.
The appearances have progressed since the study of 2019.
the Acting DP, Mars unsuccessfully contended that the Member had
disregarded this evidence. It was not contended before this
Court that the
Acting DP erred in rejecting this contention.
November 2021, Mr Knight obtained work with Stephen Smith Contracting Pty
Limited. He said that this work primarily involved driving
a light commercial
van (approximately 70% of the time) but also included some light cleaning work
(approximately 30% of the time),
noting that an offsider would do the heavier
cleaning. Mr Knight described this work as “not physically
demanding”. He
did this work until July 2022 when his knee condition
deteriorated and he was unable to continue.
5 November 2021, Mr Knight completed a “Workers Injury Claim
Form” in which he reported pain and discomfort in his
left knee from 2018.
He said that it was not until 2021, after speaking with an ex-colleague about
his problems and then consulting
solicitors, that he became aware that he was
entitled to make a claim “for simple wear and tear caused by [his]
employment”
and that he had a “workers compensation
The Member accepted this explanation.
then worked with Agrana Fruit driving a forklift from 4 to 17 July 2022. He said
this was “very light duties”.
He was initially told that he would
only have to drive the forklift and would not have to get in and out of it,
however this did
not eventuate and he was required to constantly get in and out
of the forklift. He found that he was not able to continue in the
result of his knee injuries.
said that his employment with Mars involved tasks and duties that were much more
physically demanding than any of his other
employment and his subsequent
employment was significantly less physically arduous. Despite the fact that
Mr Knight told one of the
experts, Dr Dias, that the employment at Tip
Top Bakeries was similar to that at Mars, having regard to
Mr Knight’s oral evidence
and his account to the other two experts,
the Member found that the Tip Top Bakeries job was “a much lighter
that with Mars.
underwent bilateral knee replacement surgery in April 2023.
Medical reports
the Member, Mr Knight relied upon expert evidence from an occupational
physician, Dr Dias (reports dated 8 August 2022 and
10 July 2023), and the
two letters (referred to above) from his treating orthopaedic surgeon,
Dr Lyons. Mars relied upon expert evidence
from an orthopaedic surgeon,
Dr Breit (report dated 19 January 2022). Dr Breit also prepared a
second report dated 27 October 2023,
which Mars unsuccessfully sought leave to
rely upon before the Member. The Member refused Mars’ application to
cross-examine
Dr Dias. Mars unsuccessfully appealed that decision before
the Acting DP but did not, before this Court, seek to challenge the
DP’s rejection of that ground of
was asked to respond to a number of questions and he was provided with a range
of documents from Mr Knight’s records,
including Dr Lannan’s
report referred to at [
] above. Dr Dias’ first report canvassed
Mr Knight’s medical and employment history in some depth. He recorded
Mr Knight recalls that his job role with Mars Australia was heavily manual,
physical and repetitive in nature. His job role involved
operating forklift
machines, operating packing machines, fixing breakdowns on a daily basis,
repetitive staircase climbing, frequent
and repetitive kneeling, squatting and
crouching, prolonged standing for the vast majority of his shift, and repetitive
heavy manual
handling of items weighing up to 20kg. He recalls that he would
have to assist with fixing breakdowns and performing electrical work
on machines
which would involve work in confined spaces, frequent and prolonged kneeling,
squatting and crouching and heavy pulling
and pushing in awkward postures.
noted that Mr Knight did not have any previous injuries or known
pre-existing conditions affecting his knees prior to commencing
employment with
Mars, but that within three to four years of commencing this employment he began
to experience symptoms of intermittent
pain, stiffness and discomfort affecting
both knees. These symptoms were generally intermittent and would resolve with
anti-inflammatory
tablets but would then be exacerbated by the nature and
conditions of his employment at that time.
also noted that Mr Knight sustained a “right knee meniscal
tear” when walking his dog (as set out above, Mr Knight’s
evidence was that he thought that this was an incident involving his left knee)
and that he underwent a procedure to address this
on 20 April 2009. Dr Dias
observed that Mr Knight was noted to have “Grade III osteoarthritic
change throughout most of the
medial compartment of his right knee” at
this time. Dr Dias also noted that Mr Knight had experienced worsening
symptoms in
his left knee in early 2011 and underwent a procedure on 27 June
2011 to address this. At this time “Grade III-IV degenerative
affecting the medial compartment” were observed. Over the next few years
his symptoms of bilateral knee pain worsened
until they were unremittingly
severe. By September 2019 he could not cope with the demands of his job due to
said that Mr Knight described his job with Tip Top Bakeries as
“similar to his long-standing pre-injury job role with
Mars” (as set
out above, the Member made a factual finding somewhat different to this) which
led to a “transient exacerbation
of bilateral knee pain, which reverted
employment after
10 weeks. Dr Dias referred also to Mr Knight’s
employment with Steven Smith Contracting, stating that Mr Knight could not
with even this “light and sympathetic employment”.
noted that Mr Knight continued to suffer from “chronic symptoms of
bilateral knee pain, stiffness and discomfort on
a daily basis.”
respect to Mr Knight’s “compensable physical injuries stemming
from the nature and conditions of his employment”
with Mars, Dr Dias
said that his symptoms and signs were consistent with:
a persistent aggravation of tricompartmental right [and left] knee
osteoarthritis (most severely affecting the medial compartment),
as a result of
the heavily manual and repetitive nature and conditions of his job role with
[Mars] over the course of 19 years of
response to a question as to the cause of Mr Knight’s condition,
Dr Dias stated that:
As a result of the nature and conditions of Mr Knight’s employment
with Mars Australia Pty Ltd, in my opinion, Mr Knight has
sustained a
persistent and severe aggravation of mild constitutional degenerative changes
affecting his right and left knees which
were entirely asymptomatic, prior to
the commencement of Mr Knight’s employment with Mars Australia in
September 2000.
His symptoms have persisted over the course of the past three years since
ceasing employment with Mars Australia in September 2019.
Taking into account
any constitutional non-employment related changes affecting
Mr Knight’s right and left knees, in my opinion,
Mr Knight’s symptomatology, disabilities and impairments affecting
his right and left knees are attributable to the
heavily manual and repetitive
nature and conditions of his employment with Mars Australia. In my opinion, 10%
of Mr Knight’s
symptoms, disabilities and impairments with respect to
his right and left knees could be attributable to constitutional and
degenerative
changes affecting his right and left knees which were asymptomatic
prior to the commencement of his employment related conditions.
said the injuries had caused an “aggravation, acceleration and
exacerbation of a pre-existing asymptomatic condition,
namely degenerative
tricompartmental bilateral knee osteoarthritis” and that
Mr Knight’s employment with Mars was “a
substantial
contributing factor” and the “main contributing factor” to
these injuries.
respect of Tip Top Bakeries, Dr Dias stated that Mr Knight’s
“symptoms of bilateral knee pain were transiently exacerbated,
nature and conditions of his employment with Tip Top Bakeries however soon
reverted to their baseline chronic level within
one to two months of ceasing
employment with Tip Top Bakeries” and that this employment was “not
causally attributable
to the causation or aggravation [of] his conditions
affecting his right and left knees”. As to Mr Knight’s
with Steven Smith Contracting, Dr Dias said that this did not
result in “any aggravation or exacerbation of his work-related
affecting his right and left knees, which in my opinion, are causally
attributable to his 19-year employment tenure with
supplementary report confirmed his opinion that Mr Knight’s
employment with Mars was the main and substantial
contributing factor to the
injuries affecting his knees. When asked about the role of
Mr Knight’s employment subsequent to
his employment with Mars,
Dr Dias said:
I do not believe that Mr Knight’s subsequent employments ... result
in any permanent aggravation, acceleration or deterioration
of the disease
process in his right and left knees. I note, that Mr Knight did sustain a
transient minor increase in symptoms of
his conditions affecting his right and
left knees as a result of his work at Tip Top Bakeries, as a machine operator,
(for Forsythes
Recruitment), between November 2020 and February 2021 however his
transient increase of bilateral knee pain reverted to his baseline
symptomatology after ceasing his employment with Tip Top Bakeries in February
asked whether any other employment was the main and substantial contributing
factor to Mr Knight’s injuries, he responded:
I do not believe that any other employment held by Mr Knight, has
contributed to his injuries affecting his right and left knees
in any objective
first letter from Dr Lyons, dated 14 December 2021, is a letter to
Dr Cavanagh noting that Dr Lyons had seen Mr Knight that day
that he presented with bilateral knee pain that:
has been problematic for a number of years to the extent that [Mr Knight]
has recently ceased his job as an Electrician.
on a review of Mr Knight’s x-rays, Dr Lyons identified
“advanced arthritic changes of the medial compartment”
“chondrocalcinosis of the lateral compartment and lesser arthritic changes
of the patellofemoral compartment”. Dr
Lyons said that a diagnosis of
osteoarthritis was discussed with Mr Knight and that arrangements would be
made for a total knee replacement.
Subsequently,
on 13 December 2022, Dr Lyons responded in writing to a number of questions
posed in a letter of instruction dated 13
September 2022 from
Mr Knight’s solicitors. The letter of instruction included a
statement that:
As you might be aware, the workers compensation insurer have declined liability
for our client’s claim on the basis that they
do not believe his
employment with Mars Food Australia over a span of almost 20 years was the main
or substantial contributing factor
to his knee condition. They also suggest that
his condition is a result of subsequent employment or other incidents such as
however we note that any subsequent employment was for only short
periods and that other incidents had no long lasting effect on
our client.
was provided with Dr Dias’ report dated 8 August 2022 for this
purpose. As set out at [
] above, that report included reference to the
circumstances preceding Mr Knight’s arthroscopies.
confirmed that Mr Knight was suffering from “tricompartmental
osteoarthritis of his knees”. In response to a
question “What is the
cause of our client’s condition?”, Dr Lyons said:
Mr Knight has advanced arthritis of both knees. He underwent knee
arthroscopies with Dr Darren Paterson back in 2007 and 2009 whilst
working for
the Mars Company as an Operations Technician. It was noted at the time that he
had chondral damage of the medial compartment
in addition to a meniscal tear.
This has deteriorated since those interventions.
response to a question whether Mr Knight had “any pre-existing
condition”, Dr Lyons said:
No. Mr Knight does not have any pre-existing condition.
response to being asked “Do you believe that work was a substantial
contributing factor to our client’s injury?”,
Yes, I do believe that Mr Knight’s occupation as a Operations
Technician and an Electrician for the Mars Company which involved
getting in and
out of forklifts, working machinery in tight spaces, precipitated
Mr Knight’s meniscal tears and has subsequently
been a substantial
contributing factor to the development of his arthritic process.
asked “If you believe that our client’s injury is a disease and/or
was an aggravation, acceleration, and/or exacerbation
of a pre-existing
condition or disease, do you believe that their employment was the main
contributing factor to the injury”,
Dr Lyons said:
I do believe his employment was the major contributing factor to the development
of his arthritic process [and then referred to his
response set out immediately
report otherwise indicated that Mr Knight was totally incapacitated for
work, however he had a significant chance
of returning to his pre-injury
capacity and achieving work related duties following a bilateral total knee
replacement.
the heading “Employment History”, Dr Breit noted:
Mr Knight is actually an electrician by trade and worked in that capacity
until about 1997, after which he spent two years as a correctional
officer before joining your insured in September 2020 as an operations
technician. I am told that involves setting up production
lines as well as
carrying out repairs.
was the only information in Dr Breit’s report about
Mr Knight’s duties in his employment with Mars.
diagnosed Mr Knight with bilateral knee arthritis.
response to a question as to whether Mr Knight’s employment with Mars
was the main contributing factor to his injury, Dr
Breit said:
No, it was not. Mr Knight is trying to claim that the nature and conditions
of his employment led to arthritis, a condition which
is overwhelmingly
constitutional and associated with trauma and obesity. He does not have a weight
problem but he has been quite
active and he has had both knees arthroscoped for
meniscal pathology which were not work-related. The literature shows that such
surgery inevitably results in arthritis due to the changed weightbearing status
of the knee.
also said that he did not consider that Mr Knight’s employment by
either Tip Top Bakeries or Steven Smith Contracting
had been “relevant or
contributing”. This was because the condition or pathology in
Mr Knight’s knees was a disease
process unrelated to those jobs, and
“[Mr Knight had] described his short-term work at Tip Top as being
and his subsequent work has not been onerous either”.
to capacity, Dr Breit’s opinion was that although Mr Knight
suffered from incapacity, this was not work-related.
Member’s decision
the Acting DP observed, the transcribed oral reasons of the Member are
“difficult to follow and understand” and “the
supporting the Member’s determination are not always easily
identified”. The Member’s key conclusions
are, however, tolerably
as already noted, the Member found Mr Knight to be generally credible and
accepted much of his evidence.
the Member preferred the report and opinion of Dr Dias to that of
Dr Breit and accepted the opinion of Dr Dias. The Member
accept Dr Breit’s opinion as to causation because he found that
Dr Breit did not engage with Mr Knight’s specific
duties at Mars and instead had “argued that it was simply a blanket
argument that the employment duties are not
related to [Mr Knight’s]
condition” without explaining why specified employment duties were not so
related. By contrast,
the Member observed, Dr Dias took a detailed history
of Mr Knight’s duties, the prior arthroscopies and the onset of
(which the Member had accepted).
as to Dr Lyons, the Member noted Mars’ submission that Dr Lyons
had the history wrong to the extent that he had made
“an assumption that
the meniscal tears occurred in the context of [Mr Knight’s] work
duties with [Mars] given [Mr Knight’s]
unequivocal evidence that each
knee was injured in circumstances occurring outside the workplace”. The
Member noted Dr Lyons’
unequivocal view that Mr Knight’s
work duties at Mars were a substantial contributing factor to the arthritic
process. The
Member also noted that there was no discussion in
Dr Lyons’ report of “the circumstances in which
[Mr Knight] thereafter
underwent surgery to each knee”, and that
while he had said that his work precipitated the meniscal tears, this was
fatal” to his opinion. The Member said that what was important
was Dr Lyons’ “more detailed than Dr Breit’s”
recording of the duties Mr Knight undertook at Mars and his opinion as to
the deterioration in Mr Knight’s condition during
his employment with
Mars. That provided “a fair climate” for Dr Lyons’
opinion which the Member interpreted on
the basis that it lent support to
Mr Knight having suffered an aggravation of a pre-existing degenerative
condition in circumstances
where “an assumption ... can’t be made
out one way or the other as to whether or not those earlier arthroscopies were
related to [Mr Knight’s] employment”. Thus, the Member found
that Dr Lyons’ opinion “still stands”.
the Member upheld Mr Knight’s claim that the bilateral osteoarthritis
in his knees was an aggravation of a pre-existing
degenerative condition of
osteoarthritis in both knees which was due to the nature of
Mr Knight’s employment with Mars. The
Member said that his conclusion
was supported by a “common sense appraisal of the causal chain”,
which was supported
by Dr Cavanagh’s notes, Mr Knight’s
evidence both in his statements and in cross-examination and the opinions of
Dr Lyons and Dr Dias. Significantly, explaining his key
conclusion that Mr Knight’s employment with Mars caused the injury
his knees, the Member said:
So – and in my view – the evidence supports that common sense link
between the nature of the [Mr Knight’s] employment
and the onset of
symptoms in both knees which – which amounted, in my view, based on the
opinion of Dr Dias to being an aggravation
of a pre-existing osteoarthritic
degenerative condition being a disease process and, indeed, consistent with the
opinion of Dr Lyons
that this was also a disease process.
is apparent, the Member here relied upon Dr Dias’, but not
Dr Lyons’, opinion as to causation (which he also accepted).
relied upon Dr Lyons’ opinion as to the injury to
Mr Knight’s knees being a disease process.
the Member noted that none of the experts said that Mr Knight’s
employment subsequent to Mars was related to his bilateral
knee conditions and
rejected Mars’ submission to this effect. In this regard, the Member also
relied upon Mr Knight’s
evidence as to the continuity of his symptoms
in both knees after 2019, and upon his rejection of Mars’ contentions that
Knight’s symptoms had not deteriorated in the course of his
employment at Mars.
the Member found that the date from which Mr Knight ceased to have any
capacity for work was 18 July 2022, being the day after
his last day working for
Agrana Fruit (albeit that, as noted by the Acting DP, the Certificate of
Determination did not accurately
reflect this date of incapacity).
The decision of the Acting DP
grounds of appeal to the Acting DP were:
1. That the Member erred in law in failing to give proper and adequate
2. That the Member’s decision is affected by several errors of fact and
law, namely:
(a) that the Member disregarded the radiological evidence of Dr Lannan contained
in [a] report dated 21 September 2021.
(b) that the Member erred in his treatment of the evidence of Dr Lyons.
(c) that the Member erred in his conclusions as to the worker’s
incapacity.
(d) that the Member erred in his treatment of the evidence relating to the
worker’s attendance at Wyong Hospital on 13 October
(e) that the Member erred in his treatment of the evidence relating to the
absence of complaint of knee problems in the clinical
notes of Dr Cavanagh.
3. That the Member erred in the exercise of his discretion and committed error
of law in refusing the appellant’s application
to cross-examine
2(b) reflects ground one in this Court. Ground 2(c) reflects ground two in this
Court. Given the ambit of ground two in this
Court, and that it indirectly
raises issues under other grounds, it is necessary to refer to the Acting
DP’s reasons for rejecting
all grounds of appeal.
Acting DP summarised the most important facts and findings of the Member.
These included that the Member had generally accepted
the credibility of
Mr Knight; that the Member had observed that Mr Knight had not been
challenged as to the duties he performed at
Mars; that the Member had accepted
Mr Knight’s evidence that the work at Tip Top Bakeries was lighter
than the work with Mars
and Dr Dias’ finding that the Tip Top
Bakeries job had caused a “transient exacerbation” of the bilateral
pain; that the Member preferred the evidence of Dr Dias to that of
Dr Breit and did not accept Dr Breit’s opinion as to causation;
and that the Member did not accept that Mr Knight’s condition
deteriorated after leaving the employ of Mars.
regards Mars’ contentions on ground 1, the Acting DP described
Mars’ complaint as being, in part, that “the Member
provide adequate reasons for not accepting [Mars’] submission of a
tangible worsening of [Mr Knight’s] knee
problems in conjunction with
subsequent employment”; that the Member had relied in this regard simply
on the opinions of Dr
Dias and Dr Lyons; and that the Member’s
reasons were logically inconsistent with the fact that the date of injury was
to three years after Mr Knight ceased employment with Mars. As is
apparent, these contentions attack both the logic of the Member’s
reasoning and the adequacy of the reasons given. The Acting DP’s
reasons for rejecting these contentions relied upon the Member’s
acceptance of Mr Knight’s evidence in key relevant respects,
including that Mr Knight had been hanging on for a voluntary redundancy
notwithstanding chronic debilitating pain, and upon the Member’s
acceptance of the evidence of Dr Dias.
regards Dr Lannan’s report, the Acting DP rejected the contention
that the Member had erred in his treatment of this report,
noting that
Mars’ proposition that Dr Lannan’s report showed changes that were
consequent upon Mr Knight’s work
at Tip Top Bakeries “does not
follow from the report”. The Acting DP observed that the medical
evidence accepted by the
Member did not demonstrate that the radiological
changes were due to work at Tip Top Bakeries or the subsequent employment.
regards the Member’s treatment of Dr Lyons’ report, Mars
submitted that Dr Lyons’ report was flawed because he
assumed that
the bilateral meniscal tears were caused by employment, whereas the evidence
demonstrated that these injuries were caused
by events occurring outside of the
workplace. As to this, the Acting DP found that:
[178] Dr Lyons’ second report is ambiguous with respect to the
meniscal tears for which he received arthroscopic surgery. The
Member regarded a
“fair reading” of Dr Lyons’ reports to be that the doctor
found the operations had occurred when
the respondent was employed by the
appellant and notwithstanding the use of the word “precipitated”,
Dr Lyons was not
intending to imply the meniscal tears had been caused by
the work with the appellant. That was a reading of the reports that was
the Member. Others may have adopted a different interpretation, but it does not
follow the Member was in error in his view
of the doctor’s intention.
[179] No error on the part of the Member is demonstrated
footnote to [178] of the Acting DP’s decision referred to the
decision of
which, as I have already observed, was disapproved
to the contention that the Member erred in his conclusions as to
Mr Knight’s incapacity, Mars’ written submissions
Acting DP stated that its submissions at first instance pointed overwhelmingly
to the conclusion that:
(1) Mr Knight was not incapacitated at the time his employment with Mars
(2) Mr Knight’s employment at Tip Top Bakeries and Agrana Fruit was
aggravating and caused a deterioration in his condition;
(3) Employment subsequent to Mr Knight’s employment with Mars was the
main contributing factor to the aggravation of the pre-existing
osteoarthritic
changes; and
(4) The date of incapacity as found by the Member, which occurred after
cessation of employment with Mars, was not reflective of
aggravation caused by
employment with Mars and established that Mars was not the last relevant
employer for the purposes of the 1987
was a footnote to this submission that referred to Mars’ submissions
before the Member at “[9][a]-[pp]”. Paragraph
9 of those submissions
had the chapeau “[t]he evidence up to [late 2021] bears careful analysis,
and in particular”,
followed by 42 sub-paragraphs referring to aspects of
the evidence. Those 42 sub-paragraphs can be broadly summarised as referring
(1) The arthroscopies in 2009 and 2011 and to the circumstances preceding those
operations and the lack of symptoms prior to 2008
(a, b, c, d, f, g);
(2) Accommodations (including the availability of an occupational health nurse)
made for Mr Knight at Mars after those procedures,
the willingness of Mars
to make those accommodations, and the lack of any certificates restricting
Mr Knight’s capacity to
work or request for modification of work
whilst at Mars and an alleged inconsistency in Mr Knight’s evidence
that he thought
Mars would only accommodate a week of suitable duties (d, e, h,
i, j, k, p, q, r);
(3) The records of Dr Cavanagh, referred to at [
] above (l, m, y);
(4) Mr Knight’s awareness of the option of voluntary redundancy and
the timing of him taking redundancy (n, o);
(5) The terms of Mr Knight’s exit medical assessment (s, t);
(6) The Wyong Hospital notes, referred to at [
] above (u, v, w);
(7) The Forsythes Recruitment questionnaire and the information on a Forsythes
document, referred to at [
] above, and that he made himself available for
medical assessment at that time (x, z, aa);
(8) Dr Dias having recorded that Mr Knight said that his work at Tip
Top Bakeries was similar to that at Mars, and that that work
was described in
documents produced by Forsythes Recruitment as not entirely sedentary and the
fact that Mr Knight was limping at
Tip Top Bakeries, and that Mars had not
been permitted to cross-examine Dr Dias (cc, dd, ee, ff, gg, hh, ii);
(9) Dr Lannan’s report (jj, kk); and
(10) That Mr Knight was recorded as being in pain in 2021 but denied
worsening symptoms, that his employment at Agrana Fruit was
also provocative,
and generalised assertions as to conclusions that should be drawn from the
contemporaneous records or evidence
as a whole (bb, mm, nn, oo, pp).
Acting DP rejected these contentions, explaining:
[181] The submissions in support of this ground of appeal are largely a
repetition of what is advanced with respect to other matters
in the appeal and
are dealt with in that context. However, this alleged error highlights the
difficulty [Mars] has in succeeding
in the appeal in circumstances where the
Member has accepted [Mr Knight’s] evidence that the subsequent
employment caused a
transient increase in symptoms such that the condition of
the knees returned to that in which they were as a consequence of the employment
with [Mars]. Furthermore, the acceptance of Dr Dias’ evidence makes
the asserted error with respect to this issue untenable.
[182] There is no error with respect to the Member’s conclusions as to
incapacity based as they are on acceptance of [Mr Knight’s]
Dr Dias’ evidence.
Acting DP also rejected Mars’ contentions that the Member had erred
in his treatment of the evidence relating to Mr Knight’s
admission to
the Wyong Hospital and in his treatment of the evidence “as to the absence
of complaint to Dr Cavanagh”.
As to the latter, the Acting DP
placed weight on the Member’s acceptance of the evidence of
The grounds of appeal to this Court
relies upon two grounds of appeal:
1. As to appeal ground 2(b) of the appeal to the Deputy President, the Deputy
President erred in point of law in that:
a. in the interpretation of the Member’s reasons at first instance, the
Deputy President held that the Member read Dr Lyons’
report as not
intending to imply that meniscal tears in around 2007 or 2009 had been caused by
the work with the appellant (decision
below at [178]);
b. further or as a result, the Deputy President failed to perform his task of
considering whether there was an error of fact or law
in the Member’s
reasons, by reference to the Deputy President’s own assessment of how
Dr Lyons’ report should be
understood (decision below at
[178]-[179]).
2. As to ground 2(c) of the appeal to the Deputy President, the Deputy President
erred in point of law by failing to ask himself
whether there was an error of
fact in the Member’s acceptance of the [Mr Knight’s] evidence
as described in the decision
below at [181], having regard to [Mars’]
submissions at first instance at [9](a)-(pp) and the submissions to the Deputy
at [47] (decision below at [181]).
Relevant principles
already noted, this is an appeal under s 353(1) of the 1998 Act, which
Appeal against decision of Commission constituted
by presidential member
(1) If a party to any proceedings under the Workers Compensation Acts
before the Commission constituted by a presidential member
is aggrieved by a
decision of the presidential member in point of law, the party may appeal to the
Court of Appeal.
nature of such appeal was considered in
Fisher v Nonconformist Pty Ltd
(2024) 114 NSWLR 1
[2024] NSWCA 32
Nonconformist
”) at [50] by Kirk JA (Meagher JA and Simpson AJA
Making out legal error in the decision of the presidential member will not
necessarily lead to the decision being overturned. Section
353(2) of the WIM Act
provides that this court may then remit the matter and may make such other
orders in relation to the appeal
as it thinks fit. The powers are discretionary.
They will not in general be exercised unless the error is material: see,
analogously,
Yates Property Corporation Pty Ltd (in liq) v Darling Harbour
(1991) 24 NSWLR 156
Melino v Roads and Maritime
(2018) 98 NSWLR 625
[2018] NSWCA 251
. Materiality involves
considering whether there is a realistic possibility that the error could have
made a difference to the result.
That understanding is consistent with the
requirement for materiality in establishing jurisdictional error: for example,
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR
[2021] HCA 17
. It also is consistent with common law principle in
relation to ordering new trials:
Conway v The Queen
(2002) 209 CLR 203
[2002] HCA 2
Gerlach v Clifton Bricks Pty Ltd
209 CLR 478
[2002] HCA 22
similar effect, in
, Leeming JA explained:
[92] There are apt to be decisions by the Commission constituted by a
Presidential member which have applied the approach overturned
Court’s judgment. Some may be pending appeals to this Court; others may be
cases where no appeal has been lodged. The
fact that a Presidential member has
applied the incorrect approach does not without more mean that a further appeal
to this Court
under s 353 will be allowed. It will be necessary to
establish material error of law. Unless it be shown that an application of the
approach in
Warren v Coombes
Fox v Percy
would make a difference, an appeal will be dismissed.
[93] The nature of the task is such that it ought to be possible to establish
such an error in this Court, which after all will be
in the same position as the
Presidential member in hearing and determining an appeal on the papers. Further,
as Basten JA explained
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer v Hill
[[2020] NSWCA 54; 295 IR 172] at [20], the distinction is a fine one, and it may
be that there are relatively few cases where it
is material.
circumstances in which there is nothing in the judgment of Leeming JA to
suggest that his Honour was intending to reflect a test
for materiality
different from that identified by Kirk JA in
Fisher v Nonconformist
(which reflected, in turn, well established authority as to the threshold for
materiality in other contexts), I would read the words
“would make a
difference” in the last sentence of [92] of
as nothing more
than shorthand for the materiality threshold as set out in
Nonconformist
at [50]. Contrary to Mars’ submission before this Court,
I would also not read
at [93] as suggesting that a different
approach should be taken to the issue of materiality depending upon whether or
not the error
of law was in applying the wrong standard of appellate review. The
issue of materiality should, in all cases, be approached in the
manner explained
by Kirk JA in
Fisher v Nonconformist
. Where, however, the appellate
court finds that there is only one legally correct conclusion on a particular
legal or factual issue,
that finding may be of determinative significance on the
issue of materiality if the substantive outcome in the case depends upon
particular issue.
Consideration
contention under ground one, simply stated, is that the Acting DP applied
the wrong standard of appellate review when
considering Mars’ contention
that the Member had erred in the conclusions that he had expressed as regards
evidence. Mars contended that the Acting DP should have
applied the correctness standard of appellate review but, instead, the
DP rejected Mars’ contention on the basis that the
Member’s interpretation of Dr Lyons’ opinion was “open
him”. Mr Knight, for his part, contends that the Acting DP did
not err. He submits that it is important to look beyond the
language used by the
Acting DP, and to focus upon the substance of his reasoning which was to
affirm the correctness of the Member’s
interpretation of Dr Lyons’
agree with Mr Knight’s contention that it is important to focus upon
the substance of the Acting DP’s reasoning having
regard to his
decision as a whole. Taking that approach does not, however, resolve the
difficulty identified by Mars. The inescapable
fact is that the Acting DP,
having identified the ambiguity in Dr Lyons’ report as regards the
causation of the meniscal tears,
goes no further than to identify that the
Member’s “reading of the reports” was open to him. On that
basis, having
regard to the now disapproved of authority of
Acting DP found that Mars’ contention as to error should be rejected.
In so reasoning, the Acting DP erred in point of
is thus necessary to consider whether or not this error is material in the sense
that it could realistically have made a difference
to the result before the
Acting DP. Mars’ contention in this regard is that Dr Lyons’
report could be read as providing
support for the opinion of Dr Breit,
which could, in turn, have led to Mr Knight’s claim for compensation
being dismissed.
Mars also submits that it is entitled to a determination by a
Deputy President, being an expert body, of its submissions as to the
interpretation and significance of Dr Lyons’ report.
contentions should be rejected. The Member rejected Dr Breit’s
evidence and accepted the evidence of Dr Dias. That analysis
did not depend
upon the terms of Dr Lyons’ report, albeit that the Member did regard
Dr Lyons’ report as supportive of
his conclusion as to causation.
Moreover, Dr Lyons’ report, whilst somewhat ambiguous as to whether
or not Dr Lyons was intending
to suggest that the meniscal tears in
Mr Knight’s knees were the result of the work he undertook in his
employment at Mars,
cannot be read so as to provide support for
Dr Breit’s opinion. On no view does Dr Lyons suggest that
Mr Knight’s bilateral
osteoarthritis was unrelated to work duties, or
that arthroscopic procedures inevitably result in osteoarthritis (which was the
of Dr Breit’s opinion).
whilst there is ambiguity as to whether or not Dr Lyons considered that
Mr Knight’s employment duties at Mars themselves
contributed to his
meniscal tears, and whether or not in reaching that conclusion he took into
account the history preceding the
arthroscopies in 2009 and 2011 as recorded in
Dr Dias’ report (which Dr Lyons was provided with), that
ambiguity could, at
most, have led to Dr Lyons’ opinion being
discounted (as to some extent it was by the Member: see [
] above). That would
still have left the report of Dr Dias, which was accepted by the Member,
and which supported Mr Knight’s
claim. Further, the Acting DP
held at [182] of his reasons that there was no error in the Member’s
conclusions as to incapacity
“based as they are on acceptance of
[Mr Knight’s] and Dr Dias’ evidence”. That
reinforces the conclusion
that this was the critical evidence upon which the
outcome of the appeal turned. However it was interpreted, Dr Lyons’
could not have undermined the force of that evidence.
follows that there is no realistic possibility that the Acting DP would
have upheld Mars’ appeal from the Members’
decision if he had
applied the correct standard of appellate review.
contention in ground two is that the Acting DP erred in failing to
appreciate, or substantively to consider, that Mars’
contention in ground
2(c) relied upon all of the matters identified in paragraph 9 of Mars’
submissions before the Member,
which are summarised above at [
]. These, Mars
contends, challenged a multitude of the Member’s findings, including his
overarching conclusion as to the credibility
of Mr Knight’s evidence.
Mars submits that, in this way, Mars made a substantive, clearly articulated,
contention, which the
Acting DP did not engage with, that the
Acting DP should revisit all of the credit and factual findings that led to
the Member’s
ultimate conclusion. Further, Mars contends, the
Acting DP erred in stating that Mars’ submissions under ground 2(c)
were largely
repetitive of what was advanced in respect of its other grounds and
had been dealt with in that context. In this regard, Mars contends
was a constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction:
Dranichnikov v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 26
77 ALJR 1088.
also contends that the Acting DP applied the wrong standard of appellate
review, relying upon
contentions should be rejected for three reasons.
a constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction depends upon there having been a
substantial, clearly articulated, argument
relying upon established facts which
the relevant decision-maker failed to consider or engage with. Mars’
submissions before
the Acting DP challenged the Member’s conclusion
that Mr Knight suffered incapacity as a result of his employment with Mars.
That substantial, clearly articulated, argument was directly engaged with by the
Acting DP and rejected. There was no constructive
failure to exercise
Mars sought, for example, to challenge the Member’s credit findings before
the Acting DP, it could, and should, have included
a ground of appeal to that
effect, much as it included a number of grounds of appeal challenging specific
aspects of the Member’s
decision-making. Such a submission would, of
course, have had to grapple with the limitations on appellate review of fact
which are well recognised and are reiterated in
Mars’ submissions made no attempt to engage with those limitations.
Mars’ submissions before the Acting DP fell well
short of directly raising
a challenge to the Member’s acceptance of the credibility of
Mr Knight’s evidence. The same
analysis applies as regards the other
matters of fact raised in Mars’ submissions before the Member at paragraph
and in any event, as is clear from the summary of the Acting DP’s decision
set out above, the Acting DP engaged with
many of the matters raised in
paragraph 9 of Mars’ submissions before the Member. The
Acting DP’s analysis of Mars’
reasons challenge (ground one
before the Acting DP), engaged with contentions as to illogicality of the
Member’s reasoning
having regard to the evidence. The Acting DP also
engaged with Mars’ criticisms of the Member’s findings as regards Dr
Lannan’s report, Dr Cavanagh’s notes and what was or was not
said at Mr Knight’s Wyong Hospital admission. In addition,
clear from my summary of Mars’ contentions in paragraph 9 of its
submissions before the Member at [
] above, in large measure the matters raised went to
the credit of Mr Knight. As the Acting DP observed, given this,
Mars’ contentions
went nowhere given the Member’s acceptance of the
evidence of both Mr Knight and Dr Dias.
it is clear that the Acting DP considered the correctness of the
Member’s conclusion as to incapacity, and did not apply
the wrong standard
of appellate review. There is nothing in the Acting DP’s analysis
that suggests he limited his consideration
only to what conclusion was
“open” to the Member.
these circumstances, ground two should be rejected.
follows from my reasons as set out above that the appeal should be dismissed.
Mars sought the opportunity to make written submissions
as to costs after we
delivered reasons. That opportunity should be given.
propose the following orders:
(1) Appeal dismissed.
(2) Mars Australia Pty Limited is to file and serve submissions as to costs, of
no more than three pages, by 4 pm on 27 October 2025.
(3) Mr Knight is to file and serve responsive submissions as to costs, of
no more than three pages, by 4 pm on 3 November 2025.
(4) The issue of costs will be determined on the papers.
I agree with Stern JA.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (380 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter