URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/299.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fitzgerald v Building Professionals Board [2013] NSWADT 299 (24 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Fitzgerald v Building Professionals Board
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 299
Hearing Date(s):
8, 9 and 28 August 2013
Decision Date:
24 December 2013
Judge K P O'Connor, President
P Hayward, Non-judicial Member
1. The Board's finding that the applicant engaged in professional
misconduct in relation to his issuance of a construction certificate
development the subject of Complaint No 01/12 (Waverton) is affirmed.
The Board's finding that the applicant engaged in unsatisfactory professional
conduct in relation to the developments the subject
of complaints Complaint No
16/12 (Bexley) and Complaint No 21/12 (Mosman) is affirmed. The finding in
respect of Complaint No 116/11
(Chatswood) is set aside.
3. The Registrar
is to fix a date for directions to be given in relation to hearing of the
parties' submissions in relation to the
Board's disciplinary order.
Catchwords:
PROFESSIONAL DISCIPLINE - accredited certifier - application for review of
disciplinary decision - initial hearing confined to review
of the disciplinary
findings - Board findings of professional misconduct with respect to one
project, affirmed with one qualification;
Board findings of unsatisfactory
professional conduct in respect of other three projects - set aside in respect
of one project, otherwise
affirmed. Further hearing to be held in relation to
the disciplinary orders.
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Building Professionals Act
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Regulation 2000
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Donaghy v The Council of The
Law Society of New South Wales
[2013] NSWCA 154
Lesnewski v Mosman Municipal
Council & Anor
[2004] NSWLEC 99
MM & SW Enterprises Pty Ltd v
Strathfield Council
[2010] NSWLEC 8
Moy v Warringah Council
[2004] NSWCCA 77
Qiu v Building Professionals Board
[2013] NSWADT 289
Principal judgment
Paul Fitzgerald (Applicant)
Building Professionals Board
(Respondent)
Representation
T G Howard SC (Applicant)
- Solicitors:
A Gough, Storey and Gough Lawyers (Applicant)
A Grey, Building
Professionals Board (Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
is an application for review of disciplinary findings and orders made by the
Building Professionals Board against the applicant,
an accredited certifier, Mr
Paul Fitzgerald, who conducts business as Fitzgerald Building Certifiers Pty Ltd
at Thornleigh NSW.
decision deals with the first part of the application for review, the dispute as
to the disciplinary findings. The Tribunal will
reconvene after this decision is
issued to hear submissions on the application as it relates to the disciplinary
orders, taking into
account these reasons.
Board derives its disciplinary authority over certifiers from the
Professionals Act 2005
(the BP Act), see esp s 31. The certifier's right to
apply for review is conferred by s 33.
Board investigated four complaints, each relating to a development for which Mr
Fitzgerald was the accredited certifier and principal
(1) Complaint No 116/11 - demolition of an existing single storey house
together with the existing brick fence located on the front
boundary, and the
construction of a new two storey house and front fence, at 53 Centennial Avenue,
(2) Complaint No 01/12 - alterations and additions to a large, multi-storey
Federation building - at 116 Bay Road, Waverton.
(3) Complaint No 16/12 refers to a residential development at 40 & 42
Kingsland Road, Bexley, comprising the construction of two
multi-storey houses,
with garages and basements on the lowest level.
(4) Complaint No 21/12 refers to alterations involving the removal of a wall
and the fit out of a small commercial/retail building
at 565 Military Road,
3 May 2013 the Board notified Mr Fitzgerald that the Board's disciplinary
committee had, on 15 March 2013, found him guilty of
professional misconduct in
respect of matter (2) and guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct in
respect of the other three
complaints. It cancelled his accreditation, and
imposed a fine of $36,000.
full terms of the Board's orders follow (point 1 not relevant):
'2. In relation to complaints no 116/11, 16/12 and 21/12, the Committee
determined that the conduct of Mr Fitzgerald constituted unsatisfactory
professional conduct as defined under
Building Professionals Act
and, in relation to complaint 01/12, professional misconduct as defined under
Building Professionals Act
3. Mr Fitzgerald is reprimanded;
4. Fitzgerald [sic] is fined the amount of thirty six thousand dollars
($36,000) to be paid to the Board within in [sic] 28 days of
receipt of the
notice of decision on complaint;
5. The Certificate of Accreditation of Paul Fitzgerald is cancelled;
6. Mr Fitzgerald cannot re-apply for accreditation for a period of five (5)
7. The decision on penalty is an aggregation of complaint investigation
determinations by the Disciplinary Committee on 15 March 2013
for complaints no
116/11, 01/12, 16/12 and 21/12; and
8. The Committee took into consideration previous disciplinary action taken
against Mr Fitzgerald, having regard to the Board's Disciplinary
Guidelines.'
Fitzgerald lodged his review application with the Tribunal on 10 May 2013. The
Tribunal made consent orders on 28 May 2013 staying
the operation of order 4
(the $36,000 fine) pending final decision of the Tribunal. Therefore Mr
Fitzgerald has ceased practice.
Administrative
Review Function.
The Tribunal's exercise of its administrative review
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
(the ADT Act), the principal provision being s 63 which
63 Determination of review by Tribunal
(1) In determining an application for a review of a reviewable decision, the
Tribunal is to decide what the correct and preferable
decision is having regard
to the material then before it, including the following:
(a) any relevant factual material,
(b) any applicable written or unwritten law.
(2) For this purpose, the Tribunal may exercise all of the functions that are
conferred or imposed by any relevant enactment on the
administrator who made the
(3) In determining an application for the review of a reviewable decision,
the Tribunal may decide:
(a) to affirm the reviewable decision, or
(b) to vary the reviewable decision, or
(c) to set aside the reviewable decision and make a decision in substitution
for the reviewable decision it set aside, or
(d) to set aside the reviewable decision and remit the matter for
reconsideration by the administrator in accordance with any directions
recommendations of the Tribunal.
BP Act divides professional conduct warranting disciplinary action into two
categories: professional misconduct, and unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
They are defined as follows (s 19):
professional misconduct
, in relation to an accreditation
holder, means conduct that is unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of the
accreditation holder's certificate of accreditation.
unsatisfactory professional conduct
of an accredited certifier
means any of the following (whether consisting of an act or omission):
(a) conduct occurring in connection with the exercise of the accredited
certifier's functions as a certifying authority that falls
short of the standard
of competence, diligence and integrity that a member of the public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably competent
accredited certifier,
(b) a contravention of this Act, the
Environmental Planning and Assessment
Strata Schemes (Freehold Development) Act 1973
Strata Schemes (Leasehold Development) Act 1986
, or the regulations under
any of those Acts, by the accredited certifier, whether or not the accredited
certifier is prosecuted or
convicted for the contravention,
(c) a contravention by the accredited certifier of a law (whether or not a
New South Wales law, and whether or not the contravention
is an offence) that
relates to the functions or obligations of a person as an accredited certifier
or the holder of an equivalent
authorisation, or involves fraud or dishonesty,
whether or not the accredited certifier is prosecuted or convicted for the
contravention,
(d) a failure to comply with a statutory or other duty, or a contractual
obligation, imposed on the accredited certifier by or in
accordance with a law
(whether or not a New South Wales law) that relates to the functions or
obligations of a person as an accredited
certifier or the holder of an
equivalent authorisation,
(e) the exercise by the accredited certifier of functions as a certifying
authority in a partial manner,
(f) the wilful disregard by the accredited certifier of matters to which the
accredited certifier is required to have regard in exercising
functions as a
certifying authority,
(g) a failure by the accredited certifier to comply with any relevant code of
conduct contained in the accreditation scheme,
(h) a failure by the accredited certifier to comply with a term or condition
of the certificate of accreditation,
(i) a failure by an accredited certifier to comply with an order of the Board
or the Tribunal under this Act,
(j) a failure by the accredited certifier, without reasonable excuse, to
comply with a direction or requirement under
(k) wilfully misleading or obstructing the Board in the exercise of any
function under this Part or
(l) any other improper or unethical conduct of the accredited certifier that
indicates that the accredited certifier is unfit to properly
carry out the
duties of an accredited certifier,
(m) any conduct specified by a provision of this Act as being capable of
being unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct or any
other conduct prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
definition.
Tribunal convened to hear the case on 8, 9 and 28 August. Mr T Howard SC
appeared for Mr Fitzgerald; Mr A Grey for the Board.
The Tribunal was
constituted, as is usual in these matters, by a presidential member of the
Tribunal and a non-judicial member with
expertise in building practice and
accredited certification, Mr Philip Hayward, a registered surveyor of
Tribunal heard oral evidence from Board investigation staff, Ms Dorothy Kay
Harlor, Senior Investigator and Ms Janina Veri, Senior
Investigator. Ms Harlor
undertook the investigations in relation to the Chatswood (1) and Waverton (2)
matters, and Ms Veri undertook
the investigations in relation to the Bexley (3)
and Mosman (4) matters. They were cross-examined. Mr Fitzgerald gave evidence
was cross-examined. The Tribunal had before it the investigation reports,
and a transcript of the Board's hearing on 13 December
2012, and the text of its
determination made 13 March 2013.
his submissions Mr Howard criticised a number of aspects of the process followed
by the Board disciplinary committee, and asserted
that his client had been
denied procedural fairness in certain respects. He noted that the
recommendations under notice at its hearing
on 13 December 2012 were for his
client to be found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct in respect of
all four complaints.
He asserted that no notice had been given that the
disciplinary committee might take a more serious view of the Waverton matter,
and importantly that it was considering a more grave finding, that of
professional misconduct. He asserted that his client was not
given a fair
opportunity to be heard on that matter.
also criticised the fairness of the Board's reasons for not having regard, in
his submission, to the well-known observations of
the High Court in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
on the making of findings on
the balance of probabilities that have serious consequences for a person, and
for not explaining how
it reached its conclusions in respect of
are objections of a kind that might be raised in a judicial review application.
This Tribunal is engaged in a merits review
process, so it starts afresh: see
Donaghy v The Council of The Law Society of New South Wales
[2013] NSWCA 154
. Our hearing is bound by the usual principles in
relation to procedural fairness and adequacy of reasons.
hearing, the Board corrected an error in the text of the reasons delivered to Mr
Fitzgerald in respect of the Mosman development
(4). The text shows Allegation 6
as 'proven'. The words 'not proven' were substituted. Mr Grey advised that the
Board committee had
mistakenly recorded a determination that was contrary to the
investigation report recommendation (the recommendation was 'not proven')
had meant to enter the investigation report recommendation. Consequently this
Allegation did not fall for review.
hearing, the Board pressed a case for adoption of all the adverse findings made
by the Board.
the case of the Waverton development (no (2) in the sequence), the issues
related to Mr Fitzgerald's compliance with the requirements
governing the
issuance of construction certificates. In the case of the Chatswood development
(1) and the Bexley development (3),
the issues related to Mr Fitzgerald's
compliance with complying development certificate requirements, while the Mosman
development
(4) raised issues of compliance with the requirements governing the
issuance of complying development certificates and final occupation
certificates.
will start with the case regarded as most serious by the disciplinary committee,
the Waverton development (matter 2).
(2) COMPLAINT 1/12: DEVELOPMENT ADDRESS: 116 BAY ROAD, WAVERTON
Nature of the Development
. The approved development was for substantial
alterations and additions to an existing building with basement car parking. The
subject to redevelopment was a dwelling first built in the early 1900s
on a substantial block in an older area of Sydney close to
the Harbour,
internally configured as a two storey duplex. The dwelling is a single storey
one to the street, but is on a rearward
sloping block. It had two primary levels
to the rear, with a lower basement area. The proposal as approved permitted the
of an attic level and the raising of the ridge height, with the
consequence that the two duplexes would be capped by a shared single
rather than the two lower individual ridges that previously
duplexes sat to either side of a common wall, and as depicted, each had a
basement level, a ground floor level, a first floor
level and an attic level.
They are described in the plans as Unit 1 and Unit 2. Unit 1 was to the left
side viewed from the street,
and Unit 2 to the right side. The levels were
served by a lift well from the basement. The distribution of living spaces
in particular) varied as between the two units. At the ground floor
level, the plans provided for sliding doors to the back yard,
a yard which was
stepped downwards. At the first floor level each had a rear balcony area
enclosed by glass, and the plans showed
a dining layout in the balcony area. At
the attic level each had a deck flowing off a bedroom. These elements sought to
the outdoor amenity of the residence and the views towards the harbour
and the Harbour Bridge. Internally, each duplex had staircases
joining each of
the ground, first and attic floors.
terms of the Development Consent
. The allegations that remain under notice
refer to the following development consent conditions. [The conditions lettered
a common clause, which is omitted from the texts that follow, i.e.
'Details illustrating compliance with this condition shall be
submitted to the
Certifying Authority for approval prior to issue of a Construction
Certificate.']
out below are the Conditions to which the Board refers in its allegations or Mr
Fitzgerald raises in reply:
A1. [identifies the drawings the subject of the approval, and specifies work
to be in accordance with the plans except where amended
by the following
conditions]
A3. [prohibits alterations to and demolition of the existing building beyond
that documented on the plans]
A5. No consent is given or implied to the erection of a new front fence on
the Bay Road frontage of the property. Any new fencing
along this boundary of
the property that does not constitute exempt development pursuant to Schedule 6
of North Sydney Local Environmental
Plan 2001 shall be the subject of a further
development application. (Reason: To ensure that any new fence is of an
appropriate style
and height to the Conservation Area.)
C2. The proposed first floor rear level balcony screens on the eastern
elevation of Dwelling No 1 and western elevation of Dwelling
No 2 shall be
reduced to a maximum height of 1.6m above the finished floor level of these
balconies. (Reason: To reduce the bulk
of the development to the rear of the
C4. All fireplaces and chimneys shall be retained as existing. (Reason: To
ensure the retention of the existing fabric of the contributory
C5. All existing timber joinery, including skirting boards, dado rails,
trims, cornices and architraves shall be retained in the following
- Dwelling No 1 - Bedroom 2, Dining Room and Sitting Room; and
- Dwelling No 2 - Lounge.
(Reason: To ensure the retention of the existing fabric of the contributory
C6. The existing windows located between the proposed ground floor sitting
room and robe of Dwelling No 1 shall be retained. (Reason:
To ensure the
retention of the existing fabric of the contributory item.)
C9. Unless noted for removal on the approved plans, all leadlight windows and
doors, including internal windows and doors, shall be
retained in-situ. (Reason:
To ensure the retention of the existing fabric of the contributory item.)
C11. The proposed garbage area shall be re-located to a location where it
will not be visible from the street or impact on views of
the dwelling from the
street. (Reason: To minimise impact of the works on the contributory item and
conservations area.)
C12. All external and internal leadlight windows and doors as noted on the
approved plans to be removed shall be re-used in the works,
sold or given to
specialist heritage building supply re-seller. [To ensure the retention and
conservation of significant building
E5. Should any portion of the existing building, trees or curtilage of the
site which is indicated on the approved plans to be retained
be damaged for
whatever reason, all the works in the area of the damaged portion are to cease
and written notification given to Council.
No work is to resume until the
written approval of Council is obtained. Failure to comply with the provisions
of this condition will
result in the Council taking further action including
legal proceedings if necessary. (Reason: To ensure compliance with the terms
this development consent.)
of Construction Certificate in respect of an approved development.
certifier's primary duty is found in cl 145(1)(a) of the
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Regulation 2000
(EPA Reg), at cl 145:
145 Compliance with development consent and Building Code of
(cf clause 79G of EP&A Regulation 1994)
(1) A certifying authority must not issue a construction certificate for
building work unless:
(a1) the plans and specifications for the building include such matters as
each relevant BASIX certificate requires, and
(a) the design and construction of the building (as depicted in the plans and
specifications and as described in any other information
furnished to the
certifying authority under clause 140) are not inconsistent with the development
consent, and
(b) the proposed building (not being a temporary building) will comply with
the relevant requirements of the
Building Code of Australia
(as in force
at the time the application for the construction certificate was made).
(2) A certifying authority must not issue a construction certificate for
subdivision work unless the design and construction of the
work (as depicted in
the plans and specifications and as described in any other information furnished
to the certifying authority
under clause 140) are not inconsistent with the
development consent.
(3) Subclause (1) (b) does not apply to the extent to which an exemption is
in force under clause 187 or 188, subject to the terms
of any condition or
requirement referred to in clause 187 (6) or 188 (4).
this case the focus is the requirement at cl 145(1)(a), and in particular
whether particular matters were 'inconsistent' or 'not
inconsistent' with the
development consent.
Moy v Warringah Council
[2004] NSWCCA 77
per Sperling J
(Sully, Simpson JJ agreeing):
Clause 145 is proscriptive. It prohibits the issue of a construction
certificate unless the certifier is satisfied of the matter specified.
Lesnewski v Mosman Municipal Council & Anor
[2004] NSWLEC
32 ... [T]he possibility of some variation between the terms of a development
consent and the design and construction of the building
is contemplated by the
legislation. ...
34. It is difficult to precisely qualify the meaning of "inconsistent". Each
case will need to be decided on its own facts. A single
minor difference between
the construction certificate plans and the development consent plans is likely
to be acceptable. Where there
are a number of minor differences then the
collective impact of these differences will need to be assessed to determine
whether they
combine to result in unacceptable inconsistency. A major difference
is likely to give rise to an inconsistency. Whether a difference
is major or
minor and whether, in the case of a number of minor differences, the cumulative
effect is a major difference will depend
on the circumstances. Consideration of
whether or not a s 96 modification is warranted is not of great assistance, as
that threshold
addresses a different statutory context. It may be that there
will be a finding of inconsistency under cl 145(1)(a) before the necessity
s 96 modification arises. I consider that provided the development consent and
construction certificate plans are largely similar
so that they depict
substantially the same development they are not inconsistent.
relation to this complaint, and especially the findings in connection with
allegation 1, Mr Howard criticised the Board for having
relied, as he saw it, on
assertions of inconsistency made by council officers in their original
complaint, without having its investigative
staff do any separate inspection. He
criticised the Board's reasons for having failed to explain why it regarded the
alleged inconsistencies,
as one, meeting that description and, secondly, as
warranting the description 'significant'. As previously noted this is a merits
review proceeding, and therefore any omissions of this kind ought not repeat
themselves.
will consider separately each of the allegations, 1, 2 and 3.
Consideration of Allegation 1
Board found Allegation 1 proven.
ALLEGATION 1
Mr Fitzgerald determined construction certificate no. 2011-0422 on 2 May 2011
when the plans forming part of the construction certificate
were inconsistent
with development consent no. D234/10, determined by North Sydney Council on 29
November 2010.
Mr Fitzgerald failed to comply with clause 145(1)(a) of the
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Regulation 2000
, as the plans forming part of the
approved construction certificate were inconsistent with development consent
D234/10 in respect
to the following:
1. New concrete slab to replace existing timber floor structure to ground
floor and first floor;
2. The DA was for the retention of the floors and structure, with new floors
only to extension;*
3. Development consent conditions A1, A3, A5, C4, C5, C6, C9, C11 and C12
have not been satisfied.*
Basement Level Plan
1. Additional excavation to side and front of basement and removal of
existing footings;*
2. Inclusion of an additional stair;
3. Reconfiguration and enlargement of driveway and parking area;
4. Existing footings removed (approved DA was for their retention);
5. Increased size of lift.
Ground Floor Plan
1. Stair relocated;*
2. Eastern external wall to bedroom 1 relocated and new windows added;*
3. Approved bathroom replaced with laundry and walls reconfigured, including
removal of original fabric;
4. Approved laundry deleted;
5. Wall between sitting room and bedroom 1 changed;
6. Approved robe replaced with ensuite;*
7. Windows to south façade changed.*
1. Bathroom/robe area reconfigured;
2. Hallway reconfigured;
3. Western external wall to bedroom 2 changed and new window added;
4. Windows to south façade changed.*
First Floor
1. Stair relocated;*
2. Bathroom relocated;*
3. Store changed to WC;
4. Kitchen relocated;
5. Nib walls of existing walls removed (required to be retained in DA);*
6. Windows to balcony reconfigured.*
1. Entry and corridor reconfigured;*
2. Stair reconfigured;
3. Kitchen reconfigured;
4. Windows to balcony reconfigured;
5. Attic floor added.
1. Deck extended;
2. Roof access and concrete floor in roof added;
3. Stair relocated;*
4. Lift deleted;
5. Dressing room added.
1. Deck extended;
2. Roof access and concrete floor in roof added.
1. Hot water solar panels added to northern pitch of rear dormer roofs.*
South Elevation
1. Windows reconfigured ground and first floor;*
2. Rear extension widened;*
3. Glazed roof over balcony altered;*
4. Garage doors changed.
North Elevation
1. Front fence added (contrary to Condition AS which states that any front
fence should be the subject of a further DA);*
2. Bin store added in front setback (contrary to Condition C 11).*
East Elevation
1. Side porch area walls and windows changed;*
2. Existing walls removed level 2 (adjacent to extension);*
3. Metal roof over extension changed to slate;*
4. Privacy screens deleted and replaced with glazing, walls and glass
5. Approved windows to basement changed to glass brick.*
West Elevation
1. Windows to dormers changed;
2. Metal roof over extension replaced with slate;*
3. Window added at ground floor level;
4. Walls to extension changed;*
5. Privacy screen removed;
6. Approved window replaced with glass brick.*
Items marked with an asterisk (*) refer to works that would be
unlikely to be approved by Council.
three inconsistencies are alleged, affecting all aspects of the built structure.
Prior to hearing Mr Fitzgerald conceded only
one as inconsistent to the extent
contemplated by cl 145, i.e. item 1 under the heading 'North Elevation' - 'Front
fence added (contrary
to Condition A5 which states that any front fence should
be the subject of a further DA)'.
will refer first to the note that accompanies the asterisked items. We have
disregarded it, as we did not have any direct evidence
from council officers as
to this assertion, made in respect, on our count, of 27 of the 53 items. We are
not sufficiently familiar
with council practice in this area to reach any view
of our own.
Board conceded in its closing submissions that item 1 of its allegations in
respect of the attic area for both units ('deck extended')
had not been proven;
and no longer pressed these. Similarly, it noted that Mr Fitzgerald had now
conceded his error in permitting
the changes to the ground floor and first floor
glazing. The Board did not continue to press the other matters alleged in
of the South Elevation (i.e. items 1 and 4). The Board accepted Mr
Fitzgerald's evidence in respect of Condition C2 and the window
specifications
on the plan, and did not continue to press the allegation about the deletion of
glass louvres (item 4). The other
matters were not the subject of cross-examination of Mr Fitzgerald. Similarly in
the case of the
equivalent item in respect of the Western Elevation (item 5) was
not pressed.
the Tribunal's opinion, it was clearly demonstrated by the coloured plans to
which Mr Grey for the Board referred, and upon which
Mr Fitzgerald was
cross-examined, that internally there were many changes from the development
approval. In our view the changes
itemised in the allegations (other than those
that the Board has not continued to press) were proven.
note especially, as Mr Grey observed, that there was no cross-examination or
evidence given by Mr Fitzgerald at the hearing as
to the following matters: the
effect on the fabric of the building of the removal of the timber floors and the
related demolitions;
the change in the size of the basement car spaces and
related reconfigurations; the significant alterations to the ground levels
both units, and the changes to the rear glazing of the extension; the major
changes of the internal lay out and configuration
of the units at first floor
level; the changes in the attic level other than as noted below; the changes
affecting the roof level,
especially the repositioning of the hot water
collectors to a more conspicuous roof location; the north elevation issues; and
front fence issue.
these reasons we do not propose to engage in an itemised examination of each of
them and the individual degree of change. We are
satisfied, to adopt the words
of Pain J in
that, at the least, the 'collective impact' of
these differences gave rise to 'unacceptable inconsistency'.
the case of the internal changes, the removal of the timber floors and their
replacement with concrete floors was, we consider,
Mr Grey noted in his written submissions, by specifying that a new concrete
floor be installed in these areas it would have been
necessary to demolish and
remove existing timber floors between the two floors with consequent damage and
probable removal of cornices.
He noted that the timber flooring was tongue and
groove and part of the existing fabric of the building. He referred to
photographs
of the way the work was carried out, with the sitting room gutted
and nothing remaining of the floor, internal walls, or any other
is plain from the conditions we have quoted that the Council wished to see
preserved a range of joinery features. Clearly they
lost much of their character
once they were divorced from the timber flooring. A competent accredited
certifier would have recognised
the importance of not interfering with critical
elements of the heritage fabric of the building.
many of the other internal changes viewed in isolation might have been approved
had there been an amended application, the sheer
scope and range of these
changes raises concern as to the professional insight and understanding of Mr
Fitzgerald as to the nature
of the public office that a certifier is required to
perform, one that is independent of the client and is concerned to ensure the
public interest as reflected in the development consent is
our view, these works eventually gave rise to a virtual, total reconstruction,
especially as a result of the timber floors being
replaced by concrete and roof
structures altered. The extent of demolition attracted complaints from
neighbours from an early date
(the complaint letters are set out in the Board's
basement reconfigurations led to a substantial increase in the car park capacity
from 4m width (scaled) to 4.8m width (scaled).
There were deeper excavations
permitted to the unit 1 parking area of 0.5m.
our view, a competent certifier faced with building alterations and deviations
from the approved plans of this magnitude would
have recommended that the
developer activate the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
(EPA Act) modified consent procedure.
changes of the greatest concern, and with the widest public impact, were those
to the external appearance of the building, changes
which affected the character
of the building. It is plain from the development consent conditions that the
Council was concerned
to ensure that the development preserved the heritage
character of the building. In this regard preservation of the external
of the building is of fundamental importance.
relation to external changes, a certifier needs to be especially vigilant and in
particular in cases like the present where heritage
considerations were central
to a number of the conditions of the development consent.
Tribunal's understanding of the development approval is that it included
approval for a front fence. It was not clear at hearing
whether the front fence
deviated from the development approval in any material way. The development
approval process would have given
neighbours an opportunity to object. That
process should have allowed for any heritage impact concerns to be addressed.
find Allegation 1 proven as set out above.
Consideration of Allegation 2
Board found Allegation 2 proven.
ALLEGATION 2
As the principal certifying authority for the development, Mr Fitzgerald
failed to adequately ensure that building work proceeded
generally in accordance
with the construction certificate approved drawings and the development consent.
Roofing material and its
supporting timber roof structure was removed and
interior joinery was removed contrary to Council's development consent
A3, C4, C5, C6, C9 and E5.
Mr Fitzgerald's conduct as an accredited certifier fell short of the standard
of competence that a member of the public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably
competent accredited certifier.
2.7 The allegation is proven.
Fitzgerald's submission is that the Board has failed to explain what the
statutory duty is that Mr Fitzgerald breached. In our
view this allegation is
one about competence and refers to the responsibilities reasonably to be
expected of certifiers. It is not
necessary to reference a statutory duty. As
noted in respect of Allegation 1, the variations were quite major and exceeded
shown on CC and DA drawings.
Fitzgerald in his defence states that he attended the site on 27 June 2011 in
response to a complaint by neighbours of excessive
demolition and formed the
view that it was justified. He exercised his power to issue a notice under
giving a direction to the developer as a person to whom a formal notice
could be issued. He copied the
notice to North Sydney
Council. It received it on 29 June 2011. The Council by letter dated 1 July 2011
wrote to Mr Fitzgerald expressing
concern over excessive demolition. The Council
asked him to advise them within 7 days as to his investigation into the matter.
never responded.
Mr Grey noted in his submissions the
notice did not in any case comply in
its terms with the prescribed text of the order said to be being given, an
'Order No 15' form
of order. Such an order should have stated 'the development
consent is not being complied with', instead he wrote 'seek regulatory
for the unauthorised demolition works'.
Fitzgerald should have ensured by critical stage inspections that the building
was being constructed in accordance with the CC
find Allegation 2 proven.
Consideration of Allegation 3
Board found Allegation 3 proven.
ALLEGATION 3
Mr Fitzgerald determined construction certificate no. 2011-0422 on 2 May 2011
with an incorrect classification under the Building
Code of Australia (BCA) of
class 1a instead of classes 2, 5 and 7a. The incorrect classification has
significant adverse impacts
upon the fire separation and protection of opening
requirements of the building.
Mr Fitzgerald determined the construction certificate when the proposed
building described in the plans accompanying the construction
certificate did
not comply with the requirements of the BCA:
(a) The proposed fire separation between the two sole occupancy units did not
comply with the requirements of specification C1.1,
clause 3.1 and Table 3 of
(b) The proposed fire separation between the two sole occupancy units did not
comply with the requirements of clause C3.11 of the
(c) The fire protection of openings in the western external wall of the
proposed building did not comply with the requirements of
Windows W5-WT1, 09-WE, 11-WE, W15-WT1 and W15-WT1 were not protected in
accordance with clause C3.4(a)(ii) of the BCA.
Fitzgerald proceeded on the basis that he was dealing with a class 1a
(residential) building. The relevant definition distinguishes
'detached house' and 'one or more of a group of two or more attached dwellings'.
The BCA definition is:
Class 1: one or more buildings which in association constitute -
(a) Class 1a - a single dwelling being -
(i) A detached house; or
(ii) One or a group of two or more attached dwellings, each being a building,
separated by a fire-resisting wall including a row house,
terrace house, town
house or villa unit.
Board submitted that the plans do not show the necessary fire-resisting wall,
especially in relation to the lift area and the
way it opens. The Board referred
to concessions in evidence by Mr Fitzgerald that there was nothing in the plans
that addressed the
fire rating for the lift. Mr Fitzgerald conceded that the
plans did not depict or specify a fire resistant wall. The Board also referred
to his acknowledgement in evidence that the fire separation must extend from
bottom to top and include the roof cavity. The old structure
with separate
ridges meet that requirement but the new one with its integrated single ridge
(related to the redevelopment of the
attic area for residential use) did not. In
closing submissions Mr Fitzgerald acknowledged that the fire protection wall did
extend to the roof line.
Board challenged his statement that a class 1(a) classification is acceptable if
the lift is fire rated appropriately. Class 2
is 'a building containing 2 or
more sole occupancy units each being a separate dwelling'. Class 5 is an 'office
building used for
professional or commercial purposes, excluding buildings of
Class 6, 7, 8 or 9'. Class 7a, the other classification raised here,
'carpark' which means a building used for parking of motor vehicles than it is
not a 'private garage'. As relevant to the dispute
in this case, a 'private
garage' is a storey with parking for less than three cars.
was considerable debate at hearing as to what the alternative classification
might have been with the Board preferring car park.
As to the latter, we do not
accept that the car park as varied (4.8m wide versus 4.0m approved) now allowed
for more than two cars
to be parked (i.e. three) as there remained insufficient
width to do so.
we accept the specific points made by the Board, we were left in some doubt as
to whether a reasonably competent accredited
certifier ought be regarded as
having erred in the construction certificate classification. We find that aspect
of the allegation
not proven.
are satisfied however that, in any event, the fire resistant wall should have
reached the underside of the roof joist. In our view
this was a very serious
omission, and gave rise to the very real risk of easy spread of fire endangering
human life. We uphold the
allegation to that extent.
(1) COMPLAINT 116/11: DEVELOPMENT ADDRESS: 53 CENTENNIAL AVENUE,
of Development
. The development involved the demolition of an existing
single storey house together with the existing brick fence located on the
boundary, and the construction of a new two storey house and front fence. Only
one of the three allegations considered by the
Board remained alive, Allegation
1. Originally this allegation referred to two trees, which we will call by their
common names -
a jacaranda and a (weeping) lilly pilly. The law gives special
protection to trees, and requires their removal or pruning to be the
specific authorisation ahead of any complying development certificate
to give a Complying Development Consent
. A certifier is entitled to issue a
complying development certificate (or 'CDC') in respect of specified
developments. A developer
applicant consequently need not go to the council or
other planning authority for a development approval.
process for obtaining a CDC is set out in s 85A of the EPA Act:
85A Process for obtaining complying development certificates
Application
An applicant may, in accordance with the regulations, apply to:
(a) the council, or
(b) an accredited certifier,
for a complying development certificate.
(2) (Repealed)
The council or accredited certifier must consider the application and
(a) whether or not the proposed development is complying development, and
(b) whether or not the proposed development complies with the relevant
development standards, and
(c) if the proposed development is complying development because of the
provisions of a local environmental plan, or a local environmental
relation to which the council has made a development control plan, that
specifies standards and conditions for the complying
development, whether or not
the proposed development complies with those standards and conditions.
(4) A council or accredited certifier must not refuse to issue a complying
development certificate on the ground that any building
product or system
relating to the development does not comply with a requirement of the
Building Code of Australia
if the building product or system is
accredited in respect of that requirement in accordance with the
regulations.
(5) A council, an employee of a council and an accredited certifier do not
incur any liability as a consequence of acting in accordance
with subsection
Determination
The council or an accredited certifier may determine an application:
(a) by issuing a complying development certificate, unconditionally or (to
the extent required by the regulations, an environmental
planning instrument or
a development control plan) subject to conditions, or
(b) by refusing to issue a complying development certificate.
(7) The council or an accredited certifier must not refuse to issue a
complying development certificate if the proposed development
complies with the
development standards applicable to it and complies with other requirements
prescribed by the regulations relating
to the issue of a complying development
certificate.
(8) The determination of an application by the council or accredited
certifier must be completed within the period prescribed by the
regulations (or
such longer period as may be agreed to by the applicant) after lodgment of the
application.
(9) In determining the application, the council or the accredited certifier
must impose a condition that is required to be imposed
under Division 6 in
relation to the complying development.
(10) There is no right of appeal against the determination of, or a failure
or refusal to determine, an application for a complying
development certificate
by a council or an accredited certifier.
Payment of long service levy
Where a council or accredited certifier completes a complying development
certificate, that certificate is not to be forwarded or
delivered to the
applicant, unless any long service levy payable under
Building and Construction Industry Long Service Payments Act 1986
where such a levy is payable by instalments, the first instalment of the levy)
has been paid.
Post-determination notification
On the determination of an application for the issue of a complying
development certificate:
(a) the council or accredited certifier must notify the applicant of the
determination, and
(b) the accredited certifier must notify the council of the determination,
(c) if the determination is to issue a complying development certificate, the
council or accredited certifier must notify any other
person, if required to do
so by the regulations, in accordance with the regulations.
(12) For the purposes of subsection (7),
development standard
includes a provision of a development control plan that would be a development
standard, within the meaning of section 4, if the
provision were in an
environmental planning instrument.
will be seen that the accredited certifier's duty is set out in sub-section (3).
It will be seen that wide authority is given to
the certifier.
Consideration of Allegation 1
Board found Allegation 1 proven.
ALLEGATION 1
Mr Fitzgerald issued complying development certificate no. J2011/071 dated 31
May 2011, when no permit or development consent for
the removal or pruning of
trees on the development site had been obtained, as required by clause
1.18(1)(h) of the State Environmental
Planning Policy (Exempt and Complying
Development codes) 2008 (SEPP).
Mr Fitzgerald issued the complying development certificate when the
development was not complying development in accordance with
Section 85A(3)
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
, as the provisions of
clause 1.18(1)(h) of the SEPP had not been complied with prior to the issue of
the complying development certificate.
allegation referred to the following provisions:
State Environmental Planning Policy (Exempt and Complying Development
Codes) 2008
(SEPP), cl 1.18(1)(h) [subject - removal or pruning of
1.18 General requirements for complying development for this
(1) To be complying development for the purposes of this Policy, the
development must: ...
(h) if it involves the removal or pruning of a tree or other vegetation that
requires a permit or development consent to which clause
3.6A or 3A.7 does not
apply, before the complying development certificate is issued, have a permit or
development consent for that
removal or pruning.
A permit for the removal or pruning of a tree or other
vegetation may be granted under a local environmental plan. A development
consent for the removal of native vegetation may be granted under the
Vegetation Act 2003
. Paragraph (h) may not apply to certain trees or
vegetation near complying development under
(see clauses 3.6A and
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2000
, cl 4(2)(b) of
Schedule 1 of the [subject - indications on site plan as to vegetation and
4 Documents to accompany application for complying development
certificate
(2) The site plan referred to in subclause (1)(a) must indicate the following
(b) existing vegetation and trees on the land,
Board's reasons for decision include the following statements:
1.3 Mr Fitzgerald failed to ensure that a permit was obtained for the removal
or pruning of the Jacaranda tree in accordance with
clause 1.18(1)(h) of the
Codes SEPP.
1.4 Mr Fitzgerald failed to ensure that all trees were indicated on the site
plan in accordance with Clause 4(2)(b) of Schedule 1
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Regulation 2000
1.5 The allegation is proven in part. [The Tribunal adds, i.e. as to the
jacaranda but not the lilly pilly.]
2. The Board is satisfied, based on its findings on the material facts in
relation to part Allegation 1, that the conduct of Mr Fitzgerald
constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct as defined by section 19 of the BP Act in
that it was conduct:
- Occurring in connection with the exercise of the accredited certifier's
functions as a certifying authority that fell short of the
standard of
competence, diligence and integrity that a member of the public is entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent accredited
- Contravened
section 85A(3)
Environmental Planning and Assessment
, or the regulations under either of those Acts whether or not he or
she is prosecuted or convicted for the contravention.
- Contravened Clause 18(1)(h) of the Codes SEPP.
Consideration of Allegation 1
attention was given at hearing to this case, and several site photographs
showing the demolition works and the new dwelling
works at different points of
time were tendered.
Fitzgerald issued the CDC on 31 May 2011. The project involved substantial
demolition and excavation works. There was a real issue
as to the potential
impact of those works on established trees on the property. An aborist's report
had been obtained, dated 21 May
2011. The report made recommendations as to the
limit of the boundary of an excavation so as to avoid any interference with the
pilly tree and its roots. A Council tree officer made an inspection on 26
October 2011 and found that the excavation had caused damage
to the roots of two
trees, the lilly pilly and the jacaranda. The Council also considered that the
two trees had not been shown on
the approved CDC plans; and considered this was
contrary to cl 4(2)(b) of Sch 1 of the EPA Reg that requires the site plan to
the existing vegetation and trees on the land.
criticisms of Mr Fitzgerald are that he failed to ensure that all trees were
indicated on the site plan, he failed to undertake
a pre-CDC inspection and
ensure that the jacaranda was indicated, he failed to ensure that the excavation
works did not proceed in
such a way that the tree was destroyed, and that he
should have seen that the construction of the new front fence would have
in the need for the jacaranda tree to be removed, and therefore a
pre-CDC authorisation was required.
is no dispute that there was a jacaranda tree near the front of the property to
the right side as viewed from the street, and
that it was destroyed at some
point. The question is the culpability or otherwise of the certifier, Mr
Fitzgerald in that regard.
were not satisfied from the material placed before us by the Board and the
evidence that there was any intention to excavate inside
the front fence and
remove the jacaranda, as ultimately happened. The front fence/wall and the tree
had obviously lived together
for many decades which would cause the roots of the
tree to be contained by the wall. The bulk brick footing plan described by the
BPB was almost certainly in existence and would probably have supported a new
wall. (We note also that the survey plan was deficient
in that trees were shown
by dots for trunks and irregular lines for canopies with no description of tree
find this allegation not proven.
(3) COMPLAINT 16/12: DEVELOPMENT ADDRESS: NO. 40 KINGSLAND ROAD, BEXLEY,
AND NO. 42 KINGSLAND ROAD, BEXLEY
of Development
. This development comprised the construction of two
multi-storey houses, with garages and basements on the lowest level. The
have similar designs though mirrored. There is an allegation in
relation to each property, involving a common issue, the depth of
below the buildings.
have set out earlier the general provisions relating to the issuance of
complying development consents.
Consideration of Allegations 1 and 2
Board found the following allegations proven.
ALLEGATION 1
In relation to 40 Kingsland Road, Bexley
Mr Fitzgerald issued complying development certificate (CDC) 2011/1433 on 28
September 2011 for the construction of a dwelling house
when the proposed
development could not be undertaken as complying development. The proposed
development required excavation to a
depth of greater than one metre.
Mr Fitzgerald issued the complying development certificate when the
development was not complying development in accordance with
section 85A(3)
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
, as the provisions of
clause 3.29 of the
State Environmental Planning Policy (Exempt and Complying
Development Codes) 2008
[Codes SEPP] had not been complied with.
1.7 The allegation is proven.
ALLEGATION 2
In relation to 42 Kingsland Road, Bexley
Mr Fitzgerald issued complying development certificate (CDC) 2011/1434 on 29
September 2011 for the construction of a dwelling house
when the proposed
development could not be undertaken as complying development. The proposed
development required excavation to a
depth of greater than one metre.
Mr Fitzgerald issued the complying development certificate when the
development was not complying development in accordance with
section 85A(3)
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
, as the provisions of
clause 3.29 of the
State Environmental Planning Policy (Exempt and Complying
Development Codes) 2008
had not been complied with.
2.6 The allegation is proven.
REASONS FOR THE DECISION - Complaint No. 16/12
1. The Board is satisfied, based on its findings on the material facts in
relation to Allegations 1 and 2, that the conduct of Mr
Paul Fitzgerald
constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct as defined by section 19 of the
BP Act in that it was conduct:
Occurring in connection with the exercise of the accredited certifier's
functions as a certifying authority that fell short of the
standard of
competence, diligence and integrity that a member of the public is entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent accredited
allegations raise the same concern in respect of the adjacent works.
to the scope of the material relevant to the complaint, the Board accepted
submissions for Mr Fitzgerald to bring closure to the
case that the recitals in
the allegation should be strictly adhered to, and therefore it was not
permissible to have regard to the
amended CDCs issued in respect of each site
(2011/1433A and 2011/1434A both dated 13 December 2011) in making the case
Fitzgerald.
applicant concedes that the depth of excavations were 2.7m from the floor level
of the garage to the ground floor level.
Board's allegation refers to Clause 3.29 of the Codes SEPP which
3.29 Excavation of sloping sites
(1) Excavation associated with the erection of, or alterations or additions
to, a dwelling house or ancillary development (other than
a swimming pool) must:
(a) be not more than 1m below ground level (existing), and
(b) be constructed using a retaining wall or unprotected embankment that
meets the standards of subclause (2) or (3), respectively.
(2) A retaining wall:
(a) must not redirect the flow of surface water onto adjoining property,
(b) must not extend more than 2m horizontally from any external wall of the
dwelling house or ancillary development.
(3) An unprotected embankment must not extend more than 2m horizontally
beyond the external wall of the dwelling house or ancillary
development.
(4) Excavation associated with the erection of, or alterations or additions
to, a swimming pool must be not more than the depth required
for the pool
Board's case refers to sub-cl (1)(a) and (b). Mr Fitzgerald raises as part of
his defence Codes SEPP cl 3.4:
3.4 Basements and roof terraces excluded
(1) The erection of a basement, either as part of a new dwelling house or as
an addition or alteration to an existing dwelling house,
is not development
specified for this code if:
(a) on a lot that has a width, measured at the building line, of at least
10m-the basement has an area greater than 45m2, or
(b) on a lot that has a width, measured at the building line, of at least 6m,
but less than 10m-the basement has an area greater than
(2) The erection of a roof terrace on the topmost roof of:
(a) an existing or a new dwelling house, or
(b) an existing or a new outbuilding that is detached from a dwelling
is not development specified for this code.
also refers to the definition of 'basement' in the Standard Instrument -
Principal Local Environmental Plan:
means the space of a building where the floor level of
that space is predominantly below ground level (existing) and where the floor
level of the storey immediately above is less than 1 metre above ground level
(existing).
Fitzgerald's submission is that a basement (provided it does not exceed the area
limits specified in cl 3.4) can be part of a complying
development, and the
subject of cl 3.29 is the special situation of 'sloping sites'. He submitted
that a guide issued by the Department
of Planning depicts a basement towards the
rear of a sloping site which shows a space with a height greater than 1m. The
further is that cl 3.29 should be construed as applying to
excavations external to the building footprint. It is said that any other
interpretation would prevent the construction of footings, drainage or below
ground water tanks to a depth greater than 1m and would
be entirely inconsistent
with cl 3.4.
have dealt with similar submissions in our recently published decision in
v Building Professionals Board
[2013] NSWADT 289
50 In relation to Mr Bennett's opinion, we consider that the rule in cl 3.29
is a general rule that is applicable, as it is expressed,
to any 'excavation
associated with the erection of ... a dwelling house'. This accords with the
view expressed in the 2010 discussion
51 Cl 3.29 appears in Subdivision 6 of Division 2 of Part 3. Part 3 is headed
'General Housing Code'. Division 2 is headed 'Development
standards for this
code'. The building issues the subject of this division are covered in
Subdivisions 2-7, and they are headed 'Site
requirements', 'Building heights and
setbacks', 'Landscaping', 'Car parking and access', 'Earthworks and drainage'
(Subdivision 6
where cl 3.29 appears), 'Ancillary development', 'Outbuildings'
and 'Development standards for particular land' (such as bushfire
prone land).
52 This strict provision needs to be understood in the overall framework of
the policy aims of the Codes SEPP. The instrument provides
for a streamlined
process, enabling the 'fast tracking' of various aspects of residential building
works. In our view it is understandable
that some caution would be shown in
relation to allowing fast tracking of more substantial excavation works. The
instrument as it
is presently framed means that more substantial footings
excavation can not be the subject of a CDC.
53 We accept that the construction of a basement that is at or near the upper
end of the area limits specified would often normally
require more than 1.0m
depth excavation; and that as a practical matter many basements are built in a
way that allows someone to
stand up in them, and therefore would ordinarily be
at least 2.0m in height. Nonetheless, cl 3.4 is entirely silent on this matter,
and we are not able to draw the inference that Mr Bennett does.
54 Consequently, we agree with Mr Oslan's and the Board's interpretation of
, we are dealing here also with a sloping site. The result
therefore is that any excavation work is constrained as to its depth, and
excavation cannot be authorised by a CDC.
allegation is proven.
we acknowledge that the application of these provisions to sloping sites is
affected by difficulty. The distinction between
a sub 1 metre excavation and one
that exceeds that limit can be hard to define in a sloping site situation. The
measurements specified
by the Codes SEPP only work easily within flat sites.
Further we regard an excavation that occurs within the building fabric as
a less significant issue than one that occurs on open land or near the
boundary of the land.
This allegation raises the same issue as Allegation 1 in relation to the
neighbouring building. The same finding is entered, subject
to the same
reservations.
(4) COMPLAINT 21/12: DEVELOPMENT ADDRESS: 565 MILITARY ROAD, MOSMAN NSW
case relates to the issuance of both a CDC (4 June 2010) and an occupation
certificate (17 January 2011) in relation to the fit
out of the rear part of 565
Military Road Mosman.
of Development
. The building within which the development in issue took
place is one of a row of shops in a busy shopping area. At ground level
building was the subject of two retail tenancies, one for the front facing the
street (a shop), the other for the rear facing
a courtyard and back street known
as Myahgah Mews (the tenancy of relevance to this case). Upstairs was occupied
as a residence.
The lessee of the back rooms at ground level proposed to run a
shop selling chocolates ('Coco Chocolates') with an associated small
area. The lessor agreed to redesign the rooms in the rear area to create a
café. Works went ahead that included
removal of the internal masonry
her evidence, Ms Veri, the Board investigator inspected the premises on 17
August 2012. The internal masonry wall had been removed.
The ceiling lining had
been replaced in all the rooms. A four bowl vanity unit had been installed.
There was a new plumbing and electrical
fit out. There was a surface finish and
painting. The entry area from the rear had been altered.
We have set out earlier the general provisions relating to CDCs.
The Board's case refers to the following additional provisions:
EPA Reg, Sch 1, cl 4:
4 Documents to accompany application for complying development
certificate
(1) An application for a complying development certificate must be
accompanied by the following documents:
(a) a site plan of the land, ...
(d) if the development involves building work (including work in relation to
a dwelling-house or a building or structure that is ancillary
dwelling-house):
(ii) appropriate building work plans and specifications, ...
(2) The site plan referred to in subclause (1) (a) must indicate the
following matters:
(a) the location, boundary dimensions, site area and north point of the land,
(d) existing levels of the land in relation to buildings and roads, ...
(5) Appropriate building work plans and specifications referred to in
subclause (1) (d) (ii) include the following:
(a) detailed plans, drawn to a suitable scale and consisting of a block plan
and a general plan, that show:
(i) a plan of each floor section, and
(ii) a plan of each elevation of the building, and
(iii) the levels of the lowest floor and of any yard or unbuilt on area
belonging to that floor and the levels of the adjacent ground,
(iv) the height, design, construction and provision for fire safety and fire
resistance (if any), ...
Clause 134(1)(f) of the EPA Reg
(1) A complying development certificate must contain the following:
(f) a statement to the effect that the development is complying development
and (if carried out as specified in the certificate) will
comply with all
development standards applicable to the development and with such other
requirements prescribed by this regulation
concerning the issue of this
certificate.
Consideration of Allegation 1 (Concerning the Complying Development
Certificate)
Board found Allegation 1 proven.
ALLEGATION 1
Mr Fitzgerald issued complying development certificate no. 2010/309, dated
4 June 2010, which did not indicate that the proposed building
work was to
include the removal of a wall, nor was the proposed removal of the wall
indicated in the endorsed plans or specifications
accompanying the complying
development certificate. The removal of the wall was specified in the
description of work on the application
form for the complying development
certificate.
Mr Fitzgerald's conduct as an accredited certifier fell short of the
standard of competence, diligence and integrity that a member
of the public is
entitled to expect of a reasonably competent accredited certifier.
application is on a form that bears the masthead of Mr Fitzgerald's business.
The formal applicant was the lessor (Paul Lotz).
It describes the works as 'wall
removal and café area (seating 8)', with estimated cost of works at
$10,000. Mr Fitzgerald's
CDC states that the application was received on 3 June
2010 and was approved on 4 June 2010. The approved plans are listed as 'I
and the person who prepared them is marked as 'not nominated', and the fire
safety schedule is listed as '1 sheet'.
single page plan covers the ground floor and the (residential) first floor (see
p 36 of the s 58 materials) and is similar in
style to a real estate agent's
basic plan used in sales advertising. The ground floor depiction shows the front
and rear areas of
the shop premises. The 'front' is the shop; and the rear shows
four room spaces adjoined to the front by a doorway. The rear area
is the area
of the second tenancy, and the source of these proceedings.
four spaces divide into a small area (5.94 sq m), divided by a part wall from an
'office' area (12.05 sq m) that shows a fireplace
cavity in the corner, with the
whole area separated by a solid wall from another area marked 'office' (8.08 sq
m) adjacent to which
through a doorway in a solid wall is an area marked 'WC'
(3.69 sq m). It is the unbroken solid wall between the two 'offices' that
issue. As we understand the intention, the seating area for the café was
to be created by having the wall removed with
the result that two office areas
would become one with an overall space of about 20 sq m, and the WC would be at
the back. The photographs
presented to the Tribunal showed an entrance to the
café from the rear courtyard.
Board's material noted the terms of the lease where the issue of proposed
removal of the wall was addressed. The lease terms included
requirements that
the work be done in a workmanlike manner and under the supervision of a
structural engineer.
Fitzgerald stated to the Board that he had contacted the tenant (Ms Rebecca
Kerswell) prior to issue of the CDC and was told by
her that the purpose of the
application was for shop fit out for a chocolate shop called 'Coco Chocolates'
which would sell chocolates
produced off-site, supported by a café area,
and the fit out would consist of shelving and the like. Ms Kerswell supplied
with a letter dated 1 April 2010 from John Bagnall & Associates Pty Ltd,
Consulting Civil & Structural Engineers, headed
'rear 565 Military Road
Mosman', and confirming its advice that 'that internal wall with the fireplace
could be demolished, but not
until part of the ceiling has been removed to
reveal the means of support of the existing brick wall in the residence above.'
letter went on to say 'It may be necessary to install a steel beam depending
on what is revealed. In any case some brickwork will
have to be built back at
the fireplace location to support the chimney structure above.' It continued
'The inner wall of the WC and
the Mews entry foyer is loadbearing and it would
be somewhat more involved (though not impossible) to remove this
reply to the Board's investigation, Mr Fitzgerald asserted that this letter
amounted to an engineer's certificate. The Board's
investigator correctly
responded that this document was merely advisory and did not constitute a
certificate of any kind. This assertion
by Mr Fitzgerald points to a lack of
acuity that must be of concern in terms of the standard of professional conduct
reasonably to
be expected of a certifier.
Board's investigation report noted numerous matters it regarded as deficiencies
in the actions of Mr Fitzgerald. The site plan
did not, in its opinion, comply
with cl 4(1)(a), 4(2)(a) and 4(2)(d), the plans did not show the matters
required by cl 4(5)(a)(ii)
or (iii) or (iv) or the matters required by cl
4(1)(d)(i) or (ii). We agree the site plan did not have the linear or spatial
required by these provisions.
is no answer as Mr Fitzgerald submits that the CDC's failure to depict the
removal of the internal wall cannot be a problem if
the endorsed plan did not
itself show the removal of the internal wall. We do not regard the statements of
Pepper J in
MM & SW Enterprises Pty Ltd v Strathfield Council
otherwise of the contents of application forms as bearing on this case. Her
Honour was not dealing in that case with a question of adequacy of professional
conduct. The nub of the allegation here is that Mr
Fitzgerald ought reasonably
to have known what was being requested, but he allowed a CDC to issue which made
no reference to the
core structural matter, and did not see to it that the terms
of the CDC and the endorsed plan addressed the issue. This is a case
fundamental omission.
are satisfied that the application itself in its terms, and Mr Fitzgerald's
of an intention to
undertake work that may have major structural implications. The application was
deficient. Allegation 1 is proven.
Consideration of Allegations 3 and 4 (concerning the Occupation
Certificate)
of Occupation Certificates
. In relation to the issuance of the occupation
certificate (or 'OC'), the Board's case referred to the following
provisions:
EPA Act s 109H(6):
109H Restrictions on issue of occupation certificates
(6) A final occupation certificate must not be issued to authorise a person
to commence a new use of a building resulting from a change
of building use for
an existing building unless:
(a) a development consent or complying development certificate is in force
with respect to the change of building use, and
(b) the building is suitable for occupation or use in accordance with its
classification under the Building Code of Australia, and
(c) such other matters as are required by the regulations to be complied with
before such a certificate may be issued have been complied
EPA Reg, cl 132(2):
132 Development standards for building work involving the alteration,
enlargement or extension of an existing building
(1) This clause applies to development for which a complying development
certificate is sought involving the alteration, enlargement
or extension of an
existing building, otherwise than in connection with a change of building use of
an existing building.
(2) The development standards applicable to such development include the
requirement that, on completion of the building work, the
fire protection and
structural capacity of the building will not be reduced.
(3) That requirement assumes that the building work is carried out in
accordance with the plans and specifications to which the complying
development
certificate relates and any conditions to which the complying development
certificate is subject.
Board found Allegation 3 proven.
ALLEGATION 3
Mr Fitzgerald issued final occupation certificate no. 2011/058 on 17
January 2011 for a building that was not suitable for occupation
accordance with its classification under the Building Code of Australia. Mr
Fitzgerald failed to ensure that the integrity
of the fire protective covering,
situated between the retail and residential level above was not compromised by
penetrations caused
by the installation of light fittings.
Mr Fitzgerald has breached
section 109H(6)
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Mr Fitzgerald's conduct as an accredited certifier fell short of the
standard of competence, diligence and integrity that a member
of the public is
entitled to expect of a reasonably competent accredited certifier.
final occupation certificate (see p 38 of the
documents) had attached a
fire safety certificate signed by the landlord (see pp 39-40). The wall had been
removed and there was
a new ceiling. Therefore Mr Fitzgerald needed to satisfy
himself as to its compliance with the CDC, its general compliance and address
properly particular matters, in this instance the matter of significance being
the conditions relevant to issuance of the fire safety
certificate.
Fitzgerald stated that prior to issuing the occupation certificate he obtained a
statement from the installer of the new ceiling,
Mr Sharp, (see p 65) which
This is to certify that CSR 13mm Fire Check gyprock 13mm (CSR 805 system)
Fire Resistance Level FRL of 30/30/30 was installed at Coco
Chocolates, Rear 565
Military Road, Mosman.
Board's investigator, Ms Veri, accepted that type of ceiling material recorded
in Mr Sharp's certificate was generally compliant.
installation of lighting in the ceiling and the creation of penetrations meant
that care needed to be shown to ensure adherence
to relevant fire safety
standards, especially in circumstances where there was a residence
her report Ms Veri referred to her site inspection on 17 August 2012 which
revealed numerous unprotected penetrations in the ceiling
of the coffee shop.
The penetrations were for the electrical fit-out. The floor of the residential
unit can be seen by looking through
the light fittings of the area below. She
said that the café could not reasonably operate without adequate lighting
certifier should have ensured appropriate lighting was properly in place
prior to the issue of the final occupation certificate.
She said it was evident
that the penetrations compromised the fire protective covering to the first
accept Ms Veri's evidence that the penetrations were visible to the naked eye
(supported by her photographs that were tendered),
and agree with her view that
at his final inspection Mr Fitzgerald should have identified this
are satisfied from the material tendered and after considering the evidence of
the Board's investigator, Ms Veri, and the evidence
of Mr Fitzgerald that there
were failings in the fire protection offered by the gyprock ceiling due to
unsealed down light penetrations.
find Allegation 3 proven.
regard this as a very serious omission on Mr Fitzgerald's part, and one that
clearly falls below the standard that a reasonably
informed and fair minded
member of the public might expect of an accredited certifier.
Board found Allegation 4 proven.
ALLEGATION 4
Mr Fitzgerald issued final occupation certificate no. 2011/058 on 17
January 2011 for a building that was not suitable for occupation
accordance with its classification under the Building Code of Australia. Mr
Fitzgerald failed to ensure the building was
structurally adequate following the
removal of an internal wall. Mr Fitzgerald has breached the requirements of
clause 132(2) of
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation
(EP&A Regulation) and
section 109H(6)
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Mr Fitzgerald's conduct as an accredited certifier fell short of the
standard of competence, diligence and integrity that a member
of the public is
entitled to expect of a reasonably competent accredited certifier.
agree with the Board's investigator that Mr Fitzgerald needed to provide a
certificate as to the structural adequacy of the building
following removal of
the wall. It was not acceptable as he sought to do in his reply to the Board's
investigation to seek to justify
this omission by referring to the engineer's
letter of 1 April 2010 sent to the tenant. As we have already noted, this letter
qualifications and could not have been relied upon to confirm the
structural adequacy of the finished building.
find Allegation 4 proven.
Assessment of the Conduct found Proven
have upheld the Board's findings in respect of the Waverton development in
respect of Allegations 1 and 2, and in a specific aspect
in relation to
Allegation 3, an aspect that we regard as very serious. We have upheld the
Board's findings in respect of the allegations
relating to the Mosman
development that remained in contest, Allegations 1, 3 and 4. We have upheld the
Board's findings that remained
in contest in respect of the Bexley development,
but have indicated some reservations about the practicality of the relevant
provisions.
We have not found proven the remaining allegation under notice in
respect of the Chatswood development, Allegation 1.
set out earlier in these reasons the provisions relating to the meaning of
professional misconduct and unsatisfactory professional
mere error of professional judgement would not ordinarily give rise to an
adverse disciplinary finding. The error or errors must
be of an order that a
disinterested member of the public, who is fair minded and reasonably informed
certification, would regard as falling short of
the standard of competence, diligence and integrity that is reasonably to be
of a reasonably competent accredited certifier (see para (a) of the
definition of 'unsatisfactory professional conduct'.) To enter
a finding of
'professional misconduct' the unsatisfactory professional conduct must be 'of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation' of the
holder's certificate of accreditation.
our view, the Board was correct in assessing Mr Fitzgerald's level of
culpability in relation to the Waverton development as warranting
a finding of
professional misconduct. We would add that, in our view, his culpability in
relation to the fire safety issues (Allegation
3) connected with the issuance of
the occupation certificate in respect of the Mosman development was high, and
might well have warranted
a finding of professional misconduct. However, we will
not vary the Board's determination in that regard.
Accordingly
we affirm the disciplinary findings of the Board.
1. The Board's finding that the applicant engaged in professional misconduct
in relation to his issuance of a construction certificate
for the development
the subject of Complaint No 01/12 (Waverton) is affirmed.
2. The Board's finding that the applicant engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct in relation to the developments the subject
of complaints
Complaint No 16/12 (Bexley) and Complaint No 21/12 (Mosman) is affirmed. The
finding in respect of Complaint No 116/11
(Chatswood) is set aside.
3. The Registrar is to fix a date for directions to be given in relation to
hearing of the parties' submissions in relation to the
Board's disciplinary
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (405 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter