URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SMITH V THE NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA [2013] NSWNMT 10 (10 July 2013)
Jacqueline SMITH
THE NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
APPEAL AGAINST DECISION OF NATIONAL BOARD
CITATION: SMITH V THE NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF
[2013] NSWNMT 10
Appellant: Jacqueline
Respondent:
The Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
Deputy Chairperson Mr R. C.
Nurse and Midwife Member: Ms C. Doyle
Ms A. J. Currie
Lay Member: Mr P. Hooker
Date and place of hearing:
14 May 2013 at Sydney, and by written
submissions dated 14 May 2013 and 12 June 2013.
Date of Orders and Reasons for Decision:
10 July 2013
Representation:
Appellant: Mr S. Hopper,
Respondent: Mr A. Stafford of Counsel
instructed by Ms V. Pollard, Crown Solicitor’s Office of NSW.
Appeal against decision to refuse registration. Interpretation of the Recency
of Practice Standard approved under National Law. Meaning
of “sufficient
practice to demonstrate competence in their professions within the preceding
five years”. Meaning of “direct
non clinical relationship with
clients”. Meaning of “working in management, administration,
education, research, advisory,
regulatory or policy development roles, and any
other roles that impact on safe, effective delivery of services in the
and/or use their professional skills”. HELD – Decision of
the respondent confirmed.
Legislation
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1936) 60 CLR 336.
Cook v Cook
[1986] HCA 73
(1986) 162 CLR 376.
McMahon v The Nursing and Midwifery Board
[2013] NSWNMT 4.
R v The War Pensions Entitlement Appeals Tribunal; Ex parte Bott
(1933) 50 CLR 228.
Pursuant to s175C of the
Health Practitioner National Law
appeal is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
appellant Ms Smith initially qualified as a registered nurse in the United
Kingdom in 1986. In 1988 she was first registered as
a nurse in New South Wales.
She became registered as a midwife in New South Wales in 1992. She then
practised as a registered midwife
(on both a full-time and part-time basis)
until November 1998. By reason of travelling overseas and then raising a
family she did
not practice as either a midwife or a nurse from 1999 to 2006,
and her registration both as a nurse and as a midwife lapsed.
2005 Ms Smith sought registration as a nurse and as a midwife by the Nurses and
Midwives Board of NSW (NMB), the predecessor body
to the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia (the Board). Her registration as a nurse was granted on the
basis that she provide
nursing care to the public only in accordance with three
conditions, namely that a person at the level of nurse manager agreed to
a report to the NMB, that she inform the NMB in writing of the name of each
employer and the nurse manager who had agreed
to provide the report and provide
a copy of the written authorisation to the NMB, and to the nurse manager,
consenting to the provision
of a report to the NMB by the nurse manager
regarding the nurse’s competence and safety to practise.
conditions were placed on her registration as a midwife.
2006 Ms Smith commenced employment as the practice manager to her husband, Dr
Jonathon Riley, an anaesthetist. Her responsibilities
and duties in that role
are discussed later in these reasons.
the period 2006 to 2011 the respondent renewed her registration both as a nurse
and as a midwife annually. In each case registration
was granted, despite her
not complying with the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 above.
application dated 30 May 2012 Ms Smith sought to renew her registration both as
a nurse and as a midwife. In her application she
stated that she had not
practised as either since 1998.
Board responded to that application by email dated 19 July 2012. It asked for
further information. The letter noted that Ms Smith
had not submitted to the
Board a copy of the signed agreement from a nurse manager/employer to provide a
written report. In particular
the letter noted that the Board required a written
competency report from her manager/supervisor addressing the competency
for being a registered nurse and registered midwife, and evidence
showing that she met the respondent's Recency of Practice Registration
(the Standard) of 456 hours, or 3 months full-time equivalent, in the last five
years. The letter specifically stated that:
If you hold
qualification as a Registered Nurse and a Registered Midwife and wish to retain
your registration in both professions,
then you must demonstrate recency of
practice in
professions. That is,
456 hours, or 3 months
full-time equivalent, in the last five years
AND 456 hours, or
3 months full-time equivalent, in the last five years
in Midwifery.
(Bolding and capitalisation as appearing in the original).
Smith did not provide the information sought, and the Board considered her
application on 2 August 2012. Following that meeting
the Board wrote to her on
or about 23 August 2012 and informed her that it proposed to refuse her
registration as a nurse and as
a midwife because she did not meet the Standard
for either profession. The Board invited her to make an oral or written
within 30 days. The letter stated that as Ms Smith had not practiced
for 10 years or more, in order to meet the Standard she would
need to enrol in a
Board approved course leading to registration, such as a Bachelor of
letter dated 21 September 2012 Ms Smith provided a submission to the Board which
relevantly stated:
From 2006 to the present I have been working
20 hours a week as Practice Manager in an Anaesthetic Practice. My job involves
with patients, health funds, Medicare, surgeons’ secretaries and
creating accounts and billings. My current role, although
not a directly
clinical one, I believe complies with the Standard viz “Practice means any
role . . . [and] is not restricted
to the provision of direct clinical care.
It also includes working in a direct non-clinical relationship with
clients, working with
management administration . . .”
Smith also provided a copy of her curriculum vitae, various statements of
service and certificates of attendance and achievement
in a range of
Board considered Ms Smith’s submission at its meeting on 1 November 2012.
The Board resolved to refuse her registration
as a registered nurse and as a
registered midwife. The Board subsequently informed Ms Smith by letter dated 15
November 2012 that
her application for registration as a registered nurse and as
a registered midwife was refused as the information provided in her
did not meet the Standard.
Consequently
on 15 November 2012 the appellant's name was removed from the National Register
as a registered nurse and midwife.
13 December 2012 Ms Smith appealed from the decision of the Board to this
Tribunal. The appeal was brought in respect of both the
decision to refuse her
registration as a nurse and the decision to refuse her registration as a
midwife. However shortly after commencement
of the appeal hearing she informed
the Tribunal that she no longer wished to appeal against the Board’s
decision refusing to
register her as a midwife. Accordingly this appeal only
concerns the Board’s decision to refuse to register her as a registered
appeal is brought pursuant to s175 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
(National Law). It was common ground between the parties
that an appeal under s175 of the National Law is an appeal
the matter is not entirely free from doubt, the Tribunal notes the lengthy and
persuasive discussion of the Nursing and Midwifery
Tribunal in
McMahon v The
Nursing and Midwifery Board
[2013] NSWNMT 4
to [75]. In
the Tribunal concluded at [76]:
Adopting the
reasoning in [
Camacho v Psychology Council of NSW
[2011] NSWPST 1]
, and noting the Tribunal does not have the benefit of
appellate authority on s175 for guidance, we conclude we should treat the appeal
as being an appeal de novo. . . . Our conclusion the appeal is an appeal de
novo is informed by the following matters:
(a) the conclusion respects comity with the decision of the Medical Tribunal
of New South Wales in [
Barrett v Medical Board of Australia
[2012] NSWMT
(b) the language in s175C puts beyond doubt that the appeal is not an appeal
stricto sensu
. The absence of any provision relating to re-hearing
indicating this is a statutory appeal by way of re-hearing in the sense
by the High Court in [
Allesch v Maunz
(2000) 203 CLR 172]
supports a conclusion it is an appeal
(c) it adopts the reasoning in
, in particular the references
in that decision to the lack of recording of the respondent’s
deliberations, and the lack of
findings in formal reasons for the refusal of
registration;
(d) the statute does not include power to remit to the respondent for
re-hearing if error is detected in its decision; and
(e) conforms with broad policy considerations of an appeal to a Tribunal, as
distinct from an intermediate appellate court, generally
being an appeal
the context of whether Australian courts should consider themselves bound by
English authority, the High Court has observed that
the precedents of other
legal systems are not binding and are useful only to the degree of the
persuasiveness of their reasoning:
Cook v Cook
(1986) 162 CLR 376
[1986] HCA 73
, per Mason, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ at [19]. Until guided by
appellate authority on this issue, in light of the views of the
parties, and
given the persuasiveness of the reasoning in
we will treat this
appeal as an appeal
is also authority for the following propositions which provide useful guidance
to the Tribunal in the exercise of its functions.
in conducting an appeal under the National Law a Tribunal may conduct
proceedings as it thinks fit (see s167B of the National
[36]); see too clause 2 of Schedule 5D (Proceedings before Professional
Standards Committees or Tribunals) to the National Law.
Clause 2 provides that a
Tribunal is not bound to observe the rules of law governing the admission of
made that observation, it is timely to recall the caution suggested by Evatt J
R v The War Pensions Entitlement Appeals Tribunal; Ex parte Bott
(1933) 50 CLR 228.
His Honour stated at 256:
But this does not mean
that all rules of evidence may be ignored as of no account. After all, they
represent the attempt made, through
many generations, to evolve a method of
inquiry best calculated to prevent error and elicit truth. No tribunal can,
without grave
danger of injustice, set them on one side and resort to methods of
inquiry which necessarily advantage one party and necessarily
disadvantage the
opposing party. In other words, although rules of evidence, as such, do not
bind, every attempt must be made to
administer "substantial justice."
is observed by Aronson and Groves in
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(5th Ed) at 581:
Provisions which free a tribunal or other body
from the rules of evidence are best regarded as facultative. They are intended
procedural flexibility but not to displace logic or reasons. A
decision-maker freed from the rules of evidence must therefore still
the whether the material it can consider should in fact be considered. The
litmus test is usually whether the material is
rationally probative. It follows
that provisions which free tribunals from the rules of evidence do not allow
decision-makers to
“draw inferences or jump to conclusions, which the
available material did not adequately support”.
(footnotes omitted)
the proceedings are civil proceedings and the burden of proof is on the balance
of probabilities, and the standard of proof
being the Briginshaw standard (see
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1936) 60 CLR 336
the Tribunal hearing the appeal must apply the law in force as at the date of
the hearing of the appeal, not the date of
the Board’s decision (see
the Tribunal is required to conduct the proceedings by determining an
appellant’s application for registration afresh.
This requires an
assessment of an appellant’s evidence in support of his or her claim that
she or he has met the relevant Standard
(in which respect the appellant bears
the onus of proof to the civil standard) and an assessment of the
respondent’s evidence,
and taking into account all relevant considerations
and exercising any discretion as if hearing the original application (see
Objectives and Guiding Principles of the
National Law
Overarching
the specific provisions of the National Law are the objectives and guiding
principles which are set out in s3 as follows:
Objectives and
guiding principles
The object of this Law is to establish a national registration and
accreditation scheme for--
(a) the regulation of health practitioners
(b) the registration of students undertaking--
(i) programs of study that provide a qualification for registration in a
health profession; or
(ii) clinical training in a health profession.
(2) The objectives of the national registration and accreditation scheme
(a) to provide for the protection of the public by ensuring that only
health practitioners who are suitably trained and qualified
to practise in a
competent and ethical manner are registered; and
(b) to facilitate workforce mobility across Australia by reducing the
administrative burden for health practitioners wishing to move
participating jurisdictions or to practise in more than one participating
(c) to facilitate the provision of high quality education and training of
health practitioners; and
(d) to facilitate the rigorous and responsive assessment of overseas-trained
health practitioners; and
(e) to facilitate access to services provided by health practitioners in
accordance with the public interest; and
(f) to enable the continuous development of a flexible, responsive and
sustainable Australian health workforce and to enable innovation
education of, and service delivery by, health practitioners.
(3) The guiding principles of the national
registration and accreditation scheme are as follows--
(a) the scheme is to operate in a transparent, accountable, efficient,
effective and fair way;
(b) fees required to be paid under the scheme are to be reasonable having
regard to the efficient and effective operation of the
(c) restrictions on the practice of a health profession are to be imposed
under the scheme only if it is necessary to ensure health
services are provided
safely and are of an appropriate quality.
(emphasis added)
3A of the National Law, which is an additional provision for NSW, provides, in
3A Objective and guiding principle [NSW]
In the exercise of functions under a NSW provision, the protection of the
health and safety of the public must be the paramount consideration.
"NSW provision" is defined in s5 of the National Law as:
provision that forms part of this Law because of a modification made by the Health
Practitioner Regulation
of National Law) Act 2009; or
(b) a NSW regulation.
This definition is an additional New South Wales provision.
175 (Appellable decisions [NSW]) appears in Division 14A (Appeals [NSW]) of Part
8 (Health, Performance and Conduct) of the
National Law. It is a "NSW
provision" by reason of it forming part of the National Law because of a
modification made by the Health
Practitioner Regulation
of National Law) Act 2009. Section 175 appears in Division 1 of Schedule 1
to that Act.
Accordingly,
in considering this appeal, the protection of the health and safety of the
public must be the paramount consideration
of the Tribunal.
Recency of Practice Registration Standard
was the case in
, the principal issue in this appeal is the
interpretation of the Standard. As the Tribunal noted in
a standard is not a legislative instrument, its authority is recognised under
the National Law. Further, the importance of a
standard, once approved by the
Ministerial Council, is that in various situations compliance with a standard,
such as the Standard
or the English Language Standard, by a nurse is
to retain or achieve registration. The legislation contains no
discretion that enables a Board, (or a Tribunal), in particular circumstance,
not to apply a standard once approved.
Tribunal . . . considers interpretation of the Standard must be the
interpretation that adopts as paramount the objectives and
principles set out in
the National Law. Further, because of the requirement for a standard to be
widely disseminated and readily
understood by members of the profession and
former members of the profession, a standard should, so far as practicable, be
interpreted
consistently by the respondent and the Tribunal. That said, there
reposes in the respondent and the Tribunal a discretion in assessing
such as practice hours engaged in the role of a nurse practising in a voluntary
capacity, to give such weight as it considers
appropriate to the factual matters
presented to it.
The Tribunal went on to determine, at [115], that:
the mandatory
requirements to achieve registration, (excluding a nurse applying for annual
re-registration) are
(a) for those nurses who have been out of practise for over five years from
the date of application for registration successful completion
approved program or assessment; and
(b) for those nurses who have been out of practice for under five years from
the date of application by providing satisfactory evidence
of practise of
nursing, whether paid or unpaid, equivalent to 3 months full time nursing,
and/or successful completion of a post-graduate
award relevant to the practice
of nursing, and/or evidence of successful completion of a Board approved course
or Board approved
supervised practice experience completed prior to the
application for registration.
The issue in the appeal
central issue in this appeal is whether Ms Smith has satisfied the requirement
of the Standard, namely that she has undertaken
sufficient practice to
demonstrate competence in her profession as a nurse in the preceding five years
(see Summary to the Standard).
We note that clause 2(a) of the Standard provides
that nurses will fulfil the requirement relating to recency of practice if they
(relevantly) can demonstrate practice in their profession within the past five
years equivalent to a minimum of three months full
do not accept the submission of Ms Smith that the content under the heading of
Summary in the Standard is not operative. As the
Board rightly submits, such a
submission is inconsistent with
at paragraphs [103], [104] and
[114]. We are not satisfied to the requisite standard that Ms Smith has done
summary Ms Smith submits that she has satisfied the Standard by reason of
employment as a practice manager in an anaesthetist’s
practice. In
particular she relies on that component of the Standard which provides that
“practice” is not restricted
to “direct clinical care”.
Board submits that she has not practised as a nurse in the last five years. It
further submits that as she has had a break of
more than five years from
practice she is subject to an overriding requirement in the Summary to the
Standard that, to return to
practice, she must satisfactorily complete a program
or assessment process that is approved by the Board.
Smith relied on her own evidence, and that of Dr Riley. The Board relied on the
evidence of Ms Anne Samuelson. Ms Samuelson is
the Manager, Nursing and
Midwifery Registration, of the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency.
witnesses were cross-examined. All were reliable and believable. By and large
the facts were not in dispute. What was in dispute
was whether the factual
circumstances of Ms Smith’s employment as practice manager should be
considered to amount as “practice”
as a nurse for the purposes of
the Standard.
The evidence of Ms Smith
Smith’s primary evidence was contained in her affidavit affirmed 21
February 2013 (Exhibit 1). In addition she tendered during
the hearing, without
objection, four certificates from the College of Nursing (Exhibit 2).
Smith’s affidavit was read without objection. It was a short affidavit,
two pages in length, which primarily set out her
work history. At paragraph 11
she stated:
In 2006 until the current time I am the practice
manager from [sic] Dr Jonathan Riley Aneasthetist. During the course of my
as a practice manager I perform the following duties;
Doctor provides me with patient information and then I create an account and
enter the necessary patient data on the computerised
the phone and deal with patient enquires, health fund liaisons and Medicare
liaisons, and other doctor’s surgeries liaisons.
administration and bookkeeping as required.
with accounts and stocking office.
written evidence was supplemented by oral evidence in chief and through cross
examination at the hearing. She described her interaction
with Dr Riley’s
patients in the following terms:
When a patient is scheduled for
surgery, they will go and see the surgeon and the surgeon will tell them to ring
our office so that
they can get more information about maybe the cost of the
anaesthetic and that's generally the main reason why they will ring, but
often they're quite anxious in regards to the upcoming surgery and anaesthetic
and they may also have some other health issues.
They might be on medications
or have had previous surgery, they may also have had previous anaesthetics that
they might not have
been very happy with and that's concerning them, that the
same thing doesn't happen again. So they will generally tell me what they're
concerned about and they may want to talk to Dr Riley, and quite often it's
just general concerns, but if it you know, if I think
it's more specific
and he needs to be informed, I will take their details and let him know and he
will ring them and talk to them
prior to them going in to the hospital for their
operation, but generally he will just see them the morning of their surgery and
he will talk to them in the anaesthetic bay about their medical history,
surgical history, any allergies they've had and anything
that's concerning them.
So I guess I just make a decision about whether he actually does need to talk to
them prior to them going
into hospital or whether they're just general worries
that I can help them with and just explain a little bit about the procedure
after when they go in. I think quite often patients are probably more concerned
and worried about the anaesthetic than they are
the surgery because it's more of
an unseen thing. You know, they don't really understand how it works or what
Smith said that she did not have direct clinical care for patients, and had not
done so since 2006.
was asked about her failure to comply with the conditions that had been placed
on her registration as a nurse (and as a midwife)
since 2005. She agreed that
she had not complied with those conditions, but said that she understood the
conditions to comply if
she was “working as a registered nurse in a
clinical situation” and had a nursing unit manager to report to.
cross examination Ms Smith explained that her work was undertaken at her home.
She said that Dr Riley did not see patients in
the office there, but he usually
saw them at the hospital prior to surgery. Thus all her dealings with patients
were on the telephone.
She informed Dr Riley about all calls except for
quotations for the provision of services. In cross examination she also accepted
that the duties she referred in paragraphs 11(a) (data entry), (c) general
administration) and (d) (accounts and stocking office
supplies) were functions
that any practice manager would be expected to perform.
to paragraph 11(b), (telephone enquires from patient and discussions with Dr
Riley) Ms Smith agreed that this was also a role that
could be performed by
other practice managers, and agreed that she would only receive calls in
relation to medication and the like
if the particular patient wanted to make an
enquiry of Dr Riley. However Ms Smith did say, in answer to the suggestion from
Mr Stafford
that as practice manager she was not using her knowledge and skills
as a nurse to make the decision as to whether to pass on information
patient to Dr Riley, that:
I think having that knowledge certainly
as just compared
to an anxiety and worry point of view from the patient.
Ms Smith agreed that anyone properly qualified in managerial or administrative
duties would have been able to perform the
role as practice manager that she
The evidence of Dr Riley
Riley’s short statement dated 22 February 2013 was tendered without
objection (Exhibit 3). His written statement provided
evidence entirely
consistent with Ms Smith’s evidence as to the nature of her duties and
responsibilities. He stated, and the
Tribunal accepts,
[d]uring the time that [Ms Smith] has been in my employment
she has performed these duties with the utmost professionalism, care and
compassion. She has exceptional organizational skills and ability to take the
initiative in problem solving. Her nursing background
has been particularly
useful in liaising with sick patients regarding pre-operative instructions and
sorting out minor post-operative
Riley was affirmed and gave further evidence in chief. He said it was
“very useful to have someone with experience in nursing”
calls, and that:
having worked in the nursing field, [Ms Smith]
recognises a problem that I need to discuss directly with the patient, so any
of clinical problem that the patient has, she will call me and then I will
call the patient and discuss it with them. I think having
nursing experience
allows her to prioritise when she needs to call me. If the patient calls her
and discusses an issue, she will
either call me straightaway and say, "Look,
there's this patient needs something sorted out", and then I can ring the
patient straightaway
or she may wait until, you know, when I finish work that
day and then let me know about the patient and then I can either ring the
patient straightaway then or ring the next day, just depending on the urgency of
the situation. I think her experience just allows
her to prioritise whether it
needs to be sorted out immediately or it can wait.
also made it plain that he had told Ms Smith that she should not give advice to
patients, and that any patient who had a medical
or clinical problem was to be
referred to him, and he would deal with the problem directly with the patient.
This was consistent
with both Ms Smith’s evidence and Dr Riley’s
evidence in cross examination that Ms Smith had conditions on her registration
as a nurse that prohibited her from providing nursing care to the public.
cross examination by Mr Stafford Dr Riley stated that the role of practice
manager was a varied one that required a lot of skills
and that one of the
skills he had found useful was experience is nursing. In reexamination by Mr
Hopper he said that he thought
that about on average ten calls a week were made
to his surgery by patients, and that Ms Smith would contact him in relation to
or three of those calls.
The evidence of Ms Samuelson
written evidence of Ms Samuelson was contained in her affidavit affirmed 26
March 2013 (Exhibit A). That affidavit was read, without
objection, save for
paragraph 54, which was not read.
her affidavit Ms Samuelson, having set out her role and experience with the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency, describes
the Board’s
registration standards, the Board’s
Re-entry to Practice Policy
the Standard and the progress of Ms Smith’s application for registration
and the Board’s considerations leading to its
decision to refuse Ms
Smith’s re-registration (relevantly) as a registered nurse.
note that the
Re-entry to Practice Policy
was adopted by the Board on 19
March 2012. The interaction of that policy and the Standard was considered by
the Tribunal in
, where the Tribunal stated at
The policy was developed to be applied in conjunction with
the Standard. We infer this means the policy is designed to facilitate,
guide, application of the Standard in particular cases. We accept, as this is a
, that subject to procedural fairness considerations, the
Tribunal, should, as explained by McClellan CJ in
Developments Pty Ltd v Manly City Council
(2004) LGERA 254]
have regard
to such policy and should consistently, so far as practicable, interpret the
Standard in conformity with the policy.
Operable Provisions
is now convenient to set out the relevant provisions of the Standard. (The
complete Standard is set out as Attachment A to these
reasons.) The Standard
relevantly provides:
Nurses and midwives must have undertaken sufficient practice to demonstrate
competence in their professions within the preceding five
years. Nurses and
midwives who are returning to practice after a break of more than five years
must satisfactorily complete a program
or assessment process that is approved by
Scope of application
This standard applies to nurses and midwives seeking registration,
endorsement of registration or renewal of registration. . . .
Requirements
and midwives must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Board, that they have
undertaken sufficient practice, as defined
in (2) below, in their professions
within the preceding five years to maintain competence.
and midwives will fulfil the requirements relating to recency of practice if
they can demonstrate one, or more of the following:
in their profession within the past five years for a period equivalent to a
minimum of three months full time
hours are recognised if evidence is provided to demonstrate:
nurse or midwife held a valid registration with a nursing or midwifery
regulatory authority in the jurisdiction (either Australian
or overseas) when
the hours were worked, or
role involved the application of nursing and/or midwifery knowledge and skills,
Definitions
means any role, whether remunerated or not, in which the
individual uses their skills and knowledge as a nurse or midwife. For the
purposes of this registration standard, practice is not restricted to the
provision of direct clinical care. It also includes working
in a direct non
clinical relationship with clients, working in management, administration,
education, research, advisory, regulatory
or policy development roles, and any
other roles that impact on safe, effective delivery of services in the
profession and/or use
their professional skills.
Recency of practice
means that a practitioner has maintained an
adequate connection with, and recent practice in, the profession since
qualifying or obtaining
Ms Smith’s Submissions
will be recalled that in paragraph 11 of Ms Smith’s affidavit she referred
to performing the following duties which we summarise
(a) computer data entry;
(b) telephone liaison with patients, health funds and other doctors’
(c) general administration and bookkeeping; and
(d) accounts and stocking office.
oral submissions Mr Hopper was asked whether he submitted that everything that
Ms Smith did as a practice manager was a demonstration
of using her skill and
knowledge as a nurse. He responded that it was only that portion that dealt with
“vetting certain calls
and prioritising calls that the doctor must attend
to”. The Tribunal asked Mr Hopper to address the issue of how Ms Smith
establish that she had been in practice for 456 hours in the last five
years. In response he said that it was difficult to quantify
the hours of
practice. Mr Hopper sought to address this in written submissions. He was also
asked to address that component of the
Summary to the Standard which states that
nurses must have undertaken sufficient practice to demonstrate competence in
their profession.
his written submissions Mr Hopper made the following principal
(a) that by virtue of being of registered as a nurse in the
period 2006 to 2012 Ms Smith qualified for the recency requirement in
2(a) and 3(a) of the Standard;
(b) that as Ms Smith held a valid registration as a registered nurse from
2006 to 2012 then pursuant to clause 3(a) of the Standard
she has satisfied the
requirement of performing sufficient hours “subject to the Honourable
Tribunal accepting that her employment
and every hour she was employed as a
practice manager for Dr Riley satisfies the definition of practice”;
(c) that Ms Smith exercises her skill and knowledge obtained as a direct
clinical nurse all the time she performs her role as practice
(d) that the role of practice manager performed by Ms Smith fits within the
extended definition of practice in the Standard “under
the head of
managerial and/or administrative role”.
(e) the administrative role performed by Ms Smith is “significantly
more effectively performed” by her due to her knowledge
and skill than by
a “lay” practice manager.
The Board’s submissions
Board’s primary submission is that Ms Smith’s role as practice
manager does not meet the definition of “practice”
in the Standard
in connection with the practice of nursing. That being the case then it cannot
be counted for the purpose of clause
2(a) of the Standard.
Board further submits that while the definition of “practice” makes
it clear that roles can satisfy the definition
even if they do not involve
direct clinical care, the “role” must be one in which the individual
uses their skills and
knowledge as a nurse. To satisfy the definition, this
requirement in the first sentence of the definition has to be satisfied, even
the role involves working in a direct non-clinical relationship with clients or
working in management or administration. Thus
the Board submits that Ms
Smith’s practice manager role is not a “role” in which she
uses nursing knowledge and
Consideration
stated earlier in these reasons that the central issue in this appeal is whether
Ms Smith has satisfied the requirement of the
Standard, namely that she has
undertaken sufficient practice to demonstrate competence in her profession as a
nurse in the preceding
five years (see Summary to the Standard). Clause 2(a) of
the Standard provides that nurses will fulfil the requirement relating to
recency of practice if they (relevantly) can demonstrate practice in their
profession within the past five years equivalent to a
minimum of three months
her written submissions Ms Smith submits that every hour of her employment with
Dr Riley satisfies clause 2(a) of the Standard,
and thus counts towards the
necessary hours demanded by clause 3(a).
evidence of both Dr Riley and Ms Smith was to the effect that Ms Smith, as a
registered nurse, brought her training and experience
as a nurse to the role she
performed as a practice manager, and that she performed that role better because
of that nursing experience.
However we cannot accept Ms Smith’s
submission that everything that she did as a practice manager was a
demonstration of using
her skill and knowledge as a nurse. This is because Ms
Smith’s role as practice manager was a managerial and administrative
not involving the application of nursing knowledge and skills as required by the
accept the Board’s submission that whatever nursing skills and knowledge
Ms Smith brought from her background, the practice
manager role was not one in
which she was required to use nursing knowledge and skill. As Mr Stafford stated
in oral submissions:
In the case of Ms Smith, her role is not
one that would specifically have to be filled by a nurse or midwife, a practice
manager performing
the functions that she performs. Even screening calls, to be
frank, for the doctor could equally be [taken by] a person with an
administrative or management background. It wouldn't specifically have to be a
Ms Smith agreed that anyone properly qualified in managerial or administrative
duties would have been able to perform the
practice manager role.
was evidence before the Tribunal that Ms Smith’s duties for 20 hours per
week since 2006 comprised:
(a) computer
data entry;
(b) telephone
liaison with patients, health funds and other doctors’ surgeries;
(c) general
administration and bookkeeping; and
(d) accounts
and stocking office.
(a), (c) and (d) clearly have no connection with practice as a nurse. Mr Hopper
was right to make the concession at the hearing.
closest type of work may be matter (b), the telephone liaison with patients.
similar scenario was considered in
the appellant, a
previously registered nurse whose registration had lapsed in 2001, claimed that
advice provided to her husband’s
patients in the course of her clerical
duties satisfied clause 2(a) of the Standard. The Tribunal rejected this
submission noting
at [158] that:
[t]he Tribunal was unable to accept
that the “advice” provided to the surgical patients whom Dr McMahon
has treated, and
who telephone the appellant in relation to their accounts has a
sufficient nexus with the practice of nursing. Again, we had no doubt
appellant is a genuinely caring person who makes enquiries about the
patient’s progress when they ring with a query
of payment. However, the type of advice, the basis for it, and the relevant
connection to nursing was
not established by the appellant to the relevant
satisfaction of proof.
was no advice to Dr Riley’s patients. Indeed, Dr Riley said that he
instructed Ms Smith not to do so.
Summary to the Standard requires a nurse to have undertaken sufficient practice
to demonstrate competence in that profession.
We are unable to conclude that Ms
Smith’s screening of telephone calls made to her husband’s practice
demonstrates competence
in the profession of nursing. It cannot be considered to
be a role in which she was required to demonstrate knowledge and skills
are not persuaded that any component of Ms Smith’s work as a practice
manager constitutes “practice” in the profession
of nursing for the
purposes of the Standard. Accordingly we are not satisfied that she has
undertaken practice to demonstrate competence
in her profession as a nurse
within the preceding five years. In reaching this conclusion we note
(a) the practice manager role was not one “in which
[she] use[d her] skills and knowledge as a nurse” as demanded by the
(b) Ms Smith did not provide direct clinical care to patients, and has not
done so since 1998;
(c) she provided no medical advice to patients, on Dr Riley’s specific
instructions; had she done so she may have contravened
the conditions placed on
her registration that she provide nursing care to the public only in accordance
with those conditions;
(d) as she referred all telephone calls which related to medical issues to Dr
Riley, there was no opportunity for her to utilise her
nursing skills;
being the case, we consider that the Board’s decision to refuse Ms
Smith’s registration as a nurse ought to be confirmed.
Having had a break
of more than 5 years from practice (from 1998 to the present, but at least from
2006 to the present taking her
position at its highest) she is subject to the
overriding requirement in the Summary to the Standard that, to return to
she must satisfactorily complete a program or assessment process that
is approved by the Board.
assessing all the evidence before it the Tribunal is not satisfied to the
requisite standard that Ms Smith’s employment
as a practice manager, or
any part of it, constituted the relevant number of hours of the practice of
nursing required by the Standard.
Nor are we satisfied that Ms Smith has
undertaken sufficient practice to demonstrate competence in that
profession.
that the objectives of the national registration and accreditation scheme
include the protection of the public by ensuring that
only health practitioners
who are suitably trained and qualified to practise in a competent and ethical
manner are registered, and
further given that the protection of the health and
safety of the public must be the paramount consideration of the Tribunal, the
Tribunal has determined that it should, pursuant to s175C(1)(a) of the National
Law, confirm the orders made by the Board.
Tribunal indicated at the conclusion of the hearing that it proposed to follow
the ordinary rule and order that the unsuccessful
party pay the costs of the
successful party. Accordingly the Tribunal proposes to order Ms Smith to pay the
Board’s costs of
the appeal, as agreed or assessed.
either party wishes to submit that some other order should be made, they should
file and serve any submissions within seven days
of the receipt of these
reasons, with the other party having a further seven days to respond. Any
submission should be filed with
the Registry and sent to the legal
representative of the other
Mr R. C. Titterton
Ms C. Doyle
Deputy Chairperson
Nurse and Midwife Member
Ms A. J. Currie
Mr P. Hooker
Nurse Member
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
Recency of practice registration standard
This standard has been approved by the Australian Health Workforce
Ministerial Council on 31 March 2010 pursuant to the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
(2009) (the National Law) with approval taking
effect from 1 July 2010.
Nurses and midwives must have undertaken sufficient practice to demonstrate
competence in their professions within the preceding five
years. Nurses and
midwives who are returning to practice after a break of more than five years
must satisfactorily complete a program
or assessment process that is approved by
Scope of application
This standard applies to nurses and midwives seeking registration,
endorsement of registration or renewal of registration. It does
not apply to
recent graduates from nursing or midwifery programs in Australia applying for
registration for the first time; persons
holding student registration; or nurses
or midwives holding non-practising registration or applicants for non-practising
registration.
Requirements
and midwives must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Board, that they have
undertaken sufficient practice, as defined
in (2) below, in their professions
within the preceding five years to maintain competence.
and midwives will fulfil the requirements relating to recency of practice if
they can demonstrate one, or more of the following:
in their profession within the past five years for a period equivalent to a
minimum of three months full time
completion of a program or assessment approved by the Board,
completion of a supervised practice experience approved by the
hours are recognised if evidence is provided to demonstrate:
nurse or midwife held a valid registration with a nursing or midwifery
regulatory authority in the jurisdiction (either Australian
or overseas) when
the hours were worked, or
role involved the application of nursing and/or midwifery knowledge and skills,
time was spent undertaking postgraduate education
to an award or qualification that is relevant to the practice of nursing and/or
time away from practice due to illness or any type of leave will not be counted
as practice.
Definitions
means any role, whether remunerated or not, in which the
individual uses their skills and knowledge as a nurse or midwife. For the
purposes of this registration standard, practice is not restricted to the
provision of direct clinical care. It also includes working
in a direct non
clinical relationship with clients, working in management, administration,
education, research, advisory, regulatory
or policy development roles, and any
other roles that impact on safe, effective delivery of services in the
profession and/or use
their professional skills.
Recent graduate
means a person applying for registration for the first
time whose qualification for registration was awarded not more than two years
prior to the date of their application.
Recency of practice
means that a practitioner has maintained an
adequate connection with, and recent practice in, the profession since
qualifying or obtaining
registration.
Australian Nursing and Midwifery Council (2009):Continuing Competence
Framework for Nurses and
(adapted from Nursing Council of
New Zealand, 2004).
This standard will commence on 1 July 2010. The Board will review this
standard at least every three years of operation.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (343 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter