URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rich v Fair Trading Administration Corporation [2000] NSWFTT 10 (23 November 2000)
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
FAIR TRADING
ADMINISTRATION CORPORATION
[2000] NSWFTT 10
Respondent:
Fair Trading Administration Corporation
File Number:
BU1999-01414
Catch Words:
Appeal against the decline of an insurance claim by the Fair Trading
Administration Corporation – Building Services Corporation
Comprehensive
Insurance Scheme – cl 5(1) – jurisdiction of the Tribunal –
or general defects – single skin
wall – Expert evidence – weight
Primary Legislation:
Fair Trading Tribunal Act
Building Services
Corporation Act
Building Services Corporation Regulation
1990 – cl 3(1)(a)
& (b), 4 & 31
Matter for Decision:
The primary application
Cases Cited:
Penn v Fair Trading Administration Corporation
[2000] NSWFTT 5.
PQ v Australian Red Cross Society
[1992] VicRp 2
(1992) 1 VR 19
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
P.H. Molony, Senior Member
Hearing dates:
14 and 15 August, 2000 and 5 October 2000
Date of Decision:
23 November 2000
REPRESENTATION
Mr. A. Searle of Counsel instructed by Carmody Crampton, Solicitors,
Respondent:
Ms. E. Kennedy of Counsel instructed by the Solicitor for the Department of
Fair Trading
1) I find that:
a) the cracking to the external walls is a
major structural defect under sub-clause (b) of the definition of major
structural defect
in Clause 31of the Building Services Corporation Regulation
1990. Those defects are both inherent from the manner in which the walls
the house were constructed, and damage induced as a result of that faulty
construction.
b) the cracking in the external walls is a major structural
defect under sub-clause (a) of the definition of major structural defect
Clause 31 of the Building Services Corporation Regulation 1990, resulting from
the walls being inadequately stressed. Those defects
are both inherent from the
manner in which the walls and the house were constructed, and damage induced as
a result of that faulty
construction.
c) the numerous defects in stressing
the walls by means of the tie down rods and top plates, as specified in Mr
Rendell's report of
3 October 2000, together constitute a major structural
defect under sub-clause (a) of the definition of major structural defect in
Clause 31 of the Building Services Corporation Regulation 1990. Those defects
are inherent.
2) I direct that the application be listed for a telephone
directions hearing before me at 4pm on 21 December 2000 so that directions
be made with respect to the further conduct of the application.
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
1) On 28 May 1999 Mr (‘the Applicant’) lodged a Notice
of Appeal in the Fair Trading Tribunal against a decision of the
Fair Trading
Administration Corporation (‘the Respondent’) dated 4 May 1999.
That decision was to decline the Applicants’
claim under Clause 5(1) of
the insurance scheme known as the Building Services Corporation Comprehensive
Scheme. This scheme covers
indemnity for losses incurred by the Applicants in
respect of residential building work. The residential building work, the
of the claim, was the construction of the Applicants’ home at
Young. The work was commenced in September 1991.
2) As a result of evidence obtained in the course of the hearing
the Respondent made a further decision on 5 October 2000, in respect
enumerated in a report from Mr Rendell, a building consultant retained by the
Applicant. That decision was conveyed to
the Applicant and to the Tribunal by
the Respondent’s Counsel, Ms Kennedy, on the final day of hearing. The
decision was to
decline the claim on the basis that, while the Respondent
accepted that the defects were major structural defects, the claim was
of time, and was not encompassed in the original claim. The Applicant contended
that the defects reported on by Mr Rendell
did not constitute a new and separate
claim as the Respondent maintained, but formed part of the initial claim which
had been declined
by the Respondent, and was therefore within
3) With the consent of the parties, it was agreed that I would
determine whether or not there was a separate second claim, and if
treat the application as including an appeal against the Respondent’s
decision of 5 October 2000. In adopting this
course I bore in mind the
Tribunal’s duty to determine proceedings in an informal, expeditious and
inexpensive manner.
4) It should also be noted that at the same time as this
application was heard, I had listed for hearing before me another application
involving an appeal against a decision of the Respondent relating to a property
at Young, in which the Applicants are Mr and Ms Shiller.
The parties in each
case were represented by the same Counsel and Solicitors, and aside from some
minor differences, the issues
to be determined were identical, as was much of
the evidence. While it was initially intended to hear each application
consecutively,
it rapidly became apparent that this would only lengthen each
hearing. It was therefore agreed by the parties’ respective Counsel
myself, that I should hear evidence common to both applications only once, and
take that evidence into account in determining
each application.
5) The Fair Trading Tribunal may exercise such functions as are
conferred or imposed on it by the Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998 (‘the
FTTA’) and by any other Act or law (section 6 FTTA). The
(‘the HBA’) is an Act that confers jurisdiction on the
Tribunal. Section 39 of Schedule 4 of that Act provides, in summary,
provisions of the Building Service
Corporation Act 1989
Act’) and the Building Services Corporation Regulations 1990 (‘the
BSC Regulations’) remain in
force in relation to residential building work
insured under that legislation prior to its repeal. The building work in Jimmy
Close was covered by that insurance, and so that legislation applies in
6) Section 85 of the BSC Act provided for a right of appeal to the
former Commercial Tribunal by a claimant aggrieved by a decision
in relation to
the Scheme. Clause 37 of Schedule 4 of the HBA provides that the provisions
relating to appeals to the Commercial
Tribunal, contained in Part 5 of the BSC
Act, continue to apply to decisions made in relation to claims under the Scheme.
transitional provisions contained in Schedule 5 of the FTTA, a
reference to the former Commercial Tribunal is to be read as a reference
Fair Trading Tribunal (clause 6). Accordingly, this Tribunal now has the
Tribunal in respect of
appeals in relation to the Scheme.
7) The Fair Trading Administration Corporation has the functions
and powers previously held by the Building Services Corporation in
relation to
provisions of insurance under the Building Services Corporation Insurance Scheme
(section 39(2) of the
). Pursuant to section 88 of the
BSC Act, the Tribunal has the power to confirm the decision of the Respondent or
to substitute for
that decision any other decision or order that the Respondent
could have made.
Relevant Law
8) Section 91 of the BSC Act provides for the establishment of the
Comprehensive Insurance Scheme (‘the scheme’) to apply
residential building work carried out after 4 February 1991. The terms of the
scheme are found in Form 4 of Schedule 1 to the
BSC Regulations. It covers
certain residential building work that was carried out by a person who was the
holder of an appropriate
licence under the BSC Act (clause 3). The scheme
provides that successors in title to the owner of the land on which the
residential
building work was carried out are beneficiaries (clause 4).
9) Losses indemnified under the scheme include losses in
rectifying defects in insured work (clause 5(d)) and losses in repairing
caused to the dwelling by a defect in the insured works (clause 5(e)) up to a
maximum, aggregate claim of $100,000 for a single
dwelling (clause 6). Claims
must be made within time limits set out in the terms of the scheme. Clause 7
provides, in part, as
LIMITATIONS
7.(1) Subject to subclause (2), to qualify for the benefits under
this Scheme the beneficiaries must notify the Corporation in writing
matters that could give rise to the losses referred to in clause 5 of 5A within
the following times:
(b) for loss relating to heads of claim in clause 5(1)(d) or (e)
incurred in rectifying major structural defects or in repairing damage
dwelling that has occurred in consequence of major structural defects- within 6
months after the beneficiary first becomes
aware of the defect, but not later
than 7 years from:
(i) the commencement of insured building work which is not also
insured owner builder work; or
(c) for loss relating to heads of claim in clause 5(1)(d) or (e)
other than those referred to in paragraph (b)–within 6 months
beneficiary first becomes aware of the defect, but not later than 3 years
(i) the commencement of insured building work which is not also
insured owner builder work; or
(2) The Corporation may extend the times specified in subclause (1)
if it is satisfied that the delay in notification was due to circumstances
outside the control of the beneficiary.
(3) If the Corporation exercises its discretion under subclause(2) ,
it may assess the indemnity for the cost of:
(a) completing incomplete work or rectifying defective work;
on the basis of the reasonable market costs prevailing at the latest
time the notification would have been required to be made in
the absence of that
discretion.”
10) Clause 10 of the scheme provides that the BSC has no further
liability under the scheme more than 10 years after the commencement
residential building work, “for any reason attributable to that
11) “Residential Building Work” is defined (as far as
is relevant here) in section 3 of the BSC Act as follows:
“residential
means any work involved in, or involved in
coordinating or supervising any work involved in:
(a) the construction of a dwelling; or
(b) the making of alterations or additions to a dwelling;
(c) the repairing, renovation, decoration or protective treatment of
a dwelling.”
12) “Dwelling” is defined in section 3 of the BSC Act
as follows:
means a building or
portion of a building that is designed, constructed or adapted for use as a
dwelling (such as a detached or semi-detached
house, transportable house,
terrace or town house, duplex, villa-home, strata or company title home unit or
residential flat).
• It includes any swimming pool or spa constructed for use in
conjunction with a dwelling and such additional structures and
improvements as
are declared by the regulations to form part of a dwelling.
• It does not include buildings or portions of buildings
declared by the regulations to be excluded from this
definition.”
13) ‘Major structural defect’ is defined in clause 31
of the BSC Regulations:
“major structural defect”
inherent or damage-induced defect:
(a) in an element that provides essential supporting structure to
the whole or any part of a dwelling ( for example, a footing, beam,
column or a
suspended slab) which renders the element inadequate for its structural purpose;
(b) in a substantial functional element essential to the
habitability of a dwelling ( for example, a panel wall, masonry veneer wall
slab on ground) which is of such a kind that the element itself does not have
adequate structure for its purpose.”
14) “Damage-induced defect” is defined in clause
“damage-induced defect”
defect in an element of a dwelling, or part of a dwelling, caused when the
element was damaged:
(a) by the holder of a licence, or holder’s employee or agent,
in doing residential building work connected with that dwelling;
(b) as a consequence of such work having been done
defectively.”
15) It is for the Applicants to prove their case to the Tribunal
on the civil standard of proof, namely the balance of
probabilities.
16) There are a number of issues to be determined in this case
which are inter-related. The first is whether the defects, which are
subject of the original claim encompassed the defects in the alleged second
claim. If so, they will be “major structural
defects” and the claim
will have been made within time. If not, it will be necessary to determine
whether the defects encompassed
in the first claim are ‘major structural
defects’ within the meaning of that phrase in the BSC Regulations. If
are not ‘major structural defects’, they are described as
general defects.
17) An issue would then arise as whether the Tribunal should
exercise its discretion to accept the claims outside of the time limits
the terms of the BSC Comprehensive Insurance Scheme. It is agreed that the
building work, which is the subject of the dispute,
commenced in September 1991.
In accordance with the terms of the scheme set out above, Mr Rich would have
been required to notify
FTAC (or before it the BSC) of the defects by September
1994 in the case of general defects, and by September 1998 in the case of
structural defects. Outside of these time limits it is for the Tribunal to
determine whether the failure to notify was due
to “circumstances outside
of the control” of the Applicants. The determination of the extension of
time issues is not
considered in these reasons. If, after the Tribunal
determines the issues mentioned in paragraph 16, an extension of time issue
arises it was agreed that written submissions would be sought from the parties
before any determination is made.
18) In order to understand the nature and complexity of the issues
it is necessary to traverse the evidence presented to the Tribunal
19) The Tribunal heard sworn evidence from the following persons
a) called on behalf of the Applicant –
i) the Applicant himself, Mr Rich;
ii) his partner, Ms Rich;
iii) Mr Rendell, a Building Consultant
iv) Mr Shayler, National Technical Manager, CSR Building Materials
v) Mr Simpson, a Consulting Civil and Structural
vi) Mr Tierney, a Concreter who had worked on both houses;
vii) Mr Burnes, also a Concreter who had worked on both
b) called on behalf of the Respondent –
i) Dr Kanan; and
ii) Mr McNamara, Principal Structural Engineer.
20) The Tribunal had tendered to it expert reports from
a) Mr Rendell dated 22 June 2000 and 3 October
b) Mr Shayler dated 27 July 1999 and 30 July 2000.
c) Mr Simpson 18 September 1999, 30 May 2000 and 4 October 2000;
d) Mr McNamara dated 1 February 2000, 11 August 2000, 12
September 2000 and 22 September 2000.
21) In addition the Tribunal had tendered to it affidavits
a) Mr Rich dated 26 November 1999;
b) Mr Tierney dated 14 August 2000;
c) Mr Burnes dated 14 August 2000; and
d) Mr Kuster, the builder of the house, dated 29 September
22) The Applicant’s claim is based on the fact that there is
extensive cracking to both the external and internal walls of the
house, with
consequent problems resulting from an alleged failure of the structures weather
proofing. At the commencement of the
hearing there was a marked difference
between the understanding of the experts retained by the Applicant and those
retained by the
Respondent as to the method of construction of the
23) The Applicant’s home was constructed using Hebel bricks.
These are aerated auto-claved concrete bricks, and are typically
used to crate a
single skin structure, without internal framing, which is rendered to make it
weatherproof. The precise date of
commencement of the building is unclear,
although Young Shire Council records indicate that the footings were inspected 2
1991. The Applicant’s purchase of the property was finalised on
1 May 1992.
24) In his affidavit of 20 November 1999 Mr Rich outlined what
then followed:
3. Approximately
8 months after we had moved in following settlement of our purchase we noticed
cracks appearing in different parts
of the inside and outside of the house. I
informed him
of the problem. He told me he would come up to have a look but
despite numerous other calls he failed to show. Eventually after about
since I first contacted him I sent him a letter demanding he attend my place to
inspect the problem otherwise I would take
legal action. Mr Kuster responded to
the letter and after an inspection he patched up the cracks.
4. However, the patch work was unsuccessful and after a month to
six weeks the cracking re-appeared. I kept ringing Kuster to
let him know the
problem hadn't been fixed and that the cracking was getting worse. Everytime he
told me he would come back and fix
the problem. He never responded to these
calls although he made promised that he would come and see to the problem.
5 . The cracking continued to get worse and worse. I didn't know
where to turn. I then decided to ring Mr Basham who owned a property
road which Kuster had also built and told him of our problems. He told me that
he was having the same problems. He also
told me that I had 7 years to lodge a
claim with the Department of Fair Trading and we decided to keep in contact with
regarding the cracking in our respective house.
6. Some time later I spoke to Mr Basham and he told me he had
been in contact with a structural engineer by the name of Simpson
who was coming
to look at the problem. He told me he would ask Simpson to see me when he was in
Young to look at his house.
7. I engaged Mr Simpson to do the report on my house and he
prepared the report dated June 1998. I then decided to make a complaint
Department of Fair Trading which I did at the end of July 1998.
8. The Department investigated our complaint but by its letter
dated 6 October 1998 advise us that Kuster was not prepared to
rectify the works
and we should submit an Insurance Claim Form. However we were informed that we
should obtain three quotes to accompany
the Claim. I tried to get quotes from
local builders but none seemed to be interested.
9. So I decided in March 1999 to lodge the Insurance Claim Form
anyway following advice from an officer of the Department of Fair
10. I eventually obtained 3 or 4 quotes from builders.
11. At no stage did we realise that our claim should have been
submitted earlier.
25) With respect to the problems caused by the cracking in the
house, Mr Rich said:
a) that the bed in his eldest daughter’s bedroom had to be
moved because:
i) the wall moves, and
ii) moisture penetrated during winter.
b) in winter, mould forms throughout the house and condensation
drips off the windows.
c) when windy, drafts circulate throughout the house. This is so
despite efforts to stop drafts, by fitting rubber seals around the
using snakes to block gaps under doors.
d) that there are constant drafts in his bedroom making it was
necessary to have the heater on all the time in the cooler months.
e) that water comes down the bathroom’s
f) that his daughter’s rooms are cold despite the fact that
the roof is insulated.
g) that some of the cracks in the house are visible both
internally and externally.
26) Mr Rich gave evidence of two meetings with Dr Kanan of PPK
Consultants, expert consultants retained by the Respondent. In view
conclusions I have reached it is not necessary to outline that evidence of
determine the conflicts it raised between Mr and
Mrs Rich’s recollection
of those meetings and Dr Kanan’s.
27) Mrs Rich also gave evidence of the first inspection by Dr
Kanan from PBK. As to the effects of the condition of the house on
their day to
day life, Mrs Rich said:
a) that her children get coughs and colds regularly, as do the
whole family.
b) the walls are wet and mouldy, and they have spent a large
amount of money cleaning them. The windows are wet and drip
continually.
c) the house is cold and wet.
d) the house is breezy and despite efforts, they are unable to
locate the source of the drafts.
e) they have been so cold in the house that they have changed
their heating from electric to gas.
f) that their daughter Courtney’s room, which is at the rear
left hand side of the property, is always damp: there is water
on the windows,
mould on the ceiling and walls. They had to remove her bed from the walls
because the bedding was getting damp and
g) the heating is on every day in the cooler seasons.
described living in the house as depressing.
28) There was considerable expert evidence called by both parties
as to the nature and cause of the defects in Mr and Mrs Rich’s
Before turning to that evidence it is convenient to refer to the evidence of Mr
Tierney and Mr Burnes, who both worked on the
construction of the house. Their
evidence had a considerable impact on the Tribunal’s consideration of the
expert evidence.
29) Mr Tierney is a concreter /handy man. He said that in
constructing both the Rich and Shiller homes, a system called the Australian
Litebrick Company System was used. This involved a cement slab being laid, into
which holes were drilled, with rods then glued into
the holes at regular
distances. Mr Tierney said that the rods, once glued into the holes, were very
firmly fixed. He called these
rods the “set-out rods”. They were
30) Once the rods were drilled into the slab, the first course of
Hebel bricks was laid in a course of mortar to provide an even surface.
even surface had been achieved, Hebel blocks were put, one over the other, on
top of the steel rods and dry stacked, without
the use of adhesive or mortar.
The set out of the rods and the bricks was in accordance with a colour-coded
plan provided by the
Litebrick Company. The bricks were made in such a way that
they were keyed into each other, having tongue and grove ends. Each
holes drilled through it so that the brick could be inserted over a rod if
31) The construction of each house proceeded with the Hebel
bricks, as modified, being dry-stacked. When they were laid to a level
they had reached the top of the 1m high set-out rods, a connecter was used to
add a further metre of height to the rods. This
was a simple process as the
rods were threaded, and it was simply a matter of using a connecter to screw the
two together. This
process continued until the walls reached the desired
height. At this point, a top plate of timber was drilled and fitted over the
top of the set-out rods. Washers, bolts and nuts were then fitted, and the
walls were tensioned down. Mr Tierney said that there
was no adhesive used on
the walls externally. He said it was his understanding that Council had been
told of the method and had
approved it.
32) Mr Tierney said that the set-out rods were placed at varying
distances apart depending on where they were sighted, at distances
1200mm down to 450mm in the corners. Mr Tierney said that he thought that the
houses had been designed by Mr Carpenter,
a local architect. Mr
Carpenter’s plans had been given to the Litebrick Company who had prepared
a laying plan for the Hebel
bricks, which was colour-coded showing which bricks,
of what size, were to be used where. Mr Tierney said that in laying the bricks
at both houses, these plans had been followed. He did not know if Mr Carpenter
was aware that the bricks were to be dry stacked.
33) Mr Tierney was cross-examined extensively by Ms Kennedy. In
the course of cross-examination, he told of how he, his partner Mr
Burnes and a
local builder, Mr Kuster, had come to be involved in the formation a company,
Ferbane Pty Ltd, which had developed the
Rich and Shiller homes using the
Australian Litebrick Company construction method. Much of the evidence given by
Mr Tierney assisted
the parties in finding further information about the
construction method, but is not relevant to my determination of the issues in
34) In cross-examination Mr Tierney said:
a) CSR Hebel manufactured the bricks for the Australian Litebrick
b) the Australian Litebrick Company drilled the bricks at its own
premises: he did not know if CSR Hebel was aware of this;
c) that Hebel bricks were extremely water resistant and that an
external coating, created by Edgar Lucth from Queensland, called ‘Supa
Coat’, was used as render. This involved the application of a blue
substance to seal the bricks before putting on a render
of Supa Coat. The blue
coating stopped flakiness and provided a surface for the Supa Coat to be applied
to. Mr Tierney said that
the Supa Coat used on the Rich’s property was
different to that used on the other properties as it contained more pebbles and
provided a rougher texture.
d) with respect to the internal walls of the properties, these
were not constructed using the Australian Litebrick method, but Hebel’s
ordinary method as the bricks were extremely thin and could not be drilled.
Hebel glue was therefore used on all internal walls.
e) where internal walls abutted onto external walls, no ties were
used, but the internal walls were fixed to the external walls by
using Hebel
f) that the only information the Australian Litebrick Company
provided to he and his partners about the building system were the colour-coded
g) that when working on the Rich’s home he had done a bit of
everything including laying the bricks, fitting of set-out rods,
as well as the
cement work around the house.
h) there was a damp course at the property. He commented that the
Council had inspected the footings.
i) with respect to the specification of the building, that he was
never shown the specifications, but that he knew the Council was
aware of the
system being used, because there had been a meeting with Mr Page, the Building
& Health Inspector, from the Council,
explaining how the system worked. It
was put to him that the specifications given to Council showed that the bricks
were to be glued.
He agreed that this was the case, but said that the first
time he had seen the specifications was the day before he gave evidence.
35) Mr Burnes, also a Concreter, gave evidence, that he had worked
on the construction of these dwellings. He said that the brickwork
stacked, on threaded rods, at distances of between 600mm & 1200mm. These
rods were chemically anchored into the slab
and, when the bricks had been dry
stacked, were bolted down using the specifications provided by the Litebrick
Company. Internally,
the walls were 100mm thick. The blocks had a tongue and
groove on them which enabled them to be fitted together.
36) Mr Burnes confirmed Mr Tierney’s evidence that the
Litebrick Company drilled a hole in the Hebel blocks at its premises
road from CSR Hebel in Gosford. He was unable to say whether CSR knew that the
bricks were being drilled or were being
used without adhesives. He said that
the Council knew of the method of construction because when they inspected the
footings, they
would have seen the dry stacked brick blocks above and below the
footings. When told that there were specifications that said that
were to be glued using adhesive, he said that it was news to him. The
specifications did not reflect what really happened.
37) In cross-examination, Mr Burnes recalled a meeting with Mr
Page, the Building Inspector, Mr Jackson from the Australian Litebrick
Kuster and Mr Tierney where the method of construction was discussed. He could
not recall what was said.
38) Mr Burnes said that the render on the houses were provided by
Mr Lucht, who came down while they were building Rich’s home
them how to use his products. The outside render was trowelled on while the
inside was sprayed on. He agreed that a
blue substance was first applied. He
did not know whether the render was CSR approved. He was asked about how the
internal and external
walls were secured to each other where they abutted. He
said there was tie every 2nd course and a thin layer of glue.
39) The evidence given by Mr. Tierney and Mr. Burnes in the course
of the hearing as to the method of construction, provided levels
of detail and
access to information which had not previously been available to the various
expert witnesses retained by the parties.
That evidence led each of those
experts to reassess their respective opinions to various degrees.
40) There was a six week period following that evidence up to 5
October 2000 for them to do so. These inquiries led to an affidavit
sworn by Mr
Kuster, the builder of the house, being filed on 3 October 2000 (and tendered 5
October 2000). Attached to the affidavit
were a series of documents concerning
the Lite Brick system which Mr. Kuster said had been in his possession and had
been given to
the Young Council. These were:
a) a uniform distributed load test report on Hebel –
Litecrete from the CSR Concord Research & Development Centre
b) a report dated August 1991 from Associate Professor A. W. Page
of the University of Newcastle reporting test results on AAC
“Litebrick”
c) a copy letter dated 26 November 1991 from the Brisbane City
Council to Lite Brick Holdings Pty Ltd advising that,
...approval
is granted to use the Lite Brick A.A.C. Building System in the Brisbane City
Council Area provided the System is used
strictly in accordance with the
Manufacturer’s and Engineer’s recommendations.
d) a copy letter dated 18 December 1992 from the Queensland
Department of Housing Local Government and Planning to Lite Brick AAC
Pty Ltd advising that the Lite Brick AAC Building System had been approved for
use in the Departments construction program
...subject to the following:
§ System is to be installed strictly in accordance with
technical information supplied with original submission.
§ “Supa Coat” textured coating is to be applied to
the AAC block by approved applicators only and is to be applied
in accordance
with information supplied with original submission.
§ approved licensed block layers only are permitted to perform
work associated with the system.
e) a undated document entitled “Design Data for
Processing”; and
f) a copy undated letter from Graeme Holmes & Associates Pty
Ltd, Consulting Civil & Structural Engineers explaining the Litebrick
41) In outlining the expert evidence I consider it necessary to
have regard to the initial opinions given by the various experts and
changed in the light of this information.
42) The Applicant called Mr Rendell who in evidence in chief was
taken through his report in some detail. He said that he concluded
property was suffering from major structural defects for a number of reasons.
These were:
a) Non-compliance with Ordnance 70 in relation to special
b) Rain and water was not prevented from entering the
c) Non-compliance with the manufacturer’s specifications
with respect to damp-proofing, dry-beds, wall intersections, the absence
fibre-glass matting, and the presence of tie-rods.
d) The fact that the bricks had been dry-stacked and that no
adhesive had been used to bind them. He acknowledged that the tie-rods
set-out rods - fulfilled this function in part.
Rendell said that he did not consider that the structure was structurally sound,
or serviceable.
43) In cross-examination, it was put to him that the
non-compliance with Ordnance 70 was not a true non-compliance as the
certificates
he said he would require were discretionary only. He was asked
projects where Hebel had been used of which he was the project manager. He said
that in the last 12 months, he had had
to investigate the use of Hebel on a
number of occasions and it was only in that time that he had investigated them
deeply. It was
put to him that the specifications for the use of Hebel had
changed dramatically since 1991/92 when these dwellings were constructed
now. He agreed that he had used edition 6 of the Hebel manual in preparing his
report, and had not seen editions 3, 4 &
5. He had spoken with Michael Sabe
from CSR to see if they had changed dramatically.
44) Mr. Rendell agreed that structural codes were aimed at
securing four essential elements – strength, stability, durability
serviceability. It was put to him that the strength of the structure had not
been compromised – he disagreed, cited a number
of items in his report.
He thought that the cracking was the most obvious example of this.
45) He was asked on what basis he had concluded that the Hebel
bricks had been dry-laid. He said this was on the basis of a non-invasive
examination by him and on the report from Mr Simpson. He said that he had
examined those bricks that he could see, and could see
no sign of adhesive
between the blocks.
46) He was asked on what basis he concluded that there were no
ties between abutting walls. He said that where there were vertical
between abutting walls, it should be possible to see ties. His examination of
the cracks between abutting walls – that
is where external-internal walls
abut external walls - had showed no evidence of ties. He qualified his
statement by saying, that
was not to say they were not there, but that he could
not see any when he would have expected to.
47) He said that single-skin walls, should not be regarded as
impervious to rain and needed to be rendered or sealed. This was the
the rendering. He put the bubbling of the render around the edges of the
Rich’s property down to one of two causes:
rendering inappropriately
applied or the wrong render.
48) It was put to him that mesh reinforcing control joints and
slip joints were not required by the Hebel manual at the time of the
construction of the building. He said that he was not aware of this. He agreed
that if mesh reinforcing had not been required,
he would not have used it, but
was not prepared to concede as much with respect to control joints and slip
joints. He described
these as common building practice.
49) He was questioned about his views of crack width and reliance
on the Australian standard to determine that crack width indicated
damage. In reply to this, Mr Rendell said that the number of cracks and their
size, in the context, indicated a lack
of structural integrity. He qualified
this by saying that he was not saying that the walls could not hold the roof up,
or that they
were not stable, but their serviceability was poor.
50) It was put to him that the paths around the property were
higher than the damp course, thereby allowing surface water to enter
He said that this might be the situation at the side, was the situation at the
front, but was definitely not the situation
at the rear of the property. This
is so as the damp course at the rear was 3 or 4 brick levels above the concrete
pathway. He had
taken moisture levels at a spot above the damp-course and had
found readings of 99.9, the highest possible, and 77.7.
51) Mr Rendell gave further evidence ( following my granting the
Applicant leave to re-open their case) on 5 October 2000. In doing
taken through a further report dated 3 October 2000 which outlined his opinion
having taken into account, and investigated,
information obtained about the
Litebrick construction method.
52) Mr Rendell said that upon receiving design data for the use of
the Litebrick construction method – obtained by the Respondent’s
experts - he had gone to the Rich’s home to examine the state of the
fastenings. He had removed some of the roof tiles, at
both the front and back
of the house, and cut back the sizillation in order to get a clear view. Of
major concern, he found:
a) the wooden top plate is not F17, seasoned, kiln dried hardwood
as specified in the design data, but F8 pinus radiata, a
b) in two places on the front elevation of the house he found that
the top plate had a thickness of less than 23mm, whereas the design
specified that in no instance was the top plate to be less than 35mm
c) the top plates where they abutted were not spliced as specified
in the design data. In the instance he observed there was,
just a rough, out-of-square, out-of line, butt joint with a 3-4mm gap. The only
tie between the two top plate members were 2
X jolt head nails, both skewed from
one member to the other.
This meant that there was no continuity
of top plates around the building’s perimeter as specified in the design
d) that of the 10 rods he examined at the Rich’s house he
could turn the nuts on 8 by hand. None of the nuts were tensioned
specified level of 15kN. One nut was so loose that he could insert a 20c coin
under the washer.
e) none of the tie-rod bolts he examined was fitted with
“load indicating washers” as specified, and the washers fitted
undersized.
f) the rods were randomly spaced, invariably at greater distances
than those set out in the design data.
g) none of the piers he observed were reinforced with fibre glass
as specified in the design data.
h) the masonry pier in the north-east corner of the house which
supports a lintel spanning an opening of 1800mm, has only one tie-down
This does not comply with the design data requirement that there be, “2 X
Member rods either side of all openings 1200mm
or wider”. That pier also
was not as wide as specified.
53) Mr Rendell concluded that the large number of non-compliances
with the Litebrick design data had most likely led to the defects
set out in his
first report. He was of the view that the non-compliances constituted a major
structural defect. He remained of
the view that the defects enumerated in his
first report still constituted major structural defects, the damage being
inherent and
defect induced as a result of the failure to comply with the design
54) The following points emerged from Ms Kennedy’s second
cross-examination of Mr Rendell:
a) he had tested the nut tension on 10 of the
b) he was unable to say how many rods there were in the structure
as they were set out randomly.
c) that the design data recommended the set out of rod centres
rather than specifying them.
55) Ms Kennedy challenged Mr Rendell’s conclusions that the
problems he had discovered following receipt of the Litebrick design
responsible for the defects set out in his first report. Mr Rendell said that
the fixing and top-plate problems were logically
responsible for the cracking,
which were the result of the cumulative effects of that poor work. The
Litebrick system relied on
tensioning to provide the structural stability which
Hebel constructions normally gained from the use of adhesive. The absence of
tensioning, together with the other non-compliances, had, in his opinion, led to
the cracking. Mr Rendell agreed that he would always
refer such questions to an
engineer, but commented that ‘basic logic and experience tells me’
that that the construction
defects led to the cracking.
56) Mr Rendell was questioned further about the Table of
Classification of Damage with Reference to Walls – Table C1 of Appendix
of AS 2870-1996 ‘Residential Slabs and Footings –
Construction’ – a copy of which is annexure 1 to these
reasons. It
was put to him that the cracks in the walls at the Rich’s house were
damage category were 1 and 2 cracks and that
they were not structural. Mr
Rendell disagreed saying that a degree of judgement had to be applied when
applying the Table, as is
indicated in the notes to the Table. It remained his
view that the cracks were of damage category 3 because of the nature of the
construction of the walls, the effect of the cracks on living conditions in the
house, and his conclusion that the cracking was likely
deteriorate.
57) Mr Shayler, the National Technical Manager of CSR Hebel, and a
Civil and Structural Engineer gave evidence on behalf of the Applicant.
so before the evidence of Mr Tierney and Mr Burnes was led, and without the
benefit of knowing of, or seeing, the material
attached to Mr Kuster’s
affidavit. Mr Shayler has been the National Technical Manager for CSR Hebel
since August 1998, and
two reports he had written, dated 27 July 1999 and 31
July 2000 respectively were tendered. It was Mr Shayler’s view, having
inspected Mr. Rich’s property on 28 March 2000, that there was cracking in
both the exterior and interior walls, and that the
exterior coating on the
premises had failed. Mr Shayler said that in his opinion the house was not
structurally sound as the Hebel
bricks had been dry stacked, without the use of
adhesive. He explained the strength of AAC Hebel structures was dependent on
bonding of the block created by adhesive. CSR Hebel had never tested dry
stacked walls and it was difficult to predict the effect
of the absence of
adhesive. Mr Shayler also noted that the absence of both slip and control
joints in the structure would contribute
to its instability.
58) In cross-examination Mr Shayler was asked on what basis he
concluded there was no adhesive used in the construction? He replied
number of factors had led him to do so. First, the report by Mr Simpson said
that no adhesive had been used. Other indications
of the absence of adhesive
a) that many of the cracks in the house followed the jointing
pattern. Mr Shayler was of the view that this was unusual unless there
b) the adhesive was not visible, and should be so as it should
have been applied so that it was 2 to 3mm thick.
Kennedy challenged Mr Shayler as to the thickness of adhesive required,
suggesting that at the time of construction a thickness
of only 1mm was
required. He denied this. She put to him that it was highly unlikely that the
walls were dry-stacked, and that
his conclusions as to the structural integrity
of the house would differ if the walls were not dry stacked. Mr Shayler
his view that the walls were dry stacked.
59) Ms Kennedy challenged Mr Shayler on his views with respect to
slip and control joints, and the requirements for them in the Hebel
Handbooks. Given the later evidence that the house was constructed in
accordance with the Lite Brick System design data,
I consider that evidence to
be of little relevance.
60) Mr Simpson, a consulting civil and structural engineer was
called by the Applicant. His reports of 18 September 1999 and 30 May
tendered. Mr Simpson had inspected a series of house constructed in Young by Mr
Kuster, including the Rich and Shiller
the method of construction by examining photographs of the houses under
construction and
by questioning an owner who had observed the
construction.
61) His understanding was that the houses were constructed of dry
stacked Hebel bricks as a single skin, with 12mm steel reinforcing
rods at 900mm
centres. He assumed that there were reinforcing bars as the roofs had not blown
off. On his inspection in 1998 he
observed a consistent pattern of cracking in
all houses, which followed the joint line – the weak point - between the
blocks. He commented that if there was adhesive he would not expect the
cracking to follow the joint line. In his report of 18
September 1999 he
commented that:
blocks should be laid using thin bed adhesive between all blocks as recommended
by the manufacturers CSR Hebel. Alternatively,
it is possible to construct the
walls with the rods and no adhesive
reinforcing mesh is used
over all block joints during the rendering process. This method is sometimes
used in Queensland.
62) Mr Simpson said that the walls did not provide a full
weatherproof seal. He was of the view, given the method of construction,
the cracking would get worse. This was so as the Hebel blocks would be
compressed and shrink over time, which together with
a loosening of the tie
bars, would allow further movement.
63) In cross-examination it was suggested that the cracking
evident in the houses were settling cracks. He replied that the houses
built on moderately reactive clays, and that he thought settling cracking would
be minimal. He agreed with Ms Kennedy’s
proposition that there were four
elements to structural adequacy: strength, stability, durability and
serviceability. He accepted
that the first three were evident in the houses,
but was of the view that the houses were not serviceable as they were not
weatherproof.
Mr Simpson was challenged on this conclusion. He said that if a
Hebel wall was properly constructed and rendered, no extra waterproofing
be necessary. In his view this was not the case with these houses. He was
referred to the reports prepared by PPK Consultants
and by Mr Rendell, both of
which he had read. It was put to him that the cracking was all category 2
cracking for the purposes of
AS 2870-1996, and that it was not structural. In
reply Mr Simpson said that in his view AS 2780-1996 did not really address the
issue of serviceability and habitability. In any case, a distinction needed to
be made between a single skin wall such as existed
here and cavity walls or
brick veneer constructions. While category 2 cracking may be acceptable in
cavity walls or brick veneer
constructions, in his view it constituted a major
problem in single skin walls. It was put to him that the cracking would be
considerably
worse, if there was no adhesive used with the Hebel bricks. He
maintained his view that there was no adhesive used, although he
did qualify
this by saying that he believed adhesive was used around the
64) Mr Simpson was not recalled to give further evidence after the
design data for the Lite Brick construction method came to light.
report from him was however tendered, by consent, on 5 October 2000. That short
report dated 4 October 2000 was written
after Mr Simpson had read Mr
Rendell’s report of his investigation of whether the Rich and Shiller
Lite Brick design data. He wrote:
Rendell Report compares the as built building method used on the said premises
against the specifications for the construction
method adopted as outlined in
the document titled “Tests of AAC Litebrick Panels”, the report by
Graeme Holmes &
Associates Pty Ltd and the document titled “Design
Data for Processing” plus other reports as mentioned in the supplementary
In general the writer concurs with the conclusions of the Rendell
report. The total lack of pre-tensioning in the vertical wall bars
with the lack of tensile strength in the render (as evidenced by the extensive
render cracking) means that the walls as
a major structural element contain
major structural defects from both a strength/stability viewpoint as well as a
weatherproof/habitability
viewpoint. The walls in these two houses have not
been constructed in accordance with relevant specifications.
65) The Respondent called two expert witnesses both from PPK
Environment & Infrastructure Pty Ltd. The first was Dr Kanan, a
Structural Engineer, whose evidence was interposed during the Applicant’s
case, after Mr Tierney and Mr Burnes had
given their evidence.
66) In evidence in chief Dr Kanan said that he had inspected the
Rich’s house on 16 December 1999 on instructions from the Respondent.
While there he had taken extensive notes and taken photographs of what he
observed. He recalled that when he had arrived, he had
sat down at a table with
Mr and Mrs Rich and discussed with them what he intended to do, and had asked
them about various bits of
information he needed. He had then started the
inspection. Mr Rich had originally accompanied him. When he finished, he had
spoken with Mr Rich who had asked when the report would be ready. He had
told him it would be 2 or 3 weeks. Dr Kanan could not
recall exactly what was
said. He thought Mr Rich might have asked if it was structural, in which case
he would have told him he
would get a copy of the report from the Department.
Dr Kanan said he recalled discussing living in Queensland with Mr Rich. Mr
had offered to drop Dr Kanan back in town, which offer he had
67) Dr Kanan said that when he returned to his office he had
prepared a draft report, which he had discussed with his principal, Mr
After that discussion the final report had been finalised between the two of
68) Dr Kanan had met Mr Rich again on 4 April 2000 when preparing
a report on the Shiller’s house. By that time he had completed
Rich’s report. He said that Mr Rich had approached him and asked how
things were going. He had replied that there was
another problem, referring to
the Shiller’s house.
69) Much of the cross-examination of Dr Kanan was directed to the
inconsistencies between his recollection of the event of 16 December
April 2000, and that of Mr and Mrs Rich. Given the conclusions I have reached,
it is not necessary to set out that evidence
in these reasons. Dr Kanan was
asked why he had not signed the report form PPK, if it was his report. He
replied that the practice
at PPK was for the investigating engineer to prepare a
draft report, which was then discussed and refined together with the principal
– in this case Jim McNamara – who acts as a quality assurance
reviewer. The principal then signs the final report.
He said that his draft
report and the final report were the same, apart from editorial and grammatical
corrections. He was unable
to produce a copy of his draft as the reports were
not saved by versions.
70) The other expert called by the Respondent was Jim McNamara the
Principal Civil/Structural Engineer with PPK. Reports signed by
Mr McNamara
relating to the Rich's house and dated 1 February 2000, 11 August 2000, 12
September 2000 and 22 September 2000 were
tendered. In evidence Mr McNamara
explained that PPK has a “very vigorous” reporting system which
allows it to report
in a “uniform and consistent” manner. This
procedure was followed with both the Rich and Shiller houses. Dr Kanan had
conducted a thorough survey inspection of the properties and had then drafted a
report based on the observations he had made. That
report had been discussed
with Mr McNamara and then redrafted by Dr Kanan, until it met with Mr
McNamara’s approval. He had
then sighed the report. “I effectively
prepared the report”, said Mr McNamara. He had since inspected the house,
the Tribunal conducted a view of the property during the hearings conducted
in Young in August 2000.
71) Mr McNamara said that the findings of the initial inspection
of the property (conducted by Dr Kanan) was numerous cracking in
the property
which could be broken down into three types:
a) vertical and diagonal cracking;
b) block wall joint cracks which followed the path of the block
joints; and
c) render cracking.
72) Mr McNamara explained that cracking is caused by a combination
of movements within the structure:
a) roof timber shrinkage;
b) concrete slab shrinkage;
c) differential movements, resulting from the daily expansion and
contraction of materials due to heat and cold; and
d) foundation movement and reactive movement.
masonry wall, he said, will have some cracking - the current code considers 1mm
acceptable. In the both houses, Mr McNamara said
that the various cracks could
be attributed to various causes. Thus cracks one course down from the roof were
due to roof movement,
while the diagonal cracking was typical of settlement
cracks, which wall shrinkage could often exacerbate.
73) Mr McNamara said that the walls constituted a major structural
element of a structure, with an important structural role as well
functional role. Mr McNamara said that when he wrote the first report he
expected the walls to have been properly glued, and
considered that the cracks
did not affect the load carrying capacity of the walls. Walls, he said, have to
be strong enough to carry
the load placed upon them, they have to be durable,
stable and serviceable. The structural codes set out the basic criteria
to meet these objectives. He concluded that the Rich's house was
stable, strong, durable and serviceable, and, based on the foundation
in AS 2870-1996, that the cracking was minor. His view was that the cracking at
the Rich's house was not significant,
although he conceded that that might not
be the case for those living there.
74) Mr McNamara had addressed the issue of the absence of control
and slip joints in his report of 11 August 2000. His view that
was that there
was no requirement for control or slip joints in the Rich's property at the time
it was constructed. In his report
of 11 August 2000 he had undertaken a
comprehensive review of the codes and the relevant Hebel technical manuals
applicable at the
time before reaching this conclusion. He explained that at
the time he had undertaken this analysis he believed that the house had
built in accordance with CSR Hebel recommendations. He thought the rods
referred to in Mr Simpson's report were tie down rods
for the roof, which would
have been drilled, and faced, down the inside face of the walls. The first time
he knew this was not correct
was when he heard Mr Tierney and Mr Burnes give
their evidence to the Tribunal. It is informative to set out what Mr McNamara
Mr Simpson states that 'no
mortar was used between the blocks". The basis of this statement is unclear
although his earlier report
on four houses in the Close (April 1998) also states
the "reported" absence of adhesive on the external walls but the use of thin
adhesive on the internal walls.
The PPK inspection noted that all faces of the walls were rendered
and it was generally not possible to see any jointing in the blocks.
area where external block walls are exposed appear to be properly bonded. Such a
statement of reliance on steel rods to stabilise
the walls seems unlikely
• the walls would be highly unstable without the adhesive.
It would be possible to easily push over wall or push out individual
• the 12 mm rods which are required to hold down the roof
would supply minimal benefits to wall strength and stability;
• a tradesman who applies adhesive to the internal wall is
unlikely to omit it on the external walls;
• the building would have been seen by Council inspectors
and other tradesmen prior to wall rendering. Any experienced
person would
have strongly questioned the absence of adhesive; and
• the specification for the work included in Young Council's
files indicates that the work was to be carried out by a CSR Hebel
Contractor (Mr Kustor) and that the workmanship was to be of a type approved by
The statement that the un-mortared joints was the genesis of the
cracks is inconsistent with the fact that the claimed adhesive fixed
walls show a similar level of damage as the claimed dry fixed external
The second point of concern raised relates to the waterproof
performance of the wall. None of the inspections have identified telltale
evidence of rain entry to any walls. Also the current masonry code AS3700
– 1998 states that for an external single skin wall
reliance for
waterproofing should be placed on an applied costing. Failure of that coating,
if it has occurred, is not a structural
Mr Simpson therefore based his conclusion of a structural defect on
a seemingly erroneous assumption.
75) With respect to the issue of whether the dampness at the house
was a result of the absence of a dampcourse, Mr McNamara said that
in an earlier
report he had canvassed the possibility that there was no dampcourse. He now
accepted that there was a dampcourse,
in the light of the evidence to the
Tribunal, but considered that the height of the path at the front of the
property, above the
dampcourse, was a cause of rising damp.
76) Mr McNamara was taken to his report of 11 September 2000 which
sets out his assessment of the structure in the light of full information
the construction methods used, and with the benefit of the design data and test
reports on the Lite Brick system. He said
that following brief discussions with
Professor Page and Mr Holmes, he had concluded that the Lite Brick system
offered a level of
structural equivalence with Hebel construction methods and he
concluded that the structure was properly fixed. His report states
Evaluation of Wall Strength
and Stability
From the Tribunal evidence that the internal AAC walls were
constructed with thin bed adhesive and the previous evaluations of their
I reconfirm that the defects in these walls are 'General Defects' in accordance
with Clause 31 of the Building Services Corporation
Regulation 1990.
I also confirm that the defects in external walls as constructed
utilising the 'Lite Brick' wall system are also 'General Defects'
in accordance
with the regulations based on the evidence provided to the Tribunal, the above
documentation and telephone discussions.
These confirm the likelihood of
adequate structural stability and strength for the external AAC walls and a
structural equivalence
to the thin bed adhesive walls which were previously
assumed in and accepted as structurally adequate in my earlier analysis. The
basis of this opinion is:
• that the external walls have performed structurally
adequately for the period of approximately eight to nine years since
construction. By structural adequacy I refer to the ability to support, without
obvious distress, the applied loading including
win earthquake or accidental
• the level of defects in the external walls which,
although slightly higher than the internal walls, can be attributed to
severe environmental conditions that the external walls are subjected to -
particularly ground movement, material shrinkage
and temperature and moisture
• the system adopted by Lite Brick Holdings utilises
prestressing principles which are commonly used and are well understood
structural engineering. Whilst we do not have the design drawings and a record
of construction relevant to the above property
I understand from discussions
with Graeme Holmes that special engineering designs were prepared for each house
layout to ensure the
structural adequacy of the walls. The evidence provided to
the Tribunal gave no indication of any short cuts to these requirements
the construction of the walls;
• the fact that testing undertaken by University of
Newcastle and CSR confirms this structural adequacy confirms the serious
professional approach adopted by Lite Brick in proving the structural adequacy
of the system. The fact that both the Brisbane
City Council and Queensland
Department of Housing, Local Government and Planning have independently reviewed
and have accepted the
system gives an additional level of confidence in the
• I have presented the opportunity during discussions with
Professor Page and Mr Holmes to raise any concerns that they may
have with the
system which may have been gained through their experience in evaluating the
Lite Brick system. Whilst clearly neither
engineer was in a position to endorse
the system they also did not nominate any areas of concern.
Because the substitution of stressed rods and vertical block keys
are structurally equivalent to the adhesive jointed blocks it is
not surprising
that these two wall types have cracked similarly. As stated in the previous
assessments the cracking of these houses
are consistent with movements within
and adjacent to the walls. These mechanisms include:
• foundation movements - both settlement and ground heave;
• shrinkage of the blocks - a known phenomenon with AAC
• temperature effects;
• shrinkage of the ground slab;
• moisture movements in the roof trusses.
As stated in previous reports the cracking in the walls is a result
of site environmental conditions including temperature and moisture
ground movement and natural material shrinkage and expansion. Because regular
vertical control joints and horizontal slip
joints were omitted from the masonry
wall construction these movements could not be readily accommodated in the walls
without causing
cracking. These joints were not a requirement of building
practice at that time. Because relatively shallow foundations were constructed
in accordance with building ordinance requirements of that time the vertical
movements in those walls is greater than a building
designed in accordance with
the current Building Code of Australia requirements.
Whilst these cracks are unattractive and causes obvious discomfort
to the residents they do not weaken the wall and are unlikely to
premature failure of the house. it is also relatively simple and inexpensive to
repair these cracks with a suitable flexible
sealant which will, after
repainting, address any visual and climatic concerns. Future cracking should be
at a relatively reduced
scale to that of today.
77) Mr McNamara then turned to the impact of the findings made by
Mr Rendell as to how the structure failed to comply with the Lite
Brick design
data. Specifically, he considered the absence of proper top plate splicing, and
the lack of tension in the tie rod
bolts to be of major concern, and to put the
structural stability of the building in doubt. As to the other non-compliances
by Mr Rendell, he was unable to say what impact they may have on the
structural integrity, but did think that they might possibly
exacerbate the
problems created by the top plate splicing and lack of tie rod tensioning. Mr
McNamara said that he did not lack
of stressing force in the walls, created by
the failure to tension down the walls as specified. He was of the view that the
in the walls created by the lack of tension, should have enabled
micro-movement between the blocks, and not led to the cracking that
was evident.
He remained of the view that the cracks were a mixture of settling cracks and
movement cracks associated with shrinkage
and normal expansion and
contraction.
78) In cross-examination Mr McNamara agreed with the suggestion
that with the Rich's house the failure of the render would make the
less strong. He also agreed that, with dwellings, the concept of serviceability
of a structure implies that it be reasonably
habitable, and that one of the
functions of a wall is to keep the elements out. He agreed that he had done no
independent checks
to see if the Lite Brick System was followed.
79) In addition to the large volume of evidence presented to the
Tribunal, I also had the advantage of a view of both the Rich and
of the Evidence
80) There is little dispute as to the factual background to this
appeal. What is hotly in dispute is the nature, extent and cause
of the defects
in the Rich's house, and whether or not the cracking alone constitutes a major
structural defect for the purposes
of the BSC Comprehensive Insurance Scheme.
To resolve the later, I must first determine the nature, extent and cause of the
81) There are two strongly divided views as to the nature and
severity of the cracking among the various experts called by the parties.
Austin and Mr Rendell are of the view that the cracking is structural, and
results from the method of construction. They think
that the problems of non
compliance with the Lite Brick design data highlight and go some way towards
explaining the cracking, while
creating serious issues as to the structural
stability of the houses themselves. Mr Rendell, while the only professional
without an engineering qualification, tenaciously chased down the
defects and provided much of the information upon which the others
formed their
opinions. At all times both Mr Austin and Mr Rendell had a clear idea of the
construction method used to build the
houses, and based their findings on that
knowledge. The only facet of the construction method they had not discovered,
Tierney and Mr Burnes gave their evidence, was the keying of the
blocks. Mr Shayler, from CSR Hebel, agreed with their earlier
conclusions, on
the assumption that their understanding of the construction method was
82) Dr Kanan and Mr McNamara took the opposing view that the
cracking was relatively minor. Mr McNamara did agree that the failure
properly splice the top plates, and to tension down the tie rods constituted a
serious structural problem. He insisted, however,
that the cracking was not
related to these defects.
83) If one closely examines the reports submitted by PPK a number
of things become clear:
a) in the first report, of 1 February 2000, the assumption is made
that the building was constructed in accordance with normal Hebel
methods. This
is so despite the fact that the authors had access to the Simpson report which
clearly set out Mr Simpson's understanding
of the construction method, and his
sources. Indeed the PPK report addresses and criticizes Mr Austin's report. No
explanation
is given as to why it was assumed that the building was constructed
in accordance with normal Hebel methods, rather than as stated
by Mr Austin, who
had made inquiries as to the method used.
b) in the second PPK report of 11 August 2000 (quoted at paragraph
74 above) Mr McNamara, who still had not inspected the premises
commented on Mr Austin's 'reports' of the lack of adhesive, and listed a number
of reasons as to why the reported method
of construction was unlikely. This
included a statement that, 'The one area where the block walls are exposed
appear to be properly
bonded'. This was something that neither Mr Austin or Mr
Rendell could see. It is also something I could not detect at my view
c) the third report of 12 September 2000 (quoted at paragraph 76
above) addresses the issue of the impact of the evidence given to
the Tribunal
that the house was built using the Lite Brick construction method. As noted,
this evidence did not cause Mr McNamara
to change his opinion. Of particular
interest is the fact that he reviewed and affirmed his opinion without making
any further inspections
or tests at the house. The problem, in not doing so,
was highlighted by Mr Rendell's discoveries when he did conduct further on
investigations.
84) The other issue requiring comment with respect to the PPK
reports and Mr McNamara evidence is the methodology adopted in preparing
first and second reports. While there is nothing inherently wrong about an
engineer, such as Mr McNamara, giving an opinion
based upon the observation of
others, that opinion is necessarily dependent on the accuracy and relevance of
those observations to
the issues at hand, and is, of its nature, likely to be
given less weight by a tribunal of fact than a expert report based on an
expert's own observations: see PQ v Australian Red Cross Society
[1992] VicRp 2
(1992) 1 VR 19
per McGarvie J. and Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642.
That is certainly my
view when I come to weigh the PPK reports against those of Mr Austin and Mr
Rendell, especially as a number
of the assumptions and observations which Mr
McNamara and Dr Kanan relied upon were proved incorrect.
85) I have little confidence in the PPK reports and in Mr
McNamara's evidence. The PPK opinions have been made on the basis of a
of assumptions which proved unfounded. viz, the false assumption that the house
was not built as stated by Mr Austin, and
the later false assumption that it was
built in accordance with the Lite Brick design data. Expert opinion evidence to
be persuasive
in cases such as this should be based on independent inquiries and
investigation, followed by expert assessment and evaluation.
I am persuaded
that this was not the case with the PPK reports. I conclude that while Mr
McNamara's evidence and reports may be
uniform and consistent, they are not
persuasive. I prefer the evidence of Mr Austin and Mr Rendell, which does not
suffer from any
of defects I perceive in that of Mr McNamara.
Application
86) In making submissions of law Counsel for both parties referred
me to a decision of Senior Member Fleming in Penn v Fair Trading
Administration
Corporation
[2000] NSWFTT 5
as to the interpretation of the meaning of major
structural defect in Clause 31 of the BSC Regulation. Senior Member Fleming
(at paragraph 45):
Are the defects ‘major structural
To determine this issue the Tribunal must first consider the meaning
of the definition of ‘major structural defect’ found
in Regulation
31 of the BSC Regulations and set out above. To facilitate this discussion it
is set out again here:
“major structural
means an inherent or damage-induced defect:
(a) in an element that provides essential supporting structure to the whole
or any part of a dwelling (for example, a footing, beam,
column or a suspended
slab) which renders the element inadequate for its structural purpose; or
(b) in a substantial functional element essential to the habitability of a
dwelling (for example, a panel wall, masonry veneer wall
or slab on ground)
which is of such a kind that the element itself does not have adequate structure
for its purpose[s].”
The definition is in terms which convey that it is intended to be comprehensive
and exclusive, in for instance the use of the word
Sherritt Gordon Mines Ltd v FCT
[1977] VicRp 42
(1976) 10 ALR 441
at 455. At the same
time each limb of the definition is to be read disjunctively. The examples
cited in each limb are illustrative
of the nature of the ‘element’
to which each applies and they themselves are not exclusive.
... Regulation 31(1)(a) distinguishes ‘an element’ which
has a, singular,
structural purpose
. Regulation 31(1)(b) distinguishes a
‘substantial functional element’ that may have inadequate structure
The Tribunal accepts that the ‘element’ which is
defective in this dispute, with the exception of the retaining wall in
garden, is the cavity brick wall of the house. The evidence before the Tribunal
is that this ‘element’ of the dwelling
is made up of an inner and
outer brick ‘skin’, a cavity between them which should be clear of
debris, weepholes to allow
for water drainage and flashings covering joints to
prevent water entry. The Tribunal finds that the ‘cavity brick
as a whole is the element which is defective, and that the defect is
as a result of the poor standard of work carried out in construction.
The evidence before the Tribunal illustrates the difficulties in the
definition of ‘major structural defect’ where an
‘element’ of a dwelling may both provide ‘essential supporting
structure’ to the dwelling and be a ‘substantial
functional’
element of the dwelling. The Tribunal accepts that it is clearly wrong to state
that a cavity brick wall does
not have a function in keeping water from
penetrating into the interior of the house. However, at the same time the
Tribunal finds
that the two limbs of the definition are directed at different
aspects of a building. Clause 31(1)(a) is, in the Tribunal’s
directed at those aspects of the building which are ‘essential’ to
the structural integrity of the building. Without
them, the building would not
be structurally sound. It would be without ‘support’. On the
evidence before the Tribunal,
a ‘cavity brick wall’ of a
‘cavity brick dwelling’ primarily provides the essential structural
support for
the building. While it also functions to prevent water entry its
primary ‘structural purpose’ is to support the building.
the walls the building would not be able to stand up. The Tribunal finds
support for this view in the wording of the definition
and in particular in the
reference to ‘
’ in Clause 31(1)(a).
The Tribunal also accepts the evidence of Professor Marosszeky that
‘structural purpose’
has a particular meaning in the context of
building, which refers to the ability of the building to withstand the load
Clause 31(1)(b) refers to the effect of the defect on the
‘habitability’ of a dwelling. However the examples contained
this clause, namely a panel wall, masonry veneer wall or slab on the ground, are
all elements of a dwelling which, according to
the expert evidence before the
Tribunal, relate to non-structural aspects of the building. They are
‘substantially functional’
in that they, for instance, prevent the
transmission of sound within the structure or provide protection from the ground
in the case of a masonry veneer wall, provide protection from the
weather. To a lay person it is clear that a building is not habitable
walls, be they cavity brick or of some other construction. However, in the
Tribunal’s view, to interpret this in this
simple way would be to
misconstrue the wording of the definition and to effectively encompass all parts
of the building within Clause
31(1)(b). As with the issue of functionality all
elements of a building may be said to affect its habitability. A dwelling would
similarly not be considered habitable without a floor, ceiling, windows, roof,
suspended slab in the case of a multi story dwelling,
or without the supporting
structures of beams, footings etc which ensured that it was safe and
structurally sound. The Tribunal
is of the view that the use of the word
‘habitability’ contained in Clause 31(1)(b) must be referable to the
‘substantial
functional element’ that is identified as defective.
It is not intended to also encompass structural elements of the
The Tribunal reads the word ‘element’ in Clause 31(1)(b)
as qualified by the words ‘substantial’ and
‘functional’.
In other words, the element itself must be a
substantially functional one to come within clause 31(1)(b). The example is
of a masonry veneer wall. Evidence was given to the Tribunal as to the
difference between this and a cavity brick wall. In the
case of a masonry
veneer wall it is the timber or steel frame internal to the wall which fulfils
the load bearing, or ‘structural
purpose’, of the wall and the
masonry veneer which functions as weatherproofing. In this case, the purpose of
the masonry
veneer wall is substantially functional.
The Tribunal is of the view that the cost of rectifying the
defective work is not relevant to whether the defect is a ‘major
structural’, or ‘general’ defect. In this case there is no
dispute that rectification work will be needed and
that this will be at a
significant cost to the Penns.
87) Having given that passage a lot of thought, I am in
substantial agreement with the comments of Senior Member Fleming. I have
the extract from Penn out at some length, as the remarks made need to understood
in the context of the structure to which they
relate. Ms Kennedy argued that
Penn decided that where an element provided essential supporting structure and
was also a substantial
functional element essential to the habitability of the
structure, then it could only be classified as a major structural defect
clause (a) of the definition, and not clause (b). Thus, she submitted that even
if I were satisfied that the cracking in the
walls (as a substantial functional
element essential to the habitability of the dwelling) meant that they did not
have sufficient
structure for their purposes in terms of clause (b), I could not
find that this constituted a major structural defect because the
notified in the original claim) were adequate for their structural purpose in
terms of clause (a). This is so because
the Tribunal in Penn found that the
word habitability in sub-clause (b) related to substantial functional elements
only, and did
not apply to structural elements.
88) The difficulty with such an analysis is starkly highlighted in
the present situation where the structure has a single skin wall,
concerned acknowledge is designed to serve a structural purpose, as well the as
the purposes of excluding the elements
and vermin, etc. In that sense the walls
are a functional element essential to the habitability of the house. I am
satisfied that
the walls do not have sufficient structure to fulfil that
purpose, yet on Ms Kennedy's submissions that lack of structure does not
constitute a major structural defect because, in her submission, the walls
provide essential supporting structure and are adequate
for that purpose. While
the two limbs of the definition of major structural defect in Clause 31 are
clearly disjunctive, there is
nothing in the definition which indicates that
they are mutually exclusive.
89) A close reading of the passage from Penn shows that the
Tribunal there was endeavouring to highlight the distinction between the
tests in the definition of major structural defect, and was anxious to make the
point that an element which provides essential
supporting structure would not
suffer a major structural defect for the purposes of paragraph (a) of the
definition, if it lacked
adequate structure for the purpose of habitability, yet
was adequate for its structural purpose. This is so, as the test with respect
to lack of adequate structure for the purposes of habitability is set out in
clause (b) of the definition, and requires that the
element be a substantial
functional element essential to habitability. If an element satisfies the
requirements of both limbs of
the definition, in that it provides essential
supporting structure and is also a substantial functional element essential to
habitability,
there is no reason why it could not suffer a major structural
defect under either or both limbs of the definition, provided the criteria
specified in the definitions is met. In my view Penn should not be read as
saying otherwise. It is clear from the Senior Member’s
findings of fact
that, while she did not go through the process of applying paragraph (b) of the
definition, she was of the view
that it did not apply, and confined her
considerations to paragraph (a) of the definition.
90) Each of the examples given in the definition are illustrative
of building elements which clearly satisfy the criteria set out
in the limb of
the definition to which they relate. None of the examples cited in Clause 31
relate to building elements which might
satisfy the requirements of both limbs
of the definition. This is understandable as to do so would only create
confusion. The absence
of such an example, however, does not justify the
conclusion advanced by Ms Kennedy.
91) The purpose of the BSC Comprehensive Insurance Scheme was to
provide protection, within defined limits, to those whose homes suffer
either general defects or major structural defect as defined. Clause 31 in
defining major structural defects acknowledges that
they can be structural or
can arise because a functional element essential to habitability does not fulfil
its purposes. I can see
no basis for finding that an element which fulfils both
a structural purpose and is a functional element essential to habitability,
cannot suffer a major structural defect because, while it fails to fulfil one
those purposes, it continues to fulfil the other.
In my view such a
construction is artificial, and imposes a Catch 22 on those who own homes which
are constructed in such a way that
single elements of the structure satisfy both
limbs of the definition of major structural defect. In my opinion, the issue of
a defect is a major structural defect will in each case require the
particular defect, and the context in which it arises, to be
assessed in the
light of each limb of the definition of major structural defect. If the element
under consideration fulfils both
a structural purpose and is a substantial
functional element essential to habitability, the inquiry should be directed to
there is a major structural defect under either limb of the definition.
92) Applying that approach to the Rich's home, I am satisfied
a) the cracking to the external walls is a major structural defect
under sub-clause (b) of the definition of major structural defect
in Clause 31.
Those defects are both inherent from the manner in which the walls and the house
were constructed, and damage induced
as a result of that faulty construction.
b) the cracking in the external walls is a major structural defect
under sub-clause (a) of the definition of major structural defect
resulting from
the walls being inadequately stressed. Those defects are both inherent from the
manner in which the walls and the
house were constructed, and damage induced as
a result of that faulty construction.
c) the numerous defects in stressing the walls by means of the tie
down rods and top plates, as specified in Mr Rendell's report of
3 October 2000,
together constitute a major structural defect under sub-clause (a) of the
definition of major structural defect.
Those defects are
93) It should be understood that in so finding I have formed the
a) that the claim as initially made by Mr Rich and rejected by the
Respondent did relate to a major structural defect;
b) that the cracking in the external walls alone constituted a
major structural defect;
c) that the construction defects in the stressing of the walls, by
use of the tie rods and top plates, was a contributing cause to
structural defect in the external walls, and was properly part of the first
claim. In making this finding, I accept the
opinions of both Mr Rendell and Mr
Austin on this issue; and
d) that the cracking in the internal walls, while undoubtedly
significant, amount to general defects as they do not satisfy the requirements
of either limb of the definition of major structural defect.
94) In the light of the above it will not be necessary to consider
the extension of time issues. I propose to formally record my
findings in
paragraph 92. The parties will no doubt require some time to consider their
respective positions and the further conduct
of the application. I propose to
direct that the application be listed for a telephone directions hearing before
me at 4pm on 21
December 2000 so that directions can be made with respect to the
further conduct of the application.
P. H. Molony
Senior Member
23 November 2000
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THIS IS A TRUE AND ACCURATE RECORD OF THE REASONS FOR
DECISION OF THE FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL .
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter