URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/665.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCL Associates (Aust) Pty Ltd v Duraglaze NSW Pty Ltd (Home Building) [2013] NSWCTTT 665 (31 December 2013)
HCL Associates (Aust) Pty Ltd v Duraglaze NSW Pty Ltd (Home
[2013] NSWCTTT 665
(31 December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER
AND TENANCY TRIBUNAL
APPLICATION NOS:
HB 13/25457 and HB 13/26887
HCL Associates (Australia) Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT:
Duraglaze NSW Pty Ltd
APPLICATION:
Payment of money
9 September 2013
APPEARANCES:
Hank Laan for applicant;
Michael Tuckwell for respondent
LEGISLATION:
Consumer Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
Repudiation of Contract
the matter number HB 13/25457, the application is dismissed because, having
considered the material placed before it, the Tribunal
is not satisfied at the
civil standard that the grounds required to make the orders have been
the matter number HB 13/26887, the Tribunal orders HCL Associates (Australia)
Pty Ltd to pay Duraglaze NSW Pty Ltd the sum of $1,342.00
immediately.
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATIONS
application HB 13/25457 filed on 10 May 2013 the applicant HCL Associates
(Australia) Pty Ltd (hereunder referred to as “HCL”)
following orders against the respondent Duraglaze NSW Pty Ltd (hereinafter
referred to as “Duraglaze”):
(a) An order for the payment of $1,273.00;
(b) An order seeking relief from payment of $11,460.00
an application HB 13/26887 filed on 16 May 2013, Duraglaze requested the
Tribunal to make an order that HCL pay the sum of $10,580.00
for monies owed
under a contract to renovate a swimming pool at a residential property in
applications were heard together on 9 September 2013. The Tribunal directed that
the evidence given at the hearing was to be
evidence in both applications HB
13/25457 and HB 13/26887. The hearing of the applications proceeded on that
DIRECTIONS HEARINGS
21 June 2013 the Tribunal directed the parties to file and serve evidence on
each other and to provide the Tribunal with copies
of that material. Both
parties have filed and served evidence as directed.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine any building claim brought
before it in which the amount claimed does not exceed
$500,000.00
) (“the Act”). I am
satisfied that the nature of both applications falls within the definition of
“building claim”
as defined in
section 48A
of the Act. I find that
the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine both
applications.
is the owner of residential premises at Cronulla. Duraglaze is the holder of
Licence No. 93178C.
requested a quote from Duraglaze in December 2012. In or about February 2013 HCL
obtained a quote from Duraglaze for the renovation
of a swimming pool at
Cronulla. The refurbishment process was described on the company’s website
and in its brochure.
some negotiation between the parties, HCL submitted purchase order 2013/11 dated
21 February 2013 to Duraglaze. The purchase
order states it is
refurbishment of a swimming pool at “...” Cronulla as per Duraglaze
quotation No. 5172 dated 11 February
amended...”
purchase order set out the work to be done and noted the price inclusive of GST
as $12,733.00.
payment terms were as follows:
10% deposit on acceptance of the purchase order $1,273.00
payment on completion of pump out and commencement
of the work $5,093.00
Balance on completion and final clean up $6,367.00
purchase order stipulated that the work was to commence no earlier than the week
commencing Monday, 25 March 2013.
22 February 2013 Duraglaze generated quotation No. 5176 which reflected the
terms of the purchase order.
parties entered into a formal written contract on 22 February 2013 for Duraglaze
to undertake the works as set out in quotation
sheet No. 5176 for a price of
$12,733.00.
1 March 2013 HCL pays the deposit of $1,273.00 to Duraglaze.
commences work on the pool renovation about 10 April 2013.
15 April 2013 Duraglaze sent an email at 1.55 pm to HCL in the following
“My purpose for this email is twofold, first is to request our
second payment as per contract and the second to put on record
conversation this morning in regard to the purpose of the filla-coat layer of
our Fibreglaze system which is to help hide
the fibre pattern of the 450csm matt
so it fills the valleys of the laminate and is then ground back so that high
spots and overlaps
will often be cut back to the glass laminate but not through
the laminate. I have spoken with Girts and Michael who applied the finish-coat
who have assured me the laminate was sound with good coverage. Please let me
have your thoughts on this.”
replied to the email on the same day at 5.30 pm:
“Please forward a tax invoice for the second payment and I will
forward a cheque to you.
With regard to the final coat, I think it best if you can come out and
have a look for yourself. It is nothing like the finish of
the pool before the
renovation or when it was done the first time more than 15 years ago. There are
high and low spots, ridges and
thickened areas that are very noticeable. It was
my understanding that the end result would be a smooth, even
email dated 16 April 2013, HCL raises with Duraglaze an issue with the finish of
the pool. Duraglaze suggests the appointment of
a building consultant to inspect
the job but this offer is rejected by HCL in an email on the same date wherein
Mr Laan writes:
“I am not interested in your consultant deciding
whether the finish is as it should be or not”.
17 April 2013 Duraglaze receives a cheque for $5,093.00 from HCL for the second
instalment under the contract. The cheque is deposited
into Duraglaze’s
bank account.
Tuckwell from Duraglaze attends the property at Cronulla on 18 or 19 April 2013
and inspects the pool. He undertakes the inspection
with Hank Laan who
represents HCL. There seem to be some doubt as to the actual date of the
inspection.
19 April 2013 Michael Tuckwell writes to Hank Laan about the inspection and
“As I stated to you, my inspection of the pool confirmed to me that
this was a satisfactory standard application of our fibreglass
Your reply was: “I thought you might say that and in that case, we
have a problem.”
his letter, Mr Tuckwell suggested that the parties appoint an expert to resolve
the dispute with the cost to be shared between
them. He threatens termination of
the contract and action to recover payment for the 95% of the works already
20 April 2013 Mr Laan sends a letter to Duraglaze wherein he highlights the
perceived faults with the work and expressed his concerns.
He also explains why
HCL is opposed to the appointment of a building consultant or industry
association to determine the issue. He
suggests the appointment of a person
“having the necessary qualifications in the application of fibreglass
to inspect the pool surface, read this correspondence
and your brochure and
website and provide an expert opinion as to whether the system in its current
form meets what you were contracted
to provide”.
in the letter, Mr Laan states:
“If you intend to pursue what you term as your last resort and apply
to the Department of Fair Trading to seek termination of
the contract and
payment for 95% of the works. I will have no hesitation in obtaining the expert
report together with the original
pool builder’s report which will then be
tendered in evidence at the Department of Fair Trading hearing together with
photographs
taken by me during application of the Duraglaze
email dated 29 April 2013, HCL advises Duraglaze that the cheque for $5,093.00
representing the second payment under the contract
was cancelled as requested by
Michael Tuckwell. It is not disputed that HCL did not issue a replacement
25 April 2013 Shaun Edmunds from All Areas Fibreglass Pool Resurfacing inspects
“for the purposes of providing an opinion of the fibreglass
resurfacing of the pool and an estimate of costs of repair or replace
imperfections in the liner”.
29 April 2013 Manfred Wiesemes who conducts business as Australian Pools and Spa
Consulting inspects the pool and prepares a report
for HCL (the “Wiesemes
Wiesemes has had considerable experience in the pool and spa industry and has
impressive qualifications.
detailing his observations, Mr Wiesemes concluded at 3.4:
“It is my opinion that the end result is of a poor standard and should
be redone.”
suggested rectification in the Wiesemes Report is as follows:
“Sand back pool walls and floor and prepare surface for relining of
fiberglass. Lay fiberglass sheets making sure that edges
are feathered where
overlaps occur. Filla Coats and resins should be evenly applied so that a smooth
finish can result. Care should
be taken to avoid runs and drips.
Allow finish to cure then replace hydrostatic valve, fill pool and
chemically treat water.
I would stress the above works should be carried out urgently. In my
opinion the pool is at great risk of lifting out of ground whilst
being empty.
Any detrimental weather could cause great damage to the pool in its present
A series of photographs is attached to the report.
Areas Fibreglass Pool Resurfacing submits a report and quotation on 6 May 2013
(the “Edmunds Report”). Shaun Edmunds
lists his qualifications and
experience in the pool resurfacing business. He states that he has completed
jobs over approximately 4 years.
Edmunds Report notes Mr Edmunds’ observations made on 25 April 2013 and
his opinion that:
“...the entire surface of the existing pool liner will need to be
ground back to remove the numerous hard edges, runs, ‘curtains’
different colour patches in the top coat and to provide a ‘key’ for
installing a new liner.”
Edmunds Report then details the work to be done and quotes a price of $10,118.00
for the job.
seeks the opinion of Mr Wiesemes about the scope of works and price contained in
the Edmunds Report.
in early May 2013 Mr Wiesemes provides written confirmation that the quote and
scope of works are reasonable.
submitted that it contracted with Duraglaze to refurbish/replace the liner in a
pool at residential premises in Cronulla using
the Duraglaze
contract price was $12,733.00 including GST which included relining the pool,
regrouting of tiles and other works.
the course of the resurfacing, HCL was concerned that Duraglaze had not applied
the four layers Fibreglass Pool resurfacing
system as described in a brochure to
the whole pool.
alleges that Duraglaze omitted the third layer from large parts of the pool and
there were numerous other defects in the works.
claims to have attempted to resolve the issues with Duraglaze but had been
unable to reach agreement. HCL and Duraglaze were in
dispute about whether the
work which had been completed was defective.
Duraglaze’s refusal to acknowledge that the work was defective and carry
out remedial work, HCL engages Manfred Wiesemes
and Shaun Edmunds to inspect the
works and prepare reports.
engages All Areas Fibreglass Pool Resurfacing to remove and replace the
fibreglass liner installed and to complete the outstanding
seeks orders that Duraglaze repay the deposit monies of $1,273.00 and relief
from payment of the unpaid part of the Duraglaze
DURAGLAZE CASE
Duraglaze case is set out in a submission dated 16 July 2013. In summary,
Duraglaze argues that:
(a) HCL had the pool resurfaced by another company thereby denying Duraglaze the
opportunity to undertake any repairs;
(b) Duraglaze was always prepared to abide by the decisions of an independent
expert arranged by CTTT and any orders of CTTT. Once
the pool was resurfaced by
another company, it was denied the opportunity to finish the
(c) The work on the pool was not complete at the time of inspection and
Duraglaze was denied the opportunity to address any final
repairs or issues
before final payment was due;
(d) HCL was in breach of the conditions of the contract in failing to make the
second payment notwithstanding that the bank lost
seeks an order that HCL pay the sum of $10,823.35 representing the value of the
95% of the contract price less the deposit
FINDINGS AND
DETERMINATIONS
Tribunal finds that HCL and Duraglaze entered into a written contract on 22
February 2013 for Duraglaze to carry out the works
specified in quotation sheet
contract price of the works was $12,733.00 and HCL paid Duraglaze a deposit of
$1,273.00 on 1 March 2013.
Tribunal finds that the terms of the contract are contained in the written
document dated 22 February 2013, the quotation sheet
No. 5176 and purchase order
No. 2013/11 (“the Contract”).
the evidence, the Tribunal finds that Duraglaze commenced the contracted works
on or about 10 April 2013 and that by 15 April 2013,
approximately 95% of the
works had been completed.
find that Duraglaze requested from HCL on 15 April 2013 the second payment of
$5,093.00 pursuant to the contract. HCL made the payment
on or about 17 April
2013 but the cheque was lost. HCL did not replace the cheque nor did it make the
evidence establishes that on 15 April 2013, HCL raised with Duraglaze for the
first time issues regarding the finish of the pool.
There is a flow of email
correspondence between the parties.
is undisputed that as a result of HCL’s concerns, Michael Tuckwell visited
the site on 19 April 2013 and in a letter of the
same date, advised Mr Laan that
the application of “our fibreglass process” was a satisfactory
evidence shows that Mr Laan responded to Michael Tuckwell’s letter on 20
April 2013 and challenged Mr Tuckwell’s assertion
that the work was of a
satisfactory standard and there were no defects. He invited Duraglaze to
undertake “the required remedial
accept Mr Laan’s evidence that following this correspondence, HCL
instructed Shaun Edmunds to prepare a report and quotation
on 25 April
is not disputed Mr Laan requested Mr Wiesemes to inspect the site on 29 April
2013. In his report, he noted a number of defects
and provided recommendations
for rectification. Although HCL had the Wiesemes Report, it did not make a copy
available to Duraglaze
or invite Duraglaze to undertake the rectification works
suggested by Manfred Wiesemes.
Laan’s evidence was that Shaun Edmunds provided a report and quotation to
HCL to rectify the defects and complete the works
on 6 May 2013. As with the
Wiesemes Report, the Edmunds Report was not provided to Duraglaze. There is no
dispute that All Areas
Fibreglass Pool Resurfacing at the request of HCL
installed a new liner and completed the works in accordance with the quote
by Shaun Edwards.
Tribunal has not been provided with a copy of any formal written notice
terminating the Contract between the parties. At the hearing,
both parties
conceded that neither had served a notice of termination. The Tribunal finds on
the evidence that the Contract had not
been terminated by either
his cross examination of Mr Laan, Michael Tuckwell asked him why he was not told
until the first hearing before this Tribunal
on 21 June 2013 that the pool had
been resurfaced. Mr Laan replied that Mr Tuckwell had made it clear he did not
believe that the
work was sub-standard. In those circumstances, HCL needed to
mitigate its loss.
All Areas Fibreglass Pool Resurfacing (“All Areas”) commenced work
on the pool, the Tribunal finds the Contract between
HCL and Duraglaze had not
been terminated and was still on foot.
Shevill v Builders Licensing Board
(1982) HCA 47
149 CLR 620
stated (at pp625-626) that:
“a contract may be repudiated if one party renounces his liabilities
under it – if he evinces an intention no longer to
be bound by the
contract...or shows that he intends to fulfil the contract only in a manner
substantially inconsistent with his obligations
and not in any other
first question for determination is whether HCL’s actions constitute a
repudiation of the Contract? Can the inference be
drawn from HCL’s conduct
that it evinced “an intention no longer to be bound by the contract”
or show that it intended
to fulfil the contract only in a manner substantially
inconsistent with its obligations and not in any other way.
Stephen Wayne Velik v Noreen Steingold
(2013) NSWCA 303
Sackville AJA
outlined the relevant principles at [85-86];
“85. The principles relating to repudiation, insofar as relevant to
this case, are not in dispute. In Koompahtoo Local Aboriginal
Land Council
v Sanpine Pty Ltd
[2007] HCA 61
233 CLR 115
, the plurality said (at [44]) that one way the
term "repudiation" is used is to:
refer to conduct which evinces an unwillingness or an inability to render
substantial performance of the contract. This is sometimes
described as conduct
of a party which evinces an intention no longer to be bound by the contract or
to fulfil it only in a manner
substantially inconsistent with the party's
obligations [Laurinda Pty Ltd v Capalaba Park Shopping Centre Pty
[1989] HCA 23
166 CLR 623
at 634 per Mason CJ]. It may be termed
renunciation [Heyman v Darwins Ltd
[1942] AC 356
at 397]. The test is
whether the conduct of one party is such as to convey to a reasonable person, in
the situation of the other
party, renunciation either of the contract as a whole
or of a fundamental obligation under it [Laurinda Pty Ltd v Capalaba, at 659
Deane and Dawson JJ].
“86. Koompahtoo Council v Sanpine, as the plurality noted (at [44]),
was not concerned with issues that arise when the alleged
repudiation takes the
form of one party asserting an erroneous interpretation of a contractual
provision. However, the authorities
establish a number of principles relevant to
such a case. A convenient statement of "some of the key principles" is to be
the judgment of Ashley JA (with whom Kellam JJA, and Osborn AJA agreed)
in R & A Cab Co Pty Ltd v Kotzman
[2008] VSCA 68
, at [44]-[49]. What follows is in part drawn on that
party to a contract has acted in such a way as to evince an intention not to
carry out the contract is a question of fact:
Laurinda v Capalaba at
repudiation
of a contract is a serious matter and is not to be lightly found or
inferred: Shevill v The Builders Licensing Board
[1982] HCA 47
149 CLR 620
, at 633, per Wilson J;
the question
of repudiation requires a consideration of all of the circumstances, including
the conduct of the party claiming to have
accepted the
repudiation: Koompahtoo Council v Sanpine, at [60]; Cab Co Pty Ltd v
Kotzman, at [48] and cases cited there;
repudiation
is not determined by inquiring into the subjective state of mind of the party in
default, but by reference to conduct
(verbal or otherwise) which conveys to the
other party the defaulting party's intention not to perform the contract or to
it only in a manner inconsistent with that party's obligations and in no
other way: Laurinda v Capalaba at 647, per Brennan
party to a contract persists in maintaining that it will only perform an
obligation of essential importance in accordance
with an untenable construction
of that obligation, that conduct amounts to a repudiation of the
contract: Satellite Estate Pty Ltd
(1968) 71 SR (NSW) 126
, 149 per Asprey JA
(with whom Wallace P agreed);
circumstances, an honest misapprehension as to the proper construction of the
contract will not justify a claim of repudiation,
especially if the defaulting
party indicates that he or she may be open to correction: Ross T Smyth
& Co Ltd v TD Bailey, Son
[1940] 3 All ER 60
, at 72 per Lord
Wright; Cab Co Pty Ltd v Kotzman, at [49]; and
whether the
party propounding an erroneous construction of the contract has put forward that
construction in good faith is relevant
to the question of whether he or she
evinces an intention not to be bound by the contract: Satellite Estate Pty
Ltd v Jaquet, at
149; Trawl Industries of Australia Pty Ltd v Effem Foods
(1992) 27 NSWLR 326
, at 354 per Samuels
these principles to the facts of this matter, I find that HCL’s conduct
evinced an intention to no longer be bound
by the Contract. The Tribunal finds
that the conduct of HCL was such as to convey to a reasonable person, in the
situation of the
other party i.e. Duraglaze, renunciation either of the contract
as a whole or of a fundamental obligation under it [
Laurinda Pty Ltd v
Capalaba at 659 per Deane and Dawson JJ
letter dated 20 April 2013 from Hank Laan to Duraglaze is an indication that HCL
was aware that Duraglaze may seek termination
of the Contract and payment of 95%
of the works.
subsequent engagement of All Areas and Shaun Edmunds on 25 April 2013 and
Manfred Wiesemes on 29 April 2013 to prepare reports
confirm that HCL was
contemplating having someone else complete the job.
did not furnish Duraglaze with the Wiesemes Report and/or the Edmunds Report but
rather contracted with All Areas to carry out
rectification works and finish the
job. The failure of HCL to provide the reports and afford Duraglaze an
opportunity to fix any
defects and complete the contracted works is, in the
Tribunal’s view, further evidence that HCL had repudiated the
the Tribunal accepts the oral evidence of Manfred Wiesemes and statements of
opinion in both the Edmunds Report and the Wiesemes
Report as regards the
standard of workmanship and incomplete works, it is undisputed that when the
inspections were done, the job
was about 95% complete. Duraglaze was not aware
of the findings and recommendations made by Shaun Edmunds and Manfred
Tribunal accepts the submission made by Michael Tuckwell that HCL had by its
actions denied Duraglaze the opportunity to repair
any defects. Further,
Duraglaze had received no notification from HCL of the termination of the
Tribunal has considered all the circumstances of the case and finds that
HCL’s conduct constituted a repudiation of the
Contract. If the Contract
was on foot at the time the applications were filed, I am satisfied it is now at
found that HCL’s actions constituted repudiatory conduct, the next
question for determination is to assess the damages
which flow from the
repudiation of the Contract.
seeks the payment of $10,823.35 representing 95% of the contract price less the
deposit of $1,273.00. HCL seeks an order
for relief from payment of the amount
claimed and a refund of the deposit.
find that because of HCL’s repudiation of the Contract, Duraglaze has a
claim for damages. Duraglaze is entitled to be paid
the unpaid balance of the
contract price after allowance for incomplete works and rectification of
submitted that it had taken steps to mitigate its loss and the risk of damage to
the pool. I accept that action was required to
finish the works and fill the
pool with water. What is significant is the failure of HCL to provide Duraglaze
with copies of the
expert reports and give the contractor an opportunity to
rectify the defects. Communication between the parties ceased after 29 April
is no dispute between the parties about the conclusions in the Wiesemes Report.
Michael Tuckwell’s evidence was that Duraglaze
accepted the findings in
the Wiesemes Report but submits that when the inspection was done, the works had
not been finished.
Contract is silent on what is to happen in the event of a dispute between the
parties or upon termination of the Contract. In
the absence of any specific
provision in the Contract, the assessment of damages will be based on common law
principles.
only expert evidence in these applications is that tendered by HCL which relied
upon the independent consultant report of Manfred
Wiesemes and his oral
evidence, along with the report and quotation of Shaun Edmunds.
Wiesemes identified various defects in the work done by Duraglaze and suggests
methods of rectification. He does not express an
opinion about the likely cost
of rectification.
Edmunds provided a report and quotation but did not give evidence. The
conclusions and findings in his report are consistent
with those in the Wiesemes
Report. He details the work and cost to complete the job. He sets out the work
needed to rectify the
defects and complete the job and provides a lump sum
Areas quoted $10,118.00 to carry out the rectification works, supply materials
and complete the job. Manfred Wiesemes has confirmed
in writing that the amount
“of $10,118.00 is reasonable for the suggested rectification work set out
in the quote”. I
find on the evidence that the All Areas quote was fair
and reasonable.
All Areas quote does not provide a breakdown of the cost of rectifying the
defects and completing the works. Duraglaze has not
adduced any evidence which
would enable the Tribunal to reach any conclusion about the likely cost of
rectification or independently
value the works completed by it.
paragraph 15 of its submission, HCL submits that as HCL “has had to remove
and replace the fibreglass liner installed by
Duraglaze and that Duraglaze did
not clean and seal the terracotta tiles nor clean the area of dust and debris or
supply and install
the pool lighting and the strong likelihood that the solar
heating pump has been damaged, HCL respectfully requests the Tribunal
determine that HCL is not required to pay the unpaid part of the Duraglaze
contract price and that Duraglaze be ordered
to repay the deposit moneys paid by
HCL ($1,273.00)”.
considering the submissions of both parties and the relevant legal principles,
the Tribunal finds that Duraglaze is entitled
to claim the value of the work
completed subject to a deduction for the incomplete works and the costs of
rectification.
H Dakin & Co Ltd v Lee
(1916) 1KB at 576 Sankey J
“...and the true method of ascertaining the amount due to the
plaintiff in such a case is, I think, that given by Parke B in
the case of
Thornton v Place where he said “what the plaintiff is entitled to recover
is the price agreed upon in the specification,
subject to a deduction; and the
measure of that deduction is the sum which it would take to alter the works so
as to make it correspond
with the specification.”
is no dispute that there were incomplete works or there were defects in the
works which had been done. If the Contract had been
performed then Duraglaze
would have at its own expense been required to rectify the defects
and complete the works in accordance with the Contract.
there is no evidence about the actual costs of rectifying the defects, the
Tribunal accepts the quote from All Areas that the
lump sum price to rectify the
defects and complete the works was $10,118.00. The quote is broken down into
various components.
mentioned earlier, I accept the opinions of Mr Wiesemes as set out in his report
and in his oral evidence. I also accept the opinions
and recommendations of
Shaun Edmunds expressed in his report.
rely on the evidence of Mr Wiesemes as to the price of $10,118.00 quoted by All
Areas to rectify the defects and complete the works
as fair and
reasonable.
Tribunal now turns to an assessment of damages:
Contract Price: $12,733.00
Less costs of rectification of Defects and Completion
of Works as per quote from All Areas $10,118.00
Sub-Total: $2,615.00
Less Deposit Paid by HCL $1,273.00
Balance: $1,342.00
a result of my findings and conclusions, the Tribunal makes the following
(a) In HB 13/25457 the application is dismissed as having considered the
material placed before it, the Tribunal is not satisfied
at the civil standard
that the grounds required to make the orders have been
established;
(b) In HB 13/26887, the respondent HCL Associates (Australia) Pty Ltd is ordered
to pay the applicant Duraglaze NSW Pty Ltd the sum
of $1,342.00
immediately.
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy
31 December 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (196 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter