URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BTA [2013] NSWGT 23 (12 August 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 23
(12 AUGUST 2013)
APPLICATION FOR GUARDIANSHIP AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ORDERS
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
12 August 2013 at Balmain
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
The Hon. Jennifer Boland
Professional Member:
Dr Phoebe Williams
Community Member:
Ms Janene Cootes
Guardianship
involuntary patient under the Mental Health Act – objecting
to medication and accommodation decisions – objecting to
orders being made
– Tribunal determined to appoint a private guardian and the Public
Guardian as an alternative guardian.
Financial management -
adjourned the application for a financial management order.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 12 August 2013
What the Tribunal decided
the conclusion of the hearing conducted at Balmain, NSW on 12 August 2013, the
Tribunal made an order under
Guardianship Act 1987
(“the Act”), appointing Ms YTR (“Ms YTR”) as
guardian for Mrs BTA (“Mrs BTA”). The Tribunal also
made an order
of the Act appointing the Public Guardian as alternate guardian. The
order is for a period of 3 months when it will be reviewed.
The guardian may
make decisions for Mrs BTA in respect of accommodation, services and health
care, and may give any necessary medical
or dental consents.
Tribunal adjourned an application for the appointment of a financial manager for
Mrs BTA to be heard at the same time as the review
of the guardianship
are the Tribunal’s reasons for the order made.
applications and issues identified
application for guardianship and a financial management order in respect of Mrs
BTA, who is aged 50, was lodged with the Tribunal
by Miss NKI, social worker on
19 July 2013. When the application was lodged, and at the date of the hearing,
Mrs BTA was an involuntary
patient in a public hospital.
BTA is a divorced woman who, prior to her admission to the public hospital,
lived in private rental accommodation in Southern
Sydney. Mrs BTA is of Chinese
background, and is fluent in Mandarin. Sadly, she has a long history of mental
illness, and has a
diagnosis of severe schizophrenia and suffers chronic
BTA’s only relative presently in Australia is her sister, Ms YTR. Ms YTR
travelled from China to assist her sister in April
2013. Ms YTR has a
temporary visitor’s visa that permits her multiple entries into Australia
for a period of up to twelve
months. Her current valid entry visa expires in
October 2013. Ms YTR is currently seeking permanent residence in Australia in
order that she can care for her sister, but the outcome of her application is
of Mrs BTA’s medical condition, and previous asserted irresponsible
financial behaviour by her, Miss NKI applied to
the Tribunal for the appointment
of the Public Guardian as guardian for Mrs BTA, and the appointment of the NSW
Trustee and Guardian
(“the NSW Trustee”) as her financial manager.
Miss NKI nominated the statutory authorities because of her concern about
YTR’s visa status in Australia. She did not suggest that Ms YTR is an
unsuitable person to be appointed her sister’s
guardian and financial
BTA steadfastly maintained throughout the hearing that she does not need a
guardian or financial manager.
Mrs BTA disputes she suffers a disability, and does she accept she lacks the
requisite capacity to manager her financial affairs,
Ms YTR’s evidence,
and the expert evidence before the Tribunal, does not accord with Mrs
BTA’s view. In these circumstances
the Tribunal was unable to assist the
parties to reach a settlement of matters in issue.
the Tribunal was required to independently determine whether or not Mrs BTA
suffers a disability, if she needs a guardian and
what functions a guardian
should have. We were further required to determine whether the guardian should
be Ms YTR, a person well
qualified to undertake the role, but whose ability to
stay in Australia is in doubt, or the Public Guardian. As Mrs BTA’s
affairs were being managed more than satisfactorily on an informal
basis by her sister at the time of the hearing, the Tribunal determined
adjourn the financial management application pending further information about
Ms YTR’s visa status in Australia.
following matters, unless noted by us to be an assertion, were accepted as
relevant facts established on the evidence before us.
BTA was born on 29 November 1962. She is accordingly aged 50 years. As noted
above, Mrs BTA was divorced from her husband approximately
seven years ago. She
has one son, aged 17, who lives with his father and who has little contact with
BTA’s income is derived from Centrelink “New Start”
entitlements. These entitlements will expire on 7 September
2013. Ms YTR was
responsible for applying to Centrelink on her sister’s behalf to obtain
benefits. She is named as her sister’s
Centrelink nominee. At the date
of the hearing an application had been made on Mrs BTA’s behalf for a
disability support pension
but this had been refused.
to Mrs BTA receiving New Start benefits her family in China had sent money to
Australia to pay for her expenses including rent.
Mrs BTA is reported as having
inappropriately used funds, including the sum of $20,000 sent from China. It is
asserted she expended
funds staying in five star hotels. It is asserted that
Mrs BTA’s landlord has requested she leave her rented accommodation
Southern Sydney.
BTA is able to communicate with her sister in the Mandarin language. She
appears to have a good relationship with her sister.
Ms YTR has obtained
suitable accommodation for herself and her sister. She proposes Mrs BTA move
into this accommodation on her
discharge from the public
BTA was admitted to the public hospital on 3 May 2013 following deterioration in
her mental state.
Health Professional Report form was completed by Dr Z (“Dr Z”)
Psychiatrist on 17 February 2013. Dr Z recorded that
Mrs BTA refuses oral
medication, and that it is proposed to discharge Mrs BTA on a Community
Treatment Order. Dr Z opined Mrs BTA
suffers from schizophrenia, and has
suffered that condition for more than five years. She noted “Chronic
delusions despite
ongoing treatment and disorganised behaviour. These symptoms
impair her ability to manage her own accommodation, finances and
medication”.
Mrs BTA is noted to currently be receiving Risperdal Consta
fortnightly via intramuscular injection.
Y, Occupational Therapist at the public hospital completed a report dated 17
July 2013. He noted Mrs BTA exhibited grandiose behaviour
in answering
questions. Because of her behaviour, including lack of co-operation with any
functional assessment (shopping and cooking),
he had been unable to complete the
occupational therapy report.
NKI, in a report to the Tribunal dated 9 August 2013 asserts that Mrs BTA is
“fixed in her delusions”. These delusions
include her being a Nobel
Prize winner and having a case against the government. Mrs BTA is also asserted
to be “extremely
disorganised in her behaviour, not managing her finances,
poor self-care...talking to herself and writing incessantly about nonsensical
The Hearing
hearing was conducted at the Tribunal’s Balmain premises using video link
to the public hospital. A Mandarin interpreter
was present at Balmain and
translated for Mrs BTA and Ms YTR. They participated via video from the public
hospital, as did Miss
the hearing Mrs BTA steadfastly asserted she did not need assistance with
life-style decisions or financial decision making,
and demonstrated delusional
behaviour speaking about her Court cases.
What did the
Tribunal have to decide?
issues that had to be decided independently by the Tribunal in relation to
guardianship were:
does Mrs BTA
suffer a disability (as defined in the Act);
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made;
who should be
the guardian; and
how long should
the order last.
Is Mrs BTA someone for whom the
Tribunal could make an order because she has a disability which prevents her
from being able to make
important life decisions?
Tribunal may make a guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that
a person who because of a disability is totally or
partially incapable of managing his or her person.” Section 3(2) of the
Act defines “disability”. A person with a disability is a person who
(a) intellectually,
physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) of advanced
(c) a mentally
ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act
(d) otherwise
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one
or more major life activities to such an extent that he or she requires
supervision
or social habilitation.
the expert evidence before the Tribunal about Mrs BTA diagnosis was scant, the
health professional report and the reports of
Miss NKI and Mr Y corroborated our
observations of her condition.
found, on balance, having regard to the medical evidence before us, our personal
observations of Mrs BTA and the oral evidence
of her sister that Mrs BTA suffers
a disability. We were satisfied, to the requisite civil standard, her condition
fulfills the criteria
(2) of the Act. Further, we were satisfied
that disability affects her ability to make life-style decisions. We were
accordingly
satisfied that Mrs BTA is a person for whom a guardianship order
could be made.
Should the Tribunal make a guardianship order and
what order should be made?
provisions of the Act are relevant to whether or not an order should be made.
, which section contains the overarching principles, which the
Tribunal must observe in dealing with any application under the Act,
provisions contained in
overarching principles in
include the following considerations of relevance
in this matter:
that the welfare
and interests of Mrs BTA be given paramount consideration;
BTA’s freedom of decision and freedom of action should be restricted as
little as possible;
that Mrs BTA
should be encouraged, as far as possible, to live a normal life in the
the views of Mrs
BTA should be taken into account;
the importance
of preserving Mrs BTA’s family relationships should be recognised as
should her cultural and linguistic environments;
Mrs BTA should
be protected from neglect, abuse and exploitation.
requires the Tribunal to have regard to the views of Mrs BTA, and any person
who has had the care of her. The section also stresses
the importance of
preserving existing family relationships, the importance of a person’s
particular cultural and linguistic
environment, and the practicability of
services being provided to the person without the need for the making of a
guardianship order.
The reasons now address the relevant matters under these
Evidence relevant to the welfare and interests of Mrs
relevant evidence before us is summarised earlier in these reasons under
“background”. It is unnecessary we repeat
the matters set out above.
They matters demonstrate:
discharge needs supervision and care especially in respect of her
medication;
Mrs BTA has a
need for stable accommodation. This need requires the payment of her rent as
and when due;
Mrs BTA is able
to communicate with her sister in the Mandarin language. Her sister is
concerned for her welfare and has taken appropriate
steps to obtain Centrelink
benefits for her, and to find suitable accommodation for her;
presently totally lacking insight into her condition and the need for services
to assist her; and
Mrs BTA is non
compliant with medication.
The views of Mrs BTA
noted earlier in these reasons, Mrs BTA consistently opposed the need for the
appointment of a guardian and or financial manager.
Her oral evidence showed a
complete lack of insight into her illness and needs.
of an order on Mrs BTA’s family relationships/cultural or linguistic
environment
BTA is fortunate that her Chinese family, particularly Ms YTR, exhibit a high
level of concern for her emotional and financial
well being.
Tribunal observed, not only was Mrs BTA able to communicate readily with her
sister in Mandarin, but she did not appear to dispute
her sister’s role in
the proceedings or to be opposed to help from her.
Tribunal found the relationship of Mrs BTA and her sister to be a very important
one. Their shared cultural heritage and family
connections demonstrate that Ms
YTR’s support is very important to Mrs BTA’s ability to function on
discharge from the
public hospital.
Are there decisions which
need to be made by a guardian?
heard the oral evidence and read written material including the reports referred
to above, the Tribunal found there was a need
for the appointment of a guardian
to make decisions for Mrs BTA.
What decision making functions
should be attached to the order?
was no dispute that the major issue requiring determination for Mrs BTA at the
present time is in respect of accommodation.
Closely linked to that is
necessity of her receiving appropriate medical care and services. Although it
is proposed that Mrs BTA
will be subject to a community treatment order, the
Tribunal discerned that other medical decisions may be required on her behalf
and that it is important a guardian have the ability to make those decisions and
to authorise any services Mrs BTA may require.
Who should be the
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person’s guardian
if there is a private person who can be appointed
That section
has been interpreted to mean, that the Public Guardian should not be appointed
in circumstances in which an order can
be made in favour of
another person (see
[2003] NSWSC 1170
(2003) 59 NSWLR 220).
White J, set aside a guardianship order appointing the Public
Guardian in circumstances where the Tribunal was found to have erred
failing to make necessary findings that a family member could not be properly
appointed in the best interests of the person
needing a guardian. His Honour
cited, with approval, Windeyer J’s decision in
paragraphs 25 and 26.
Tribunal has to be satisfied that any person appointed as a private guardian
meets the following requirements. He/she must
personality generally compatible with the personality of the person under
guardianship,
have no undue
conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of the person and
be able and
willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accord with the principles set
of the Act. (
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the
Public Guardian
(unreported per Windeyer J 29.11.99)).
Tribunal accepts that Ms YTR has demonstrated a caring and responsible attitude
towards her sister since her arrival in Australia.
She has been devoted to her
sister and has been proactive in advocating for her. It was Ms YTR who
approached Centrelink and obtained
benefits for her sister. She has been
co-operative with Miss NKI in respect of matters relating to her sister, and has
suitable accommodation to be taken up by them on Mrs BTA’s
the Tribunal was satisfied that Ms YTR has a personality which is generally
compatible with her sister, and she is acting in
her sister’s best
interests, we are concerned about her ability to make life-style decisions in a
timely way for her sister
if her visa status means she cannot live in Australia
on a permanent basis.
Tribunal is cognisant that pursuant to
if the Public Guardian is
appointed as Guardian, the Tribunal is precluded from appointing an alternate
guardian. However, on our
reading of the Act, it does not preclude the
appointment of the Public Guardian as alternate guardian for a private guardian
of the Act. That sub-section provides that, during the absence or
incapacity of the guardian, the person’s alternate guardian
functions of guardian.
YTR has applied for a visa on the basis she wishes to become her sister’s
carer. However, in her oral evidence she explained
that she has a booked return
ticket to China to leave Australia on 4 October 2013. The Tribunal is unable to
gauge the likelihood
of success or failure of Ms YTR’s visa application.
Ms YTR may have to leave Australia, and not be able to return on a permanent
basis. It would be difficult for her to carry out her functions as guardian in
a timely way if she is resident in China, particularly
given the nature of Mrs
BTA’s illness. It was for this reason we took the somewhat unusual step
of deciding that the Public
Guardian should be appointed as alternate guardian.
The Tribunal notes it expects Ms YTR to notify the Public Guardian in the event
that, during the course of the order, she must leave
How long should the order last?
initial guardianship order can be made for a period of up to one year from the
date on which it is made. However, an order of up
to three years can be made, if
the person the subject of the order has permanent disabilities, is unlikely to
become capable of managing
his or her person and there is the need for an order
longer than one year.
Tribunal determined to make an order for a three month period when it will be
reviewed. This was because we considered in that
period the uncertainty about
Ms YTR’s residence in Australia on a permanent basis may be resolved, or
it will at least be clear
if she can stay beyond October 2013 for some period.
It is also appropriate to review at that time the accommodation function.
Mrs BTA’s accommodation needs are being met at that time the function may
no longer be necessary. However, if Ms YTR is
not in Australia to support Mrs
BTA, other arrangements for suitable accommodation may require a
guardian’s consent.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT APPLICATION
BTA’s financial affairs are not complicated. Ms YTR is managing her
finances in her role as her Centrelink nominee. Ms
YTR has also obtained
appropriate accommodation at in Southern Sydney in which she proposes she will
live with her sister.
her oral evidence to the Tribunal Ms YTR explained that if appointed her
sister’s financial manager she would see “my
younger sister does not
waste her money”.
evidence before the Tribunal indicates that Mrs BTA does not have the capacity
to manage her financial affairs, and that it
may be in her best interests that a
financial manager is appointed, there are no pressing financial matters which
need to be undertaken
on her behalf.
YTR has obtained suitable accommodation for her sister, and paid rent. She is
liaising with Centrelink about her sister’s
entitlements, and was
responsible for her sister receiving benefits. The Tribunal saw no urgency in
dealing with the application.
Ms YTR appears ideally placed to act as financial manager the Tribunal
determined it would be appropriate to adjourn this
application until the review
of the guardianship order in 3 months. At that time it will be clear whether or
not Ms YTR is able to
remain in Australia, and if she is not able to do so, to
determine the need for a financial manager to be appointed at that time.
apparent that if Ms YTR is not available, the financial manager would, of
necessity, be the NSW Trustee.
Tribunal takes this opportunity to record that after discussions with Miss NKI
and Ms YTR about proposed orders they each agreed
the orders the Tribunal
ultimately made were appropriate ones.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (565 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter