URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/850.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Olovi v Secure Parking Pty Ltd ATF Secure Kings Unit Trust [2025] NSWPICMP 850; (4 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL PANEL
Olovi v Secure Parking Pty Ltd ATF Secure Kings Unit Trust [2025]
NSWPICMP 850
Madina Olovi
RESPONDENT:
Secure Parking Pty Ltd ATF Secure Kings Unit Trust
APPEAL PANEL
Carolyn Rimmer
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Michael Hong
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
DATE OF DECISION:
4 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
; review of Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC);
assessment of primary psychological injury; appeal on basis of demonstrable
and application of incorrect criteria; Appeal Panel satisfied that two
discrepancies relating to date of arrival in Australia and
date of injury were
typographical not demonstrable errors; Appeal Panel satisfied that there was no
demonstrable error in relation
to the adequacy of the Medical Assessor’s
(MA) reasons; appellant failed to demonstrate that the MA failed to take into
relevant considerations; appeal against all assessments in the
psychiatric impairment rating scales (PIRS);
– Appeal Panel
satisfied that there was no error or the application of incorrect criteria in
the scales of self-care and personal
hygiene, social and recreational
activities, social functioning, and employability; Appeal Panel found error in
the assessments in
the PIRS of travel, and concentration, persistence and pace;
MAC revoked.
BACKGROUND TO THE APPLICATION TO APPEAL
9 July 2025 Madina Olovi (the appellant) lodged an Application to Appeal Against
the Decision of a Medical Assessor. The medical
dispute was assessed by Dr
Surabhi Verma, a Medical Assessor, who issued a Medical Assessment Certificate
(MAC) on 17 June 2025.
appellant relies on the following grounds of appeal under s 327(3) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
the assessment
was made on the basis of incorrect criteria, and
the MAC contains
a demonstrable error.
delegate is satisfied that, on the face of the application, at least one ground
of appeal has been made out. The Appeal Panel
has conducted a review of the
original medical assessment but limited to the ground(s) of appeal on which the
appeal is made.
128 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the PIC Rules) and Procedural
Direction PIC7 - Appeals, reviews, reconsiderations
and correction of obvious
errors in medical disputes set out the practice and procedure in relation to the
medical appeal process
under s 328 of the 1998 Act. An Appeal Panel
determines its own procedures in accordance with r 128(1) of the PIC Rules.
assessment of permanent impairment is conducted in accordance with the
NSW Workers Compensation Guidelines for the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
1 March 2021 (the
Guidelines) and the
American Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
RELEVANT FACTUAL BACKGROUND
appellant sustained a psychological injury deemed to have occurred on 8 March
2023 in her employment as a customer service with
Secure Parking Pty Ltd ATF
Secure Kings Unit Trust (the respondent).
appellant lodged an Application to Resolve a Dispute in the Personal Injury
Commission (Commission) dated 6 May 2025 in which
she claimed lump sum
compensation in respect the psychological injury.
matter was referred to Dr Surabhi Verma, Medical Assessor, for assessment of
whole person impairment (WPI) of a psychiatric/psychological
disorder as a
result of the injury deemed to have occurred on 8 March 2023.
Medical Assessor examined the appellant on 10 June 2025 via video link and
assessed 6% WPI in respect of the psychological injury
deemed to have occurred
on 8 March 2023.
PRELIMINARY REVIEW
Appeal Panel conducted a preliminary review of the original medical assessment
in the absence of the parties and in accordance
with the Procedural Direction
a result of that preliminary review, the Appeal Panel determined that it was not
necessary for the worker to undergo a further
medical examination because there
was sufficient information upon which to make a
determination.
Documentary evidence
Appeal Panel has before it all the documents that were sent to the Medical
Assessor for the original medical assessment and has
taken them into account in
making this determination.
Medical Assessment Certificate
parts of the medical certificate given by the Medical Assessor that are relevant
to the appeal are set out, where relevant, in
the body of this decision.
SUBMISSIONS
parties made written submissions. They are not repeated in full, but have been
considered by the Appeal Panel.
appellant’s submissions include the following:
(a) Ground 1 – the MAC contains a demonstrable error;
(b) at page 3 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor took a history of the
Ms Olavi reported that she was born in Pakistan to parents of
Afghani background. She migrated to Australia in 1996
at the age of one.
The appellant in her statement dated 2 February 2024 at paragraph 10 stated that
she was born in Pakistan and moved
to Australia when she was one year old and
granted her Australian Citizenship in March1986;
(c) the Medical Assessor does not account for this discrepancy in the MAC, such
that the reader is forced to draw their own conclusions
as to how the Medical
Assessor made this finding. On the face of the record, the MAC thus contains a
demonstrable error;
(d) further, at page 1 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor records the date of
injury as 8 March 2023 and on page 10 of the MAC records
the date of injury as
3 March 2023. There is no clear indication as to how or why the Medical
Assessor recorded two different dates of injury such that
the decision is marked
by a demonstrable error on the face of the record;
(e) in the alternative, the inconsistencies contained on the face of the record
of the MAC call into question the credibility of
the Medical Assessor’s
findings and call for closer scrutiny;
(f) Ground 2 – failure to provide adequate reasons. In
Australia Partners Pty Ltd v Kocak
[2013] HCA 43
the majority stated at
“What is to be set out in the statement of reasons is the actual path
of reasoning by which the Medical Panel arrived at the
opinion the Medical Panel
actually formed for itself;”
(g) at page 7 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor simply states the following under
(i) platinum rehabilitation group vocational assessment report dated
February 2024, and
(ii) clinical notes from Merrylands Family Practice, various dates;
(h) no context is provided in relation to these documents so that the reader is
forced to form their own opinion as to what the Medical
Assessor intended by
referring to these documents. There are no reasons provided in support of the
documents and the actual path
of reasoning is not disclosed in reliance on those
documents, if any. As such, the Medical Assessor erred in failing to provide
reasons and fell into demonstrable error;
(i) Ground 3 – the Medical Assessor failed to take into account relevant
considerations. The Medical Assessor does not comment
on the issues with the
appellant’s weight or address this as a relevant issue. The relevance of
the appellant’s weight
is relevant to the psychiatric impairment rating
scale (PIRS) category of “self care and personal hygiene”;
(j) the appellant in her statement dated 5 May 2025, relevantly stated at
paragraph 15: “...I now suffer from an appetite disturbance
gain of approximately 23kg”. The report of Dr Abdal Khan, consultant
psychiatrist, dated
6 November 2024. Dr Khan relevantly reported the
following at page 9 of his report in respect of the PIRS category of self-care
personal hygiene: “...Ms Olovi’s neglect to her self-care is
evidenced by her appetite disturbance and weight gain of
approximately 23kg
since the subject injury”. In the report of Associate Professor Gordon
Davies, consultant psychiatrist,
dated 23 April 2025, Dr Davies took the
following history at page 5 of his report: “Ms Olovi said that she had put
of weight ‘since all of this has happened’.” In the
Dr Gregory Cameron, occupational physician, dated 25 November 2024,
Dr Cameron took the following history at pages 3 and 4 of his report:
“At page 3: ...She said she had gained weight and used
to be 63kg and was
now 79kg”. At page 4: “Appetite/Weight change – about 79-80kg.
Please see above. Just eats junk
(k) it is perplexing as to how the Medical Assessor failed to comment on or
completely ignored the available evidence which was referred
to in both the
appellant’s and respondent’s evidence. The Medical Assessor appears
to make no light of the evidence referring
to the appellant’s weight gain,
which is relevant to the PIRS category of self-care and personal hygiene;
(l) further, the Medical Assessor makes no discernible attempt to engage in an
active intellectual process directed at the information
Singh v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2001] FCA at [59];
(m) the Medical Assessor also appears to make no mention of the
appellant’s statement evidence other than providing a blanket
response to
what evidence was considered at page 6 of the MAC: – Clinical Interview
– Mental Status Examination –
Documentation received including
previous IME. As such, the Medical Assessor failed to take into account relevant
considerations
clearly available on the evidence and thus fell into demonstrable
(n) Ground 4 – the Medical Assessor did not correctly apply the PIRS. The
Medical Assessor will commit legal error in circumstances
where the application
of the PIRS is inconsistent with the available evidence;
(o) the Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as a Class 2 in respect of the
PIRS category of self-care and personal hygiene. The
Medical Assessor pays no
regard to the appellant’s reported weight gain on the evidence, such that
it plays no bearing on the
PIRS category of self-care and personal hygiene when
it arguably should have;
(p) the Medical Assessor should have taken into consideration the
appellant’s reported weight gain as a relevant factor. Had
the Medical
Assessor done so, a Class 3 rating was warranted on the evidence;
(q) the statutory power must be exercised fairly, that is, in accordance with
fair procedures that are fair to the individual considered
in the light of the
statutory requirements, the interests of the individual and the interests and
purposes, whether public or private,
which the statute seeks to advance or
protect or permits to be taken into account as legitimate considerations (see
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
at paragraph
). The appellant was thus
denied procedural fairness and the Medical Assessor erred;
(r) the Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as a Class 2 in respect of the
PIRS category of social and recreational activities.
It is baffling as to how
the Medical Assessor drew the conclusion that the appellant warranted a Class 2
in respect of the PIRS category
of social and recreational activities
notwithstanding the appellant’s complaints of having trouble leaving the
house and having
conversations with others during assessment;
(s) the Medical Assessor does not grapple with this evidence such that it is
difficult to appreciate whether there had been an active
intellectual process
directed at the information at all (see
Singh v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2001] FCA at [59]). A Class 3 rating was warranted on
the available evidence;
(t) the Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as a Class 1 in respect of the
PIRS category of travel. The Medical Assessor conceded
that the appellant left
the house for medical appointments and was driven by her husband 95% of the
time. Further, the Medical Assessor
conceded that the appellant was able to
drive on her own to the nearby shopping centres and that her husband drove her
(u) further, the Medical Assessor does not adequately engage with the evidence
of Dr Khan, who at page 9 of his report dated 6 November
2024, took a history
that the appellant required her husband to be present when leaving her home due
to her debilitating anxiety,
panic and avoidance of crowds. Similarly, the
Medical Assessor does not adequately address or respond to Associate Professor
evidence who at pages 4 and 5 in his report dated 23 April 2025
took a history that the appellant would go to the shops with her
husband wearing
her pyjamas but sometimes would panic and just sit in the car. Further,
Associate Professor Davies took a history
that while the appellant was now able
to drive, she did not drive on main roads;
(v) the failure to adequately address and/or respond to this evidence, tempered
the severity of the appellant’s symptoms. On
the available evidence, a
minimum of a Class 2 rating was warranted, and the Medical Assessor erred;
(w) the Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as a Class 2 in respect of the
PIRS category of social functioning. The Medical Assessor
tempers the
appellant’s psychological symptoms in respect of her relationships, in
particular, her relationship with her husband.
On the evidence, the appellant
experienced a period of separation from her husband on account of her fragile
mental state, evidenced
on page 9 of Dr Khan’s report dated 6 November
(x) the appellant in her statement dated 5 May 2025 at paragraph 19 indicated
that her agitation and irritability had caused tension
in her relationships. The
appellant would also tend to lose her temper with her husband if she was having
(y) further, Associate Professor Davies in his report dated 23 April 2025, took
a history of the following in relation to the appellant’s
“...She said that there are however times when she does not want to talk
to him and that she ‘just shuts’
herself in her room and isolates
(z) it is difficult to appreciate how the Medical Assessor determined that the
appellant warranted a Class 2 rating based on the
available evidence, which
described a period of separation, which is a component of a Class 3 rating as
per table 11.4 of the Guidelines,
in addition to the existing issues in the
relationship. The appellant submits that a Class 3 rating was warranted;
(aa) the Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as a Class 2 in respect of the
PIRS category of concentration, persistence and pace.
The appellant takes issue
with the Medical Assessor’s opinion at page 11 under the PIRS category of
concentration, persistence
and pace which states the following: “...Ms
Olovi gave crisp replies when answering to the questions and there was no
of any significant deterioration in her concentration, persistence or
(bb) the reader is simply forced to accept the Medical Assessor’s opinion
at face value, absent adequate reasons to support
this rationale. Relevantly, to
fulfil a minimum legal standard, the reasons need not be extensive or provide
detailed explanation
of the criteria applied by medical specialists in reaching
a professional judgment. At least, that will be so where the medical science
not controversial, if it is, a more expansive explanation may be required (see
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan & Ors
[2006] NSWCA 284
(cc) to a lay person, the words “...there was no evidence of any
significant deterioration in her concentration, persistence
arguably convey no meaning and the Medical Assessor was required to provide
further reasons in support of classing
the appellant as a Class 2. Particularly
so in circumstances where Dr Khan at page 9 of his report dated 9 November 2024
took a history
that the appellant was easily distracted and her memory was
(dd) the appellant in her statement dated 5 May 2025 at paragraph 20 maintained
that her attention and concentration levels had deteriorated
dramatically and
she could not read a book and remain focused or retain the information she read.
A Class 3 rating was warranted
on the evidence;
(ee) the Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as a Class 4 in respect of the
PIRS category of employability. Again, it is difficult
to appreciate how the
Medical Assessor formed this opinion in circumstances where Dr Khan assessed the
appellant as a Class 5 and
Associate Professor Davies who also considered that
the appellant, as she presented, would be considered unfit for employment, there
is a failure to undertake an active intellectual process directed at the
information (see
Singh v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
[2001] FCA 389
at paragraph
(ff) while a clinical assessment is a component of the medical assessment, no
regard appears to have been paid to this evidence of
two experts qualified in
psychiatric injuries. The appellant submits that a Class 5 rating was warranted,
and the Medical Assessor
thus erred, and the assessment was based on incorrect
criteria and/or demonstrable error, and
(gg) the MAC dated 17 June 2025 should be set aside, and a Medical Assessor of
the Appeal Panel re-examine the appellant and reassess
respondent’s submissions include the following:
(a) the appellant received an independent medical assessment of her psychiatric
condition in accordance with the role and function
of the Medical Assessor. The
Medical Assessor had the benefit of both examining the appellant and reviewing
the evidence relied upon
by both parties;
(b) there is no evidence the examination by the Medical Assessor was in any way
materially defective. The Medical Assessor’s
examination amounted to a
proper medical examination. There is no evidence to the contrary;
(c) there has been no demonstrable error nor use of incorrect criteria in the
Medical Assessor’s assessment of the appellant’s
impairment;
(d) Ground 1 – in respect of the factual inconsistencies recorded by the
Medical Assessor, the difference in the dates in the
appellant’s
submissions are typographical errors. The typographical errors are appropriately
characterised as “obvious
errors”, not demonstrable errors as
asserted by the appellant;
(e) the typographical errors identified by the appellant have no impact on the
Medical Assessor’s assessment or findings in
the MAC. In particular, the
typographical errors have no impact on the matters on which a medical assessment
certificate is conclusively
presumed to be correct (s 326 (1) of the 1998
(f) being obvious typographical errors, the respondent rejects the
appellant’s submission that errors call into question the
credibility of
the Medical Assessor’s findings and call for closer scrutiny. This is
contrary to the very nature of an obvious
(g) the procedure for the correction of obvious errors is set out in PIC7. An
appeal pursuant to s 327 of the 1998 Act is not the
appropriate mechanism to
correct obvious errors. The appellant’s submissions in this regard do not
disclose a demonstrable
(h) Ground 2 - the appellant alleges that the Medical Assessor failed to provide
the actual path of reasoning in relation to the
Medical Assessor’s
intention when referring to the clinical records from Merrylands Family Practice
and the vocational assessment
from Platinum Rehab Group;
(i) case law in relation to the provision of sufficient reason by decision
makers, including cautioning against a hyper critical
approach to the reasons
Bojko v ICM Property Service Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWCA 175
affirming that a decision maker’s reasons are not to be over-zealously
scrutinized when seeking to discern whether
some inadequacy may be gleaned from
the way in which the reasons are expressed (
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259
at [271-271]). Notably,
Basten JA in
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan & Ors
[2006] NSWCA 284
at 122 stated:
“a. ... to fulfil a minimum legal standard, the reasons need not be
extensive or provide detailed explanation of the criteria
applied by medical
specialists in reaching a professional judgment ... At least, that will be so
where the medical science is not
controversial: if it is, a more expansive
explanation may be required.”
(j) the medical sciences grounding the clinical records from Merrylands Family
Practice (including specialists reports), the vocational
assessment from
Platinum Rehab Group and the MAC, as well as the matters addressed in the
clinical records, the vocational report
and the MAC are essentially and
inherently different. There being no overlap in the medical science and matters
addressed by the
clinical records, vocational report and MAC, there is therefore
no controversy between the documents which requires ventilation by
the Medical
(k) this is particularly the case where the Medical Assessor has on page 7
(under heading 10c) provided detailed, thought out and
considered reasons as to
the divergences in opinion with other independent and treating doctors who have
specifically addressed the
subject injury;
(l) the appellant’s submissions as to the insufficiency of the Medical
Assessor’s reasons in relation to the clinical
records and the vocational
assessment are hyper critical and overzealous, particularly given the totality
of the Medical Assessor’s
response in addressing the divergences in
opinion with other independent and treating doctors who have specifically
addressed the
subject injury;
(m) the respondent submits the appellant’s submissions do not disclose a
demonstrable error with respect to the adequacy of
the Medical Assessor’s
(n) Ground 3 - the appellant submitted that the Medical Assessor failed to
consider the appellant’s alleged weight gain, including
as set out in her
statement, which is a relevant factor to the PIRS Category of self-care and
personal hygiene;
(o) the appellant’s submissions make no reference to the actual documented
evidence of the appellant’s weight since the
subject injury on 8 March
2023 (the date of the alleged first injurious event);
(p) the respondent notes the following documentary evidence with respect to the
appellant’s weight since 8 March 2023:
“observations” (pages 127 to 128, Application to Resolve a Dispute
(ARD)) in the clinical records from Lane Cove
Doctors Medical Centre as at 9 May
2024 record the appellant’s weight at various stages. Of note:
(i) the earliest record of the appellant’s weight is on 23 August 2017 at
which time she weighed 93.7kg. (The respondent notes
there is no other entry
prior to the appellant’s bariatric surgery on 14 December 2017 (page 131,
(ii) the latest record of the appellant’s weight is on 28 April 2023
(being around seven weeks after the alleged first injurious
event). At that
time, the appellant weighed 78kg.
report of Dr Darshika Christie-David dated 17 October 2023 (pages 276-277, ARD)
records the appellant’s weight at 75.8kg;
respondent notes the ‘observations’ (page 217, Reply) in the
clinical records from Dr Kafiris as at 28 May 2025 record
the appellant’s
weight at various stages after the aforenoted ‘observations’
contained in the clinical records
from Lane Cove Doctors Medical Centre. Of
(i) the earliest entry is 5 July 2024, at which time the appellant weighed
(ii) the next entry dated 12 November 2024 notes the appellant’s weight at
(iii) the final entry dated 17 April 2025 notes the appellant’s weight at
(q) the evidence demonstrates a continued decrease in the appellant's weight
since the initial March 2023 incident. Indeed, in April
2023 (seven weeks after
8 March 2023) she weighed 78kg. By 17 May 2025 (around eight weeks prior to
the Medical Assessor’s assessment with Dr Verma),
she weighed 72kg;
(r) despite the appellant’s assertions to various independent
practitioners, as well in her statement, there is no documented
evidence of
weight gain since the subject injury as alleged. Therefore, it was not open to
the Medical Assessor to consider the appellant’s
alleged weight gain since
8 March 2023 particularly as there is no documented evidence to support the
appellant’s allegations
in this regard;
(s) in any event, the Medical Assessor was not required to address the alleged
consequential weight gain for the purposes of the
PIRS Category of self-care and
personal hygiene, but rather, to consider the cause of the alleged weight gain
by way of reviewing
the appellant’s eating habits and nutrition;
(t) in this regard, the descriptors for Class 2 and Class 3 of the PIRS Category
of self-care and personal hygiene (as per the Guidelines)
refer to eating habits
(such as missing a meal, relying on take-away food and meal preparation) and
nutrition. Neither Class 2 nor
Class 3, or any of the other Classes under this
PIRS Category, direct an assessor to address weight gain or weight loss. Weight
or weight loss is undoubtedly a consequence related to eating habits and
nutrition, which are the causes of weight gains or losses.
However, in the
Guidelines for self-care and personal hygiene, a Medical Assessor is not
directed to consider the consequence (weight
gain), but rather, to consider the
cause (eating habits and nutrition) when assessing self-care and personal
(u) in the circumstances, it was not open to the Medical Assessor to assess the
appellant’s alleged weight gain for the PIRS
Category of self-care and
personal hygiene. As per the descriptors for this PIRS Category set out in the
Guidelines, the Medical
Assessor directed herself to the cause by reference to
the appellant’s eating habits and nutrition;
(v) there is no evidence to support the appellant’s alleged weight gain as
a result of the subject injury. The evidence demonstrates
she has lost weight
8 March 2023. The Medical Assessor appropriately considered the factors
in relation to the PIRS Category of self-care and personal
hygiene with respect
to eating habits and nutrition when assessing the appellant. The appellant
failed to demonstrate that the Medical
Assessor failed to take into account
relevant considerations and that the Medical Assessor fell into a demonstrable
(w) Ground 4 - PIRS Category of self-care and personal hygiene - The appellant
submits the Medical Assessor erred in failing to consider
her allegations of
weight gain and that the Medical Assessor erred in assessing Class 2. The
respondent repeats its submissions in
response to Ground 3 above;
(x) PIRS Category of social and recreational activities - the appellant’s
submissions relate to the Medical Assessor’s
alleged failure to grapple
with the appellant’s “present symptoms” when assessing Class 2
for the PIRS Category
of social and recreational activities. The
appellant’s submissions do not consider the totality of the evidence with
to appellant’s social and recreational activities;
(y) the respondent rejects the submission that the Medical Assessor failed to
grapple with the appellant’s reported ‘present
symptoms’ in
assessing this PIRS Category. On pages 4 and 10 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor
noted the appellant reported
she socialises regularly with her brother and
mother, goes out with her husband, goes on outings to restaurants in Penrith or
Langley, attending funerals, a wedding, as well as the Mosque. The Medical
Assessor also noted the appellant’s alleged cessation
in pre-injury
sewing, reading and swimming hobbies;
(z) the assertion that the appellant experiences trouble leaving her house and
has difficulty socialising is inconsistent with the
balance of the self-reports
from the appellant to the Medical Assessor and is difficult to reconcile with
the documented evidence
of the appellant being in Bali in June 2024 as noted by
the Medical Assessor (desktop investigation report dated 11 November 2024,
(aa) once the totality of the evidence with respect to the appellant’s
functioning for the purposes of the PIRS Category of
social and recreational
activities is considered, there is no support for the contention that the
Medical Assessor failed to grapple
with all relevant evidence given the Medical
Assessor’s assessment for this PIRS Category takes into consideration all
evidence. The Class 2 assessment from the Medical Assessor for this PIRS
Category is warranted once all of the evidence is considered.
There is no
demonstrable error in the MAC in this regard, nor is the MAC based on incorrect
(bb) PIRS Category of travel - the appellant’s submissions do not consider
the totality of the evidence with respect to the
appellant’s travel as
reported by her to the Medical Assessor or the totality of the documentary
evidence. The appellant’s
ability to travel overseas as noted by the
Medical Assessor is not considered in the appellant’s submissions. At page
Medical Assessor notes the inconsistent evidence with respect to the
appellant’s travel;
(cc) the appellant’s submissions imply that the Medical Assessor is
required to address each aspect of the reports of Dr Khan
and Associate
Professor Davies in relation to each independent doctor’s specific
comments on travel. Professor Davies’
comments as to travel ultimately did
not form part of any PIRS assessment and assessment of impairment. However, the
comments from
Dr Khan and Associate Professor Davies as to travel largely
align with the comments from the Medical Assessor addressing the
appellant’s
travel with her husband and ability to travel on her own;
(dd) as there is no controversy in the medical science in this regard
there was no requirement from the Medical Assessor to address or
respond the comments from Dr Khan and Associate Professor Davies
(ee) PIRS Category of social functioning - alleged failure to consider the
appellant’s period of separation from her husband
and issues in that
relationship. The appellant’s submissions in this regard do not consider
the totality of the evidence with
respect to the appellant’s social
functioning as reported by her to the Medical Assessor, including positive
relationships
with her mother and brother as well as a presently positive
relationship with her husband;
(ff) that the Medical Assessor may have placed weight on certain information and
not on other information when forming her opinion
was a matter within her
clinical judgement. A mere difference in medical opinion between the Medical
Assessor and Dr Khan (noting
Associate Professor Davies does not undertake a
PIRS assessment) and the weight to be placed on the evidence does not amount to
demonstrable error (
Merza v Registrar of the Workers Compensation
[2006] NSWSC 939).
The weight of the evidence supports the
Medical Assessor’s assessment of Class 2 for this PIRS Category;
(gg) PIRS Category of concentration, persistence and pace - alleged failure to
provide sufficient reasons when assessing the appellant
in relation to this PIRS
Category, and in particular, to explain the comment that “there was no
evidence of any significant
deterioration in [the appellant’s]
concentration, persistence or pace”;
(hh) there is a divergence between the earlier assessment from Dr Khan on
November 2024 and the Medical Assessor’s findings in relation to this PIRS
Category. The fact that another medical professional,
such as Dr Khan, made a
different assessment based on the history provided to him is of little
significance. A mere difference in
medical opinion does not amount to a
demonstrable error;
(ii) the Medical Assessor had the benefit of both examining the appellant in
person and reviewing the evidence relied on by the parties.
Given the Medical
Assessor’s own observations as to the appellant’s concentration,
persistence and pace during the assessment
do not reflect the appellant’s
self-assessment of her concentration, persistence and pace as set out in her
statement of 5
May 2025, it was within the Medical Assessor’s expertise to
form her own views as to the appellant’s concentration, persistence
(jj) PIRS Category of employability - alleged failure to address the opinions of
Dr Khan and Associate Professor Davies with respect to the PIRS Category of
employability;
(kk) Associate Professor Davies did not assess employability pursuant to the
PIRS and did not assess impairment, ultimately forming
the view that the
appellant required further treatment. He considered that she had not reached
maximum medical improvement. Associate
Professor Davies anticipated that with
further treatment, the appellant should improve and be able to resume work.
Therefore it is
not appropriate to refer to Associate Professor Davies’
views as to the appellant’s current capacity for work;
(ll) the appellant’s submissions only consider one aspect of the Medical
Assessor’s findings in relation to this PIRS
Category. However, the
respondent notes the additional history reported to the Medical Assessor by the
worker as to being a director
and owner of a car dealership (Prestige Motor
House) and that her husband registered a company Z.A.I Couture “as she has
degree”. The evidence indicates the appellant was appointed to the role
of director and shareholder of Z.A.I Couture from 12
June 2024. At page 6, the
Medical Assessor notes the inconsistent evidence with respect to the
appellant’s employment. The
history of the appellant’s involvement
with Prestige Motor House and Z.A.I Couture was considered by Dr Khan;
(mm) whilst there may be a divergence between the Medical Assessor’s
assessment of Class 4 for this PIRS Category and Dr Khan’s
assessment of
Class 5, the extent to which this divergence is the result of the
appellant’s failure to fully disclose her post
injury activities is not
clear. Therefore the extent to which Dr Khan’s assessment can be relied on
to accurately assess this
PIRS Category is called into question;
(nn) in the alternative, the respondent maintains that the fact that another
medical professional, such as Dr Khan, made a different
assessment based on the
incomplete history provided is of little significance as a mere difference in
medical opinion does not amount
to a demonstrable error (
(oo) the appellant has failed to demonstrate that there has been a demonstrable
error with this aspect of the MAC or that the MAC
is based on incorrect
criteria, and
(pp) the MAC should be confirmed.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
procedures on appeal are contained in s 328 of the 1998 Act. The appeal is to be
by way of review of the original medical assessment
but the review is limited to
the grounds of appeal on which the appeal is made.
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan
[2006] NSWCA 284
the Court of Appeal
held that the Appeal Panel is obliged to give reasons. Where there are disputes
of fact it may be necessary to
refer to evidence or other material on which
findings are based, but the extent to which this is necessary will vary from
case. Where more than one conclusion is open, it will be necessary to
explain why one conclusion is preferred. On the other hand,
the reasons need not
be extensive or provide a detailed explanation of the criteria applied by the
medical professionals in reaching
a professional judgement.
Appeal Panel reviewed the history recorded by the Medical Assessor, his findings
on examination, and the reasons for his conclusions
as well as the evidence
referred to above.
Ground 1 - Factual inconsistencies recorded by
the Medical Assessor
appellant submitted that the Medical Assessor noted that the appellant reported
that she migrated to Australia in 1996 at the
age of one, but in her statement
dated 2 February 2024 at paragraph 10 relevantly stated she moved to Australia
when she was one
year old and was granted Australian Citizenship in March 1986.
The appellant submitted that at page 1 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor
the date of injury as 8 March 2023 and on page 10 of the MAC records the date of
injury as 3 March 2023. The appellant submits
that these discrepancies amount to
a demonstrable error or in the alternative, the inconsistencies call into
question “the
credibility of the MA’s findings and call for closer
page 1 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor also noted that the appellant’s
date of birth was in 1985. The Appeal Panel also
noted that the date of injury
in Table 2 on page 9 of the MAC was 8 March 2023.
Appeal Panel is satisfied that these are typographical errors appropriately
characterised as “obvious errors”, and
not demonstrable errors.
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
and the PIC Procedural
Direction PIC7 (Appeals, reviews, reconsiderations and correction of obvious
errors in medical disputes),
examples of obvious error include: an obvious
clerical or typographical error, an error arising from an accidental slip or
among others. Obvious errors are errors of a kind which do not go to
the substance or fairness of a decision, and do not conflict
with the actual
assessment made (
Wang v Fuji Xerox Australia Pty Limited
[2005] NSWWCCPD
Newell v John Bruce trading as Tarawa Rural Partnership
NSWWCCPD 282
typographical errors identified by the appellant have no impact on the Medical
Assessor’s assessment or findings in the
MAC. In particular, the
typographical errors have no impact on the matters on which a medical assessment
certificate is conclusively
presumed to be correct s 326 (1) of the 1998
obvious typographical errors, the Appeal Panel rejects the appellant’s
submission that errors call into question the credibility
of the Medical
Assessor’s findings and call for closer scrutiny. The Appeal Panel agrees
with the respondent that this is contrary
to the very nature of an obvious
procedure for the correction of obvious errors is set out in PIC7. An appeal
pursuant to
s 327 of the 1998 Act is not the appropriate mechanism to
correct obvious errors. This ground of appeal is not made out.
Ground 2 - Failure to provide adequate reasons
appellant submits that no context is provided in relation to the vocational
assessment report of Platinum Rehabilitation Group
dated 16 February 2024 and
the notes from Merrylands Family Practice (various dates) at 10 c of the MAC so
that “the reader
is forced to form their own opinion as to what the
Medical Assessor intended by referring to these documents.”
10c of the MAC, the Medical Assessor is to provide brief comments regarding the
other medical opinions and findings submitted by
the parties and, where
applicable, the reasons why the Medical Assessor’s opinion differs.
case law in relation to the provision of sufficient reasons by decision makers,
includes cautioning against a hyper critical approach
to the reasons (
ICM Property Service Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWCA 175
at 36) and affirming that a
decision maker’s reasons are not to be over-zealously scrutinized when
seeking to discern whether
some inadequacy may be gleaned from the way in which
the reasons are expressed (
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu
(1996) 185 CLR 259
at [271-271]). Basten JA in
Campbelltown
City Council v Vegan & Ors
[2006] NSWCA 284
“...where more than one conclusion is open, it will be
necessary for the Panel to give some explanation for its preference for
conclusion over another. That aspect may have particular significance in
circumstances where the medical members of a Panel have
made their own
assessment of the applicant’s condition and have come to a different
conclusion from that reached by other medical
practitioners, as set out in
reports provided to the Panel.
...to fulfil a minimum legal standard, the reasons need not be extensive or
provide detailed explanation of the criteria applied by
medical specialists in
reaching a professional judgment ... At least, that will be so where the medical
science is not controversial:
if it is, a more expansive explanation may be
appellant has not identified any conclusion in the vocational assessment report
of Platinum Rehabilitation Group dated 16 February
2024 or in the notes from
Merrylands Family Practice which required explanation for a preference for one
conclusion over another.
Appeal Panel accepts that the clinical records from Merrylands Family Practice
(including specialists reports), the vocational
assessment from Platinum Rehab
Group and the MAC, as well as the matters addressed in the clinical records, the
vocational report
and the MAC are essentially and inherently different. There
being no overlap in the medical science and matters addressed by the
records, vocational report and MAC, there is therefore no controversy between
the documents which requires ventilation by
the Medical Assessor.
Medical Assessor did on page 7 (under heading 10c) provide detailed, thought out
and considered reasons as to the divergences
in opinion with other independent
and treating doctors who have specifically addressed the subject injury.
Appeal Panel considers that the appellant’s submissions as to the
insufficiency of the Medical Assessor’s reasons
in relation to the
clinical records and the vocational assessment are hyper critical and
overzealous, particularly given the totality
of the Medical Assessor’s
response in addressing the divergences in opinion with other independent and
treating doctors who
have specifically addressed the subject injury.
Appeal Panel is satisfied that the appellant’s submissions do not disclose
a demonstrable error with respect to the adequacy
of the Medical
Assessor’s reasons and this ground of appeal is not made
Failure to take into account relevant
considerations
appellant submits that the Medical Assessor did not comment on the issues with
the appellant’s weight or address this as
a relevant issue in the PIRS
category of self-care and personal hygiene.
appellant in her statement dated 5 May 2025, stated at paragraph 15: “...I
now suffer from an appetite disturbance and weight
gain of approximately
report of Dr Khan dated 6 November 2024. Dr Khan relevantly reported the
following at page 9 of his report in respect of the PIRS
category of self-care
and personal hygiene: “...Ms Olovi’s neglect to her self-care is
evidenced by her appetite disturbance
and weight gain of approximately 23kg
since the subject injury”. In the report of Associate Professor Davies,
dated 23 April
2025, he took the following history at page 5 of his report:
“Ms Olovi said that she had put on a lot of weight ‘since
this has happened’.”
a report of Dr Cameron dated 25 November 2024, Dr Cameron took the following
history at pages 3 and 4 of his report: At page 3:
“...She said she had
gained weight and used to be 63kg and was now 79kg”. At page 4:
“Appetite/Weight change –
junk food.”
Appeal Panel notes that the appellant’s submissions make no reference to
the actual documented evidence of the appellant’s
weight since the subject
injury on 8 March 2023.
the “observations” (pages 127 to 128, ARD) in the clinical records
from Lane Cove Doctors Medical Centre the appellant’s
weight is recorded
at various dates. The earliest record of the appellant’s weight is on 23
August 2017 at which time she weighed
93.7kg. The Appeal Panel notes that this
entry was made prior to the appellant’s bariatric surgery on
December 2017 (page 131, ARD). The latest record of the appellant’s weight
28 April 2023 (being around seven weeks after the first injurious
event). At that time, the appellant weighed 78kg.
report of Dr Darshika Christie-David dated 17 October 2023 (pages 276-277, ARD)
records the appellant’s weight at 75.8kg.
Dr Christie-David noted:
“She reached a minimum weight following her weight-loss
surgery in 2017 of 63kg from a previous weight of 101kg. Her weight
did increase
stable weight around 77kg.”
the “observations” (page 217, Reply) in the clinical records of Dr
Kafiris, the appellant’s weight is recorded
at various times. The earliest
entry is 5 July 2024, at which time the appellant weighed 77kg. The next entry
dated 12 November 2024
notes the appellant’s weight at 74kg. The final
entry dated 17 April 2025 notes the appellant’s weight at 72kg.
Appeal Panel considers that the medical evidence demonstrates a continued
decrease in the appellant's weight since the initial
March 2023 incident.
Indeed, in April 2023 (seven weeks after 8 March 2023) she weighed 78kg. By 17
May 2025 (around eight weeks
prior to the assessment with the Medical Assessor),
she weighed 72kg.
Appeal Panel is satisfied that despite the appellant’s assertions to
various independent practitioners, as well in her statement,
there is no
documented evidence of weight gain since the subject injury. Therefore, it was
not open to the Medical Assessor to consider
the appellant’s alleged
weight gain since 8 March 2023 as the medical evidence does not support the
appellant’s allegations
in this regard.
is no evidence to support the appellant’s alleged weight gain as a result
of the subject injury. The evidence demonstrates
she has lost weight since 8
March 2023. The Medical Assessor appropriately considered the factors in
relation to the PIRS Category
of self-care and personal hygiene with respect to
eating habits and nutrition when assessing the appellant. The appellant has
to demonstrate that the Medical Assessor failed to take into account
relevant considerations. This ground of appeal is not made
Ground 4 – PIRS scales
Self-care and personal hygiene
appellant submits that the Medical Assessor pays no regard to the
appellant’s reported weight gain on the evidence, such
that it plays no
bearing on the PIRS category of self-care and personal hygiene when it arguably
should have.
appellant argues that the Medical Assessor should have taken into consideration
the appellant’s reported weight gain as
a relevant factor and had the
Medical Assessor done so, a Class 3 rating was warranted on the evidence.
examples under Table 11.1 for “Self-care and personal hygiene” in
the Guidelines are:
“Class 2 Mild impairment: Able to live
independently; looks after self adequately, although may look unkempt
occasionally; sometimes
misses a meal or relies on take-away food.
Class 3 Moderate impairment: Can't live independently without regular
support. Needs prompting to shower daily and wear clean clothes.
prepare own meals, frequently misses meals. Family member or community nurse
visits (or should visit) 2-3 times per week
to ensure minimum level of hygiene
and nutrition.”
Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as Class 2 for self-care and personal
hygiene. In the PIRS Rating Form, the Medical Assessor
“Self care and personal hygiene - Class 2
Ms Olovi reported that she showers in frequently, with the reason that she
forgets to shower. She is no longer as concerned about
her hygiene and self-care
as she used to be before. she relies on her husband to do the household chores
like cooking and cleaning,
she is however able to wash the dishes, do vacuuming
and general tidying up around the house.”
“Findings on Physical examination” the Medical Assessor noted that
the appellant was wearing pyjamas and a T-shirt
with her hair tied back.
her statement dated 5 May 2025, the appellant stated at paragraph 6 that Dr Khan
in his report dated 15 November 2024 referred
to appetite disturbance with a
weight gain of approximately 23kg. She wrote:
“14. Prior to
my injury, I would take pride in my appearance and maintain my self-care and
personal hygiene as best I could.
I took regular showers, brushed my teeth
frequently, and followed my skin and health care routine.
my injury, I would only shower and brush my teeth one to two times per week when
prompted by my husband. Sometimes I keep my
distance from my husband due to my
lack of self-care which impacts our relationship. I often wear the same clothes
for a few days
without changing them and now find it difficult to maintain a
healthy routine independently without prompting. I do not take pride
appearance anymore and have lost all motivation. I often find myself isolated in
my bedroom. Unfortunately, I now suffer from
an appetite disturbance and weight
gain of approximately 23kg. My mother has moved closer to provide additional
assistance.
to my work injury, I regularly cooked for my husband. Now, I do not prepare
meals, and struggle to assist my husband with the
cooking despite his numerous
requests. I often purchase take away food and take comfort in the food I eat
resulting in my weight
gain. I have also noticed that I now bite my nails, sweat
a lot and grind my teeth.”
Abdal Khan, consultant psychiatrist, in a report dated 6 November 2024, reported
that the appellant had an appetite disturbance
with weight gain of approximately
23kg. He noted that she was dressed in casual attire and appeared unkempt.
his report dated 6 November 2024, Dr Khan assessed the appellant as Class 3 for
self-care and personal hygiene and provided the following reasons:
“Ms Olovi showers and brushes her teeth less frequently,
often only one to two times per week when prompted by her husband.
most of her time isolating in her bedroom. Ms Olovi relies on her husband to
complete domestic duties. Her mother moved
closer to her to provide additional
support. Ms Olovi’s neglect to her self-care is evidenced by her appetite
disturbance and
weight gain of approximately 23kg since the subject
a report dated 23 April 2025 Associate Professor Gordon Davies noted under
“Medical History” that the appellant reported
that she had put on a
lot of weight “since all of this has happened”. He
“She said that she had lost forty kilograms prior to
her marriage but since had put on weight as she was eating a work. Ms Olovi
that she had been prescribed the medication Ozempic to help her lose weight and
has lost five or six kilograms.”
Professor Gordon Davies noted that the appellant was wearing nightwear.
appellant submits that Medical Assessor should have taken into consideration the
appellant’s reported weight gain as a relevant
factor and had the Medical
Assessor done so, a Class 3 rating was warranted on the evidence. However, as
noted above under “Ground
3”, there was no actual weight gain by the
appellant since the work injury. The Appeal Panel is satisfied after looking at
the clinical records of the treating general practitioner and the report of Dr
Darshika Christie-David that the appellant did not
have a weight gain of 23kg as
she stated following the work injury.
appellant submits that the appellant was denied procedural fairness as a result
of the failure to take into account the weight
gain and that the Medical
Assessor erred.
Appeal Panel rejects that submission. The Appeal Panel is satisfied that there
was no weight gain following her work injury and
therefore there was no denial
of procedural fairness.
Appeal Panel is not persuaded that there has been a demonstrable error with this
aspect of the MAC or that the MAC is based on
incorrect criteria.
ground of appeal is not made out.
Social and recreational
appellant submits that it was “baffling” as to how the Medical
Assessor drew the conclusion that the appellant warranted
a Class 2 in respect
of the PIRS category of social and recreational activities notwithstanding the
appellant’s complaints
during the assessment of having trouble leaving the
house and having conversations with others.
appellant argues that the Medical Assessor does not grapple with this evidence
such that it is difficult to appreciate whether
there had been an active
intellectual process directed at the information at all (see
Singh v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2001] FCA at [59]) and a Class 3
rating was warranted on the available evidence.
examples under Table 11.2 for “social and recreational activities”
in the Guidelines are:
“Class 2: Mild impairment:
occasionally goes out to such events e.g. without needing a support person, but
does not become actively
involved (e.g. dancing, cheering favourite team).
Class 3: Moderate impairment: rarely goes out to such events, and mostly when
prompted by family or close friend. Will not go out
without a support person.
Not actively involved, remains quiet and withdrawn.”
Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as Class 2 for social and recreational
activities. In the PIRS Rating Form, the Medical
Assessor wrote:
“Social and recreational activities - Class 2
Ms Olovi reported she previously enjoyed “sewing, swimming and reading
books”. She has now stopped engaging in sewing
or reading, as it does not
interest her anymore. She no longer goes for swimming as the night shift worker
once called her fat when
she was swimming. Her mother comes and visits her at
least two to three times a week. Her brother too comes and sees her whenever
mother comes. She socialises regularly with her brother and mother. Her husband
and herself too would make a movie night and
either cook at home or go out.
They usually go out to Penrith or Kings Langley to restaurants in that area.
She has too close friends who come over whenever her
husband invites them. She
has attended funerals as and when required. She also attended her brother's
wedding in May 2024. She has
been able to go to the mosque after the injury as
she finds that helpful and to find her inner peace.”
page 3 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor takes to the following history under
“Present Symptoms”:
“Ms Olovi reported that she
continues to have difficulties as before. She experiences trouble leaving her
house and having conversations
with others. She feels ongoing anxiety about
being judged and about people talking about her. She has ‘good days when
normal.’ She added that she is particularly anxious when she is
outside her home, and that people look at her and judge her.”
her statement dated 2 February 2024, the appellant wrote: “My hobbies
include swimming, reading and sewing. I don’t
sew anymore, I have not been
as creative since the onset of my symptoms, and I have not sewn
his statement dated 5 May 2025, the appellant wrote:
my injury, I often engaged in social activities willingly. I would attend family
events, participate in hobbies such
as reading and drawing, attend dinners, and
family lunch. However, since my psychological injury, I have become socially
I no longer engage in any social or recreational activities. I rarely
leave my home, and I have no close friends as I constantly
believe that someone
is always talking about me. I am embarrassed of my situation and do not want
anyone seeing me in this state.”
his report dated 6 November 2024, Dr Khan assessed the appellant as Class 2 for
social and recreational activities and provided
the following reasons:
“Ms Olovi previously enjoyed socialising with family and
friends, attending outings, reading and drawing. She does not engage
social and recreational activities. Ms Olovi remains socially
withdrawn.”
his report dated 23 April 2025, Associate Professor Davies noted that when asked
that she was not doing a lot.
He reported that she said she was watching some television and her husband would
take her for a walk
in the evenings.
Professor Davies noted: “Ms Olovi said that her friends used to come and
visit but that they would ask her questions
and now do not come anymore. Ms
Olovi said that she only answers the phone if it is her mother or her
Medical Assessor noted that the appellant socialises regularly with her brother
and mother, had movie nights with her husband
and either cook at home or go out.
The Medical Assessor noted that “they usually go out to Penrith or Kings
Langley to restaurants
in that area”. The Medical Assessor noted that the
appellant has two close friends who come over whenever her husband invites
and has attended funerals as and when required as well as her brother's wedding
in May 2024 and is able to go to the mosque.
Appeal Panel also notes that the appellant went to Bali in 2024 with her husband
and her “friend’s friend”.
While the travel to and from Bali
would be taken into account in assessing the scale of travel, the actual time in
Bali is a holiday
and clearly involves recreational activity.
Appeal Panel notes that both Dr Kaplan and Associate Professor Davies obtained
rather different histories concerning social and
recreational activities
compared to the more comprehensive history taken by the Medical Assessor. The
Medical Assessor’s history
is not challenged.
Appeal Panel considers that the history taken by the Medical Assessor is
consistent with a Class 2 in respect of the PIRS category
of social and
recreational activities. Although the appellant told the Medical Assessor that
she has trouble leaving the house and
having conversations with others, she is
able to leave her home and go to restaurants and go on holiday.
Appeal Panel is satisfied that the Medical Assessor engaged with all of the
evidence and there had been an “active intellectual
process directed at
the information.” The Appeal Panel is not persuaded that there has been a
demonstrable error with this
aspect of the MAC or that the MAC is based on
incorrect criteria.
ground of appeal is not made out.
appellant submits that the Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as a Class 1
in respect of the PIRS category “travel”
when the Medical Assessor
noted that the appellant left the house for medical appointments and was driven
by her husband 95% of the
time. Further, the Medical Assessor conceded that the
appellant was able to drive on her own to the nearby shopping centres and that
her husband drove her to see her mother. The appellant argues that on the
available evidence, a minimum of a Class 2 rating was warranted.
examples under Table 11.3 for “Travel” in the Guidelines are:
“Class 1 No deficit, or minor deficit attributable to the
normal variation in the general population: Can travel to new environments
without supervision.
Class 2 Mild impairment: Can travel without support person, but only in a
familiar area such as local shops, visiting a neighbour.
Class 3 Moderate impairment: Cannot travel away from own residence without
support person. Problems may be due to excessive anxiety
or cognitive
impairment.”
Medical Assessor assessed Class 1 in relation to travel noting:
“Ms Olovi leaves her house for medical appointments and said
that her husband drives her 95% of the time. She is able to drive
on her own to
the nearby shopping centres. Her husband drives her to see her mother at least
once a week, she denied any overseas
travel but when I highlighted that the
documents mentioned that she went to Bali in June 2024, she said ‘I
forgot, I went to
Bali.’ I again asked her if she went to Bali with her
friends, she denied and said that she only went with her husband, I again
highlighted the documents mentioning that she had gone to Bali with her friends
to which she said ‘she is not my friend she
is my friend’s
her statement dated 5 May 2025, the appellant
“18. Prior to my injury, I was able to travel outside
of my house independently, catch public transport, and drive without feeling
stressed or anxious. Since my injury, I find it extremely distressing to leave
my house, even when supported by my husband. I rarely
travel independently and
often do not leave my bedroom for the vast majority of the day.”
his report dated 6 November 2024, Dr Khan assessed the appellant as Class 2 for
travel and provided the following reasons: “Ms
Olovi requires her husband
to be present as a support person when leaving her home due to her debilitating
anxiety, panic and avoidance
of crowds.”
Professor Davies, in his report of 23 April 2025, noted that the appellant said
that she was able to drive but not on main
appellant submits that the Medical Assessor did not adequately engage with the
appellant’s evidence and that of Dr Khan
and Associate Professor Davies.
The appellant argues that the Medial Assessor failed to adequately address
and/or respond to this
Appeal Panel accepts that the appellant leaves her house for medical
appointments although her husband drives her 95% of the time,
is able to drive
on her own to the nearby shopping centres, is driven by her husband to see her
mother at least once a week and went
to Bali for a holiday in June 2024 with her
husband. The Appeal Panel notes that most of the appellant’s travel
involves her
being driven or accompanied by her husband. She said in her
statement dated 5 May 2025 that prior to her injury she was able to travel
independently outside her house, catch public transport and drive without being
stressed or anxious. The Appeal Panel accepts that
the appellant now rarely
travels independently.
Appeal Panel considers that the evidence including the history obtained by the
Medical Assessor is inconsistent with a Class 1
rating and is consistent with a
Class 2 rating.
on the evidence before the Appeal Panel, and for the reasons provided by the
Medical Assessor in the MAC, the Appeal Panel considered
that the reasoning
process was not sufficiently clear in the assessment of travel and the Medical
Assessor did not provide in his
reasons an adequate explanation of why she
determined that the appellant had no deficit, or a minor deficit attributable to
variation in the general population. In these circumstances, the
Appeal Panel concludes that the Medical Assessor failed to provide
reasons for rating the appellant as Class 2 for travel and such failure was a
demonstrable error.
ground of appeal is made out.
Social functioning
appellant notes that the Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as a Class 2 in
respect of the PIRS category of social functioning.
The appellant submits that
the Medical Assessor “tempers” the appellant’s psychological
symptoms in respect of
her relationships, in particular, her relationship with
her husband and the appellant had experienced a period of separation from
husband on account of her fragile mental state.
examples under Table 11.4 for “social functioning” in the Guidelines
“Class 2: Mild impairment: Existing relationships
strained. Tension and arguments with partner or close family member, loss
some friendships.
Class 3: Moderate impairment: Previously established relationships severely
strained, evidenced by periods of separation or domestic
violence. Spouse,
relatives or community services looking after children.”
Medical Assessor assessed Class 2 in relation to social functioning noting:
“Ms Olovi reported that she has positive relationship with
her mother and brother who lives in Kings Langley. Her husband however
quite supportive and provides additional support. There was a time when he when
her husband went to stay with her mother
for a month, but they soon sorted their
differences out and he has been helping her in day to day chores and emotionally
her statement dated 2 May 2024, the appellant stated at paragraph 25:
"It has affected my marriage more than anything else. I tend to
snap at my husband, and I am picking on little things due to the lack
and bad dreams. I keep thinking about what has happened in the past and taking
it out on him, so we start arguing about
things that we didn’t really need
to argue about.”
her statement dated 5 May 2025, the appellant wrote:
my injury, I had a social lifestyle with many friends and frequently
communicated with my husband. Since my injury,
I have lost contact with my
friends and have become easily agitated and irritable. I tend to lose my temper
much quicker with my
husband if I am having a bad day. This agitation and
irritability have caused tension in my relationships. It has caused me to become
withdrawn from my friends and family. There was also a period of time when I had
separated from my husband due to my fragile mental
his report dated 6 November 2024, Dr Khan assessed the appellant as Class 3 for
social functioning and provided the following reasons:
Olovi has experienced strain in her marriage and there was a period of time when
she had separated from her husband due
to her fragile mental state. During this
her mother needed to provide additional support. She remains withdrawn from
her extended family and friends.”
his report dated 23 April 2025, Associate Professor Davies took a history of the
following in relation to the appellant’s
husband: “...She said that
there are however times when she does not want to talk to him and that she
‘just shuts’
herself in her room and isolates herself.”
appellant submits that it is difficult to appreciate how the Medical Assessor
determined that the appellant warranted a Class
2 rating based on the available
evidence, which described a period of separation, which is a component of a
Class 3 rating in addition
to the existing issues in the relationship. The
appellant submits that a Class 3 rating was warranted.
Appeal Panel accepts that the appellant has positive relationship with her
mother and brother and her husband is quite supportive.
The Appeal Panel accepts
that in the past there was a period of about one month when her husband went to
stay with her mother, however,
the appellant and her husband “soon sorted
their differences out” and he has been helping her in day to day chores
emotionally supporting her. Impairment is assessed at the time of the
examination by the Medical Assessor. At the time of this examination,
appellant was not separated from her husband. Their separation was historic and
transient, and while their current relationship
may be described as strained it
could not be described as severely strained on the basis of the history obtained
by the Medical Assessor.
In addition, Dr Khan noted that there was strain in the
marriage but did not describe the marriage as severely strained as described
the examples for a Class 3 assessment.
Appeal Panel considers that the evidence including the history obtained by the
Medical Assessor is consistent with a Class 2 rating
for social functioning.
on the evidence before the Appeal Panel, and for the reasons provided by the
Medical Assessor in the MAC, the Appeal Panel considered
that the reasoning
process was sufficiently clear in the assessment of social functioning and the
Medical Assessor provided an adequate
explanation of why she assessed the
appellant as Class 2. The Appeal Panel is not persuaded that there has been a
demonstrable error
with this aspect of the MAC or that the MAC is based on
incorrect criteria.
ground of appeal is not made out.
Concentration, persistence and
appellant notes that the Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as a Class 2 in
respect of the PIRS category of concentration,
persistence and pace. The
appellant takes issue with the Medical Assessor’s opinion at page 11 which
states the following:
“...Ms Olovi gave crisp replies when answering to
the questions and there was no evidence of any significant deterioration
concentration, persistence or pace.”
examples under Table 11.5 for “concentration, persistence and pace”
in the Guidelines are:
“Class 2: Mild impairment: can
undertake a basic retraining course, or a standard course at a slower pace. Can
focus on intellectually
demanding tasks for periods of up to 30 minutes, then
feels fatigued or develops headache.
Class 3: Moderate impairment: unable to read more than newspaper articles.
Finds it difficult to follow complex instructions (e.g.
operating manuals,
building plans), make significant repairs to motor vehicle, type long documents,
follow a pattern for making clothes,
tapestry or knitting.”
Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as Class 2 for concentration,
persistence and pace. In the PIRS Rating Form, the Medical
Assessor wrote:
“Concentration, persistence and pace - Class 2.
Ms Olovi reported that her attention concentration is poor. She added that
she had difficulty in reading and retaining the information.
She added that she
has memory of her “goldfish and difficulty in remembering things,
especially needing prompting for
her medical appointments. She also forgets people's name. She uses Instagram
but then just “stares at the screen.” She
uses Instagram towards
spiritual things to help her cope with her situation. Ms Olovi was not
distracted and was able to focus during
the assessment. She was able to give
correct timeline of the incidents. Ms Olovi gave crisp replies when answering to
the questions
and there was no evidence of any significant deterioration in her
concentration, persistence or pace.”
“Social Activities/ADL” the Medical Assessor
“Concentration, Persistence, and Pace: Ms. Olovi
reported that her attention and
concentration are poor. She mentioned difficulties in reading and retaining
information. She compared her memory to that of a ‘goldfish’
indicated that she often forgets things, especially needing reminders for her
medical appointments, and she also forgets people's
names. She watches TV but
mostly ‘stares ot the screen.’ She uses Instagram to share spiritual
content, which helps her
cope with her situation. During the assessment, Ms
Olovi remained focused and was not distracted. She correctly provided a timeline
of incidents and answered questions with crisp replies, showing no evidence of
significant deterioration in her concentration, persistence,
“Findings on Mental State Examination” the Medical Assessor
“I reviewed Ms Olovi via video. She engaged
superficially during the assessment and was cooperative. She presented as a
female of Afghanistani background who appeared appropriate for her age.
She was wearing her pyjamas and a T-shirt, with her hair
tied back. There was no
evidence of psychomotor agitation or retardation. No abnormal motor movements,
such as tics or mannerisms,
were noted. She reported her mood to be low, and her
affect was congruent with the mood described. Her speech was spontaneous and
normal in volume and tone; her thoughts were logical and goal-directed.
Currently, she reported ongoing negative rumination, anhedonia,
interest in activities, and sleep disturbances.
There was no evidence of manic, psychotic, or perceptual abnormalities. I
have noted the presence of pseudo hallucinations; however,
they were not true
hallucinations. She was able to focus and pay attention during the assessment
and was not distracted. There were
no obvious cognitive deficits noted during
the assessment. She had insight into her condition, and her judgement was
intact. She
denied having any thoughts of harming herself or others, as well as
any suicidal ideas, plans, or intent.”
her statement dated 2 May 2024, the appellant stated: “My current injury
has affected my capacity to do anything during the
day; I sit on the couch and
do nothing, and I cannot focus on everyday duties; it has made me very
her statement dated 5 May 2025, the appellant wrote:
Prior to my injury, I had no issues with focusing on activities and I was able
to multitask. I used to enjoy watching movies,
reading, and discussing various
topics with people. Since my injury my attention and concentration levels have
deteriorated dramatically.
I cannot read a book and remain focused or retain the
information I had read. During conversations, I tend to lose my trail of
am easily distracted, or unengaged. I struggle to remember what was
being discussed or what was previously said. It is difficult
for me to watch
movies or read books. My memory is poor, and I am now forgetful. I often require
instructions to be repeated to me
before I can understand what is required of
me. There have been occasions previously when I tried to cook but left the stove
severely burnt the food.”
his report dated 6 November 2024, Dr Khan assessed the appellant as Class 3 for
concentration, persistence and pace and provided
the following reasons:
“Ms Olovi struggles with her attention and concentration. She
has difficulty focusing on tasks such as reading and retaining
the information
she reads. Ms Olovi is easily
distracted and her memory is impaired. There have been occasions previously
when she tried to cook but left the stove on.”
his report dated 23 April 2025, Associate Professor Davies noted that the
appellant said that she had forgotten her birthday until
her husband reminded
her and she used to help her husband with his accounts but no longer does so. He
noted that she said that she
has a television in her room as she had trouble
concentrating to read.
noted above, the appellant took issue with the Medical Assessor’s opinion
at page 11 under the PIRS category ‘concentration,
persistence and
pace’ which states the following:
“...Ms Olovi gave
crisp replies when answering to the questions and there was no evidence of any
significant deterioration in
her concentration, persistence or pace.”
appellant argues that the reader is simply forced to accept the Medical
Assessor’s opinion at face value, absent adequate
reasons to support this
rationale. In particular, the appellant submits that to a lay person, the words
“...there was no evidence
of any significant deterioration in her
concentration, persistence or pace” arguably convey no meaning and the
Medical Assessor
was required to provide further reasons in support of classing
the appellant as a Class 2.
Appeal Panel notes that the observations during the examination are a matter
properly taken into account in assessing impairment
in this scale. The Medical
Assessor also took a history of the appellant reporting that her attention
concentration was poor, having
difficulty in reading and retaining the
information, comparing her memory of that of a goldfish, having difficulty in
remembering
things, needing prompting for medical appointments and forgetting
people's names.
Appeal Panel accepts that the appellant in her statement dated 5 May 2025
maintained that her attention and concentration levels
had deteriorated
dramatically and she could not read a book and remain focused or retain the
information she read. Dr Khan reported
that there had been occasions previously
when the appellant tried to cook but left the stove on. Associate Professor
Davies noted
that the appellant said that she had forgotten her birthday until
her husband reminded her and she used to help her husband with
his accounts but
no longer did so. He also noted that she said that she has a television in her
room as she had trouble concentrating
Appeal Panel accepts that the Medical Assessor made no reference to the
appellant’s statements and the evidence in those
statements concerning
memory, focus and concentration were not addressed by the Medical Assessor in
the MAC. The Medical Assessor
did not explain why she did not accept this
evidence, when it was significantly different to the evidence relied upon in the
is no evidence of the appellant’s undertaking, or being able to undertake,
a retraining course or a standard course, or
evidence of the appellant’s
ability to focus on intellectually demanding tasks for periods of up to 30
minutes apart from her
participation in the medical examination. However, the
Medical Assessor did not provide any details of the time the assessment took
address the total period that the appellant was able to focus.
Jenkins v Ambulance Service of New South Wales
[2015] NSWSC
) at [64] held that the examples given in the tables in
the Guidelines were neither the sole, nor the minimum, basis for assessment
person’s impairment as falling within a particular class. Rather, his
Honour held, at [60]:
“Those examples attempt to explore the
ways in which a psychiatric condition impacts upon the activities of daily
an individual, and their capacity to function in the areas
described.”
the Appeal Panel agree that the examples in the PIRS Tables are not the sole,
nor the minimum, basis for assessment within a
particular scale, the evidence of
the appellant in her statement and the reasons provided by Dr Khan in his
assessment and the history
provided by Associate Professor Davies do not support
a finding of a mild impairment in this scale.
on the evidence before the Appeal Panel, and for the reasons provided by the
Medical Assessor in the MAC, the Appeal Panel considered
that the reasoning
process was not sufficiently clear in the assessment of concentration,
persistence and pace. This ground of appeal
is made out.
Appeal Panel, having reviewed the evidence in this matter, assesses the
appellant as Class 3 in the scale of concentration, persistence
Employability
appellant submitted the Medical Assessor erred in her assessment of Class 4 in
respect of the PIRS category of employability.
The appellant argues that it is
difficult to appreciate how the Medical Assessor formed this opinion in
circumstances where Dr Khan
assessed the appellant as a Class 5 and Associate
Professor Davies who also considered that the appellant, as she presented, would
be considered unfit for employment. The appellant submits that there is a
failure to undertake an active intellectual process directed
information.
examples under Table 11.6 for “employability” in the Guidelines are:
“Class 4: Severe impairment: cannot work more than one or two
days at a time, less than 20 hours per fortnight. Pace is reduced,
attendance is
Class 5: Totally impaired: Cannot work at all.”
Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as Class 3 for employability. In the
PIRS Rating Form, the Medical Assessor wrote:
“Employability
Ms Olovi reported that because of her ongoing difficulties, she does not
believe that she could work. I highlighted her, I highlighted
the document that
she was the director and owner of a car dealership, Prestige Motorhouse to which
she said that she was just the
director. I then asked her to clarify about the
Z.A.I couture to which she said that her husband just ‘registered the
as she has a degree.’ I believe that Ms Olovi cannot work for more
than one or two days at a time and less than 20 hours per
fortnight. She could
work as a designer initially from her home until her anxiety
decreases.”
the MAC under “Consistency of Presentation”, the Medical Assessor
“Ms Olovi denied engaging in any form of work or
employment. However, the document suggested that Ms Olovi registered the
and was the director of her company Z.A.I Couture since 12 June 2024.
The desktop investigation also mentioned that she had been
able to create a
fashion portfolio which was published at Whitehouse-design.”
her statement dated 5 May 2025, the appellant wrote:
Prior to my work injury I was a confident employee with a strong work ethic. I
completed my role with no difficulty and
was good at what I was doing. I enjoyed
going to work and felt that it gave me a strong sense of purpose. Since my
psychological
injury, I am completely unable to return to work. I experience
significant stress, anxiety, and depression with some days being worse
others. I struggle to fall asleep and stay asleep due to my anxiety which means
I have a very inconsistent sleep pattern. I
constantly feel emotionally
distressed and this is draining. I am no longer the same person I used to be as
I am no longer able to
cope with everyday activities and
responsibility.”
Khan noted:
“...from the date of injury to date, Ms Olovi has
suffered an incapacity to work. She has been totally incapacitated to work
around July 2023 to date. Ms Olovi’s total incapacity to work is likely to
persist for the foreseeable future....
Given Ms Olovi’s injury and illness, it is unlikely that she will ever
again engage in gainful employment in a sustainable
basis in any occupation for
which she is reasonably qualified by education, training and experience. From a
psychiatric perspective,
she is considered totally and permanently
his report dated 6 November 2024, Dr Khan assessed the appellant as Class 5 for
employability and provided the following reasons:
“Ms Olovi cannot work at
all due to her pervasive mental health and cognitive difficulties.”
Professor Gordon Davies considered that the appellant was, as she presents,
unfit for employment but with treatment should
improve and be able to resume
work. He considered that with adequate treatment and rehabilitation support the
appellant should be
able to return to work within three months.
appellant submits that it is difficult to appreciate how the Medical Assessor
formed this opinion in circumstances where Dr Khan
assessed the appellant as a
Class 5 and Associate Professor Davies considered that the appellant, as she
presented, would be considered
unfit for employment.
appellant submits that while a clinical assessment is a component of the medical
assessment, no regard appears to have been paid
to this evidence of two experts
qualified in psychiatric injuries and a Class 5 rating is warranted.
Appeal Panel notes that the appellant’s submissions do not address the
additional history reported to the Medical Assessor
of the appellant being a
director and owner of a car dealership (Prestige Motor House) and that her
husband registered a company
Z.A.I Couture “as she has a degree.”
The Medical Assessor noted that the documents suggested that the appellant
the company and was the sole director of Z.A.I. Couture and she was
appointed to the role of director and shareholder of Z.A.I Couture
from 12 June
2024. The history of the appellant’s involvement with Prestige Motor House
and Z.A.I Couture was not considered
by Dr Khan or by Associate Professor
Davies. This difference in the history reported by the Medical Assessor and that
taken by Dr
Khan and Associate Professor Davies is a factor which explains the
difference in the assessments of impairment in this scale.
Appeal Panel rejects the submission that the Medical Assessor failed to
undertake an active intellectual process directed at the
information. The
Medical Assessor referred to the differences in her assessment and took a more
detailed history.
Appeal Panel is not persuaded that there has been a demonstrable error with this
aspect of the MAC or that the MAC is based on
incorrect criteria. This ground of
appeal is not made out.
Appeal Panel assesses the appellant as Class 2 for travel and Class 3 for
concentration, persistence and pace. The Appeal Panel
finds no error, nor the
application of incorrect criteria in the assessments of Class 2 for self-care
and personal hygiene, Class
2 for social and recreational activities, Class 2
for social functioning, and Class 4 for employability.
Appeal Panel finds that the PIRS scales score 2 2 2 2 3 4, ascending order 2 2 2
2 3 4, median 2, aggregate 15 so that the WPI
= 8%. The Appeal Panel noted that
the deduction of one tenth made by the Medical Assessor pursuant to s 323 was
not appealed and
therefore make a one tenth deduction which results in a total
these reasons, the Appeal Panel has determined that the MAC issued on 17 June
2025 should be revoked, and a new MAC should be
issued. The new certificate is
attached to this statement of reason.
WORKERS COMPENSATION DIVISION
APPEAL PANEL
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Injuries received after 1 January 2002
Matter number:
Madina Olovi
Respondent:
Secure Parking Pty Ltd ATF Secure Kings Unit Trust
This Certificate is issued pursuant to
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act
The Appeal Panel revokes the Medical Assessment Certificate of Medical
Assessor Surabhi Verma and issues this new Medical Assessment
Certificate as to
the matters set out in the Table below:
Table - whole person impairment (WPI)
Body Part or system
Date of Injury
Chapter, page and paragraph number in NSW workers compensation
Chapter, page, paragraph, figure and table numbers in AMA 5
Proportion of permanent impairment due to pre-existing injury,
abnormality or condition
Sub-total/s % WPI (after any deductions in column 6)
1.Psychological
8 March 2023
Chapter 11 11.1-11.3
11.4 – 11.6
Total % WPI (the Combined Table values of all sub-totals)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.52 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter