URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2024/134.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Frediani v Hall t/as Happy Camper Conversions [2024] NSWCATAP 134 (10 July 2024)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Frediani v Hall t/as Happy Camper Conversions
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWCATAP 134
Hearing Date(s):
11 April 2024
Date of Orders:
10 July 2024
Decision Date:
10 July 2024
Appeal Panel
Armstrong J, President
G Sarginson, Senior Member
(1) The appeal is
(2) The orders of the Tribunal made on 8
January 2024 are set aside.
(3) The proceedings
are remitted to the Tribunal to be reconsidered according to law, other than the
finding of the Tribunal that
the respondent has breached the consumer guarantee
under s 55 of the Australian Consumer Law (NSW) which remains
undisturbed.
(4) In the remitted proceedings, the
appellant is granted leave to rely upon the report of NSW Fair Trading dated 4
December 2023;
the affidavit of the appellant dated 14 March 2024; and the
documents referred to as “Bundle 1” in the decision of the
made on 8 January 2024.
(5) What further or other
evidence can be relied upon by the parties in the remitted proceedings is to be
considered by the Tribunal
at an interlocutory directions hearing.
(6) The costs of the appeal proceedings are to be
determined as follows:
(a) The appellant is to
file with the Appeal Panel and serve on the respondent all costs submissions and
documents (no more than
5 pages) by 14 days from the date of this
(b) The respondent is to file with the
Appeal Panel and serve on the appellant all costs submissions and documents (no
5 pages) by 28 days from the date of this
(c) The appellant is to file with the
Appeal Panel and serve on the respondent all costs submissions in reply (no more
than 3 pages)
by 35 days from the date of this
(d) The costs submissions of the parties
are to include whether or not a hearing on the issue of costs can be dispensed
if not, why not.
(e) Subject to
consideration of the costs submissions of the parties, the Appeal Panel may
determine the issue of costs on the papers
and without a hearing under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(f) If a party seeks an extension of time
to comply with directions regarding the disposition of the issue of costs, an
application
should be made in writing to the Appeal Panel by no later than the
day prior to the date of the relevant timetable obligation.
Catchwords:
APPEALS – questions of law – leave to appeal – failure to
engage with clearly articulated case – constructive
failure to exercise
CONSUMER LAW -
Australian Consumer Law (NSW) - fitness for purpose - modification of vehicle
-whether failure a major failure - rejection
of goods -remedies - principles
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
Fair Trading Act
Fair Trading Regulation 2019
Cases Cited:
Alexandria Landfill Pty Ltd v Transport for NSW
(2020) 103 NSWLR 479
[2020] NSWCA 165
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Jayco
Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1672
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission v Valve Corporation (No 3)
(2016) 337 ALR 647
[2016] FCA 196
Solar Pty Limited t/as Sunboost v Anderson
[2021] NSWCATAP 278
Bimson, Roads
& Maritime Services v Damorange Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 734
Capic v Ford
Motor Company Pty Ltd
[2021] FCA 715
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v DYD
[2023] NSWCATAP
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v Hogan
[2024] NSWCATAP
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
197 ALR 389
[2003] HCA 26
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd t/as Volkswagen
[2021] NSWSC 715
Ferella & Anor v Chief Commissioner of State
[2014] NSWCA 378
Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd v Capic
[2023] FCAFC 179
Garofali v Moshkovich
[2021] NSWCATAP 242
Liu v Director
of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2024] NSWSC 382
LSH Auto (Sydney) Pty Ltd v
[2020] NSWCATAP 246
New South Wales Housing Corporation v Orr
Nu-Stone Building Ltd v McInerney
[2023] NSWSC
Orr v Cobar Management Pty Limited
(2020) 103 NSWLR 36
Rice Marketing Board for the State of New South Wales v Forbidden
Foods Pty Limited; Forbidden Foods Pty Limited v Rice Marketing
Board for the
State of New South Wales
[2020] NSWCATAP 182
Schwartz Family Co Pty Ltd v
Capitol Carpets Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCA 223
Secretary, Department of Family and
Community Services v Smith
[2017] NSWCA 206
(2017) 95 NSWLR 597
Starr v Johnson
NSWCATAP 190
Thomas and Naaz Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State
[2023] NSWCA 40
TNT Building Trades Pty Ltd v Baker
[2023] NSWCATAP
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited v Williams
(2023) 296 FCR 514
[2023] FCAFC 50
Waverly Council v Whitehouse Properties Pty Limited
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited
Wilson v Winnicott
[2021] NSWCATAP 211
Wingfoot Australia Partners Pty
Ltd v Kocak
(2013) 252 CLR 480
[2013] HCA 43
Texts Cited:
Macquarie Dictionary
Principal judgment
Julianne Frediani (Appellant)
Matthew James Hall t/as Happy Camper
Conversions (Respondent)
Representation:
A Wilson (Appellant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Hicksons Lawyers (Appellant)
Chedid Storey
Legal (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00045197
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Not Applicable
Date of Decision:
8 January 2024
N Kennedy, General Member
File Number(s):
2022/00411738 (formerly 22/37599)
REASONS FOR DECISION
22 August 2022, the appellant commenced proceedings in the Consumer and
Commercial Division of the NSW Civil and Administrative
Tribunal seeking orders
that the respondent refund the monies she had paid the respondent to convert her
2019 Volkswagen Crafter
van (the vehicle) into a campervan/motorhome, and
consequential losses the appellant alleged she had sustained. On 8 January 2024
the Tribunal ordered that the respondent perform repairs to the
appellant’s vehicle, which had been converted by the respondent
campervan/motorhome. On 5 February 2024, the appellant lodged an appeal of the
Tribunal’s decision.
is no dispute that there was a contract between the parties for the respondent
to supply goods and services to the appellant
in trade or commerce. The
respondent conducts a business that converts certain vehicles into
campervans/motorhomes. In these reasons,
we will refer to the appellant as the
consumer, and to the respondent as the supplier.
works performed by the supplier occurred in the period between July 2020 and
November 2020, with additional subsequent work to
the vehicle occurring in about
April and May 2021. The consumer paid the supplier $69,519.60 for the conversion
the Tribunal below, the consumer’s causes of action were based on the
supplier breaching consumer guarantee provisions
of the Australian Consumer
(NSW) (ACL) in respect of the provision of goods (relevantly, ss 54
and 55) and services (relevantly, ss 60 and 61).
evidence of the consumer included expert evidence from a mechanical engineer, Mr
Dewhurst. In Mr Dewhurst’s opinion, the
vehicle was not in a condition
capable of registration when it was supplied after the conversion, because its
gross vehicle mass
(GVM) exceeded the manufacturers limit; and there were other
significant defects in the work performed by the supplier (in particular,
electrical works) that caused the vehicle to be unsafe.
supplier did not put forward any independent expert evidence to the Tribunal.
The only evidence of the supplier was the evidence
of Mr Hall. Part of his
evidence involved the cost of a GVM upgrade to the vehicle.
consumer relevantly argued that, in respect of the provision of goods, the
breach of the consumer guarantees under both s 54 (acceptable
quality) and
s 55 (fit for purpose) constituted a “major failure” as defined
in s 260 of the ACL; the consumer had rejected
the goods within the
“rejection period” under s 262(1) of the ACL; and the consumer
had the right to elect to reject
the goods and obtain a refund of the monies
paid for the conversion works, together with consequential loss. The total
monetary amount
claimed by the consumer was $99,769.60.
Tribunal found that, although the supplier had breached the consumer guarantee
that goods be fit for purpose under s 55 of the
ACL, the failure was not a
“major failure” under s 260 of the ACL. As noted, the Tribunal
ordered that the supplier perform
repairs to the vehicle.
critical issues in this appeal are whether the Tribunal erred by failing to make
findings as to whether the consumer guarantee
under s 54 of the ACL had
been breached; and by failing to apply the correct legal test as to whether the
breach of the consumer
guarantee provisions constituted a “major
failure” under ss 259(3) and 260 of the ACL.
are satisfied that the Tribunal committed errors on questions of law in respect
of its failure to deal with s 54 of the ACL, and
in respect of its
application of the legal test as to whether the breach of the consumer guarantee
was a “major failure”
within the meaning of the ACL. We consider
these errors to be material (considered separately, and cumulatively) and
accordingly,
we allow the consumer’s appeal.
the appeal hearing, both parties sought that we should, to the extent that it
was possible to do so, redetermine the proceedings
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act). Due to the
nature and scope of the issues that remain in dispute and in respect of which no
factual findings have
been made, we have decided that the case is to be remitted
to the Consumer and Commercial Division of the Tribunal, to be reconsidered
accordance with law, with the following exception. That part of the
Tribunal’s decision in which it found that the supplier
breached the
consumer guarantee under
of the ACL is to remain undisturbed.
Statutory Framework
decision under appeal refers to the consumer guarantee provisions in respect of
goods and services. The remedial provisions of
the ACL for breach of the
consumer guarantees for provision of services against a supplier
(ss 267-269) involve damages; compensation;
and the ability to terminate
the contract.
remedial provisions of the ACL for breach of the consumer guarantees for
provision of goods against a supplier (ss 259-264) are
more complex, and
involve repair; replacement of goods; refund (and return) of goods; and damages
for loss. As Wheelan J stated in
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission v Jayco Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1672
“At a general level, and without being exhaustive,
in respect of the consumer guarantees the ACL provides for the following
remedies against a supplier of goods, against a manufacturer of goods, and as
between a supplier of goods and a manufacturer.
In relation to a supplier –
(1) a supplier of goods is liable to a consumer to remedy any failure of the
goods to comply with the statutory guarantees of acceptable
quality and fitness
for purpose, and for damages for any foreseeable loss as a result of the failure
[ss 259(2) and (4), 261]; and
(2) where a failure is a “major failure,” or a failure cannot be
remedied, the consumer is entitled as against the supplier
to reject the goods,
and is entitled at the consumer’s election to replacement goods, or to a
refund of the purchase price
[ss 259(3), 263(4)].”
is unnecessary for us to set out and explore the findings and reasons of the
Tribunal regarding breach of the consumer guarantees
to provide services with
due care and skill
and services fit for purpose
reason that such an analysis is unnecessary is that the contract to modify the
van and transform it to a campervan/motorhome involved
the provision of both
goods (the installation of various items into the van, including plumbing;
electrical items and outlets; toilet;
bedding; sink; taps; and joinery) and
services. The installation of goods was substantial. By reason of the definition
of the supply
of “goods” in
of the ACL, the whole
of the transaction is properly characterised as a supply of goods (
Competition and Consumer Commission v Valve Corporation (No 3)
[2016] FCA 196
Wilson v Winnicott
NSWCATAP 211
of the ACL relevantly states:
54 Guarantee as to acceptable
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by auction;
there is a guarantee that the goods are of acceptable quality.
(2) Goods are of acceptable quality if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly
supplied; and
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods), would
regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer
of the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the goods.
of the ACL contains a consumer guarantee that goods be reasonably fit for
any disclosed purpose and any purpose for which the supplier
represents the
goods are reasonably fit for. It is unnecessary for us to set out the applicable
legal principles in respect of
of the ACL. The Tribunal found that the
vehicle was not fit for purpose under
and the supplier has not
appealed that part of the decision.
are “mandatory considerations” to establish
whether or not goods are not of acceptable quality under
such that a reasonable consumer, fully acquainted with the state and condition
of the goods, would regard the goods as being
of acceptable quality, determined
at the date of the supply of the goods (
Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty
Ltd v Capic
[2023] FCAFC 179
Capic-Appeal
) at [43] and [56]).
principles applicable to
of the ACL can be summarised as
(1) The “reasonable consumer” in
is assessed
objectively, and idiosyncratic subjective views by the consumer about the state
or condition of the goods or what is,
or is not, acceptable, is irrelevant
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited v Williams
(2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50
Williams-Appeal
) at [42]-[43]).
of the ACL requires consideration of at least some knowledge
acquired after supply, or else it would not be possible to hold that
not of acceptable quality by reason of a latent or hidden defect
Capic-Appeal
(3) The statutory language of
does not confine “acceptable
quality” to “not potentially fatal” or “unusable”
Capic-Appeal)
(4) The existence of a manufacturer’s warranty should generally have no
bearing on the question of whether the goods comply
with the statutory
guarantees of acceptable quality (
Capic-Appeal
at [63], applying
at [43]; and
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited v Williams
(2023) 296 FCR 514
[2023] FCAFC 50
(5) The consumer guarantee in
should not be “read down”
because it could otherwise lead to a “disproportionate outcome”
Capic-Appeal
(6) A reasonable consumer in the hypothetical circumstances in
be aware that motor vehicles are complicated pieces of machinery that may
develop future problems that may require rectification
by the vehicle’s
manufacturer during its lifetime, and a merely speculative theoretical
possibility of a future problem may
not be regarded as unacceptable by a
reasonable consumer (
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd t/as
Volkswagen Australia
[2021] NSWSC 715
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group
Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 211
(7) A reasonable consumer being aware that motor vehicles are complicated pieces
of machinery that may develop problems is different
to a reasonable consumer
accepting that a vehicle, because of a defect already present at the time of
supply, cannot be used in a
reasonable and normal way without malfunctioning and
consequently exposing the vehicle one or more non-trivial adverse consequences
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited
[2022] FCA 344
Capic v Ford Motor Company Pty Ltd
[2021] FCA 715
the consumer guarantee is not complied with, the next issue is the appropriate
remedy. Sections 259 and 260 of the ACL state
as follows:
Action against suppliers of goods
(1) A consumer may take action under this section if:
(a) a person (the supplier) supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to the
consumer; and
(b) a guarantee that applies to the supply under Subdivision A of Division 1
(other than
sections 58
(1)) is not complied with.
(2) If the failure to comply with the guarantee can be remedied and is not a
major failure:
(a) the consumer may require the supplier to remedy the failure within a
reasonable time; or
(b) if such a requirement is made of the supplier but the supplier refuses or
fails to comply with the requirement, or fails to comply
with the requirement
within a reasonable time—the consumer may:
(i) otherwise have the failure remedied and, by action against the supplier,
recover all reasonable costs incurred by the consumer
in having the failure so
remedied; or
(ii) subject to section 262, notify the supplier that the consumer rejects
the goods and of the ground or grounds for the rejection.
(3) If the failure to comply with the guarantee cannot be remedied or is a
major failure, the consumer may:
(a) subject to section 262, notify the supplier that the consumer rejects the
goods and of the ground or grounds for the rejection;
(b) by action against the supplier, recover compensation for any reduction in
the value of the goods below the price paid or payable
by the consumer for the
(4) The consumer may, by action against the supplier, recover damages for any
loss or damage suffered by the consumer because of the
failure to comply with
the guarantee if it was reasonably foreseeable that the consumer would suffer
such loss or damage as a result
of such a failure.
(5) Subsection (4) does not apply if the failure to comply with the guarantee
occurred only because of a cause independent of human
control that occurred
after the goods left the control of the supplier.
(6) To avoid doubt, subsection (4) applies in addition to subsections (2) and
(7) The consumer may take action under this section whether or not the goods
are in their original packaging.
260 When a failure to comply with a guarantee is a major failure
(1) A failure to comply with a guarantee referred to in section 259(1)(b)
that applies to a supply of goods is a major failure if:
(a) the goods would not have been acquired by a reasonable consumer fully
acquainted with the nature and extent of the failure; or
(b) the goods depart in one or more significant respects:
(i) if they were supplied by description—from that description; or
(ii) if they were supplied by reference to a sample or demonstration
model—from that sample or demonstration model; or
(c) the goods are substantially unfit for a purpose for which goods of the
same kind are commonly supplied and they cannot, easily
and within a reasonable
time, be remedied to make them fit for such a purpose; or
(d) the goods are unfit for a disclosed purpose that was made known to:
(i) the supplier of the goods; or
(ii) a person by whom any prior negotiations or arrangements in relation to
the acquisition of the goods were conducted or made;
and they cannot, easily and within a reasonable time, be remedied to make
them fit for such a purpose; or
(e) the goods are not of acceptable quality because they are unsafe.
(2) A failure to comply with a guarantee referred to in section 259(1)(b)
that applies to a supply of goods is also a major failure
(a) the failure is one of 2 or more failures to comply with a guarantee
referred to in section 259(1)(b) that apply to the supply;
(b) the goods would not have been acquired by a reasonable consumer fully
acquainted with the nature and extent of those failures,
taken as a whole.
Note: The multiple failures do not need to relate to the same guarantee.
(3) Subsection (2) applies regardless of whether the consumer has taken
action under section 259 in relation to any of the failures.
262 and 263 of the ACL provide for the circumstances in which consumers are not
entitled to reject goods (s 262) and the
consequences of the consumer
rejecting the goods (s 263). Those provisions state as
262 When consumers are not entitled to reject
(1) A consumer is not entitled, under section 259, to notify a supplier of
goods that the consumer rejects the goods if:
(a) the rejection period for the goods has ended; or
(b) the goods have been lost, destroyed or disposed of by the consumer;
(c) the goods were damaged after being delivered to the consumer for reasons
not related to their state or condition at the time of
(d) the goods have been attached to, or incorporated in, any real or personal
property and they cannot be detached or isolated without
damaging them.
(2) The rejection period for goods is the period from the time of the supply
of the goods to the consumer within which it would be
reasonable to expect the
relevant failure to comply with a guarantee referred to in section 259(1)(b) to
become apparent having regard
(a) the type of goods; and
(b) the use to which a consumer is likely to put them; and
(c) the length of time for which it is reasonable for them to be used;
(d) the amount of use to which it is reasonable for them to be put before
such a failure becomes apparent.
263 Consequences of rejecting goods
(1) This section applies if, under section 259, a consumer notifies a
supplier of goods that the consumer rejects the goods.
(2) The consumer must return the goods to the supplier unless:
(a) the goods have already been returned to, or retrieved by, the supplier;
(b) the goods cannot be returned, removed or transported without significant
cost to the consumer because of:
(i) the nature of the failure to comply with the guarantee to which the
rejection relates; or
(ii) the size or height, or method of attachment, of the goods.
(3) If subsection (2)(b) applies, the supplier must, within a reasonable
time, collect the goods at the supplier’s expense.
(4) The supplier must, in accordance with an election made by the
(a) refund:
(i) any money paid by the consumer for the goods; and
(ii) an amount that is equal to the value of any other consideration provided
by the consumer for the goods; or
(b) replace the rejected goods with goods of the same type, and of similar
value, if such goods are reasonably available to the supplier.
(5) The supplier cannot satisfy subsection (4)(a) by permitting the consumer
to acquire goods from the supplier.
(6) If the property in the rejected goods had passed to the consumer before
the rejection was notified, the property in those goods
revests in the supplier
on the notification of the rejection.
summary, the following principles apply:
(1) The consumer has a right to claim damages under s 259(4) of the ACL
against the supplier for reasonably foreseeable loss caused
by breach of the
consumer guarantee, irrespective of whether or not the breach is repairable, or
is a “major failure”.
(2) There are different remedies against the supplier available depending upon
whether or not the goods are repairable or the goods
have a “major
failure” (s 259(2) and (3)).
(3) If the goods cannot be repaired or have a “major failure”, the
consumer may notify the supplier he or she rejects
the goods and the grounds of
rejection (s 259(3)(a)).
(4) If the goods have been rejected in compliance with s 262, the supplier
must, in accordance with the election of the consumer,
either: (a) provide a
refund (being monies paid by the consumer to the supplier for the goods, and any
amount equal to the value
of any other consideration provided by the consumer
for the goods); or (b) replace the goods with goods of the same type and of
value that are reasonably available to the supplier (s 263(4)). The
consumer must return the goods to the supplier in accordance
with s 263(2)
and (3) of the ACL.
The Decision Under Appeal
parties were legally represented at all relevant times. At the hearing, there
was evidence by the consumer; her expert Mr Dewhurst;
and Mr Hall.
consumer’s evidence included quotations and reports in respect of repairs
to the vehicle from another supplier of campervans/motorhomes;
and automotive
electricians.
Dewhurst’s evidence was that the vehicle’s weight exceeded the
manufacturer’s GVM after supply, irrespective
of additional items that had
been added to the vehicle by the consumer (including a bull-bar; roof racks and
roof mounted solar panels).
Mr Dewhurst accepted that it was possible for a GVM
“upgrade” to be added to the vehicle after it was supplied at a
cost, but even when such an upgrade was made, the vehicle would still
be overweight and unable to be registered unless items were
removed from it to
bring it within the maximum upgraded GVM.
Importantly,
Mr Dewhurst was also of the opinion that the vehicle was unsafe because
electrical defects in the vehicle posed a fire
and electrical shock hazard.
Tribunal below found that the vehicle was not fit for purpose in breach of the
consumer guarantee under
of the ACL because (a) the vehicle was
overweight and could not be registered under the applicable Vehicle Safety
Compliance Certification
Scheme (VSCC Scheme); and (b) the electrical and other
defects identified by Mr Dewhurst prevented the vehicle from being registered
(see Tribunal’s reasons for decision (“Reasons”) at [86];
[91]; [94]).
Tribunal found the vehicle was repairable, but there was no “major
failure” under ss 259(3) and 260 of the ACL because
(a) the vehicle
could be repaired at moderate cost; (b) the consumer was aware the vehicle could
not be driven until the certification
and registration process was complete; (c)
the vehicle was not unsafe, because it could not be legally driven until the
modifications
had been approved under the VSCC Scheme; and (d) a reasonable
consumer would expect “teething problems” (Reasons at
[95]-[105]).
the Tribunal was not satisfied that there was a “major failure”
under ss 259(3) and 260 of the ACL, it ordered the
supplier to collect the
vehicle; perform repairs (including a GVM upgrade); and then return the
Scope and nature of internal appeals
of the Tribunal such as the decision before us are internally appealable
decisions. An appeal to the Tribunal’s Appeal
Panel does not simply
provide a losing party in the Tribunal below with the opportunity to run its
case again, nor is it sufficient
for an appellant to disagree with the
outcome and to contend there should have been a different outcome.
succeed in an appeal, an appellant must demonstrate either an error by the
Tribunal below on a question of law, which may be argued
as of right; or
that permission (that is, “leave”) to appeal should
be granted to bring the appeal: NCAT Act, s 80(2).
appellant to an internal appeal brought under s 80(2)(b) of the NCAT Act
must identify with precision a question of law said to
be raised by
the appeal:
Ferella & Anor v Chief Commissioner of State
[2014] NSWCA 378
Schwartz Family Co Pty
Ltd v Capitol Carpets Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCA 223
. Whether a
question is one of law must be approached as a matter of
Haritos v Federal Commissioner of
(2015) 233 FCR 315
[2015] FCAFC 92
[94], [203];
Kudrynski v Orange City Council
[2024] NSWCA
are of the view that each such question must be a pure question of law (adopting
what was said in
Orr v Cobar Management Pty Limited
(2020) 103 NSWLR
[2020] NSWCCA 220
[44], [49]; and
Thomas and Naaz Pty Ltd v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2023] NSWCA 40
in relation to different statutory provisions). In
[109] it was said by Bathurst CJ and Bell P (as the Chief Justice then
was) with Garling, Johnson and Lonergan JJ agreeing:
questions of law should be, in our opinion, what are sometimes described
as ‘pure questions of law’. They
should not draw the Court of
Criminal Appeal into questions of fact. Moreover, they must be questions whose
character as a question
of law can be recognised on the face of the question,
and not depend upon the answer given to the question. This does not include
question which may ultimately disclose an error of law depending on an analysis
of the facts but where this cannot be known without
scrutiny of the
principles governing an application for leave to appeal under the NCAT Act are
well-established and are repeated in many decisions
of the Appeal Panel, often
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP 17.
They are the same
principles applied by the courts. It is only if the decision is attended with
sufficient doubt to warrant its reconsideration
on appeal will leave be
granted. Ordinarily it is appropriate to grant leave where there is an
issue of principle, a question of
public importance or an injustice which is
reasonably clear, in the sense of going beyond what is merely
Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services v
[2017] NSWCA 206
(2017) 95 NSWLR 597
. As explained in
at [84], it is not sufficient merely to show that the Tribunal
below was arguably wrong or that there was a bona fide challenge to
issue of fact.
the circumstances in which the Appeal Panel may grant leave to appeal from
decisions made in the Consumer and Commercial
Division of this Tribunal under
s 80(2)(b) of the NCAT Act are limited to those set out in cl 12(1) of Sch
4 to the NCAT Act. In
such cases, the Appeal Panel must be satisfied that the
appellant may have suffered a substantial miscarriage of justice on the basis
that: (a) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was not fair and equitable;
or (b) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal
was against the weight of
evidence; or (c) significant new evidence has arisen (being evidence that
was not reasonably available
at the time the proceedings under appeal were being
dealt with).
, the Appeal Panel stated at [76] that a substantial miscarriage of
justice for the purposes of cl 12 (1) of Sch 4 may have been
“... there was a "significant possibility" or
a "chance which was fairly open" that a different and more favourable result
have been achieved for the appellant had the relevant circumstance in
para (a) or (b) not occurred or if the fresh evidence under
para (c) had been before the Tribunal at first instance.”
Grounds of Appeal
appeal was filed on 5 February 2024, within the applicable time period under
r 25 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
to the Notice of Appeal, we note that the grounds of appeal have been set out in
a prolix and confusing manner, with multiple
sub-paragraphs that mix purported
errors on a question of law with purported errors in factual findings.
importance of legally represented appellants setting out appeal grounds in a way
that clearly identifies the purported errors
on a question of law, and the
errors that require which leave to appeal, has been emphasised in previous
Appeal Panel decisions:
Garofali v Moshkovich
[2021] NSWCATAP
Bell Solar Pty Limited t/as Sunboost v Anderson
[2021] NSWCATAP 278
. We endorse what was said in those earlier
decisions, and it is regrettable that the grounds of appeal were not set out in
consumer’s grounds of appeal are summarised as follows:
(1) Ground 1 - Error on a question of law in respect of the failure to find the
defects were a ‘major failure’ under
ss 259(3) and 260 of the
ACL, and the finding that the consumer was only entitled to the remedy of repair
of the vehicle.
(2) Ground 2 - Error on a question of law in respect of inadequate reasons.
(3) Ground 3 - Leave to appeal under cl 12 of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act.
set out below what we regard as the questions of law which arise from the
consumer’s Ground 1, as follows:
(1) Whether there has been a constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction on
the part of the Tribunal, which includes a failure
to consider and address a
material issue raised by a party in the proceedings that is within the
determine (see e.g.
Alexandria Landfill Pty
Ltd v Transport for NSW
(2020) 103 NSWLR 479
[2020] NSWCA 165
and [413]).
(2) Whether the Tribunal applied the wrong legal principle which materially
affected the outcome (
Bimson, Roads & Maritime Services v Damorange Pty
[2014] NSWSC 734
wrong application of the correct legal principles to the facts is an error of
mixed fact and law for which leave to appeal is
required under s 80(2)(b)
of the NCAT Act (
TNT Building Trades Pty Ltd v Baker
[2023] NSWCATAP 178
and the authorities cited therein).
consumer’s Ground 2 purports to raise a question of law as
to whether adequate reasons have been
provided. Depending on
the precise arguments put by an appellant, an
allegation that reasons are inadequate may amount to a challenge to the merits
Tribunal’s decision, for which leave to appeal is required. Simply
alleging that the Tribunal’s reasons are inadequate
may not be sufficient
to identify a question of law. There are no submissions before us as to why the
issue raised by the consumer
amounts to a question of law for the purposes of
s 80(2)(b) of the NCAT Act.
no express request under s 62 of the
received by the Tribunal below. Nevertheless, the Tribunal delivered a written
statement disclosing reasons for its decision.
There has been
some consideration about whether there is a duty in the Tribunal to
provide reasons, absent a request under s 62
for a written statement of reasons, given that there is no common
law duty to give reasons:
Wingfoot Australia Partners Pty Ltd v
(2013) 252 CLR 480
[2013] HCA 43
. Whether there is
such a duty raises its own question of law; but if there is no such duty,
then it stands to reason that a failure
to provide adequate
reasons would not constitute an error of law, let
alone raise a pure question of law.
said, there have been a number of Appeal Panel decisions which have proceeded on
the view that, even in the absence of a request
made under s 62 of the NCAT Act
for written reasons, whether there has been a failure to provide adequate
reasons amounts to a question
of law for the purposes of s 80(2)(b): see
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v DYD
[2023] NSWCATAP
, [27]-[30];
Starr v Johnson
[2023] NSWCATAP
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v Hogan
NSWCATAP 77
. Without expressing a view, we note the decision of Wright J
Nu-Stone Building Ltd v McInerney
[2023] NSWSC
who found at [58] that a written statement of reasons provided by the
Appeal Panel, absent a request by the parties, was itself subject
strictures of s 62(2) of the
the question cannot be regarded as free from doubt (see e.g.
[2022] NSWCATAP 190
) or authoritatively determined by
the Courts in NSW, we are prepared to accept, for the purposes of this appeal,
that the question
of whether or not the Tribunal’s reasons are adequate is
a question of law and leave to appeal is not required.
determination in this appeal
salient issues for determination in the appeal are:
(1) Whether there was a constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction by failing
to consider whether the supplier had breached the
consumer guarantee that goods
be of acceptable quality under s 54 of the ACL, in addition to the found
breach of s 55 of the ACL.
(2) Whether the Tribunal applied the wrong legal principle in its consideration
of ss 259(3) and 260 of the ACL.
(3) Whether there is an error on a question of law due to inadequate reasons.
(4) If no error on a question of law is established, should leave to appeal be
granted and the appeal upheld on the merits of the
Consideration
Was there a constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction?
Tribunal’s reasons make no reference to having made findings regarding
whether the consumer had established a breach of
the consumer guarantee in
s 54 of the ACL. If the consumer clearly raised an argument that there was
a breach of s 54, and the Tribunal
failed to engage with a clearly
articulated argument or case put to it, then the Tribunal may have
constructively failed to exercise
its jurisdiction, which is a question of
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
(2003) 197 ALR 389
[2003] HCA 26.
Marketing Board for the State of New South Wales v Forbidden Foods Pty Limited;
Forbidden Foods Pty Limited v Rice Marketing
Board for the State of New South
[2020] NSWCATAP 182
an Appeal Panel collated
notable judicial comment on this issue, recording at
[170] – [172]:
Dennis Willcox
appellant contended that the Commonwealth Administrative Appeals Tribunal failed
to consider a submission it made concerning
whether it had gained a
“profit” on the sale of shares. Noting that the reasons given by the
Tribunal for its decision
were “devoid of reference” to that
submission, Jenkinson J (with whom Woodward and Foster JJ agreed) stated at
“Not every failure by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to mention a
contention advanced on behalf of a party will amount
to a failure to comply with
the requirements of
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
demonstrate that the contention was not considered in deciding the
matter before the tribunal. But this submission concerning
the ascertainment of
profit was worthy of serious consideration and was seriously advanced
to the tribunal. It ought, therefore,
to be inferred that the
submission was inadvertently overlooked by the tribunal either when the
reference was being decided or when
the reasons for the decision were being
committed to writing (cf Sullivan v Department of Transport
[1978] FCA 48
(1978) 20 ALR 323
D'Amore v Independent Commission Against Corruption
[2013] NSWCA
, Basten JA considered at [230] the obligation of a decision-maker in the
context of administrative decision-making to deal with part
of an applicant's
claim, citing with approval the following passage from
Applicant WAEE v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCAFC 184
... at [46]-[47], in which French, Sackville
and Hely JJ explained:
“It is plainly not necessary for the tribunal to refer to every piece
of evidence and every contention made by an applicant
in its written reasons. It
may be that some evidence is irrelevant to the criteria and some
contentions misconceived. Moreover, there
is a distinction between the tribunal
failing to advert to evidence which, if accepted, might have led it to make a
different finding
of fact ... and a failure by the Tribunal to address a
contention which, if accepted, might establish that the applicant had a
well-founded
fear of persecution for a Convention reason...
The inference that the Tribunal has failed to consider an issue may be
drawn from its failure to expressly deal with that issue in
its reasons.
But that is an inference not too readily to be drawn where the reasons
are otherwise comprehensive and the issue has
at least been identified at some
point. It may be that it is unnecessary to make a finding on a particular matter
because it is subsumed
in findings of greater generality or because
there is a factual premise upon which a contention rests which has been
rejected. Where,
however, there is an issue raised by the evidence advanced on
behalf of an applicant and contentions made by the applicant on that
resolved one way, would be dispositive of the Tribunal's review of the
delegate's decision, a failure to deal with it in
the published reasons may
raise a strong inference that it has been overlooked."
are satisfied that the Tribunal overlooked or otherwise failed to deal with
a potential breach of
of the ACL. Breach of
was clearly
raised by the consumer’s legal representative both in Points of Claim and
submissions. Notwithstanding that, the
application of
and the effect,
if any, on whether or not there was a “major failure”, is not
addressed in the Reasons.
Determination
of whether or not the supplier had breached
of the ACL was critical as to
the finding as to whether or not there was a “major failure” under
s 259(3)(a) of the ACL
and s 260(1)(a) of the ACL.
matters in s 260(1)(a)-(e) of the ACL are matters to be considered separately.
If there is a breach of a consumer guarantee regarding
the supply of goods
(other than in respect of
(1)), then only one of the matters in
s 260 needs to be established for there to be a “major
Tribunal, in the Reasons, only briefly referred to whether the goods would have
been acquired by a reasonable consumer fully acquainted
with the nature and
extent of the failure (s 260(1)(a) of the ACL). The brief reasons given
were that a reasonable consumer would
expect “teething problems”;
and the extent of the defects in the vehicle identified in the evidence of Mr
Dewhurst were
“insufficient” to find that a reasonable consumer,
acquainted with the nature and extent of the failures, individually
collectively, would not have acquired the goods (Reasons at [104]-[105]).
that finding was only made in the context where the Tribunal had found that the
goods supplied were not fit for purpose under
of the ACL. There were
no findings made in respect of whether the goods were of acceptable quality
of the ACL. To consider (albeit briefly) s 260(1)(a) in the
context of the found breach of
of the ACL, but not to consider it in
the context of any found breach of
of the ACL where the consumer was
clearly arguing there was a breach of
, was a failure to engage with a
clearly articulated case. To put it another way, it is a constructive failure to
exercise jurisdiction.
failure to deal with
was clearly material to the outcome. Accordingly, an
error on a question of law is established. That is sufficient for the appeal
be allowed. However, it is appropriate we also deal with the issue of whether a
wrong legal principle was applied in respect of
the manner in which
ss 259(3) and 260(1)(e) of the ACL were considered, and also deal with the
issue of leave to appeal.
Was the wrong legal principle applied
under s 259(3) and 260 of the ACL?
are satisfied the wrong legal principle was applied in respect of whether the
goods had a “major failure” because they
were not of acceptable
quality because they were unsafe.
are “unsafe” if they are not “safe”. The Macquarie
Dictionary definition of “safe” was referred
(Sydney) Pty Ltd v Sherman
[2020] NSWCATAP 246
secure from liability to harm, injury, danger, or risk;
free from hurt, injury, danger, or risk; or
involving no risk of mishap, error
Tribunal found that the vehicle was not “unsafe” because it could
not be legally driven without being certified under
the VSCC Scheme and
registered (Reasons at [100-103]).
find that the vehicle was only “unsafe” if it was not driven in the
condition it was supplied by the supplier makes
s 260(1)(a) of the ACL
redundant. The whole purpose of the conversion of the vehicle into a
motorhome/campervan was for it to be
able to be registered and be safe to drive.
legal test applied by the Tribunal was the wrong legal test under
s 260(1)(e), because the Tribunal considered a vehicle that
could not be
driven in the condition it was supplied was safe until it was approved under the
VSCC Scheme and registered, rather
than whether the goods were not of acceptable
quality because they were unsafe in the condition in which they had been
That is a pure question of law, because it does not involve
consideration of the factual findings.
there was no proper consideration of whether the goods were “not of
acceptable quality because they are unsafe”.
As we said earlier, the
Tribunal made no findings as to whether or not the goods were of acceptable
quality under
of the ACL. The Tribunal only considered the issue of
“safety” in the context of its findings that the goods were not
for purpose under
of the ACL, not whether the goods were not of
acceptable quality because they were supplied in an unsafe condition.
the Tribunal did is focus on s 260(1)(c) and (d), which involve whether the
goods can be easily, and within a reasonable period
of time, be remedied to make
them fit for purpose. However, if the breach of the consumer guarantee was a
“major failure”
within s 260(1)(a) or s 260(1)(e) of the
ACL, it does not matter whether the goods were capable of being easily, and
within a reasonable
period of time, being remedied (by way of repair) to make
them fit for purpose.
Were the Reasons Inadequate?
we are satisfied that errors on a question of law are established in respect of
constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction and,
separately, application of
the wrong legal principles to the facts, it is unnecessary to consider any
further the consumer’s
appeal ground based on inadequate reasons,
including whether the written reasons provided by the Tribunal are of the
acceptable standard” (
NSW Land and Housing Corporation v
[2019] NSWCA 231
Leave to appeal
are satisfied that the Tribunal’s findings that the conversion works were
not a “major failure” under ss 259(3)
and 260(1) of the ACL was
against the weight of evidence (cl 12(1)(b) of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act) and that
there is a demonstrable
injustice that is reasonably clear and going beyond what
is merely arguable such that, even if an error on a question of law was
established, we would grant leave to appeal and uphold the appeal on this basis.
finding as to whether the goods had a “major failure” under
s 259(3) and 260 of the ACL was critical to the type of
remedy that the
consumer could elect upon. The evidence of Mr Dewhurst regarding the defects in
the vehicle and the safety issues
arising from those defects that existed from
the supply of the goods was compelling.
supplier did not adduce any expert evidence to challenge the evidence of Mr
Dewhurst, nor does the transcript of the hearing indicate
that the relatively
brief cross examination of Mr Dewhurst diminished the weight to be given to his
evidence. Although the supplied
submitted that certification under the VSSC
Scheme was not within its scope of works under the contract, it supplied a
vehicle above
the manufacturer’s GVM weight, irrespective of any additions
to the vehicle by the consumer.
are satisfied the consumer may have suffered a substantial miscarriage of
justice because the Tribunal’s decision was against
the weight of
evidence; and the decision contains an error that is plain and readily apparent
which is central to the Tribunal's
decision and not merely peripheral, so that
it would be unjust to allow the finding that there was no “major
Disposition of the Appeal
s 81 of the NCAT Act, in determining an internal appeal, the Appeal Panel may
make such orders as it considers appropriate in
light of its decision on the
appeal, including (but not limited to) orders that provide for the decision
under appeal to be varied
(s 81(1)(b)), or quashed or set aside and another
decision substituted for it (s 81(1)(d)). Section 81(2) provides that the
Panel may exercise all the functions that are conferred or imposed by the
NCAT Act or other legislation on the Tribunal at first
instance when varying, or
making a decision in substitution for, the decision under appeal, and may
exercise such functions on grounds
other than those relied upon at first
instance. Further, if the grounds of appeal so warrant, the Tribunal may conduct
a new hearing
under s 80(3)(a) of the NCAT Act.
the event that we decided to allow the appeal, both parties asked the Appeal
Panel to redetermine the matter if possible, rather
than sending the matter back
to the Tribunal, due to the expense and delay of the litigation process.
do not consider that the grounds of appeal in this matter warrant a new hearing
under s 80(3)(a) of the NCAT Act.
we do not think it is appropriate for us to redetermine the matter in the
circumstances of this appeal under s 81 of the
NCAT Act for a number of
reasons, as follows:
(1) No findings have been made in respect of breach of the consumer guarantee
under s 54 of the ACL; and the Tribunal made material
errors in determining
whether there was a “major failure” under s 259(3) and 260 of
the ACL. Determining those issues
involves factual and legal findings that, in
our view, are most appropriately made in the remitted proceedings when further
will also require determination.
(2) Whether there is a “major failure” under ss 259(3) and
260(1)(a)-(e) is only part of the requirement that the consumer
will have to
establish to obtain a refund of the purchase price. The consumer still has to
have rejected the goods in accordance
with ss 262 and 263. Those are not
matters it is appropriate for us to make findings about on this appeal.
(3) When the vehicle is defitted, it is likely to require further repair. The
consumer’s Counsel described the vehicle, after
it has been defitted as
likely being so full of holes it will look like “swiss cheese”. The
vehicle may then either required
further repair (the cost of which may give rise
to damages under s 259(4) of the ACL) or, otherwise, damages under
s 259(4) of the
ACL for loss of value to the vehicle (i.e. the difference
in the value of the vehicle after the defitting works in comparison to
equivalent 2019 Volkswagen Crafter van with similar kilometres travelled). That
may require amendment to the application; and
it may require further
(4) There is a dispute between the parties as to whether the supplier is
suitably licensed to perform any repairs to the vehicle
after it has been
defitted. We cannot determine that issue in this appeal.
(5) There are aspects to the consumer’s claim that require further legal
argument and consideration. For example, the consumer
argues that she should be
awarded damages for defitting the vehicle in the amount of $15,000. However, it
is difficult to comprehend
how the consumer can obtain a refund under
s 263(4) of the ACL and additionally be awarded damages for the cost of
defitting the
vehicle herself.
(6) There is a potential monetary jurisdiction issue. The monetary
of proceedings
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) and reg 13A of the
Fair Trading
Regulation 2019
(NSW)). To this point in time, the consumer has consented to the
issue of any damages arising from the condition of the vehicle is considered is
uncertain, and leads to the possibility
that there may be an application to
transfer proceedings to a court under cl 6 of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act.
(7) The consumer’s claim for damages in respect of the cost of hiring
another campervan/motorhome when her vehicle is being
defitted has not been
determined.
is appropriate that the matter be remitted to the Tribunal for reconsideration
under s 81(1)(e) of the NCAT Act. However, there
is one issue does not
require reconsideration. The Tribunal found the goods were not fit for purpose
in breach of the consumer guarantee
under s 55 of the ACL. The supplier did
not appeal the decision, and those findings should accordingly remain
undisturbed.
The issue of fresh evidence in the appeal
is a further issue in respect of an application by the consumer to obtain leave
to rely upon documents that were not in evidence
before the Tribunal below.
Those documents can be briefly described as follows:
(1) A report from vehicle inspectors from NSW Fair Trading dated 4 December 2023
referring to defects in the vehicle and whether
the respondent is suitably
(2) A bundle of documents referred to as “Bundle 1”. Such documents
included correspondence between the consumer and
Jacanda Motorhomes regarding
the cost of de-fitting the vehicle back to its condition prior to the
modification works of the supplier.
(3) An affidavit affirmed by the consumer on 14 March 2024 dealing with her
(minimal) use of the vehicle since September 2022.
appeal succeeds without reference to the documents not in evidence before the
Tribunal. Consequently, it is unnecessary for us
to determine whether leave to
rely on any or all of these documents in this appeal should be granted.
we are satisfied the appeal should succeed and the matter be remitted back to
the Tribunal for redetermination according to law,
we see no reason why the
consumer should not be permitted to rely on the documents referred to above at
[73] in the remitted proceedings.
Those documents have been served, and any
further evidence the supplier seeks to rely upon in response to those documents
is a matter
for consideration at a directions hearing in the remitted
proceedings before the Tribunal, which is an interlocutory step that will
prior to the hearing of the remitted proceedings.
make the following orders:
(1) The appeal is allowed.
(2) The orders of the Tribunal made on 8 January 2024 are set aside.
(3) The proceedings are remitted to the Tribunal to be reconsidered according to
law, other than the finding of the Tribunal that
the respondent has breached the
consumer guarantee under s 55 of the Australian Consumer Law (NSW) which
remains undisturbed.
(4) In the remitted proceedings, the appellant is granted leave to rely upon the
report of NSW Fair Trading dated 4 December 2023;
the affidavit of the appellant
affirmed on 14 March 2024; and the documents referred to as “Bundle
1” in the decision
of the Tribunal made on 8 January 2024.
(5) What further or other evidence can be relied upon by the parties in the
remitted proceedings is to be considered by the Tribunal
at an interlocutory
directions hearing.
(6) The costs of the appeal proceedings are to be determined as follows:
(a) The appellant is to file with the Appeal Panel and serve on the respondent
all costs submissions and documents (no more than
5 pages) by 14 days from the
date of this decision.
(b) The respondent is to file with the Appeal Panel and serve on the appellant
all costs submissions and documents (no more than
5 pages) by 28 days from the
date of this decision.
(c) The appellant is to file with the Appeal Panel and serve on the respondent
all costs submissions in reply (no more than 3 pages)
by 35 days from the date
of this decision.
(d) The costs submissions of the parties are to include whether or not a hearing
on the issue of costs can be dispensed with and
if not, why not.
(e) Subject to consideration of the costs submissions of the parties, the Appeal
Panel may determine the issue of costs on the papers
and without a hearing under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(f) If a party seeks an extension of time to comply with directions regarding
the disposition of the issue of costs, an application
should be made in writing
to the Appeal Panel by no later than the day prior to the date of the relevant
timetable obligation.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (352 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter