URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/275.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Archibald v Agustin [2025] NSWCATAP 275; (30 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Archibald v Agustin
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 275
Hearing Date(s):
26 August 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Appeal Panel
P Durack SC, Senior Member
N Kennedy, Senior Member
(1) The appeal is upheld.
(2) The orders of the Tribunal made
on 1 May 2025 are set aside.
(3) The proceedings are remitted to
the Tribunal to be reconsidered according to law.
Catchwords:
LANDLORD and TENANT- residential tenancy- no grounds termination of
periodic tenancy – retaliation as a basis for refusal for
termination order under s 115(1)(b) rather than as a separate
APPEALS — Error on a question of law —
Procedural fairness — Retaliatory eviction — Issue raised by Tenant
at hearing but Tribunal misunderstood that it did not need to be the subject of
a separate claim – lost opportunity to have
defence heard and
determined— Whether denial of procedural fairness
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
Cases Cited:
Chatterjee v Pandya
[2024] NSWCATAP 85
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP
Cominos v Di Rico
[2016] NSWCATAP 5
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs; ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR 1
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Ronald Archibald (Appellant)
Cherry Agustin (Respondent)
Representation:
Appellant (self represented)
K McMahon (Agent) (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00181654
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Not Applicable
Date of Decision:
K Grafenauer, General Member
File Number(s):
2025/00080721
REASONS FOR DECISION
this residential tenancy matter, the appellant (the Tenant) appeals from orders
made by the Tribunal on 1 May 2025 terminating
his residential tenancy agreement
with the respondent (the Landlord). The agreement relates to a unit in Corrimal,
south of Sydney.
The Tenant has occupied the unit for some 11 years.
orders were made under the no grounds for termination provision in the
Residential Tenancies Act
(NSW) (RTA) which then was in operation,
At the time when the orders were made, it was uncontroversial that
a residential tenancy agreement existed between the parties, the
agreement was a
periodic tenancy agreement and a 90 day no grounds termination notice had been
given by the Landlord to the Tenant.
were 5 orders made by the Tribunal on 1 May 2025 in respect of which oral
reasons were given. Those orders encompassed an order
terminating the tenancy
immediately, an order for vacant possession to be given on the date of
termination, suspension of the order
for possession until 1 June 2025 and an
order that the Tenant pay the Landlord a daily occupation fee at the rate of
$48.57 per day,
from the day after the date of termination until the date vacant
possession was given.
Tenant lodged his appeal within the 14 day time requirement, pursuant to rule
25(4)(b) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules
(NCAT Rules) on 12 May 2025. On 1 June 2025 and Appeal Panel granted a stay of
the relevant orders for termination and possession
until further order of the
Tribunal or finalisation of the appeal, whichever is the earlier in time. The
stay was conditional upon
the Tenant paying any arrears of rent or occupation
fee, as at 28 May 2025, and continuing to pay the occupation fee on a
fortnightly
basis from 1 June 2025.
the reasons set out below, we have decided that the appeal should be allowed,
the orders made be set aside and the matter be remitted
to the Tribunal for
reconsideration.
Background and Tribunal’s decision
termination notice was dated 6 November 2024. It identified that it was a no
grounds termination notice of a periodic agreement
pursuant to s 85 of the RTA
and it provided for vacant possession to be given on 5 February 2025, being a
date not earlier than 90
days after this date of service of the notice.
Relevantly,
s 85 of the RTA then provided:
85 Termination of periodic
agreement—no grounds required to be given
(1) A landlord may, at any time, give a termination notice for a periodic
(2) The termination notice must specify a termination date that is not
earlier than 90 days after the day on which the notice is given.
(3) The Tribunal must, on application by a landlord, make a termination order
if it is satisfied that a termination notice was given
in accordance with this
section and the tenant has not vacated the premises as required by the
reasons which are not clear, the hearing of the termination application did not
come on for a first hearing until 1 May 2025
is common ground that at the hearing of the primary proceedings, the Tenant
attempted to challenge the Notice of Termination on
the grounds that it was
retaliatory, pursuant to s 115 of the RTA at the hearing.
115 of the RTA provides:
115 Retaliatory evictions
(1) The Tribunal may, on application by a tenant or when considering an
application for a termination order or in relation to a termination
(a) declare that a termination notice has no effect, or
(b) refuse to make a termination order,
if it is satisfied that a termination notice given or application made by the
landlord was a retaliatory notice or a retaliatory application.
(2) The Tribunal may find that a termination notice is a retaliatory notice
or that an application is a retaliatory application if
it is satisfied that the
landlord was wholly or partly motivated to give the notice or make the
application for any of the following
(a) the tenant had applied or proposed to apply to the Tribunal for an
(b) the tenant had taken or proposed to take any other action to enforce a
right of the tenant under the residential tenancy agreement,
this Act or any
(c) an order of the Tribunal was in force in relation to the landlord and
(3) A tenant may make an application to the Tribunal for a declaration under
this section before the termination date and within the
period prescribed by the
regulations after the termination notice is given to the tenant.
expanded upon below, there is no dispute between the parties that the Tribunal
found that the Tenant could not raise s 115 of the
RTA as a defence, in the
Landlord’s application for termination pursuant to s 85 of the RTA. The
parties agree that the Tribunal
indicated to the Tenant they needed to make a
separate application claiming the Notice of Termination was retaliatory.
declined to consider the tenant’s retaliatory defence against the
landlord’s Notice of Termination, the Tribunal
went on to consider the
termination claim.
the then prevailing s 85 of the RTA, the Tribunal then made an order for
termination once satisfied that the termination notice
had been given in
accordance with this section and the tenant had not vacated the premises as
required by the notice.
s 83 of the RTA, if the Tribunal made an order terminating a residential tenancy
agreement, it was obliged to make an order
for possession of the residential
premises specifying the day on which the order took effect. Pursuant to s 114 of
the RTA, the Tribunal
then made an order to suspend the operation of an order
for possession for a specified period, on the basis that it was satisfied
“desirable to do so, having regard to the relative hardship likely to be
caused to the landlord and tenant by the suspension.”
nature of the appeal right
s 80 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW) (NCAT
Act), a party may appeal, as a right, to the Appeal Panel in an internal appeal
on any question of law. In respect of
any other grounds, in the case of an
appeal from the Consumer and Commercial Division of the Tribunal, the appellant
must satisfy
the Appeal Panel that leave to appeal should be granted under cl 12
sch 4 of the NCAT Act on the basis that:
.....the appellant may have
suffered a substantial miscarriage of justice because:
(a) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was not fair and
equitable, or
(b) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was against the
weight of evidence, or
(c) significant new evidence has arisen (being evidence that was
not reasonably available at the time the proceedings under appeal
dealt with)
if these conditions for the grant of leave are satisfied, the Tribunal has a
discretion concerning the grant of leave which it
will ordinarily only exercise
in the circumstances described in
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
(2)], namely.
Ordinarily it is appropriate to grant leave to
appeal only in matters that involve:
1 issues of principle;
2 questions of public importance or matters of administration or policy which
might have general application; or
3 an injustice which is reasonably clear, in the sense of going beyond merely
what is arguable, or an error that is plain and readily
apparent which is
central to the Tribunal's decision and not merely peripheral, so that it would
be unjust to allow the finding to
4 a factual error that was unreasonably arrived at and clearly mistaken;
the Tribunal having gone about the fact- finding process in such an
unorthodox manner or in such a way that it was likely to produce
result so that it would be in the interests of justice for it to be
The grounds of appeal and supporting material
the Notice of Appeal, the short summary of the grounds of appeal contained the
1. procedural error: our statement was never asked to
present or read out in the hearing (sic).
2. legal error: the order abiding by the pending change law which no ground
eviction is allowed was made against the fact, the fact
is that the termination
notice was of retaliatory action.
3. humanitarian error: the pending ditched law has the error which might help
landlord and their agents punish their tenants. However,
the Tribunal still
exercised the pending abandon law to vacate tenants to streets in circumstances
of housing crisis, that is inhumane
and unacceptable (sic).
have considered whether there is a question of law that has in fact been raised
Cominos v Di Rico
[2016] NSWCATAP 5
). We consider that
the only question of law raised by the Tenant was whether the appellant was
afforded procedural fairness in respect
of the issue whether the Notice of
Termination was retaliatory.
addition to raising what the Tenant considered to be errors of law, the Tenant
also sought leave to appeal on the basis that the
decision was not fair and
equitable, it was against the weight of evidence and there was significant new
evidence now available that
was not reasonably available at the time of the
far as the new evidence was concerned, the Tenant relied upon a statement by
himself and his wife (a fellow occupant), along with
some supporting documents.
The statement was concerned with two matters. First, an allegation that the
termination was a retaliatory
action, as a consequence of the stance the Tenant
had taken in October 2024 about a rusty stove. The second matter concerned the
Tenant’s inability to find alternative rental premises and an allegation
that the Landlord’s agent had been unhelpful
and hostile in relation to
these attempts.
directions for the conduct of the appeal made on 21 May 2025, the parties
provided various documents in support of their
positions on the appeal. This
included a formal Reply to Appeal lodged by the Landlord on 18 June 2025, in
which the Landlord listed
a short reply to the grounds of appeal as
“1. the tenant case was heard as the member ruled
that the tenant were terminated and were given a longer period to vacate.
2. the termination was dated november 2024. there was no retaliation on
owners behalf the owner concern is to make unit the safe and
3. MMJ north have offered a rental unit in their price range that was
rejected, MMJ wollongong approved application for a property
declined, all rental references were filled out fair and
truthfully.”
Tenant’s additional documents in support of his appeal consisted of
documents lodged on 25 June 2025 headed “Statements
(rectified 2)”,
an informal transcript of parts of the hearing on 1 May 2025 and various
supporting documents. The Tenant also
lodged on 5 August 2025 a reply to the
Landlord’s submission.
Landlord relied upon a bundle of documents consisting of 49 pages lodged on 17
July 2025. A substantial part of this material
was new evidentiary material, not
presented to the Tribunal in the primary proceedings.
of this material, other than the transcript, could be relevant on the appeal,
except in the event that we decided that there
was appealable error and that we
should conduct a new hearing on the merits.
have read all of the written materials presented by the parties.
the hearing of the appeal, we received oral submissions from each of the
Grounds of appeal-consideration
Retaliatory termination defence-procedural fairness
the appeal hearing, the parties both agreed that the Tribunal had declined to
hear the retaliatory claim raised by the Tenant.
The parts of an informal
transcript provided by the Tenant were also not disputed by the Landlord.
transcript demonstrates that the Tenant sought to present to the Tribunal a
statement about a contention that the termination
was retaliatory. At
approximately 10m:17s the transcript shows, the following exchange between the
Tenant (Ronald) and the Tribunal:
“Ronald: because I believe
it’s retaliatory, they have...
Representative for Ronald: can you read this (point to the statement)?
Sitting member: no. it’s nothing about... If you have a claim for
retaliatory notice, you need to make an application about
Ronald: Okay, yeah. So... we can do that.”
Tribunal then continued to indicate that a retaliatory claim would need to be
brought in a separate claim by the tenant (see at
approximately 12m:40s of the
transcript). It is further noted by the Tribunal that the retaliatory
application had not been made
by the tenant (see at approximately 14m:49s of the
transcript).
Tenant’s representative then stated that the NCAT website does not
indicate that the Tenant is required to make a separate
application if they
claim the notice of termination is retaliatory (see at approximately 14m:49s of
the transcript).
Tribunal went on to explain that the Tenant had not made an application in
relation to the retaliatory claim, and the only application
before the Tribunal
was the Landlord’s termination application.
the parties were unable to come to an agreement, the Tribunal gave its decision
with reasons (see at approximately 45m:58s of
the transcript). The reasons do
not address the retaliatory claim the tenant had attempted to raise at the
sequence of events is not disputed by the Landlord.
issue whether s115 of the RTA can be used as a defence to an application by a
landlord was settled in
Chatterjee v Pandya
[2024] NSWCATAP 85
) at [65], where the Appeal Panel said:
satisfied that, as a matter of statutory construction, s 115 of the RT Act can
be raised as a response to an application by
a landlord to terminate a tenancy
irrespective whether or not the tenant filed proceedings in the Tribunal under s
115(3) of the
Appeal Panel went on to further expand on the practical application of s115 of
at [72] – [74], where it said:
An example of a situation where a tenant makes an application under s 115(3) is
when a tenant has received a “no grounds”
Notice to Terminate under
s 85 of the RT Act. Such a notice gives the tenant 90 days to vacate the
premises. The tenant can bring
an application in the Tribunal under s 115(3) to
have that Notice declared as having no effect because it is retaliatory, before
the landlord makes an application to the Tribunal for an order to terminate the
residential tenancy.
73 However, the right of the tenant to do so does not mean the tenant loses
the right to raise the issue of the landlord’s termination
application
being retaliatory at (or before) the hearing of the landlord’s application
for a termination order. Section 115(1)(b)
means that the tenant can raise in
defence to the landlord’s application for a termination order that the
actions in seeking a termination order are retaliatory under s
115(2), and such an issue is a matter for consideration by the Tribunal
hearing of the landlord’s termination application in the Tribunal.
74 In summary:
(1) Section 115(3) is not the exclusive manner in which s 115(1) and (2) may
be considered by the Tribunal.
(2) A tenant may raise the issue of the eviction being retaliatory as a
defence to the landlord’s application, at or before
the hearing of the
landlord’s application to terminate the tenancy in the Tribunal.
(3) The time limit set out in cl 39 of the RT Regulation only applies to an
application filed by the tenant in the Tribunal under
s 115(3), and not to the
tenant otherwise raising the issue as a defence to the landlord’s
application for a termination order.
(4) When considering whether a landlord’s termination application is
retaliatory, the principles in
Appeal Panel also went on to consider whether any time limits apply to the
tenant raising a s115(1)(b) of the RTA defence in the
proceedings and found that no time limit applied to the tenant, as the
proceedings were the landlord’s application
, the Appeal Panel went on to conclude that the tenant had not
been afforded procedural fairness with the consequence that an error
question of law had been established. This was in circumstances where the tenant
had in substance raised as a defence that the
termination sought was retaliatory
(albeit the tenant had not used the word “retaliatory): see at [85]-[99].
doing so, the Appeal Panel applied the well-established principle that the
Tribunal must observe the rules of procedural fairness.
this connection, the Appeal Panel in
had regard to the
well-known judgement of Gleeson CJ in
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR 1
and the statement that in this field “the concern of the law is to
avoid practical injustice” (at [37]). As to this,
[90] the Appeal Panel referred to extracts from the decision in
addressed the question whether a lost opportunity was of any significance. The
Appeal Panel stated:
[90] The principle expressed in
been considered and followed on many occasions. In
Christian Community
Ministries Ltd v Minister for Education and Early Learning
[2023] NSWSC 272
Basten AJ again referred to the
principle as follows at
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Affairs; Ex parte Lam
[13] was a case in which the applicant said that
procedural fairness arose from the failure of a departmental officer to contact
particular witness, having agreed to do so. Gleeson CJ stated:
‘22 The applicant was unable to point to any additional information, or
any argument, that might have been put before the respondent
if there had been
applicant had been told that there
would be no such contact. There is nothing to
justify a view that, considered objectively, proper decision-making required
[74] In short, the lost opportunity was not shown to have caused any
detriment to the applicant. Gleeson CJ continued:
‘37 A common form of detriment suffered where a decision-maker has
failed to take a procedural step is loss of an opportunity
representations. ... A particular example of such detriment is a case where the
statement of intention has been relied upon
and, acting on the faith of it, a
person has refrained from putting material before a decision-maker. In a case of
that particular
kind, it is the existence of a subjective expectation, and
reliance, that results in unfairness. Fairness is not an abstract concept.
essentially practical. Whether one talks in terms of procedural fairness or
natural justice, the concern of the law is to avoid
injustice.’”
to practical injustice, the Tenant clearly raised the question of a retaliatory
notice of termination and s 115 of the RTA with
the Tribunal at the hearing.
This is not in dispute. The Tenant also provided some basis for the raising of
the retaliatory grounds,
in that the Tenant had sought repairs and the Landlord
had refused the repairs, making the claim the repairs sought were damage caused
by the Tenant. The Tenant indicated he took a number of steps toward enforcing
the repairs sought, including notifying the Landlord’s
agent and following
up on the warranty with the supplier. Within a few weeks of this dispute arising
(dispute commenced on 16 October
2024 according to the Tenant statement), the
Landlord issued the notice of termination on no grounds (dated 6 November 2024).
the Tribunal recognised that a defence of retaliation could be pursued without
a separate claim and considered the Tenant’s
statement, it ought to have
been apparent to it that the Tenant had an arguable defence under s 115(1)(b)
given the close proximity
to a dispute about repairs, (where the Tenant has
indicated his stance about repairs, and taken some steps, towards enforcing his
rights) to the service of the notice of termination on no grounds..
consider, therefore, that Tribunals refusal to consider the s 115 retaliatory
allegation as a defence to the Landlord’s claim
has resulted in a lost
opportunity for the Tenant to present legal arguments and evidence, that may
have resulted in a different
outcome. In these circumstances, the Tenant has
been denied procedural fairness.
an error on a question of law has been established.
is unnecessary to consider the remaining grounds of appeal.
proceedings must be remitted to the Tribunal in order for a decision to be made
in the light of the
Tenant’s defence under s 115(1)(b) that the Tribunal should refuse to make
a termination order because
the termination notice was retaliatory notice.
Unlike the short and straightforward situation in
the Appeal Panel proceeded to determine the merits of the defence), in this case
there is a real dispute about material
facts which may also require findings
will need to be made by the Tribunal for the provision by the Tenant and the
Landlord of evidence and submissions in respect
of this defence. Given the
nature of the error made by the Tribunal, we see no need for the reconsideration
to occur before a Tribunal
differently constituted, although we recognise that
this may occur because of questions of availability and
convenience.
the above reasons, we order as follows:
(1) The appeal is upheld.
(2) The orders of the Tribunal made on 1 May 2025 are set aside.
(3) The proceedings are remitted to the Tribunal to be reconsidered according to
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (286 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter