URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWOPT/2012/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v FORD [2012] NSWOPT 1 (6 February 2012)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL
LAW (NSW) No 86a
OPTOMETRY TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 167
DAVID JOHN FORD
MATTER NUMBER: OP01/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
OPT0001143784
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION
ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v FORD [2012] NSWOPT 1
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr C P O’Donnell of Counsel instructed by Ms Monica
Richmond, Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
(Respondent) represented by Mr S Barnes of Counsel
instructed by Ms Alison Biscoe, Solicitor, Avant Law Pty Ltd.
FILE NUMBER: OP01/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Isabelle Jalbert (Optometrist
Mr Gavin Bigland (Optometrist Member)
Christopher Gardiner (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 8, 9 and 10 November 2011
DATE OF DECISION: 6 February 2012
FINDINGS (in summary): Professional misconduct – Respondent
reprimanded, suspension imposed, conditions requiring ethics course
counselling ordered. Respondent to pay costs of HCCC.
CATCHWORDS: Optometrist – unsatisfactory professional conduct
– professional misconduct – boundary violations –
relationship – sexual relationship – complaint by female
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law – NSW) – ss139B, 139E, 167;
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Optometrists Act 2002
CASES CITED:
[1938] HCA 34
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
41 NSWLR 630
Richter v Walton
(15 July 1993 – unreported).
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Optometry Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional Councils
Authority (HPCA) Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney
on 8 and 9 November 2011 to
conduct an Inquiry with respect to a complaint (Complaint) made in accordance
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No
(National Law - NSW) by Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health
Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated 15 June 2011
in relation to a
registered optometrist, David Ford (the Respondent).
Complaint alleges the Respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct related to inappropriate
conduct, the
development of a personal and sexual relationship with a female patient. The
Respondent admitted to certain conduct
prior to the Inquiry.
The Complaint
Amended Complaint alleges that the Respondent, being an optometrist under the
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 139B of the National Law in that he has:
(i) demonstrated that the judgment possessed by him in the practice of optometry
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience;
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
or about 19 March 2009, during a treatment session at the Eyecare Plus Clinic in
Grafton (“the clinic”), the practitioner
engaged in inappropriate
physical and/or sexual conduct with Patient A by doing the
(a) holding
Patient A’s hand; and
(b) kissing
Patient A on the lips.
or about 3 April 2009, during a treatment session at the clinic, the
practitioner engaged in inappropriate physical and/or sexual
conduct with
Patient A by doing the following:
(a) kissing
(b) undressing
in the presence of Patient A;
(c) engaging in
sexual contact with Patient A; and/or
(d) engaging in
sexual intercourse with Patient A.
or about 23 February 2010, during a treatment session at the clinic, the
practitioner engaged in inappropriate physical and/or
sexual conduct with
Patient A by doing the following:
(a) kissing
(b) engaging in
sexual contact with Patient A; and/or
(c) engaging in
sexual intercourse with Patient A.
or about March 2009 until or about March 2010, the practitioner engaged in an
inappropriate personal relationship with Patient
(a) frequent
telephone contact between the practitioner and Patient A for non-therapeutic
purposes; and
clinic premises on more than one occasion,
and thereby
breached Rule 7 of the Optometrists Registration Board NSW Code of Professional
the investigation of a complaint against him by the Health Care Complaints
Commission (“the Commission”) the practitioner
supplied the
Commission with false and/or misleading information in relation to his
relationship with Patient A by stating in his
response to the Commission signed
and dated 15 October 2010 that:
I had a sexual relationship with
[Patient A] on and off between 19 March 2009 and December 2009. Our meetings
occurred at my place
of residence, [Patient A’s] place of residence or a
hotel (when she was on holidays).
and thereby breached
Health Care Complaints Act
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section 139E
of the National Law (NSW) in that he has:
(i) engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration; and/or
(ii) has engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct that, when the instances are considered together,
amount to conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint 1.
The Law – preliminary matters
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
essentially the civil standard, because of
the seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
that the particulars of the Complaint have been established.
This qualifies the civil standard that is applied by the
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) at 362–363 said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not be
produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences ...
This does not mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal
inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in a civil
issue may, not must, be
based on a preponderance of probability. It means that the nature of the issue
necessarily affects the process
by which reasonable satisfaction is
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
Appearances
per headnotes.
Suppression Orders
Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation to the name of
Patient A in accordance with Schedule 5D Clause
7 of the Act as indicated in the
schedule annexed hereto and marked ‘D’. Any information beyond that
contained in this
Reasons document which may identify her is also not to be
published. Annexure D will only be attached to the original Reasons for
held by the Registry and must not be reproduced.
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in Annexure
‘A’ hereto. The documents relied upon by the
HCCC became exhibits 1
– 28. The documents relied upon by the Respondent became R1 and R10.
following people gave evidence before the Tribunal: Patient A, Mr Christopher
Henderson (Peer Reviewer) and the Respondent.
information
Background of the Respondent
Respondent was born in 1972. He completed a Bachelor of Applied Science in
Optometry at Queensland University of Technology (QUT)
in 2001, holds a Trade of
Mechanical Opticians (2005) and completed a Certificate in Ocular Therapeutics
at QUT in 2010. He was first
registered on 18 December 2000. The
Respondent’s CV indicates that he has worked continuously as an
optometrist from that time
until the time of the Inquiry. The Confirmation of
Registration status dated 7 November 2011 provided to the Tribunal indicates his
registration was current until 30 November 2011. It also noted that there had
been a condition placed on his Registration on 10 November
2010 that the
Respondent was to ensure he had an adult chaperone present at all times when he
was conducting an eye examination on
a female patient. The Respondent is married
with three children.
Background of the Complaint
Complaint arose from a notification received by the HCCC from Patient A. Patient
A later withdrew her complaint but, as provided
for in the legislation, the HCCC
proceeded with the investigation.
Evidence before the Tribunal
Tribunal had the benefit of a large amount of documentary evidence as well as
the attendance of a number of witnesses.
Evidence of Patient A
A made a complaint to the HCCC by way of the ‘Online Complaint’
system on 22 June 2010 (part exhibit 3).
3 includes a statement made by Patient A to the HCCC. Patient A gave the
following account of her treatment and relationship
with the Respondent
(paragraphs 6 – 43):
12 March 2009 I arrived at the Clinic at about 8.30am, spoke with a staff
member, who I do not recall and then waited for the optometrist.
A few minutes
later optometrist David Ford came into the area at the front of the Clinic where
I was waiting and escorted me into
the treatment room. This is the first time I
had ever seen or met David and been in this Clinic treatment
sat in the treatment chair and David conducted what I understood to be a usual
eye examination. I cannot recall all the details
of the examination but I
recall that he put a large machine in front of my face and he asked me if the
red light and green light
were clear.
said actually they are both blurry David then said words to the effect of,
“you aren’t fogging up the lenses are you?”
I smiled and
giggled. He then moved the large machine in front of me and came and stood on
my right side and held my right hand
with his left hand. Whilst he continued to
hold my hand he used his other hand to change the lenses in some glasses. He
on my face and then took them off again.
I could see his hands were shaking whilst he was putting the lenses in the
glasses I said words to the effect of, “you are
shaking”. He
replied with words to the effect of, “it is hard to do this one
handed.” Despite the difficulty
David did not let go of my
David had finished testing my eyes with the different glasses he walked across
the room to his computer and appeared to make
some notes. He then walked back
and stood on the left side of me whilst I was still sitting in the chair. David
then said words
to the effect of, “I have got one more thing to do.”
I replied “What’s that?” He then leaned in and
kissed me on
the lips. We continued kissing for about 20 minutes. During the time I was
kissing David he leaned across me and put
his hands around my back and on my
arms but he did not touch me any on my breasts or genitals.
David and I were kissing my mobile telephone rang. I have programmed my
telephone so that it a particular ring sounds when
one of my immediate family
members call and my phone was making this sound. As I realised it was a family
member I stopped kissing
David, got up, got my phone out of my bag and answered
it. It was my daughter on the phone and she asked me to come and pick her
then stood and continued kissing David for about 5 minutes before I left the
treatment room. I was in the treatment room with David
for 45 minutes but the
eye test only lasted for about 15 minutes.
I walked into the public area of the Clinic I spoke with a staff member who I do
not recall and I signed a Medicare form. I
then left the Clinic to go and pick
up my daughter.
an hour after I left the Clinic I returned with my daughter to choose some
frames. I recall that David came out of one of the
treatment rooms whilst I was
there and came over and said hello. He then proceeded to assist me in deciding
which frames would be
best for me. I took about three pairs of frames home with
me to help me decide which frames to buy. I do not recall if I spoke
or another staff member about taking the frames home.
16 March 2009 I returned to the Clinic with the frames at about 12.30pm. It was
during my work lunch break. I recall that
I spoke to a staff member by the name
of Jenny who was working in the public area of the Clinic. I told Jenny that I
to speak with David about my eyes. A couple of minutes later David
came out of a treatment room and he escorted me back into that
and I stood in the treatment room kissing and talking. We talked about the fact
that we would both like to see each other again.
He may have told me that he
would call me and he had my mobile number in my Clinical records. I left the
treatment after about
10 minutes. Before I left the Clinic I bought some frames
and left them for the lenses to be fitted.
a week later, around the end of March 2009, I returned to the Clinic to see how
long it would take before my glasses would be
ready and with the intention of
saying hello to David. I spoke to a staff member who I did not recall and then
David came out of
one of the treatment rooms. He escorted me into the treatment
room and we talked and kissed. We had much the same conversation
as I had with
him the previous time I visited him at the Clinic. I think that he gave me his
mobile number this time but it could
have been during one of the previous
this visit I was in the treatment room for about 30 minutes. We stood whilst we
kissed. Although we stayed clothed we moved
each other’s clothes around
and David touched my breasts. We also touched each other’s genitals over
our clothes and
I felt that David’s penis was erect. We did not have
sexual intercourse during this visit.
picked up my glasses from the Clinic at some point in the following two weeks
but I do not recall exactly when. As the glasses
were multi-focal I was having
trouble getting my eyes to adjust to them. Everything appeared blurry when I
was looking through the
glasses and so I thought that I would see if something
could be done to help me. I sent David a text about the problems I was having
and he returned my text advising that I should call the Clinic and make an
appointment. I then rang the Clinic and made an
appointment.
early April 2009, around lunch time, I attended an appointment at the Clinic.
When I arrived at the Clinic I may have spoken
with a staff member and then
David escorted me into the treatment room. When I got inside the room David and
I started kissing and
he said words to the effect of, “I made your
appointment 30 minutes long.” We then had sexual intercourse on the floor
of the treatment room. I recall that we both undressed fully and as far as I
could tell David’s penis was circumcised. I
do not recall anything else
unusual about his body or genitals.
we finished having sexual intercourse we both got dressed and David gave me a
very quick eye examination which took about 5
minutes. I left the Clinic about
30 minutes after I arrived.
continued to see David at the Clinic for my eyes and we continued to have sexual
intercourse at the Clinic. I recall that I asked
David if I should see another
optometrist during this period and he said that I was his
July 2009, on a Wednesday, I met David at The Cove Apartments in Yamba. When we
were at The Cove we had an argument about something.
I do not recall what it
was but when he left he was still unhappy. David and I stayed in contact via
text, email and phone calls
between July 2009 and December 2009 but we did not
have sexual intercourse. I did not recall attending to the Clinic for my eyes
during this time.
31 December 2009 I sent David a text message to his personal mobile telephone in
whilst I was at work to wish him a Happy New Year.
He sent me a text message
back asking to see me. We arranged for him to pick me up at
me up in the black Holden Commodore that he normally
drives but he was in a
brown / tan four wheel drive. He drove me to his house in Butter Factory Lane,
Great Marlow and into the
garage. We entered his house through the garage.
David took me into his bedroom and we had sexual intercourse. About 30 minutes
later we left his house and David drove me back to my
recall that his house was unusual as the ensuite off the main bedroom had a
separate toilet.
am not sure when but I recall that David told me that he had a wife and three
children. I also remember seeing a box that said
Pandora on it on the dining
table in his home when I was there on 31 December 2009. The box had a gold
bracelet in it. David told
me he bought this for his wife for Christmas. David
told me that his youngest son’s name is
and he was about
two or three years old. He also told me he has a son called
who is the middle child and his oldest child is a girl but I do not know her
name. I do not recall the ages of the two oldest children
but they are in
primary school.
January 2010 I kept in contact with David via text message, telephone calls and
emails but I did not see him very much as it
was school holidays and we both
were busy with family commitments.
February 2010 I started to have headaches and needed to have an eye examination
so I returned to see David at the Clinic. I do
not recall what time my
appointment was or the exact date in February 2010 but I went into the Clinic
and was escorted by David into
the treatment room. The first thing that
occurred was that we had sexual intercourse.
stopped touching and kissing me so he could
test my eyes. David put glasses on
my face and changed the lenses a couple of times whilst asking me if the lenses
were better,
which they were. This took about 5 minutes and then he said he
would book me in for another examination in 3 months. Then said
30min examination in 5minutes”.
February and March 2010 David came to my house on a couple of occasions during
the day and we had sexual intercourse. This
would happen on Mondays as I did
not work on Mondays, David also had every 2
Monday off. Sometimes
we would try to meet in other locations.
22 March 2010 David came to my house during the day, we had sexual intercourse
and I told him that I had feelings for him. He
left shortly after
Wednesday 24 March 2010 I sent David a text message and he wrote back a message
which said, “Big problems at home Please
don’t contact me.” I
waited till Friday and text him back and he said words to the effect of,
“My wife knows.
Someone told her my car was in your street.” After
that we sent a few messages to each other and spoke a couple of times
not see each other.
May 2010 I booked an appointment at the Clinic to see David for an eye test. I
then went to the Clinic to change the date and
asked to speak with David. I
went into the treatment room and spoke with David. I said that I didn’t
think I should see him
as an optometrist. That I should go somewhere else.
David replied with words to the effect of, “...I am a good optometrist,
why would you want to go somewhere else?” I then asked David for a
prescription for my eyes which he was going to give me
however my daughter was
waiting for me so I told him never mind and I would think about what I should
do. I made an appointment
later that day for the following
following week, in May 2010, I went to the Clinic for my eye test appointment.
Another optometrist at the Clinic, Jenny Stephens,
came out of the treatment
room and escorted me in. I said words to the effect of, “I thought I was
seeing David.” After
a discussion with her and another lady who works
there she went to check her appointment schedule. She replied with words to the
effect of, “There is a note against your name that says that you are no
longer to attend appointments with David.”
this point I felt embarrassed and humiliated and I was in tears tried not to
show it and Jenny did not say anything, she just got
on with the eye test.
Jenny mentioned the information in my notes and I told her, “It is all
fake.” I said this because
David had not been giving me proper eye tests
as he had been too busy having sexual intercourse with my during my eye
appointments.
The only proper examination I received was when I first saw him.
Jenny then gave me an eye test which required putting drops in
my eyes that I
had never had before.
few weeks later, about June 2010 I contacted Jenny Stephens via her Facebook
page and told her what had been going on between David
and myself as I was
concerned that I was not the only patient he had a sexual relationship with. I
then obtained her proper email
address from Michael Jacobs and emailed her again
asking if she received my other message. A couple of weeks later Jenny sent me
a message back which stated that she would take the issue up with the partners
of the business, asked her to let me know what decisions
they came to. I have
never heard back from Jenny. I no longer have the Facebook message or the
emails sent between Jenny and myself
so I cannot produce them as
June or July 2010, I tried to call David but discovered the telephone number was
no longer connected.
cannot recall exactly when but about June or July 2010 I deleted the emails that
David and I sent to each other so I cannot produce
them as evidence in this
matter. I deleted the emails because I was upset about what occurred between
David and myself.
the 17 June 2010 I sent a letter to Michael Jacobs from the Head Office of
Eyecare Plus about the relationship that had occurred
between David and I. The
next day I got a reply from Mr Jacobs to my letter. Stating that this was a
serious matter and he provided
26 August 2010 and 30 August 2020 I exchanged emails with David about the
complaint I made to the Health Care Complaints Commission
Commission’). A copy of these are annexed here in to marked
emails occurred because David received notification of the fact that a complaint
had been made to the Commission and contacted
me. In the emails David told me
that he had drafted a letter that he wanted to send my husband, telling him of
our personal involvement.
I asked David not to send the letter as I was afraid
it would make the situation worse.
the 27 and 30 August 2010 I sent two emails to the Commission’s
Investigating Officer, Karen Ford withdrawing my complaint.
I then forwarded a
copy of the emails to David showing him that I had withdrawn the complaint. I
thought this would discourage
him from sending the letter to my husband. David
emailed me confirming that he would not be sending the letter to my husband.
did send me a copy via email, at my request, however when it came it could
not be opened, there was a sign that said the file was
exchange of emails in August 2010 between Patient A and the Respondent is
included in exhibit 3.
making an initial enquiry as to how she could make a complaint regarding
‘one of your optometrists’
by email dated 17 June 2010,
Patient A sent an email to Mr Michael Jacobs (see below) on 18 June 2010
detailing her complaint regarding
the Respondent. This email commenced with the
I wish to put in a complaint in regards to david ford. The man is a
predator. He looks for women’s vulnerabilities and he
hoans in on them in
my case I was a very lonely woman, starved for affection, I always tried to hide
it but he saw straight through
me, he has a gift in that way
The first time we met, march 2009 (I knew of him before that day, but
never met him) I went in for an appointment, he was charming,
polite, he had a
way about him that just made you feel comfortable.
Oral evidence of Patient A
A gave evidence on the first day of the Inquiry. She confirmed the content of
her statement subject to one correction. Patient
A corrected paragraph 18 to
‘5-10 minutes’
rather than
’30 minutes’.
A confirmed that she was intimate with the Respondent on or about 12 March 2009
and entered into a sexual relationship in
early April 2009. The sexual
relationship lasted up until about March 2010.
A was asked about an entry in the clinical notes held by the Practice for 3
April 2009. This entry reads:
Explained to Px that her regular visitis (sic) are not necessary and a
little un ethical (sic). Would prefer her to see someone else
A denied that these words were spoken to her by the Respondent. Patient A stated
that this matter was raised by her right
at the end of their personal
relationship. Patient A adhered to her evidence as set out in paragraph 34 of
her statement (see above).
A confirmed that she was married at the time the relationship with the
Respondent commenced. At this time she was aware that
the Respondent was
married. She gave evidence that they did not have a conversation about their
respective marital status and he
had not told her that he was separated.
A confirmed that she made her initial complaint to the HCCC by way of the online
system. She confirmed that she had subsequently
tried to withdraw her complaint
orally by making a telephone call to the HCCC Investigator two days after she
made the formal statement
to the HCCC.
A was questioned about the reasons why she had sought to withdraw her complaint.
She gave the following evidence:
She made the
telephone call to withdraw the complaint because she regretted making the
complaint was not the right thing to do as they were
relationship – that’s
She went on to
withdraw the complaint in writing as the Respondent told her that he had written
a letter to her husband containing
details of their ‘personal
involvement’ and she felt ‘cornered’ and pressured to put her
withdrawal in writing.
The Respondent
had sent her a copy of the letter to her husband but the file was
‘corrupted’ and she could not open the
document to read it.
As far as she
was aware her husband had never received a letter from the Respondent.
cross-examined Patient A was taken to paragraphs 4 and 6 of her statement. She
accepted that she had in fact consulted the Respondent
in Yamba in 2003.
her oral evidence she stated that she had been living in either Yamba or Grafton
during 1998 to date. In March 2009 she was in
a strained marital situation and
was considering leaving her husband. She is married with three now adult
A stated under cross-examination that she had read the Respondent’s
statement (R1) and had observed that there were
some major differences between
his statement and hers.
A gave evidence about how the consultation proceeded on 12 March 2009 and agreed
with the version put to her up until the
point of her eyes being examined by a
‘torch light’
. She could not recall the Respondent stated
that he was going to check the pressure in your eyes. She stated he did not put
in her eyes that day and did not recall him placing an instrument on the
surface of her eye.
A stated that she was already wearing glasses at the time and she just required
‘stronger ones’
A denies that she said to the Respondent that she had just come in to
with him (cross-reference exhibit 23 – page
A confirmed that the Respondent was holding her right hand with his left hand
and that he was able to change the lenses while
still holding her hand.
A stated that she enjoyed the Respondent’s attention. She confirmed that
she made no objection to the Respondent’s
actions at the time. Patient A
stated that she had never done anything like this before or after and that she
was a willing participant.
She was asked again later in her evidence to confirm
that she took no objection to the conduct of the Respondent’s at the time
and that she did not stop him. She accepted that she ‘barely’ knew
the Respondent at the time.
A was taken to a statement she made in her inline complaint to the HCCC. This
statement read:
David was my optometrist and he took advantage of that trust, he exploited
my vulnerability, in order to have sex with me.
A stated that she no longer was of the view that her trust was violated or that
she was a vulnerable person.
was put to Patient A under cross-examination that her version of what occurred
in this consultation was not true. Patient A stated
that it was true.
A stated that she had not thought about other people being present in the
practice at the time they were kissing in the consultation
room and did not know
whether the door was locked. She accepted that other staff members could have
walked in but she did not consider
that at the time.
cross-examination Patient A was asked about whether she considered it unusual
for her to repose trust in the Respondent given
the limited time they had known
each other. Patient A stated that she was not able to explain how this occurs
‘it just happened’
. Later in her evidence she agreed that
A was asked about the contents of paragraphs 15 and 16 of her statement and
challenged as to whether or not there was a resumption
of kissing after she
returned to the Practice after picking up her daughter from school. Patient A
stated that she maintained the
evidence given in those paragraphs. With respect
to paragraph 14 Patient A confirmed that she had some questions for the
as well as having the desire to see him again.
respect to the contents of paragraph 17 and 18 of her statement Patient A stated
that she specifically asked to see the Respondent
and she genuinely wanted to
ask how long her new glasses would be.
her evidence she accepted that the Respondent’s evidence was that the
incident described in paragraph 18 occurred at a later
respect to the evidence she had recorded in paragraph 20 of her statement
Patient A stated the appointment was made because she
had trouble with her
glasses. At the time she was aware that there were people in close proximity but
she had seen him lock the door.
Patient A was challenged about this aspect of
her evidence on the basis that it was not recorded in her statement. She
that she had seen the Respondent lock the door on this occasion. She
denied that she had made this evidence up. Further, Patient
A stated that she
did have sex with the Respondent in the Practice while other people where
A agreed that the sexual intercourse was consensual and when asked about the
level of intimacy developing so quickly Patient
A stated that she knew the
‘well enough’
A was challenged about the content of paragraph 22 and she maintained that
sexual intercourse had occurred as described. During
the 3 April 2009
consultation Patient A stated that the Respondent re-adjusted her frames.
A was asked about when she considered the ethical nature of the
Respondent’s behaviour. She agreed that she had contacted
a senior person
in the practice group and he had directed her to websites for further
information. She was further asked how she
came to the words ‘trust’
and ‘vulnerability’ and she stated that this was ‘just common
April and July 2009 Patient A agreed that they had met in a park on one
A denies that the first sexual contact occurred in The Cove Apartments in Yamba
in July 2009. There was no sexual intercourse
between this occasion and December
With respect to paragraphs 29, 30 and 31, Patient A accepted under
cross-examination that this may have occurred on 20 January 2010.
stated that the consultation occurred in the Grafton Practice.
A stated that she was under the care of her general practitioner with respect to
hypertension and that she was concerned about
her hypertension because of her
family history. She stated that she had seen a cardiologist, although this was
not in relation to
her hypertension. She denied that she had been told that her
hypertension was unstable. Patient A was then asked to explain why she
in sexual conduct with the Respondent when she was concerned about her
hypertension.
agreed that the sexual contact had occurred prior to her eye examination and
that she was a willing participant in the sexual
acted upon her concern about the headaches she was suffering Patient A stated
that she had not really
thought about it at the time. Patient A stated that
ultimately she said to the Respondent that she actually did need an eye
examination.
She confirmed that once again this contact occurred during business
hours, with people close by and with the possibility of staff
coming in to the
room but that had not crossed her mind at the time
A stated that she had informed the Respondent that she was suffering from
headaches prior to this consultation by way of a
text message. She stated that
she was happy with the treatment but she could not recall the Respondent saying
anything to her about
the headaches. The Respondent adjusted the trial frames
and changed the lenses in them but she was adamant that he did not look into
eyes with the torch. Patient A denied that this version of events was a complete
fabrication. Patient A also stated that there
was physical contact between
cross-examined about the content of paragraph 36, Patient A stated that she
limited her comments regarding the Respondent not
undertaking proper eye tests
to the last consultation prior to the one outlined in paragraph 36.
A accepted that after the relationship ended in March 2010 that she was angry at
the way in which the relationship ended.
She also accepted that she continued to
send the Respondent text messages and that she contacted his wife via her
Facebook page.
When she contacted the Respondent’s wife she was unaware
that the particular mobile number was the one used by the Respondent’s
wife. She denied contacting the Respondent’s brother or the
Respondent’s family friends via Facebook pages. She also
denied following
the Respondent’s family around the local area.
A accepted that the Respondent mentioned that he wanted to include an apology to
her husband in the letter he was writing
to her husband but that the letter was
also providing details of their personal involvement.
A stated that the travelling time between Yamba and Grafton was 45 minutes.
Evidence of Michael Jacobs
Jacobs is the CEO of the franchise of optometry practices known as Eyecare Plus.
The Respondent operates his practice under this
banner. In response to a letter
from the HCCC dated 26 August 2010 Mr Jacobs provided copies of email
correspondence he had with
Patient A (exhibit 4). Patient A made a lengthy
complaint by email dated 18 June 2010 to Mr Jacobs regarding the Respondent and
Jacobs responded in, the Tribunals view, an appropriate manner.
Evidence of Jenny Stephens (Seeto)
Stephens is an employed optometrist that works in the same practice as the
Respondent (the Practice). She was asked (by way of
a Section 34A Notice –
see exhibit 5) by the HCCC to provide Patient A’s clinical records, all
correspondence between
her and Patient A including Facebook communications.
documentation provided by Ms Stephens was received by the HCCC on 6 September
2010 (exhibit 6).
Patient Notes held by the Practice included the following
DO NOT BOOK THIS PX IN WITH DAVID – SEE JENNY H
Px has been asked to see another optometrist practice. Cancelled appt and
asked for records. Was offered her previous scripts to
take with her but opted
not to take. Px rang to make another appt with DJF a couple of hours later.
April 30 2010.
Px was swapped to see Jenny Seeto but not happy and accusing that past
appts with DJF were “not just eye tests” 10/5/2010
Phone conversation DJF to Patient A – DJF apologised for not wanting
to see Patient A but felt that the Patient may have different
motives for being
there. Patient A expressed that she felt angry to be given over to someone else
without being contacted, she also
felt she was led to believe that there was a
“connection” being made. DJF asked for specifics but Patient A kept
“it doesn’t matter” a number of times.
bundle of documents included the ‘Examination Reports’ held by the
Practice (exhibit 6).
1 September 2010 the HCCC wrote to Ms Stephens requesting information (exhibit
7). Ms Stephens responded on 7 September 2010. Her
response (exhibit 8) included
the following:
The only day I can recall being in the practice at the same time as
Patient A and Mr Ford is on 11/5/2010 in Grafton. I provided
Patient A with
treatment on this day, and to the best of my knowledge the only contact Patient
A had with Mr Ford on this day was
by phone, at my request after this
appointment.
According to our appointment books, I was in the Grafton practice on
23/2/2010 at the same time Patient A had a consultation with
Mr Ford. I had not
met Patient A at this stage, and do not recall her being in the practice on this
day, whether she was in a separate
room with Mr Ford or the length of the
appointment.
I provided Patient A with a comprehensive eye examination on 11/5/2010.
On the morning of that day, Mr Ford advised me that Patient
A was booked in to
see me. He told me that he had seen her in the past as a patient, and he no
longer felt comfortable providing
her with optometric care. He told me he felt
the patient was not coming to see him for optometric reasons. He also told me
he had asked the patient not to continue booking in to see him, and had
advised her to see another optometrist. He told me that
she had rung the
reception staff and booked an appointment with him despite this, so he had
transferred her to my appointment book.
The first and only consultation I had with Patient A was on 11/5/2010.
When I collected Patient A from the waiting room and introduced myself,
she told me that her appointment was with Mr Ford and not
myself. I guided her
away from the waiting room, in order to have a discrete conversation with her.
I told her that I understood
that I would be looking after her eyes today, and
that I understood Mr Ford had discussed the reasons why he wouldn’t be
her, with her. She told me that this wasn’t the case and that she
did not know why he did not want to see her. At that time
we were joined by our
practice manager, Jenny Hyland, who asked her whether she felt she needed to
have her eyes tested. Patient
A confirmed this was the case, so it was agreed
that I would test her eyes, and Mr Ford would phone her later that day.
I tested Patient A’s eye sight, and the health of her eyes. This
took approximately 20 minutes. There was a mild change in
her prescription, but
I didn’t feel enough change to warrant updating her spectacles. I advised
review 2 years, unless she
noticed any changes sooner.
I felt Patient A appeared agitated and unsettled throughout the
consultation.
A few weeks after this consultation one of the reception staff asked me to
issue a copy of Patient A's spectacle prescription, which
I did, and faxed to a
number she issued the receptionist.
After my consultation with Patient A on 11/5/10, I advised Mr Ford that I
didn’t think Patient a understood the reasons he no
longer wished to see
her as a patient. I asked him to phone her and discuss it further with her.
Later that day, he told me that
he had phoned her, and she kept telling him that
she didn’t understand why he didn’t feel it was appropriate he saw
as a patient any longer as she felt they had made a
“connection”. He tells me he advised her that I would be happy to
see her in future, but if she wanted to move to a different practice we would
happily transfer copies of her patient records to that
May I received the first Facebook message from Patient
“Are you the optometrist from Grafton? If so then I owe you a huge
I cannot recall the date I opened this message, but it was likely a few
days after that. I chose to ignore this message, I didn’t
required action and I did not feel it was an appropriate means for a patient to
communicate with me or me with them.
Shortly after receiving this message (I cannot recall the date), I told Mr
Ford that I had received it, and the content. He told
me that he had noticed
Patient A in a car outside the Grafton practice at closing time, on a number of
occasions, waving him over
I returned to work after 2 weeks holidays on 28
found one email and one Facebook message from Patient A.
Given the gravity of her accusations, I immediately advised Mr Ford, and
the other business partners of their content. We agreed
to meet and discuss
them further, but by the time that happened I had received another email from
Patient A advising me she had referred
the matter to the HCCC.
On 7/7/10 I met with Ashley Seeto, George Vlastaras, David Ford and Hayley
Ford at our Maclean practice. Mr Ford explained to us
that he felt he was being
harassed by Patient A. He told us Patient A had contacted his wife on Facebook,
and by phone and accused
him of cheating on her with other women. Hayley Ford,
Mr Ford’s wife, confirmed this. He also stated that he had noticed
following him around Grafton after work and on weekends. He stated he had
reported her behaviour at the Grafton police station,
and that he had looked
into taking out a restraining order on her. He told us that he hadn’t
enacted an order yet.
Stephens stated that she had never observed any interactions between Patient A
and the Respondent nor had any staff expressed concerns
regarding the
professional boundaries between the Respondent and Patient A.
Other Evidence – telephone records
bundles of mobile telephone services formed part of the evidence. The records
relating to Patient A formed exhibit 9. Those relating
to the Respondent formed
exhibit 10.
Evidence of Christopher Henderson
peer review evidence on behalf of the HCCC was given by Mr Henderson. He
provided a report dated 2 November 2010 (exhibit 12)
in answer to a request
dated 29 October 2010 (exhibit 11). A further report dated 3 November 2010
(exhibit 14) was provided in response
to an email seeking clarification dated 2
November 2010 (exhibit 13). Mr Henderson re-formatted his report in to the
standard HCCC
template in exhibit 16.
Tribunal has not taken into account the views expressed by Mr Henderson
regarding a Medicare Item number being charged at the
time of the alleged
conduct as this is not a matter that is subject of the Particular of this
Complaint. It may well be that Mr Henderson’s
view that this could open
another line of investigation is correct. Mr Henderson’s observation that
the records reveal a Medicare
item was listed when only an adjustment was noted
contrary to the spirit of the Medicare agreement that each optometrist enters
is also not a matter considered by the Tribunal as it falls outside of the
Tribunal accepts Mr Henderson’s view that it is difficult to comment on
the standard of optometric care involved as the
records kept by the Respondent
(apart from eye health and final prescription) are limited. Once again the
Tribunal has not had regard
to this matter as it is not the subject of a
Particular of Complaint.
the further email to the HCCC dated 3 November 2010 Mr Henderson expressed the
view that the relationship between an optometrist
and a patient is no different
from that of other health professionals. His email continued:
During 45 years in optometry I learnt on the way, very quickly, not to be
in a dark room with a closed door and a patient –
particularly a female
especially in summer when often very few clothes are worn. My door is open, the
light is on and my receptionist
can walk in at any time.
Evidence – Christopher Henderson
Henderson was taken to exhibit 3 (paragraphs 6 and 7) being of the statement
provided by Patient A to the HCCC and agreed that
the events listed described a
normal consultation. Mr Henderson then described the sequence of a typical eye
examination. He further
agreed that “fogging up” of the “large
machine” is common, particularly in warmer climates. He also stated
it is typical to have separate examination rooms in optometrists’
practices and the optometrist often needs to be in close
proximity to their
patient and gave the example of the need to be ‘one inch’ away from
patient during ophthalmoscopy.
it was not his practice, Mr Henderson stated that some optometrists darken the
examination room completely during parts of
a consultation. He stated that
optometrists are often alone in the consulting room with their patient but
pointed out that he has
made it his practice to invite patients’ relatives
in. Although he does not personally close the door of the consulting room
own practice, he agreed that this can be necessary at times.
Henderson agreed that it is often necessary to touch patients, typically in the
facial region (around lids and eyes). Mr Henderson
stated that he had not found
it necessary to hold patients’ hands.
Henderson was asked to describe if it was possible to use and change lenses in a
trial frame one-handed. He noted that it was usual
to do this using both hands
but agreed that it is possible but difficult to do this
one-handed.
Henderson was then taken to exhibit 6 (page 43) being the clinical notes for the
consultation on 19 March 2009. He described this
consultation as a
‘10900’ and explained that this is an initial consultation according
to Medicare. He noted that there
was no intraocular pressure recorded and that
nothing was recorded except for refraction, internal and external tests.
Henderson described the procedure called non-contact tonometry as one that
involves a puff of air and describes applanation tonometry
as one that involves
the use of eye drops. He noted that it was possible for patients to experience
some pain or some feeling with
either procedure because of the fright involved
with the puff of air or the stinging involved with the use of eye drops. Later
his evidence he confirmed that these procedures may require the optometrist
to come close to the patient or touch the patient.
Henderson was taken to paragraphs 6 to 12 of exhibit 3 and asked to comment
minutes alleged therein by
Patient A. Mr Henderson expressed the view that this conduct falls significant
below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience and that it invites his strong
Henderson was directed to the description of events given by Patient A as having
occurred on 16 March 2009 which involved kissing
and talking in the treatment
room (paragraphs 15 and 16 of exhibit 3). Mr Henderson expressed the view that
this conduct falls significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience and that this
conduct invites
his strong criticism.
Henderson was directed to the conduct described by Patient A in paragraph 18 of
exhibit 3 and asked if this conduct falls significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience. Mr Henderson was of the
view that it did and further stated that
this conduct invites his strong criticism.
Henderson was directed to the conduct described by Patient A in paragraphs 20 to
26 and 28 to 31 of exhibit 3 and asked if this
conduct falls significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience.
Mr Henderson was of the view that it did and further
stated that this conduct invites his strong criticism.
Henderson expressed the view that continuing to act as Patient A’s
treating optometrist when engaged in a relationship was
awkward and difficult.
Mr Henderson was of the view that such conduct breached Rule 7 of the
Optometrist Registration Board of NSW
Code of Professional Conduct (exhibit 28).
Mr Henderson expressed his opinion that exploitation had taken place and when
specify what he meant, he said this meant taking
Henderson indicated that the Respondent should have had another optometrist or
another practice involved in the optometric care
of Patient A and that he should
not have remained the treating practitioner whilst maintaining a relationship
(of the nature described
in paragraphs 24 and 25 and paragraphs 29 to 31). The
conduct of the Respondent in this regard invited his strong
Henderson was directed to exhibit 6 (the clinical record notes dated 23 February
2010) and described this examination as a 2
or subsequent exam or
‘10918’ for Medicare purposes. Mr Henderson commented that the notes
appeared to be more complete
on that date than for the initial
consultation.
Henderson was directed to the Respondent’s statement and asked to express
his opinion of Mr Ford’s conduct as described
by him. He stated that this
conduct falls significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience and that it
invites his strong criticism.
Henderson was asked to specify whether he felt that there were any issues
related to the skills of the Respondent as an optometrist
and he stated that
could not comment on Mr Ford’s competence on the basis of the information
provided and specified that his
statements did not refer to a lack of skill of
the Respondent as an optometrist. He further stated that the use of Medicare
numbers may have been inappropriate. As noted above this later issue is not
considered by the Tribunal as it does not form part of
the Particulars of
cross-examination Mr Barnes highlighted the use of the words
“should” and “guide” in the introductory
paragraph of
the Optometry Board of NSW Code of Conduct (exhibit 28) to Mr Henderson. When
directly questioned, Mr Henderson agreed
that the Code of Conduct contains no
stated directive that “optometrists must not have personal relationships
with patients”.
Mr Henderson expressed his understanding of
“exploitation” as meaning “taking advantage” of
Henderson described additional testing that would have been needed to justify
the +1.75 ADD given in the prescription recorded
in Patient A’s notes. It
was his opinion that the examination conducted in March 2009 did not constitute
a “typical optometry
examination”.
Henderson felt that it was the non-refusal of Patient A’s advances,
particularly when
“it goes on”
that was inappropriate. Mr
Henderson disagreed with Mr Barnes suggestions during cross-examination that
optometrists should never
have sexual relationships with their patients. Mr
Henderson stated that it was his opinion that optometrists can have a sexual
relationship
with their patients outside of the practice in some circumstances.
In this case the Respondent should not continue to treat her as
his patient, to
see her at the practice, and should not have sex on the premises.
Henderson said that during his time as a practicing optometrist he provided
ongoing eye examinations to his children and wife.
He added that these services
were not eligible for a Medicare benefit i.e. no charge or payment was
asked to assume the veracity of the Respondent’s statement, Mr
that it was possible but difficult to conduct trial frame testing
one-handed;
relation to the intraocular pressure testing and the Respondent’s
description of the use of anaesthetic drops and Patient
A grabbing his hand and
holding it, Mr Henderson agreed that this was appropriate conduct;
that the description of events relating to the hug and kiss on March 2009 would
attract a lesser degree of criticism if events
as described by the Respondent
were the true version. Mr Henderson pointed out, however, that it was surprising
that the Respondent
had not felt the need to describe any of these unusual
events in Patient A’s patient record at the time they
asked by the Tribunal, Mr Henderson stated that he would personally not have
agreed to a patient’s request to participate
in a hug. He expressed the
view however that a hug by itself does not constitute improper
The Respondent’s
Documentary evidence
Respondent replied to a letter from the HCCC dated 19 August 2010 (exhibit 17)
by email dated 27 August 2010 (exhibit 18). This
email essentially indicated he
was unable to be specific about dates and times of
‘social and
The Respondent characterised
the complaint made by Patient A as making
‘something very
‘professional complaint’.
further noted that he had decided to return to his wife and reconcile with her
and that Patient A had tried to withdraw her complaint.
this point the Tribunal notes the response dated 27 August 2010 from the HCCC
read as follows (exhibit 19):
Thanks for your email.
All questions relate to evidence that has been provided by Patient A and
thus I require a response to investigate the matter appropriately.
I appreciate
that they are quite personal but unfortunately that is the nature of a complaint
relating to professional boundary
issues. With regard to the issue of dates and
times, if you cannot recall and there are no documents you can refer to that
assist your memory then you can give an approximate date range. If you
have no idea of the dates at all then just say that you do
not recall. I
understand that it is not always easy to recall such specific detail.
If you would like to talk to me about this further then please feel free
to call me. It may also be helpful for you to contact your
professional
indemnity insurer for assistance with your response.
Law wrote to the HCCC on behalf of the Respondent on 24 September 2010 (exhibit
20). This letter read:
We refer to the above matter and advise we have received instructions to
act for Mr Ford in this matter. We note that a serious complaint
has been made
by Patient A about Mr Ford, out client. According to your letter dated 19
August 2010, Patient a alleges that between
March 2009 and March 2010 a personal
and sexual relationship took place whilst Patient A was Mr Ford’s patient.
Although no
particulars of the complaint are provided, Mr Ford is asked to
respond in a detailed manner to a series of 17 questions.
We appreciate that you have already provided an extension of time for Mr
Ford to respond, however, Mr Ford requires a copy of the
complaint made by
Patient A in order to provide a proper response. The complaint is very serious
and your questions are very detailed.
In order to be fully informed as to the
precise nature of the allegations made against him, Mr Ford requires a copy of
the originating
To withhold the complaint from Mr Ford is a denial of natural justice and
is prejudicial to Mr Ford’s right to be fully informed
of the complaint
made against him and to specifically address each of the allegations by way of
response. It is contrary to the
functions of the Health Care Complaints
Commission as an impartial assessment body, to favour the interests of the
complainant over
those of the respondent, which would be the case if Mr Ford is
not given a copy of the complaint. If there are certain specific
mentioned in the complaint that are, for valid reasons, not relevant to the
allegations made against Mr Ford, such matters
can be blacked out with an
explanation as to the basis for doing so.
We look forward to your urgent response.
HCCC sent a letter to the Respondent’s solicitors on 5 October 2010
(exhibit 21). Avant Law responded on behalf of the
Respondent by letter dated
15 October 2010 (exhibit 22). This letter records that at the time the
Respondent commenced the relationship
with Patient A he was estranged from his
wife and he thought Patient A was estranged from her husband. The letter
acknowledged a
sexual relationship with Patient A occurred but submitted that
such a relationship should not be characterised in the same way as
relationship between a vulnerable patient receiving treatment for psychological
issues and a treating general practitioner/or psychiatrist
letter also records the Respondent tried to terminate his professional
relationship with Patient A and refer her to a colleague
but Patient A was
reluctant to see anyone else.
letter also confirmed that the Respondent takes the complaint seriously and is
distressed by it. He deeply regretted entering
into a personal relationship with
Patient A. He had voluntarily undertaken ongoing counselling and a course on
boundary issues to
ensure he does not commit further boundary violations.
letter also encloses a letter dated 15 October 2010 from the Respondent (exhibit
23). The letter reiterates some of the matters
already outlined above. It
provides an account of the treatment provided to Patient A. The Respondent
denied that the sexual relationship
continued past December 2009. At this time
he entered into a reconciliation of his marriage with his wife. When he informed
A of this she became upset and angry. The Respondent confirmed that he
had apologised to Patient A on many occasions for
. The Respondent also stated that the counselling he had
undertaken was a 10 week intensive counselling course with a Christian
during which boundary issues were discussed and from which he gained
‘a great deal of insight into how this situation occurred’.
The Respondent stated he had spoken to his general practitioner about the
boundary issues and had arranged to see his psychiatrist
for further
counselling.
HCCC wrote to Avant Law on 4 November 2010 seeking further details (exhibit 25).
The Respondent replied through his solicitors
on 19 November 2010 (exhibit 26).
The relevant parts of the response can be summarised as
Sexual contact
occurred between the Respondent and PA during a consultation on 3 April
intercourse occurred between them in the ‘office’ on one occasion,
being outside of business hours.
HCCC forwarded to the Respondent’s lawyers a section 40 letter on 25
November 2010 (exhibit 26).
Respondent’s reply is dated 11 January 2011 (exhibit 27). The Respondent
again admitted that he had entered into a sexual
relationship with Patient A and
accepted full responsibility for this conduct. He again offered an apology to
The Respondent’s statement dated 14
October 2011
Respondent provided a statement to the Tribunal (exhibit R1) dated 14 October
6 to 9 of this statement (as amended in his oral evidence) provide the following
additional personal history:
the end of 2005 I was first diagnosed as suffering depression by Dr Bill Cayzer,
a general practitioner in Grafton. I believe
it was then of relatively recent
onset of sme 2-3 months. Dr Cayzer prescribed Aropax and referred me to a
psychiatrist, Dr John
Ferguson, who visits Grafton from Coffs Harbour. I saw Dr
Ferguson approximately 6 times over a six-week period commencing in early
took leave from the practice for about 3 weeks. The sessions with Dr Ferguson
were helpful. Towards the end of my time with him
my medication started to
work. I remained on medication for approximately 18 months. The medication was
changed first to Effexor
and then to Zoloft.
have not taking medication for approximately the last 12 months. I now see Dr
James Venneri, general practitioner, who is aware
of my history and has approved
of my ceasing to take medication.
married my wife in 1995. But March 2009 our marriage had effectively broken
down. We were still living in the matrimonial home
but I was sleeping in a
separate room.
Respondent stated at paragraph 10 that he was first consulted by Patient A on 30
August 2003. This consultation consisted of
the usual tests.
Respondent gave the following account of the consultation on 12 March 2009
(paragraphs 11 to 15 of R1):
next saw Patient A in Grafton on 12 March 2009. I performed a routine
examination. I looked at the posterior surface of her eyes
and retina and took
an intra-ocular pressure reading. I made notes as the consultation
progressed.
the course of the examination I placed anaesthetic drops in Patient A’s
eyes. This seemed to make her very nervous.
I put my hand on her upper arm and
said words to the following effect: ‘it’s okay, you won’t feel
the effects
of that’. She then took hold of my left hand and I allowed
her to hold it. Soon thereafter I let go of her hand in order
tanometry (intra-ocular pressure reading).
then recorded the pressures in the notes following which I had a discussion with
Patient A during which I informed her that she
needed a new prescription and we
talked about the type of frames she needed. We agreed that she needed
multifocals and I completed
my notes to reflect that.
that point the consultation was effectively over. She stood up and asked me for
a hug. I agreed and now recognise it was inappropriate
to accede to her
request. As we embraced she briefly kissed me on the lips. I was taken aback
at that but nonetheless flattered.
believe I then took Patient A to introduce her to Jenny Hyland who is our
optical dispenser. It was necessary for Jenny to measure
the distance from
Patient A’s nose to the centre of each pupil as she was having multifocals
and also for them to sort out
the matter of an appropriate frame.
the Respondent describes holding Patient A’s hand during this consultation
he denies the description of the hand-holding
incident as set out in paragraphs
8 and 9 of her statement (exhibit 3). At paragraph 17 of R1 the Respondent
addresses the allegation
made by Client A in paragraph 10 of exhibit 3 as
I deny Patient A’s assertion that I was the instigator of the
kissing incident and that it occurred whilst she was seated in
the examination
chair. The kiss was very brief.
Respondent denied the content of paragraph 12 of Patient A’s statement
(exhibit 3) and stated that the consultation was
of normal duration.
Respondent stated that he recalled introducing Patient A to Jenny Hyland (a
member of staff) at the conclusion of this March
consultation but stated that
he could not dispute that this may have occurred later on the day of the
consultation (see paragraph
Respondent denies paragraphs 15, 16, 17 and 18 of Patient A’s statement
(exhibit 3) but accepts that the next physical
the day Patient A attended the practice to collect her glasses and that what
‘was substantially’
as described by Patient A in
paragraph 18 of her statement (exhibit 3).
Respondent denied the content of paragraphs 20, 21 and 22 of Patient A’s
statement (exhibit 3).
Respondent stated that he told Patient A during the consultation on 3 April 2009
that he could not see her as an optometrist if
they were having a relationship.
He then requested that she see
‘someone else’
Respondent stated that between 3 April 2009 and 20 January 2010 he arranged by
way of SMS messages to meet Patient A in parks
or in the street.
Respondent’s statement (R1) continues as follows at paragraphs 25 to 28 as
this third consultation and July 2009 I saw Patient A a few times in parks or in
the street. These meetings were arranged
by SMS messages.
believe the first occasion upon which I had sexual intercourse with Patient A
was in July 2009 at The Cove apartments in Yamba where
I was working that day.
Patient A was there on holidays staying on her own. Whilst I was there she had
a daughter I thought she
was single.
recollection is that until 31 December 2009 Patient A and I had sexual
intercourse on one other occasion but I cannot remember
it was before or after
the Yamba incident. I had always thought it was after and that it occurred at
the Grafton practice well before
business hours.
accept the substance of Paragraphs 24 to 27. As at 31 December 2009 I was still
separated from my wife who was holidaying away
from Grafton with our
respect to a consultation held on 20 January 2010 the Respondent stated (at
paragraphs 29 and 30 of R1):
noted Patient A complained of having unstable hypertension which she felt was
causing headaches. I checked the prescription and
also examined her to ensure
there were no leaking blood vessels at the back of her eye. I noted there was
no sign of vascular hypertension
on either side. I advised her that her
prescription was correct and billed Medicare item 10916.
believe this is the consultation referred to by Patient A in Paragraphs 29 and
30. I deny that any physical contact occurred at
consultation.
respect to a consultation held on 23 February 2010 the Respondent stated (at
paragraph 31of R1):
I noted Patient A complained of deterioration in her close vision. I
again checked the prescription and could not find any problem.
If the contents
of Paragraphs 29 and 39 are directed to this consultation then I deny
his statement dated 14 October 2011 (exhibit R1) the Respondent stated that he
accepted the substance of paragraphs 31 to 33 of
Patient A’s statement.
paragraph 33 of R1 the Respondent stated that he left his matrimonial home in
approximately March/April 2010. In paragraph 36 he
stated that he returned to
the matrimonial home in approximately July 2010 after he made a
’serious attempt to reconcile’
with his wife and attended
counselling with a family counsellor (Michael Shilling) who had previously
treated him for depression.
respect to the appointment referred to by Patient A in paragraph 34 of her
statement (exhibit 3) the Respondent stated that he
could not recall the
meeting. However, he did recall telling Patient A that he should not see her as
a patient when she said to him
words to the effect
’but you’re a
good optometrist’
respect to paragraph 36 of Patient A’s statement (exhibit 3) the
Respondent denied that he had sexual intercourse with
Patient A during any
consultation. He also denied that he did not perform proper examinations during
consultations.
Respondent did not provide a written response to the contents of paragraphs 35
and 37 of Patient A’s statement (exhibit
Respondent stated that in March 2010 he
‘communicated’
on a number of occasions that their relationship had ended. At
paragraph 37 the Respondent stated that Patient A continued to call
changed his mobile telephone number. He also records that Patient A then
telephone, his brother n his
Facebook and attempted to become
‘Facebook friends’
family friends. He further states that Patient A would follow his family along
the street up until the time she made a complaint
to the HCCC.
Respondent makes the following statements at paragraphs 38 and
am extremely sorry for any hurt I have occasioned to Patient A and her family.
Until almost the end of our relationship I was unaware
that she was in fact
married. Since the conduct complained of occurred I have done a course run by
Michael Schilling on boundary
violations and am acutely aware of the need to
maintain appropriate boundaries with patients. I have also reconciled with my
I do not seek to excuse my behaviour I am sure that significant contributors to
it were my depression and the breakdown of
my relationship with my
specific responses of the Particulars of Complaint made by the Respondent in
this statement (exhibit R1) are found under the heading
‘Findings re
Particulars’
Oral evidence – the
Respondent gave oral evidence on the second day of the Inquiry. He amended two
dates in paragraph 6 of his statement dated 14
October 2011 and stated that he
was now not sure whether Dr Ferguson was a psychiatrists or a counsellor.
Respondent was asked about the clinical notes for 12 March 2009, specifically as
to why the results of the Intraocular Pressure
Test he claimed he had conducted
had not been recorded. The Respondent stated that this was a result of poor
record keeping Although
there had been problems with the computerised recording
system he was not of the view that this had caused data loss on this occasion.
The Respondent stated that he still held this view as it was a normal part of a
full initial consultation.
Respondent stated that he had drafted a letter to Patient A’s husband for
the purpose of apologising for his behaviour but
that he had not sent this
letter and it did not contain any details of the personal involvement between
him and Patient A.
Respondent stated that the two other partners in his practice knew of this
Complaint and that they had informed him that they
were happy to allow him to
remain in that practice. The Respondent stated that he had amicably reconciled
with his wife.
cross-examination the Respondent confirmed that he remembered seeing Patient A
during a consultation in 2003. He also confirmed
that he did not know Patient A
in any other way when she consulted him in 2009. He confirmed the evidence he
had provided in his
statement (R1) that during this consultation he had touched
Patient A’s hand, embraced and Patient A had kissed him.
Respondent stated he was not aware of whether or not the Respondent had been
referred (by a doctor) or come to the practice as
a recommendation, but she had
come as a patient.
Respondent was taken to page 43 of the HCCC documents which is a computerised
record provided under a Section 34A notice issued
to a member of the Practice.
The Respondent stated that although the date of the record is 19 March 2009 that
it in fact was a record
of the consultation that occurred on 12 March 2009.
Later in his evidence he stated that although he was not overly familiar with
the computer system of record keeping he was of the view that the date of a
record could not be changed and was automatically
Respondent accepted that the lack of a record of a reading for an IOP could mean
that it did not occur.
Respondent accepted that it was not normal conduct for some hand holding hugging
and kissing to occur in a consultation. The Respondent
stated that he had on
accession held a patient’s hand. The circumstances were that the patient
was elderly, disabled or suffering
from dementia and then they would be
accompanied by a carer
The Respondent accepted that Patient A was a
woman with normal health aged about 40 years.
Respondent stated that according to his records he next saw Patient A on 3 April
2009 for the purpose of having her glasses adjusted
He agreed that this
meant that Patient A must have been to the Practice to pick up her glasses some
time prior to this date. The
Respondent denied the content of paragraph 17 of
exhibit 3 (Patient A’s statement). He later stated that Patient A had sent
him a text about her glasses when another staff member had failed to be able to
adjust them appropriately and he sent her a text
indicating she should make an
appointment to see him.
Respondent agreed that the purpose of the initial consultation with Patient A
was to undertake an eye health check and to decide
if a new prescription was
required for her glasses.
Respondent gave unclear evidence as to his response to paragraph 18 of Patient
A’s statement. Initially he stated that this
conduct had not occurred in
the Practice and it occurred at another time. Later in his evidence he stated
that this contact occurred
in the Practice on 3 April 2009. The Respondent
described the contact as passionate kissing and petting of each other and agreed
when questioned that this included on this occasion touching, kissing, touching
Patient A’s breasts and touching of each other’s
genitals. He denied
sexual intercourse occurred on this occasion.
Respondent was asked to describe his relationship with Patient A at the time and
he stated that it was a ‘normal’
sexual relationship just
‘starting off’. He stated that they were starting to get to know
each other and intimacy was
part of that process. As at 3 April 2009 he expected
the relationship to continue.
Other documents relied upon by
the Respondent
Cayzer provided a report dated 18 October 2011 stating that he had been the
Respondent’s general practitioner since 2001
(exhibit 3). He records that
the Respondent had
‘anxiety diagnosed’
in mid-2005 and had
depression when he presented on 8 November 2005. At this time Dr Cayzer
prescribed an anti-depressant which was
changed due to side effects on 3
February 2006 by which time the Respondent reported suffering from panic
attacks. Dr Cayzer stated
he had not been involved in the management of the
Respondent’s mood disorder since that time.
reference dated 20 October 2011 was provided by Reverend James Annesley on
Grafton Uniting Church letterhead (exhibit R6). Rev.
Annesley has been an
ordained minister in the Uniting Church since December 1995 and holds several
senior positions within the church
outside of his parish position.
Annesley first met the Respondent in May 2009 as he is a member of the Uniting
Church in Grafton. He has spent time with the
Respondent individually, sharing
at some depth the matters contained in the complaint. The Respondent has also
attended the men’s
group where discussion has included issues such as what
it means to be a man and a Christian in society today. Their families also
socialise together.
a result of having observed the Respondent in a number of different contexts
Rev. Annesley offered the following:
In my professional capacity, I have found David to be a very open and
honest person, particularly in the way that he shared of his
depression and of
the circumstances that have led to the complaint. He answered my questions in
detail and has never sought to diminish
the adverse impact that his behaviour
has had upon himself, his wife, children and extended family or indeed the
complainant. This
is one aspect of his character that is admirable. I have had
dealings with men who have found themselves in similar situations who
merely ‘blamed’ the other for their predicament. David in my
opinion has not sought to behave in this way. This
is an important factor for
me in agreeing to act as one of David’s references in his matter before
the Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Personally, I find David again to be an open and generous person who has
been very welcoming of me and my family into his home. He
is also a person who
I can share with at a deep level and who is prepared to heed the advice and
wisdom of others.
David’s character, his moral standards, attitudes and qualities
reflect his desire to be a follower of Jesus. By his own admission,
involvement with a woman other than his wife does not in any way, shape or form
echo how a Christian man should behave, but I
believe his behaviour to be an
aberration. It is not consistent with his prevailing Christian values and
Since David has disclosed the matter to me, he has been faithful in his
desire to live consistently with his faith, to rebuild his
relationship with his wife and family and to be accountable for his actions to
me as his minister and friend and to the
church of which he is a part.
David’s general reputation in the community, in the church and in
his professional capacity is good. Not only is he active
in the life of the
church, he is also involved with a number of sporting organisations. To those
who know him well, he is a loyal
and trusted friend who has made a genuine
I believe that David is genuinely remorseful for his behaviour. Some of
those reasons I have already outlined above including a full
admission to me of
that behaviour and the massively negative impact that this behaviour has brought
upon himself and his immediate
family in particular. He has also sought
counselling and medical help to ensure that effective boundaries and
accountability are
in place to prevent any reoccurrence of this behaviour. I
believe that this is a reflection of his determination not to place himself
his clients in such a vulnerable position again.
I would add that there has been reconciliation between David and his wife.
David’s wife is the sort of person who would not
take him back if there
was any thought in her mind that he would repeat his behaviour. Quite simply,
David would be out on his ear.
She is convinced that David has shown genuine
remorse and contrition.
I believe that he has shown genuine remorse and contrition as well. I
believe that this incident is not indicative of David’s
moral compass but
an extreme and unrepeatable deviation.
report dated 8 November 2011 was provided by Dr James Venneri (exhibit R7). Dr
Venneri has been the Respondent’s treating
general practitioner since
January 2008. Dr Venneri has treated the Respondent for depression. He has
worked with the Respondent
to find the correct medication. He records that the
Respondent has also worked hard with a counsellor and his minister in addition
to self-help courses to help mood and behaviour. Dr Venneri reports that the
Respondent made a full recovery a year ago and no longer
requires medication. Dr
Venneri records that the Respondent appears to be well adjusted and not
suffering from any type of behavioural
Michael Schilling provided both a report dated 27 October 2011 (exhibit R9) and
a reference dated 27 October 2011 (exhibit R10).
Mr Schilling is a licensed
builder who works with youth within the church, is an elder of the church and
holds an Advanced Diploma
of Counselling and Family Therapy from the
‘AIFC’ which he obtained in 2006. He also works as a school Chaplain
days a week. In his report he records that the Respondent consulted him
between 1 April 2008 and 16 June 2009 in relation to depression
and marital
issues. Mr Schilling records that he treated the Respondent’s depression
using psychotherapy as well as cognitive
restructuring and dealing with identity
and self-esteem issues. Mr Schilling also records that the Respondent undertook
called ‘Valiant Man’ which is a program from the
‘Careforce Lifekeys’ founded by Allan and Helen Meyer. Mr
provided considerable details for the course. In summary Valiant Man is about
‘male sexual discipleship’.
reference provided by Mr Schilling records that the Respondent was referred to
him by one of the local doctors. The Respondent
attended with his wife for help
with depression and marital issues. At this time Mr Schilling knew that the
Respondent was an optometrist
of good standing within the local community. His
reference continues:
I found Mr Ford to be honest and genuine, and willing to deal with
struggles of his depression and marital issues. At all times he
was respectful
and worked diligently through the counselling process. Mr Ford is a man who has
high moral standards and strives
for excellence in all that he does which is why
he displayed so much grief and shame in what was happening in his marriage. He
guilt, remorse and embarrassment for any behaviour that was not conducive
to his Christian beliefs and upbringing. Mr Ford showed
genuine, remorse,
regret and deep sorry for his behaviour and was willing to do anything to
rebuild and restore his relationship
with his wife and family.
I would like to add that both my wife and I are currently clients of Mr
Ford and have found him to be extremely professional in both
his conduct and
manner. He has a warm, cheerful, caring and respectful disposition and I can
say without any doubt that I highly
recommend his professional services to
anyone seeking optometry.
to the contest between the evidence of Patient A and the Respondent the HCCC
submitted that the Tribunal should prefer the evidence
of Patient A. It was
submitted that the Tribunal should accept that Patient A did her very best to
tell the truth and was somewhat
reluctant to give evidence and had sought to
withdraw her complaint. Patient A blamed herself as much as the Respondent for
the situation
that developed. She should not be seen as a witness with an
‘axe to grind’, nor was she acting out of revenge so that
allegations may be suspected. The HCCC further submitted that the
Respondent’s evidence supports the evidence of Patient
A. although the
timing may not tally precisely, the Respondent agrees that there was a
passionate encounter in the practice, that
sexual intercourse occurred in the
practice and that a sexual relationship existed between them with meetings at a
variety of locations.
HCCC also points to evidence of the high number of SMS text messages that went
between Patient A and the Respondent and the volume
of these appear to correlate
with the intensity of the relationship as described and recounted by Patient A.
The HCCC submitted that
there is no dispute that holding hands, hugging and
kissing occurred during consultations; rather, it was when this occurred, the
duration for which it occurred and who instigated the contact.
HCCC also submitted that Patient A gave quite definite evidence on such matters
as whether or not an intra-ocular pressure test
was undertaken whereas the
Respondent relied upon what his usual practice was. The Respondent’s
clinical notes also failed
to make a record that may have assisted the
Respondent.
HCCC submitted that the Respondent had not given a full and frank account of his
conduct. Initially he has stated that the relationship
had ended in December
2008 whereas after he completed giving his evidence to the Tribunal his evidence
was that it continued up until
March 2009. The HCCC stated this was consistent
with the down-playing of the relationship by the Respondent in a self-serving
The HCCC submitted that the Respondent’s evidence was now that he
admitted to a sexual encounter in his practice (before opening
hours) and to a
passionate sexual encounter occurring on 3 April 2009.
Respondent’s failure to refer Patient A on to another optometrist is
submitted by the HCCC as indicative of a lack of insight,
understanding of boundaries, and a lack of understanding of ethical matters on
the part of the Respondent.
Submissions
Submission made by the HCCC
HCCC provided a written outline of submissions (see annexure B hereto) which
were supplemented by oral submissions. The transcript
reflects the oral
submissions made.
respect to the conduct set out in Particular 1, the HCCC make submissions in
paragraph 4. Patient A’s evidence was that
the hand holding occurred
during the part of the examination where the Respondent was changing the lenses
in the test frames. She
further gave evidence that the Respondent initiated the
kiss and that it lasted for 20 minutes.
HCCC made submissions with respect to Particular 2 in paragraph 7.
HCCC made submissions with respect to Particular 3 in paragraph
HCCC made submissions regarding Particular 4 in a number of paragraphs (in
particular paragraphs 15 to 20). The submissions note
that approximately 430 SMS
messages were initiated from the Respondent’s mobile to Patient A’s
mobile (paragraph 15),
on some days there were multiple SMS messages (paragraph
16). The HCCC also noted in paragraph 33 that the Respondent accepted he
in inappropriate personal relationship including sexual contact in the clinic on
at least one occasion (3 April) with possible
further sexual contact in the
clinic outside of business hours (paragraph 33).
HCCC submission regarding Particular 5 was made in paragraph 31. The HCCC relied
upon the evidence of the Respondent that at least
two meetings at the clinic
that occurred between the Respondent and Patient A involving a sexual encounter.
HCCC set out details of the manner in which the Respondent’s account of
his conduct with Patient A given in 2009 and 2010
differ in certain key
respects. The HCCC submitted that these differences would cast grave doubt on
the reliability of the Respondent’s
evidence. The HCCC submitted that with
respect to the Respondent’s evidence which differs from Patient A’s
the latter should be accepted. The submissions also detailed instances
where the Respondent’s evidence differed when he gave
evidence before the
HCCC submitted that Patient A gave evidence clearly and truthfully while clearly
embarrassed about the evidence she was giving.
It was submitted that she had
nothing to gain in making the disclosures about the sexual encounters with the
Respondent. While she
was clearly distressed regarding the termination of their
relationship in March 2010, it was submitted that the Tribunal would not
that she was being untruthful in order to seek revenge on the Respondent. The
HCCC submitted that she was a reluctant witness
who had sought to withdraw her
complaint on two occasions as she felt partly responsible for the relationship
and pressured about
the Respondent’s indication that he proposed to send a
letter to her husband. The Tribunal accepts that Patient A presentation
the Tribunal does not fit into the mould of a ‘woman scorned’ who is
seeking vengeance against her former lover.
HCCC submitted that support for Patient A’s evidence came from the
Respondent’s evidence, the records of telephone
Respondent and Patient A, the clinical records (not recording an intraocular
pressure test), the fact that the
Respondent has not been full and frank in his
evidence, the evasive and vague evidence given by the Respondent seeking to put
in the best light while casting responsibility onto Patient A (see
paragraphs 42 to 46).
HCCC relies to the extent necessary on the peer review evidence of Mr Henderson
that the Respondent’s actions fell significantly
below the applicable
standard and invited his strong criticism. The HCCC submitted that all of the
Particulars of each Complaint
were made out.
HCCC submitted that the allegations relate to the level of the
Respondent’s judgment and that his conduct was improper or
HCCC submitted that the Tribunal should accept Patient A’s version of
events and find Particulars 1 to 4 established and
that deregistration is the
appropriate order. It is submitted that the Tribunal should consider a number of
factors to support this
order. These factors were set out in paragraph 49 of the
HCCC submissions.
Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent provided a written outline of submissions (see annexure B hereto)
which were supplemented by oral submissions. The
transcript reflects the oral
submissions made.
Tribunal notes the submissions made by the Respondent in paragraphs 1 to 3
regarding the role of disciplinary proceedings. With
respect to the submission
made in paragraph 4, although the question is to some extent academic, it is
likely that the number of
decided health disciplinary cases that relate to
nurses and midwives would act as a significant counterbalance to the numbers of
cases concerning medical practitioners. The Tribunal notes the submissions made
in paragraph 5, the obiter of this
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
41 NSWLR 630
has certainly stood the test of time and been frequently applied. The Tribunal
does not accept the submission made in paragraph 6
of the Respondent’s
submissions. While the conduct of the medical practitioner in the matter of
HCCC v Litchfield was
‘clear-cut’ misconduct, it is the view
of this Tribunal that the vulnerability of the patient is always a relevant
consideration.
This view is enforced by many decisions in disciplinary
proceedings in various health professions. The vulnerability of patients/clients
forms the basis of many of the ethical rules that apply to health professionals.
Vulnerability
arises by the mere fact that the patient/client is seeking treatment from the
practitioner and places trust in that
practitioner to provide those services in
a professional manner. While the holding of information regarding a
psychological problem
or self-esteem issue may contribute to the vulnerability
that inherently exists there is other information gained by virtue of the
professional relationship that contributes.
respect to the submission made in paragraphs 8, 9, 10 and 11 the Tribunal
accepts that not all cases where a medical practitioner
engages in a sexual
relationship with a practitioner will result in a de-registration. Each case
turns on its own facts and circumstances.
A submission that not all Findings of
professional misconduct which involve a sexual relationship with a client do not
automatically
result in de-registrations is accepted.
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraphs 12, 13 and 14 of the
Respondent’s submissions.
to the submission regarding the use of the word ‘should’ and
‘Guide’ in the introduction to the Code of
Professional Conduct
(Code) of the Optometrists Registration Board of NSW (Board) misunderstands the
statutory status of the Code.
Optometrists Act 2002
provided for the Board to establish such a code that
observed by registered optometrists in their professional practice’
(Section 20(1) of the 2002 Act). Section 20(5) states:
The provisions of the code of professional conduct are a relevant
consideration in determining for the purposes of this Act what constitutes
proper and ethical behaviour by an optometrist.
word ‘guide’ used in the introduction of the Code should also be
considered. The introduction to the Code reads:
The Optometrists Registration Board has established the following Code of
Professional Conduct under
Optometrists Act 2002
sets out the rules of conduct that should be observed by registered optometrists
in their professional practice. The
Code is a guide setting out certain
standards of professional conduct, and whether an act or omission is or is not
stated in this
Code, will not be the sole determinant of any question of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
to the submission made in paragraph 17, the Tribunal accepts that the
standard applies but is mindful that the Code does not purport
to cover all acts or omissions, all professional conduct or be the
consideration when determining the question of unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Further, it is an uncontested fact that
and Patient A occurred at the Respondent’s practice and that this is was
where a number of episodes
of contact occurred.
Respondent made submissions regarding Patient A’s version of events in
paragraphs 18 to 24. The Respondent’s version
of events is set out in
paragraphs 25 and 26. While the Respondent contends there was significantly less
less contact occurring at the
Respondent’s practice and early on in the relationship, there is general
agreement of a sexual
relationship occurring over a number of months at a time
that the Respondent was providing treatment to Patient A.
Respondent’s submissions deal with Particular 1 in paragraphs 27 to 29.
The Respondent admits to holding Patient A’s
hand when she experienced
discomfort after the administration of eye drops and that a brief kiss occurred
at the end of the consultation,
a kiss initiated by Patient A.
Respondent made submissions regarding Particular 2 in paragraphs 30 to 34.
Respondent admits Particulars 2(a) and (c) and denied 2(b) and (d). With respect
to Particular 2(d) the Respondent admitted that
sexual intercourse occurred at
the practice but outside of normal business hours when there were no other
people present.
Respondent denies the allegations set out in Particular 3 (see paragraph 35 of
the Respondent’s submissions).
Respondent admits Particular 4 save that it is a breach of Rule 7 of the
Optometrists Registration Board NSW Code of Professional
Conduct (see paragraph
36). In paragraphs 37 to 49 the Respondent makes submissions as to why the
conduct of the Respondent is not
a breach of Rule 7.
Respondent’s submissions deal with Particular 5 in paragraphs 50 to 54.
The Respondent’s position is submitted as
being that the letter of 15
October 2010 was truthful and if in fact the HCCC was in fact misled then the
letter dated 19 November
2010 would have clarified the matter.
Findings re Particulars
Tribunal accepts the HCCC submissions regarding the reliability of the
Respondent’s testimony and insofar as the Respondent’s
differs from that of Patient A the Tribunal prefers the evidence of Patient A.
The Tribunal notes that there is substantial
concord between their
Particular 1
Tribunal notes that the Respondent denied this Particular in his statement R1
but admits he held her hand for a short period of
time after he had placed drops
into Patient A’s eyes and alleged that Patient A initiated a brief kiss.
The Tribunal notes
that both Patient A and the Respondent agree that the
Respondent held Patient A’s hand at some point during the consultation
(Particular 1(a)). With respect to the Particular 1(b) the Tribunal prefers the
evidence of Patient A as to the kiss being on the
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct set out in Particular 1
occurred and finds this Particular established.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 1
occurred and finds this Particular established. The
Tribunal is of the view that
the conduct of the Respondent demonstrated that the judgment possessed by him
was significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of an optometrist of an
equivalent level of training and experience. The Tribunal also finds that
conduct was improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice of
Particular 2
Tribunal notes that in his statement R1 the Respondent admitted sub-paragraphs
(a) and (c) of this Particular but denied sub-paragraphs
(b) and (d). The
Respondent conceded that sexual intercourse did occur at the practice, but it
occurred outside of business hours
when no one else was present. As to the
denial of Particular 2(b) there must have been a degree of undressing for the
sexual intercourse
to have occurred. Essentially this is a contest between the
Respondent and Patient A as to whether the conduct described in Particular
occurred during a consultation on 3 April 2009 rather than outside of business
hours. The Respondent relies upon the unlikelihood
of the conduct occurring when
other people where present in the practice and when Patient A did not know
whether the door of the
consultation room was locked. Patient A’s version
of the events was not shaken under cross-examination. On balance, the Tribunal
accepts the evidence of Patient A and finds Particular 2 established.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 2
occurred and finds this Particular established. The
Tribunal is of the view that
the conduct of the Respondent demonstrated that the judgment possessed by him
was significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of an optometrist of an
equivalent level of training and experience. The Tribunal also finds that
conduct was unethical and improper conduct relating to the practice of
optometry. This would be so whether the conduct occurred
in business hours or
outside of business hours. It would also be the Tribunal’s view even if
the conduct had not occurred in
the practice.
Particular 3
Tribunal notes that in relation to sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this
Particular in his statement R1 the Respondent stated:
I deny this particular.
is a matter where there is a direct contest between the evidence of Patient A
and the Respondent.
Tribunal notes Patient A was not shaken with respect to her evidence relating to
this Particular. It is conduct of the nature
that the Respondent accepts had
occurred between them in the past (albeit not during working hours). The
Tribunal prefers the evidence
of Patient A.
balance, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in
Particular 3 is established.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of the Respondent demonstrated that the
judgment possessed by him was significantly below
the standard reasonably
expected of an optometrist of an equivalent level of training and experience.
The Tribunal also finds that
the conduct was unethical and improper conduct
relating to the practice of optometry. This would be so whether the conduct
in business hours or outside of business hours. It would also be the
Tribunal’s view even if the conduct had not occurred in
Particular 4
Tribunal notes that in relation to sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Particular
the Respondent, in his statement R1, stated:
I accept that I engaged in an inappropriate personal relationship with
I accept that relationship included frequent telephone contact for
non-therapeutic purposes.
I accept that the relationship included sexual contact. I concede that it
included sexual contact at the clinic premises on one occasion.
I concede that
there may have been a further occasion but it was also well before business
I do not admit breach of Rule 7.
Tribunal notes the submission made at paragraph 37 of the Respondent’s
submissions places the evidence of Mr Henderson in
a light that it was clearly
not intended to be in. Mr Henderson’s evidence regarding it not
necessarily being inappropriate
for there to be a sexual relationship between an
optometrist and a patient was limited in its scope. It in no way even remotely
to the circumstances of the relationship between the Respondent and
Respondent made submissions to the effect that the Tribunal would have to be
satisfied that the Respondent
‘exploited his professional
relationship’
with Patient A before finding Rule 7 had been breached.
The Tribunal does not accept this submission in the manner it is framed by
Respondent. The Respondent clearly took advantage of the professional
relationship that existed between himself and Patient A.
They would not have met
nor had the opportunity to commence the relationship but for the fact that
Patient A sought treatment from
the Respondent. Continuing episodes of treatment
provided further opportunities of contact. In this respect, the Respondent did
advantage of the trust placed in him by Patient A and exploited the
relationship. This is not to say that the Tribunal is not of
the view that
Patient A was a willing participant in the conduct. It remains, and will always
remain, the responsibility of the health
professional to contain the
relationship to a professional relationship.
Tribunal makes reference to the passage from the Court of Appeal Decision in
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
41 NSWLR 630
as set out in paragraph 3 of the
submissions made on behalf of the Respondent which reads:
The standards of the profession oblige doctors to use the opportunities
afforded them for such contact for proper therapeutic purposes
Court of Appeal also made reference to the dissenting judgment of Priestley JA
Richter v Walton
(15/7/1993 – unreported at
Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters the trust a patient
places in a doctor is considerable.
is for the protection of both the practitioner and the patient that a
professional relationship is maintained so that extraneous
issues do not intrude
into the professional relationship and result in matters such as the
practitioners professional judgment being
influenced by the personal (or other)
relationship and there being expectations of something other than what results
from a professional
relationship.
Tribunal does not accept the submission made by the Respondent in paragraphs 43
and 44 regarding subsection 139B(1)(a) being directed
to the clinical
performance of a health practitioner. While the number of decided cases applying
subsection 139B(1)(c) is not large
(given it has only applied to Complaints made
by the HCCC post 1 July 2010) the terms of this section is not substantially
from the sections defining unsatisfactory professional conduct in all
ten of the precursor pieces of legislation. The lack of judgment
shown by the
Respondent was his decision to continue with frequent telephone contact with
Patient A for non-therapeutic purposes
and engaging in sexual conduct with
Patient A while maintaining his therapeutic relationship with her. The
Respondent is correct
in the submission that there is no complaint about the
actual treatment rendered by the Respondent to Patient A. It is the view of
Tribunal that section 139B does not only relate to the Respondent’s
clinical performance. The Tribunal questioned Mr Henderson
regarding his views
as to whether the conduct was improper and unethical. The Tribunal is of the
view that the conduct breaches the
Code of Professional conduct and is improper.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Particular 4 is established. The Tribunal
is of the view that the conduct of the Respondent
demonstrated that the judgment
possessed by him was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of an
optometrist of an
equivalent level of training and experience. The Tribunal also
finds that the conduct was improper and unethical conduct relating
practice of optometry.
Particular 5
Tribunal notes that in relation to this Particular the Respondent, in his
statement R1, stated:
I deny this Particular. I did not keep a contemporaneous diary of dates
relevant to my relationship with Patient A. Before I submitted
the response to
the Commission I sent an e-mail to the Investigating Officer, Karen Ford, on 27
August 2010 expressing my concern
that I could not provide specific dates and
times (HCCC Docs p.276). Ms Ford responded (HCCC Docs p.277) on that day in
advised that it would be sufficient for me to provide an approximate
date range which is what I did.
Tribunal notes that it was not the lack of specificity regarding dates that
concerned the HCCC, rather, it was the omission of
one of the locations at which
a sexual relationship occurred between the two. The Respondent only listed his
place of residence,
Patient A’s place of residence and a hotel at which
Patient A was holidaying as the locations where sexual contact occurred.
Clearly, from the evidence as it ultimately came before the Tribunal (including
as admitted by the Respondent) sexual contact occurred
in at least one other
location, specifically in the Respondent’s practice.
Tribunal is of the view that the manner in which the Respondent answers the HCCC
is not full and frank to the extent that it is
misleading. The Tribunal finds
Particular 5 established.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of the Respondent demonstrated that the
judgment possessed and care exercised by him
was below the standard reasonably
expected of an optometrist of an equivalent level of training and experience.
The Tribunal also
finds that the conduct was improper and unethical conduct
relating to the practice of optometry.
Findings re Complaints
Tribunal makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
each of Particulars 1, 2, 3, and 4. While the
conduct set out in Particular 5 is
established to be below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level
of training and experience it is not significantly below.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct described in Particulars 1, 2, 3 and 4
taken together is of such a sufficiently serious
nature to ‘’justify
suspension or cancellation’ of the Respondent’s registration. The
Tribunal finds professional
misconduct established.
Tribunal would have made a finding of professional misconduct had findings only
been based on the admissions of the Respondent.
The conduct of the Respondent,
as admitted, not only lacked judgment but was unethical and improper.
Considerations relevant to Orders
HCCC submitted that the degree of trust placed in an optometrist is analogous to
that placed in medical practitioners. The Tribunal
accepts this submission made
by the HCCC as detailed in paragraph 33 of its submission. Optometry is
instituted socially and legally
as a health Profession. Optometrists provide
services that in some cases are identical to the services provided by doctors.
need to take a comprehensive medical history from patients; their work, by
necessity, requires close one-on-one proximity to the
patient and in many
instances physical contact with the patient. They are trusted with caring for
ocular health, they may find indicators
of other medical issues that require
referral on to a medical practitioner and many are able to prescribe a limited
range of medications.
By its very nature there must be a high level of trust
reposed by a patient in an optometrist. The work of an optometrist is not
the formulation of prescriptions for glasses.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC in paragraphs 40 and 41. The
Tribunal emphasises that the willingness of the
patient to engage in the
inappropriate conduct is not a relevant factor to the determination of whether a
boundary violation has
occurred. It may be a factor relevant to the appropriate
characterisation of the conduct and is relevant to the orders that will
from the conduct. The Tribunal is of the view that ‘mutuality’ in a
relationship that formed in the manner in which
the one between the Respondent
and Patient A formed can never truly exist and adopts the comments made in the
Medical Tribunal decision
Mehta and the Medical Practice Act of New South
(unreported) Medical Tribunal of New South Wales (29 November 2002).
It is the ethical obligation of the optometrist to resist the
advances of a
Tribunal generally accepts the submissions of the HCCC as to areas of the
Respondent’s evidence that is of concern (paragraph
submissions). It is understandable that the Respondent had difficulty with the
evidence given the nature of his conduct
and his particular personal
circumstances. Nevertheless a duty of candour to your professional body exists.
While the Respondent’s
insight may be in its early stages, he has taken
some steps towards understanding his conduct. In the circumstances the Tribunal
notes the support of the Respondent’s church and his reconciliation with
his wife and the knowledge of his work colleagues
as factors that result in the
Tribunal being reasonably satisfied that the Respondent will not repeat the
conduct. The Tribunal accepts
the character evidence provided by Reverend
Annesley and Mr Schilling. It is of some concern that there is no reference from
a professional
colleague and those provided are limited to the church community.
The Tribunal notes that the Respondent has indicated that his professional
colleagues are willing to continue to work with him and that the Respondent
expressed sincere contrition for his conduct. The Respondent
certainly showed
genuine embarrassment over his conduct while giving evidence before the
are largely external factors and the Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent
needs to develop internal control mechanisms
more fully if he is to remain on
the register.
Tribunal shares the disquiet of the HCCC that the counselling received by the
Respondent to date has not been from a registered
psychologist or psychiatrist.
While it appears that he may have been referred for counselling by his general
practitioner, the issues
of depression and possible panic attacks reported by
the general practitioner are matters that would ordinarily be addressed by a
registered health practitioner. By making these comments the Tribunal does not
intend to pass judgment in any way on the benefits
or otherwise of the
counselling provided by Mr Schilling. Rather, this Tribunal must make orders
that it is satisfied will protect
the public. The Tribunal will only be
satisfied that the issues reported to the Respondent’s general
practitioner are actually
in remission and will not in the future intrude into
the Respondent’s professional life with the intervention of a registered
health practitioner. The Council will be able to lift the condition requiring
counselling after a period of six months only if the
treating registered
psychologist/psychiatrist is of the view that the Respondent has developed
insight into his conduct and is no
longer suffering from any issues that would
lead him into conduct of a similar nature.
Tribunal is also of the view that the Respondent would benefit from a period of
time to reflect upon the gravity of his conduct,
to come to terms with the
definition of professional boundaries and to focus on commencing appropriate
counselling. The Tribunal
also has had regard to the period of time that the
Respondent has already worked with a Condition on his Registration and the steps
he has taken to remediate his position. The Tribunal intends to fix a period of
suspension of two months.
is no doubt that the conduct of the Respondent has brought the profession of
Optometry into disrepute. The Respondent is to
be reprimanded for his conduct.
Both the period of suspension of the reprimand should serve as a deterrent to
other members of registered
health professions not to engage in inappropriate
conduct with patients.
Tribunal accepts the submission of the HCCC that even if the Tribunal rejected
Patient A’s version of events and solely
relied upon the admissions of the
Respondent that the Orders set out below would be the appropriate Orders.
again while the Tribunal does not wish to pass comment on the guidance provided
by Mr Schilling regarding boundary issues the
Tribunal is of the view that the
Respondent requires a more structured course of study relating to boundaries and
ethics generally
as they apply to registered health professionals. This could be
a unit of study from a tertiary education course or an individual
study set by an appropriately qualified health professional. The course of study
should involve a wide range of readings
and assessment that is to include an
essay no less than 3,000 words that is to be submitted to the Council for
consideration. If
there is a choice of topics, an essay focussed on boundary
issues may be of the most benefit to the Respondent.
The Tribunal orders
(the Respondent is referred to as the Practitioner for the purpose of these
Orders being applied to the Register):
reprimand is to be placed onto the Practitioner’s Registration. The
Practitioner is hereby reprimanded in the terms of annexure
C to the Reasons for
HCCC v Ford [2012]
Practitioner is suspended for a period of two months commencing from the date of
the decision in
HCCC v Ford [2012]
NSWOPT 1. During the period of
suspension the Practitioner is prohibited from providing Health Services in
accordance with
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
the expiration of the suspension the Practitioner is not to work as an
optometrist until he has received approval from the
Council for the course in
ethics required in the orders of
HCCC v Ford [2012]
NSWOPT 1 and received
the Council’s approval of the registered psychologist/psychiatrist in
accordance with the orders in
HCCC v Ford [2012]
Practitioner’s registration is to be subject to a condition that he
satisfactorily complete a course in ethics approved
by the Council and provide a
copy of an essay of a minimum of 3,000 words by way of assessment within nine
months of the lifting
of the suspension imposed in the decision
HCCC v Ford
NSWOPT 1. The Practitioner is to provide an outline of the course of
study and contact details for the relevant course co-ordinator
and receive the
written approval of the Council for the course prior to recommencing work as an
optometrist. Any course undertaken
to satisfy this Order is to be at the cost of
the Practitioner.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he comes under the
care of a psychologist or a psychiatrist. The Practitioner
is to forward the
name and contact details of the psychologist/psychiatrist to the Optometry
Council of NSW prior to commencing work
as a registered optometrist and at any
time he changes his treating psychologist/psychiatrist for a minimum period of
nine months
and until such time as the Optometry Council of NSW decides this
condition is no longer required. The Practitioner is to forward
to the Optometry
Council of NSW an authority and direction addressed to the treating
psychologist/psychiatrist to provide reports
to the Optometry Council of NSW
every three months. The Practitioner is to attend the treating
psychologist/psychiatrist on a minimum
of once per fortnight for the first three
months and thereafter at the direction of the treating psychologist/psychiatrist
less than a monthly basis. Any cost involved in compliance with this
condition is to be borne by the Practitioner. The Optometry
Council of NSW may
remove this condition after a minimum period of nine months should it consider
this condition no longer required
having regard to the nature of the issues
identified in
HCCC v Ford [2012]
Practitioner is to pay the costs of the HCCC in relation to
HCCC v Ford
NSWOPT 1 as agreed or assessed. The parties have leave to apply to
the Tribunal to determine the issue of costs if such agreement
or assessment
cannot be reached.
Publication
A copy of this
Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Respondent and his legal adviser
2) The HCCC,
Optometry Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
Optometry Council of New South Wales.
Dated: 6 February 2011
___________________
___________________
Isabelle Jalbert
___________________
Gavin Bigland
___________________
Christopher Gardiner
Annexure A – Index of documents in evidence
Annexure B –
Submissions of the parties
Annexure C - Reprimand
Annexure D –
Schedule of Names Suppressed
HCCC v FORD
INDEX TO DOCUMENTS
Index to Health Care
Complaints Commission documents
Confirmation of registration Status dated 7 November 2011
Statement of Patient A of 16 August 2010 with Annexures:
Annexure A - Complaint from Patient A to the Commission of 22 June
Annexure B - Emails between Patient A and Mr Ford of 27-31 August
from Commission to Mr Michael Jacobs, Chief Executive Officer of Eyecare Plus,
of 26 August 2010
between Mr Jacobs and Patient A, including complaint email sent by Patient A to
“eyecareplus complaint” email address
of 18 June 2010
Letter from the Commission to Ms Jenny Stephens (Seeto) of 26 August 2010
Section 34A
Notice to Produce Documents
Letter from Ms Jenny Stephens to the Commission received 6 September 2010
Facebook correspondence with Patient A
clinical records
from Eyecare Plus Grafton from March 2009 to
Letter from the Commission to Ms Jenny Stephens of 1 September 2010 seeking
a response to questions
Response from Ms Jenny Seeto of 7 September 2010
Outgoing telephone records for Patient A’s mobile telephone from
March 2009 to August 2010
Outgoing telephone records for Mr Ford’s mobile telephone from March
2009 to June 2010
Request for peer review report from the Commission to Mr Christopher
Henderson of 29 October 2010
Draft report from Mr Henderson of 2 November 2010
Email from the Commission to Mr Henderson of 2 November 2010
Draft report from Mr Henderson of 3 November 2010
Email from the Commission to Mr Henderson of 3 November 2010, attaching tab
Final report from Mr Henderson of 3 November 2010
Letter from the Commission to Mr Ford of 19 August 2010
Email from Mr Ford to the Commission of 27 August 2010
Email from Commission Investigation Officer Karen Ford to Mr Ford of 27
August 2010
Letter from Avant Law (on behalf of Mr Ford) to the Commission of 24
September 2010
Letter from the Commission to Avant Law of 5 October 2010 enclosing
Notice to Give Information
Response from Avant Law to the Commission of 15 October 2010
Response from Mr Ford to the Commission of 15 October 2010
Letter from Commission to Avant Law of 4 November 2010 (unsigned
Response from Avant Law to the Commission of 19 November 2010
letter from the Commission to Mr Ford of 25 November 2011
Response from Mr Ford to
letter of 11 January 2011
Optometrists Registration Board of NSW Code of Professional Conduct of 11
May 2005 (revised 21 December 2006)
Index to documents relied upon by Respondent
Statement of Respondent dated 14 October 2011
CV of Respondent
Report of Dr Cayzer dated 18 October 2011
Letter from Avant to Dr Cayzer dated 14 October 2011
Reference of Reverend Annersley dated 18 October 2011
Letter from Avant requesting reference dated 17 October 2011
Report of Dr Venneri dated 8 November 2011
Letter from Avant to Dr Venneri dated 14 October 2011
Report of Mr Michael Schilling dated 27 October 2011
Reference of Mr Michael Schilling dated 27 October 2011
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
COMPLAINANT’S SUBMISSIONS
Ford (‘the Respondent”) was employed as an optometrist at EyeCare
Plus in 2000. He became a Partner in EyeCare
Plus in 2003. EyeCare Plus
operates optometry clinics in Grafton, Maclean and Yamba in Northern New South
Wales. The Respondent
first saw Patient A in a clinical setting in about August
2003 at the EyeCare Plus clinic in Yamba. He next saw Patient A on 12
2009 at the EyeCare Plus clinic in Grafton. Between that date and May 2010 the
Respondent provided a number of treatment sessions
to Patient A at the Grafton
are two complaints against the Respondent. The first alleges that he has been
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
as defined in s 139B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(“the National
Law”). The second alleges that he has been guilty of professional
misconduct as defined in s 193E of the
National Law.
complaints arise out of the following conduct of the Respondent:
three treatment sessions at the Grafton clinic on 19 March 2009, 3 April 2009
and 23 February 2010 the Respondent engaged
in inappropriate physical and/or
sexual conduct with Patient A;
(b) Between
personal relationship with Patient A;
(c) During an
investigation of a complaint against him by the Health Care Complaints
Commission (“the Commission”), the
Respondent supplied the
Commission with false and/or misleading information about his relationship with
Patient A in a letter to
the Commission signed and dated 15 October
The Complaints relate to the level of the Respondent’s judgment, rather
than his knowledge, skill or care and also allege that
he engaged in improper or
unethical conduct.
The Complainant’s Evidence
principal evidence of the complaints is from Patient A. On 12 March 2009
Patient A attended an appointment with the Respondent
at the Grafton clinic for
an eye test. While performing the eye test the Respondent held Patient
A’s left hand with his right
hand for a period of time while changing
lenses in some glasses with the other hand. Patient A observed his hand shaking
changed the lenses and made a comment to which the Respondent replied:
“It’s hard to do this one-handed”. The
Respondent then
initiated kissing with Patient A, which lasted for about 20 minutes. [Ex 3 pp
7-8] Patient A stated in her oral
evidence that the Respondent did not
administer an intra-ocular pressure test during this consultation. There is no
record of an
intra-ocular pressure test in the relevant clinical records for
this consultation. [Ex 6 p 43]
Patient A took some frames home with her to trial. On about 16 March 2009
Patient A returned to the Grafton clinic with
the frames. While there Patient A
and the Respondent stood in a treatment room kissing and talking and discussing
their desire to
see each other again. About a week later, in late March 2009,
Patient A returned to the Grafton clinic to inquire about the availability
her glasses. She saw the Respondent again in a treatment room for about 5 or 10
minutes. During this time they engaged in kissing
and other physical contact of
a sexual nature. Patient A believes Mr Ford gave her his mobile telephone
number during this visit.
[Ex 3 pp 7-9]
A picked up her glasses from the Grafton clinic at some time during the
following two weeks. Her vision was blurred with
the glasses so she sent the
Respondent a text about the problems. He replied by text advising she should
make an appointment with
the clinic, which she did. [Ex 3 p 9] This is
consistent with the telephone records which show initial SMS contact between the
and Patient A on 15 April 2009. [Ex 9 p
the Respondent into a treatment room, who said
he had made the appointment 30
minutes long. The two undressed fully and had sexual intercourse on the floor
of the treatment room.
The Respondent then gave Patient A a 5 minute eye
examination and she left the clinic, about 30 minutes after arriving. [Ex 3 p
This incident is alleged to have occurred during the treatment session on 3
April 2009. [Ex 6 p 42]
A continued to see the Respondent at the Grafton clinic after this encounter and
they continued to have sexual intercourse
at the clinic. Patient A asked the
Respondent if she should see another optometrist. The Respondent said that she
was his patient.
July 2009 Patient A met the Respondent at The Cove Apartments in Yamba. The two
argued and the Respondent left. They stayed in
touch by email, phone and text,
but did not have sexual relations between July and December 2009. On 31
December 2009, after exchanging
a number of text messages, Patient A and the
Respondent met and went to his house where they had sexual intercourse. At some
the Respondent told Patient A that he had a wife and three children.
Patient A and the Respondent stayed in touch by email, phone
and text during
January 2010 but did not see each other. [Ex 3 pp 9-10]
February 2010 Patient A returned to the Grafton clinic for an eye examination
due to headaches. The Respondent escorted her into
the treatment room where
they had sexual intercourse immediately. After about 25 minutes the Respondent
examined Patient A’s
eyes for about 5 minutes. [Ex 3 p 10] This incident
is alleged to have occurred during the treatment session on 23 February
February and March 2010 the Respondent visited Patient A at her home on a couple
of occasions where they had sexual intercourse.
On 22 March 2010 the Respondent
visited Patient A’s house during the day. They had sexual intercourse and
Patient A told
the Respondent she had feelings for him. The Respondent left
shortly afterwards. On Wednesday 24 March 2010 Patient A sent the
Respondent a
text. The Respondent responded with a text which stated: “Big problems at
Patient A sent another text to the
Respondent on Friday 26 March 2010. He replied by text: “My wife knows.
Someone told
her my car was in your street.” After that Patient A and the
Respondent exchanged a few messages and spoke by telephone a
couple of times,
but did not see each other. [Ex 3 pp 10-11]
test. She went to the clinic to change the date and
spoke to the Respondent.
She said she thought she should not see the Respondent as an optometrist
anymore. The Respondent replied:”Patient
A I am a good optometrist, why
would you want to go anywhere else?” Patient A made an appointment for
the following week.
When she returned to the Grafton clinic a week (on 11 May
2010) later Patient A was met by another optometrist Jenny Stephens, who
her she was no longer attending appointments with the Respondent. Patient A
felt embarrassed and humiliated and, a few weeks
later in about June 2010
informed Jenny Stephens via Facebook about her relationship with the Respondent.
A couple of weeks later
Jenny Stephens sent a message stating she would take up
the issue with her partners. Patient A did not hear back from her. [Ex
p 40] A file note from the patient records states that Patient A was
swapped to Jenny Seeto on 10 May 2010 but was not happy and
alleged that past
appointments with the Respondent were “not just eye tests”. [Ex 6 p
June or July 2010 Patient A tried to contact the Respondent by telephone but
discovered the telephone number was not connected.
In about June or July 2010
Patient A deleted all the email correspondence between herself and the
Respondent. On 17 June 2010Patient
A informed the head office of Eycare Plus
the Respondent on 22 June 2010. In late August 2010 Patient A
corresponded with the Respondent about her complaint. On 27 and 30
August 2010
she sent two emails to the HCCC withdrawing the complaint. [Ex 3 pp 11-12]
During her evidence Patient A stated that
she initially sought to withdraw the
complaint by telephone because she felt both she and the Respondent were
responsible for the
relationship. She subsequently sought to withdraw it in
writing because she felt pressured and backed into a corner by the
Respondent’s
statements that he proposed to send a letter to her
records from Eyecare Plus record Patient A attending for examinations on the
following dates: 19 March 2009; 3 April 2009;
20 January 2010; 23 February 2010;
11 May 2010. The record of the 3 April 2009 consultation contains the following
entry: “Explained
to Px that her regular visits are not necessary and a
little un ethical. Would prefer her to see someone else next time. DJF.”
[Ex 6 pp 40-44] During her oral testimony, Patient A denied that the Respondent
said this to her during the treatment session on
3 April 2009.
records of the Respondent’s telephone service XXXXXXXX show frequent
telephone communications (approximately 430 communications,
mostly by SMS)
initiated from that service to Patient A’s mobile telephone service
XXXXXXXXX between 15 April 2009 and 21 May
2010. [Ex 9] The frequency of these
communications from the Respondent to Patient A is consistent with Patient
A’s evidence
and the Respondent. This frequency was as follows: 15 April 2009 –
July 2009 - 172 communications (when the sexual relationship was current); 1
August 2009 - 30 December 2009 – 52 communications
(when there was no
sexual relationship and only telephone or email contact); 31 December 2009
– 22 March 2010 – 135 communications
(when the sexual relationship
was current); 23 March 2010 – 21 May 2010 – 71 communications (after
the relationship ceased).
records of Patient A’s telephone service XXXXXXXXX also show frequent
telephone communications initiated from that service
to the Respondent’s
telephone service XXXXXXXXX between 15 April 2009 and 1 June 2010. [Ex 10] On
many days during this period
Patient A sent multiple SMS messages to the
Respondent on the one day. On many days during this period the Respondent sent
SMS messages to Patient A in the one day. Examples of this in 2009
are: 16, 28, 29, 30 and 31 April; 4, 12, 18, 21 and 26 May; 10,
19, and 24 June;
20, 21 and 28 July; 5, 6, 7 and 24 August; 9 November; and 31 December.
Examples of this in 2010 are: 14, 15 and
28 January; 1, 5, 8, 16, 22 February;
5, 9, 11, 16, 19, 20 and 26 March 2010; 8 April; and 5, 11, 13, 14 and 21
Henderson, an optometrist of 45 years standing, gave expert peer review
evidence. He stated that the conduct of the Respondent
as particularised in
each of particulars 1 to 4 of the complaints fell significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience and invited his strong criticism. Mr Henderson expressed
opinion about each of the following: the relevant incidents involving
sexual contact between the Respondent and Patient A while
she was being treated
by the Respondent; the incident described by Patient A in paragraph 18 of her
statement [Ex 3 p 9]; a sexual
encounter between Patient A and the Respondent at
the Grafton clinic outside office hours; the Respondent engaging in a sexual and
personal relationship with Patient A while continuing to treat her; and the
Respondent’s account of his relationship with Patient
A as described in
the Respondent’s statement dated 14 October 2011 [Ex R1].
Henderson also expressed the opinion that the Respondent engaging in a sexual
and personal relationship with Patient A while continuing
to treat her was a
breach of clause 7 of the Code of Professional Conduct of the Optometrists
Registration Board of NSW [Ex 28 p
300] because it involved the Respondent
exploiting his professional relationship with Patient A i.e. taking advantage of
that relationship
in a sexual way.
Henderson stated that even when the patient makes advances the optometrist
should discourage those advances and that exploitation
occurs when the
optometrist does not reject the advances and the relationship continues on. He
stated that a sexual relationship
between the optometrist and the patient should
not occur in the practice and the optometrist should not continue to see the
as a patient when such a relationship occurs.
relation to the first consultation in March 2009 Mr Henderson stated that the
treatment that was recorded in the clinical notes
would not take 45 minutes. He
said that if an intraocular pressure tests had occurred it should be recorded in
the clinical records.
He said that it would be difficult, but not impossible to
change the lenses in trail frames one-handed.
Respondent’s evidence
Respondent has given a number of accounts of his dealings with Patient A in 2009
and 2010 which differ in certain key respects.
These differences cast grave
doubt on the reliability of the Respondent’s testimony before the
Tribunal. The Complainant
submits that insofar as the Respondent’s
evidence about those events differs from Patient A’s evidence, the latter
be accepted and the former rejected.
his initial response to the Complainant’s investigation on 15 October
2010, the Respondent stated: “I admit that I
had a sexual relationship
with [Patient A] on and off between 19 March 2009 and December 2009. Our
meetings occurred at my place
of residence, [Patient A’s] place of
residence or a hotel (when she was on holidays).” The Respondent stated
was estranged from his wife and believed Patient A was estranged from
her husband when he commenced a personal relationship with
Patient A. The
relationship began during a routine eye consultation on 19 March when Patient A
said she came to the appointment
with the intention of flirting with the
Respondent and they kissed and hugged. Patient A attended another consultation
2009 for the stated purpose of getting an adjustment to her
spectacles.
his 15 October 2010 response, the Respondent stated about the 3 April 2009
consultation: “Given we were now in a personal
relationship, I told
[Patient A] that she should see another optometrist for any ongoing professional
treatment.” The Respondent
also stated : “[Patient A] and I had a
personal relationship between March 2009 and December 2009, not May 2010, as
by [Patient A].” The Respondent said he entered into a
reconciliation of his marriage with his wife in December 2009 and decided
cease seeing [Patient A]. He informed Patient A of this “as gently as I
could”, but Patient A became angry and upset.
The Respondent stated:
“I acknowledge that I should not have entered into a relationship with
[Patient A] ... I continue to
maintain a clear boundary between my personal and
professional life ... I deeply regret mixing both professional and personal life
... I recognize that I have hurt [Patient A] by my actions and for this I am
truly sorry”. [Ex 23 pp 287-289]
a subsequent response to the Complainant’s investigation through his legal
representatives dated 19 November 2010, the Respondent
stated that some contact
of a sexual nature, but not intercourse, occurred during the 3 April 2009
consultation. At that point the
Respondent told Patient A that “it would
be unethical for her to continue seeing him as a patient ... He requested that
see a different optometrist within the practice in the future”. The
Respondent also admitted to having sexual relations with
Patient A once at his
office, but outside office hours when the practice was closed. This occurred
sometime before December 2009.
[Ex 25 p 291] The Respondent repeated these
assertions in his response to the Complainant dated 11 January 2011. [Ex 27 p
his statement dated 14 October 2011 the Respondent stated that he performed a
routine eye examination on Patient A at the Grafton
clinic on 12 March 2009, not
having treated her since 2003. He conceded in cross-examination that the
clinical records dated 19
March 2009 [Ex 6 p 43] were in fact notes of the 12
March 2009 consultation. In his statement dated 14 October 2011 the Respondent
said he placed anaesthetic eye drops in Patient A’s eyes after which she
became nervous and took hold of her left hand, which
he allowed her to hold. He
then let go of her hand and performed an intraocular pressure reading
(tonometry) on Patient A and “recorded
the pressures in the notes”.
He conceded in cross-examination that it was his normal practice to record the
pressure readings
in the records but that the records for that consultation [Ex
6 p 43] contained no such record. In his 14 October 2011 statement
Respondent stated that Patient A initiated an embrace and a brief kiss. He
denied Patient A’s account that he initiated
lengthy hand-holding and
kissing during that treatment session.
his statement dated 14 October 2011 the Respondent stated [Ex R1 para 20] that
“The next occasion upon which there was any
physical contact between me
and Patient A was after she had collected her new glasses. I am unsure of the
exact date. I therefore
deny Paragraphs 15, 16, 17 and 18 however on that date,
what occurred was substantially as described by Patient A in Paragraph
These paragraph references are to Patient A’s statement dated
1 November 2010 [Ex 3 pp 8-9]. It is submitted that this is
admission by the Respondent that he had an intimate sexual encounter with
Patient A as described by her in paragraph 18
of her statement when she visited
the Grafton clinic between 12 March 2009 and 3 April 2009.
Respondent retracted this admission during cross-examination. Under
cross-examination he stated that the “first full intimate
he had with Patient A was during the consultation on 3 April 2009 when he
engaged in passionate kissing and petting
with Patient A in a treatment room at
the Grafton clinic. He stated that Patient A was booked into to see him about
her glasses
not working properly. The contact including kissing, the Respondent
touching Patient A’s breasts and genital region and Patient
A touching the
Respondent’s genital region. The Respondent denied having sexual
intercourse with Patient A during this consultation.
In his statement dated 14
October 2011 the Respondent admitted particulars 2 (a) and (c) of the
complaints: i.e. kissing Patient
A and engaging in sexual contact with her
during the 3 April 2009 treatment session [Ex R1 p 7].
cross-examination the Respondent said he regarded himself as being in an
intimate relationship with Patient A which he expected
to continue. He said he
told Patient A she should see another optometrist in those circumstances but
took no steps to make that
happen. He said he left it to Patient A to make
those arrangements and did not mention the relationship to any of his
colleagues.
The Respondent said he thought the situation was unethical because
he undertook sexual actions in his consultation room. He realised
at this time
he was crossing a boundary and did not think what had occurred was acceptable to
his peers. He said his actions involved
poor judgment that might cloud his
judgment with the potential of leading to a poor clinical outcome for the
his statement dated 14 October 2011 the Respondent stated that between 3 April
2009 and July 2009 he saw Patient A a few times
in parks or in the street and
they communicated by SMS. The first time he had sexual intercourse with Patient
A was in July 2009
in Yamba while Patient A was on holidays there. The
Respondent stated that another act of sexual intercourse with Patient A occurred
at the Grafton clinic in 2009 “well before business hours”. He
admitted the sexual encounter with Patient A on 31 December
2009 at his marital
in February and March 2010 as
described by Patient A in paragraphs 31 to 33 of
her statement, but denied having any sexual contact with her at the Grafton
during the consultations on 20 January 2010 and 23 February 2010. The
Respondent said his relationship with Patient A ended at the
end of March 2010.
He said he made a serious attempt to reconcile with his wife soon thereafter.
He stated that he “left
the matrimonial home in approximately March/April
2010” [Ex R1 p 6], but when questioned by the Tribunal stated this was an
error and that he meant to state March/April 2009. Earlier in his statement the
Respondent said “As at 31 December 2009 I
was still separated from my
wife”. [Ex 6 p 5]
Respondent agreed in cross-examination that he wished Patient A to see another
optometrist after their relationship ended and
stated it was because “I
needed to draw a line in the sand”. He denied the real reason he no
longer wished to see her
was because it was inconvenient for him to do so as the
relationship had ended. He said he did not consider referring her to another
practitioner for the January 2010 consultation as he was the only optometrist
working at the Yamba clinic that day. He agreed it
was possible for him to
refer Patient A to another practitioner for the February 2010 consultation and
had asked her to do so but
felt she preferred to see him. He denied the real
reason he kept treating her was for his own sexual
gratification.
Respondent denied giving false or misleading information to the Complainant
during its investigation. The Complainant submits
that the Respondent clearly
did provide false or misleading information when he disclosed that he and
Patient A met at their places
of residence and a hotel during their sexual
relationship but did not disclose that meetings occurred at the clinic. It is
that even on the Respondent’s version of events, at least two
meetings between the Respondent and Patient A involving a sexual
between them occurred at the clinic.
Respondent conceded that optometry is a profession within which boundaries are
set for the protection of practitioner and patient
and involving a relationship
of trust between practitioner and patient. He said he had first looked at the
Code of Professional
Conduct governing the profession in New South Wales only
after it was sent to him by the Complainant under cover of a letter alleging
that he had breached it. The last time he had looked at a code was at
University in Queensland. The Respondent said he had received
some counseling
from Dr Schilling, who is a family counselor, not a psychiatrist or
psychologist.
his statement dated 14 October 2011 the Respondent denied Particulars 1, 2(b),
2(d), 3 and 5 of each complaint. He admitted Particulars
2(a) and 2(c). In
relation to Particular 4 of each complaint the Respondent accepted that he
engaged in an inappropriate personal
relationship with Patient A that involved
frequent telephone contact with her for non-therapeutic purposes and that
included sexual
clinic on one occasion (3 April 2009) and that here may have been a
occasion of such contact at the clinic but outside business hours. [Ex R1 pp
Relevant law
National Law relevantly defines unsatisfactory professional conduct as: conduct
“that demonstrates the ... judgment possessed
... by the practitioner in
the practice of the practitioner’s profession is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience” [s 139B(1)(a)]; and, any other improper or
unethical conduct
relating to the practice or purported practice of the
practitioner’s profession [s 139B(1)(l)]. Section 139E of the National
Law defines “professional misconduct” as:
(a) unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or
cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration; or
(b) more than
one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the instances are
considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
allegations in Complaint One relate to the level of the Respondent’s
judgment, rather than his knowledge, skill or care
and also allege that he
engaged in improper or unethical conduct. It is alleged in Complaint Two that
the Respondent has engaged
in unsatisfactory professional conduct that falls
within either or both of the limbs of the definition of professional misconduct
referred to in the previous paragraph that is sufficiently serious to justify
suspension or cancellation of the Respondent’s
registration.
standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is the
civil standard. However, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be “comfortably
satisfied” that the particulars
of the Complaints have been established.
This flows from the well known principles articulated by Dixon J in
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 362–363 as
“The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of
consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question whether the issue
has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not
be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
is fixed intermediate between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction
a civil issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily
affects the process by which
reasonable satisfaction is attained.”
determining whether the Complaints are made out and imposing any consequential
orders, this Tribunal is exercising protective,
not punitive jurisdiction.
Protective orders are made in order to protect those members of the public who
require protection and,
“from the professional point of view, in order
that abuse of privilege may not lead to a loss of privilege”:
New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Complainant submits that optometry is a profession and that the members of that
profession enjoy a privileged, autonomous and
authoritative position with
respect to their patients arising out of their position in the profession. The
skill and expertise of
optometrists, the importance of the work they do
concerning patients’ eyesight and the close one-on-one proximity that
between optometrist and patient in treatment sessions at clinics means
that patients place a high degree of trust in optometrists.
This degree of
trust is analogous to that placed in medical professionals (which has also been
held to be applicable to psychologists:
HCCC v Biersteker (No 1)
a passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993,
unreported):
“The degree of trust which patients necessarily
give to their doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the
to the doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters,
the trust a patient places in a doctor is considerable.
In some cases, of which
the present seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be
almost absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such
cases is also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a
matter of fact;
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament
of the patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
because of the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a
position to do whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is
one of the reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations
and are expected
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the
public interest.”
Complainant submits that these comments are applicable to optometrists subject
to appropriate regard being given to the differences
in the practise of the two
professions. Patients entrust the ongoing efficacy of their eyesight to
optometrists. Poor treatment
could have potentially grave outcomes for a
patient’s ocular health. Patients also trust optometrists to administer
skilled physical treatment often in very close physical proximity in
situations where they are usually in a treatment room alone
optometrist. Their position in the profession gives optometrists power over
patients which requires strict boundaries in
their relations with patients to be
clearly understood by optometrists and observed by them. These boundaries are
important to ensure
the protection of the patient so he or she can always make
informed consent where necessary and to ensure that the treatment given
patient is adequate and not compromised.
an optometrist might perceive a patient as a willing participant in an intimate
relationship is not relevant and does not excuse
a failure to observe
appropriate boundaries. As the Medical Tribunal observed in
November 2002) at p 13:
“It is not to the point that he
perceived her to be a willing party. “Mutuality” in the
relationship can never
truly exist. The position of power occupied by a
treating doctor is such that a relationship with a patient can never truly be
The doctor and not the patient has the ethical obligation
to avoid such relationships. As Denning LJ observed in
De Gregory v General
Medical Council
[1961] AC 957
at 966 “even if she sets her cap at him,
he must in no way respond or encourage her”.
Submissions on
the evidence
Complainant submits that the evidence of Patient A should be accepted and where
it conflicts with the Respondent’s evidence,
the Respondent’s
evidence should be rejected. Patient A, it is submitted, presented as a witness
who was doing her best to
tell the truth. Patient A was clearly embarrassed by
having to give evidence but, nevertheless, gave it clearly and truthfully.
had nothing to gain in making what must have been embarrassing disclosures about
the sexual encounters she had with the Respondent
at the Grafton clinic and
elsewhere. Although she was obviously distraught at the termination of the
relationship in March 2010
it is submitted that this Tribunal would not find
that Patient A was being untruthful in her evidence in order to seek revenge on
the Respondent. She was, indeed, a somewhat reluctant complainant who sought to
withdraw her complaint on two occasions because
she felt partly responsible for
the relationship and felt pressured by the Respondent’s indication he
proposed to send a letter
to Patient A’s husband. It is submitted that
this Tribunal would make a similar finding with respect to Patient A as the
Tribunal found in relation to Patient A in the case of
(supra at p 12): i.e. “She did not and does not fit the mould of a
“woman scorned” who is seeking to exact vengeance
against her former
is significant support for Patient A’s evidence in other evidence admitted
in these proceedings. Some support can be
found in the Respondent’s
evidence. He admitted to an inappropriate sexual relationship with Patient A
between March 2009
and March 2010. He admitted to engaging in a passionate
sexual encounter with her during a treatment session at the Graton clinic
April 2009, after which he regarded himself as being in a relationship with her.
He also admitted to engaging in sexual intercourse
with her on another occasion
at the clinic before work hours and to treating Patient A in January and
February 2010 when they were
in a sexual relationship. He admitted to frequent
telephone contact with Patient A.
for Patient A’s testimony is also found elsewhere. For example, the
frequency and pattern of the telephone communications
from the Respondent to
Patient A, as noted above, support her evidence about the relationship. The
frequency of these communications
from the Respondent to Patient A is consistent
with Patient A’s evidence about the duration and nature of the
relationship
between her and the Respondent. This frequency was as follows: 15
April 2009 – 31 July 2009 - 172 communications (when the
relationship was current); 1 August 2009 - 30 December 2009 – 52
communications (when there was no sexual relationship
and only telephone or
email contact); 31 December 2009 – 22 March 2010 – 135
communications (when the sexual relationship
was current); 23 March 2010 –
21 May 2010 – 71 communications (after the relationship
A’s evidence that the Respondent did not administer an intraocular
pressure test and changed lenses with one hand during
the first treatment
session in March 2009 is supported by the evidence of Mr Henderson and the
clinic records for that treatment.
Mr Henderson said changing lenses with one
hand was possible, though difficult. The clinic records do not record the
pressure test
being given.
Respondent, on the other hand has not been full and frank in his evidence. He
has given a number of accounts, which differ in
very significant ways as noted
above in paragraphs 21 to 33. These differences relate to the length of the
relationship, the occurrence
of sexual encounters at the clinic and the date of
reconciliation with his wife. The Respondent, it is submitted, presented as a
witness who was evasive, vague and who sought to shade his evidence to put
himself in the best light while casting responsibility
on Patient A, even to the
extent of suggesting that she should have been responsible for arranging to see
another optometrist because
of their relationship. It is submitted that the
Respondent did not appear to have any clear understanding of appropriate
boundaries,
of his ethical obligations not to exploit a patient sexually and of
the inappropriateness of continuing to treat a patient with whom
he had formed a
sexual relationship. It is submitted that to the extent of conflict between
their testimony, the Tribunal would
prefer the testimony of Patient A to that of
the Respondent. If the Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s evidence is
and frank it follows that the Tribunal may find that the way in which
the Respondent conducted his “defence” did not
involve him taking
any responsibility for his actions.
Complainant submits that the Respondent’s termination of his clinical
relationship with Patient A from May 2010 is not consistent
with any recognition
by him at that time of ethical boundaries. Rather it is consistent with it no
longer being convenient for the
Respondent to see Patient A because his sexual
relationship with Patient A had ended and his wife had become aware of that
relationship.
The Respondent maintained the clinical relationship with Patient
A through to February 2010 out of self-interest so that he could
sexual relationship with her. He also terminated the clinical relationship in
May 2010 out of self-interest rather than
out of any ethical concern for Patient
A or any recognition of appropriate boundaries.
the extent that peer review evidence is necessary, the Complainant, relies upon
the evidence of Mr Henderson that the Respondent’s
actions fell
significantly below the applicable standard and invited his strong criticism.
The Complainant, therefore submits that
all the particulars of each complaint
are made out.
Appropriate orders
this Tribunal accepts Patient A’s evidence account and Particulars 1 to 4
of the Complaints are made out, the Complainant
submits that a period of
deregistration is appropriate in the circumstances for the following
Respondent has
not fully admitted the extent of the conduct and has not been fully candid with
the Tribunal.
Respondent does
not have true insight into the seriousness of the conduct and the Tribunal would
no doubt consequently hold concerns
that he could repeat similar behaviour in
the future.
complainant’s version of the first treatment session is accepted, the
swiftness with which the conduct commenced (with
a patient he had just met) is
an extremely concerning factor.
There is no
evidence before this Tribunal that the Respondent has had counselling by a
registered psychologist or psychiatrist or
that any counselling has been based
on full and frank admissions regarding the extent of the conduct he engaged
in. The Tribunal
would not therefore be assured that there is no risk to
the public from a repeat of such behaviour.
the event that the Tribunal does not consider deregistration appropriate, but
finds that particulars 1 to 4 are still made out,
the Complainant proposes that
the following orders are appropriate at a minimum:
short period of suspension (3 months)
3. The Respondent enrol in and complete appropriate
ethics course at own expense within 6 months of order being made. Course
be approved by Optometry Council of NSW.
4. The Respondent receive counselling from a
registered psychiatrist or psychologist, to be approved by the Optometry Council
NSW, for a period of 12 months or for a further period as deemed appropriate
by the Council. Counselling sessions are to occur on
a monthly basis at a
minimum. Prior to commencing the counselling sessions, the Respondent is
to provide the psychiatrist/psychologist
with a copy of the Tribunal’s
Reasons for Decision. Counselling sessions are to involve discussion of
the conduct and concerns
raised in the Reasons for Decision and the
psychiatrist/psychologist is to provide reports to the Council at 3 monthly
regarding the Respondent’s progress.
purpose of the period of suspension is to mark this Tribunal’s strong
disapproval of the Respondent’s conduct and
for the purpose of specific
deterrence and also general deterrence.
this Tribunal does not accept the complainant’s version and prefers the
Respondent’s version, the Complainant submits
that orders 1, 2 and 3 in
paragraph 50 above are still appropriate.
Complainant seeks its costs in these
proceedings.
RESPONDENT’S WRITTEN
SUBMISSIONS
nature of professional disciplinary proceedings is not to punish the relevant
practitioner but to protect the public. The Court
of Appeal in a joint judgment
(Gleeson CJ, Meagher JA and Handley JA) said this in
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
[1997] 41 NSWLR 630
...Disciplinary proceedings against members of a profession are
intended to maintain proper ethical and professional standards, primarily
the protection of the public, but also for the protection of the profession.
case concerned a general practitioner who had been found by the Medical Tribunal
to have engaged in the following conduct:
The first patient, JT, was seen by the doctor in his surgery at
Woolgoolga on 6 May 1987 for the purpose of having an inter-uterine
contraceptive device fitted. After the patient sat up on the examination table,
the doctor placed her hand on his clothing over his
erect penis.
JT's friend, DM, was the next patient admitted to the doctor's surgery
that day. She had attended to drive JT home and to have a
pap smear. After this
procedure, the doctor asked whether she had had a recent breast examination. She
said she did not "really bother
examination table the doctor, standing behind her, put his hand inside her dress
and bra and
held one of her breasts. DM said she did not want this and sat up
NM, who was then 20, consulted the doctor at the Warringah Mall Medical
Centre, Brookvale on 27 March 1992 complaining of flat feet.
He examined one
foot and one lower leg, and then informed her that she was due for a breast
examination and pap smear, and asked
her to get on to the examination table. She
did so. She was not wearing a bra and the doctor handled her breasts. Earlier,
had initiated a personal conversation, unrelated to her flat feet,
described as her
unusual tan. The Tribunal were convinced, to the necessary degree of
satisfaction, that the doctor's examination
of this patient was carried out for
sexual gratification.
The last complaint related to LW, who saw the doctor at the Chatswood 24
Hour Medical Centre on 2 November 1992. She was complaining
of loss of appetite,
nausea, vomiting and sleeplessness. After minimal history taking, the doctor
pulled up her upper garment and
palpated both breasts with his fingers. After
pressing both sides of her stomach down as far as the groin, he then resumed his
examination
"of her breasts" and, after discussing acu pressure points, he
demonstrated these on her upper chest wall above each nipple and on
her perineum
between her vagina and anus. He then carried out an irregular vaginal
examination. The Tribunal concluded:
"It seems most improbable that this examination was for any genuine
medical purpose and we are satisfied that it was at least in part
motivated by a
desire for some form of sexual gratification
". (pp 632-633)
the context of those factual findings the Court said the following on the matter
of the trust given by patients to medical
practitioners:
Female patients entrust themselves to
doctors, male and female, for medical examinations and treatment which may
require intimate
physical contact which they would not otherwise accept from the
doctor. The standards of the profession oblige doctors to use the
opportunities
afforded them for such contact for proper therapeutic purposes and not
otherwise. This is the standard that the public
in general and female patients
in particular expect from their doctors, and which right thinking members of the
profession observe,
and expect their colleagues to observe. In this context we
would adopt, with respect, the following statement from the dissenting
of Priestley JA in Richter v Walton (15/7/93, unreported) at 8-9:
"The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their doctors may
vary according to the condition which takes the patient
to the doctor. Even in
regard to the most commonplace medical matters the trust a patient places in a
doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present seems to me to be an
example, the patient's trust cannot help but be almost absolute. The doctor's
power in regard to the patient in such cases is also very great. I do not mean
power in an abstract way but as a matter of fact;
the extent of the power will
vary according to the temperament of the patient, but the doctor with some
patients and for limited
periods, because of the relationship in which they are
temporarily placed, is in a position to do whatever the doctor wants with
body of the patient. This is one of the reasons why doctors are subject to
correspondingly great obligations and are expected
to maintain very high
standards: all this being very much in the public interest
Unsurprisingly
the vast majority of decided health disciplinary cases concerns medical
practitioners.
can be no doubt that medical and other health practitioners who abuse that trust
in the way Dr Litchfield was found to have,
must have their right to continue to
practise removed by way of deregistration.
Litchfield’s
case is an example of a serious and complete breach of the trust a patient
reposes in an examining medical practitioner.
In such clear-cut cases the matter
of ‘vulnerability’ of a particular patient is not a relevant
consideration.
issue is just is more likely to arise where there is an ongoing doctor-patient
relationship in consequence of which the doctor
is aware of some matter or
matters which demonstrate vulnerability in the patient – eg a
psychological problem, low self-esteem,
etc. If a practitioner exploits that
known vulnerability by engaging in a personal and/or sexual relationship with
that patient it
is likely to cause harm to the patient. Those practitioners are
usually de-registered (eg
it is not the fact that in
cases where a medical practitioner and
patient engage in a personal and/or sexual relationship the practitioner is
necessarily de-registered
the Medical Tribunal refers to the Medical
Board’s then-existing Policy on Sexual Misconduct which would appear to be
in identical
terms to that currently on the Medical Council’s
Policy first seeks to impose an absolute prohibition upon sexual activity
between a medical practitioner and a current patient
by declaring that such
conduct amounts to professional misconduct on the part of the
practitioner.
2 however makes the important point that in order to determine the appropriate
sanction to impose one must look at ‘
... the circumstances of each
12. Clause 3 sets out relevant factors to
consider being:
- the degree of dependence in the doctor/patient
relationship;
- evidence of exploitation;
- the duration of the
professional relationship; and
- the nature of the services
5 sets out the rationale for the Board’s/Council’s adopting its
position. What is said in sub-clauses a, b, c and
d commend themselves for
consideration and highlight the unique nature of the doctor-patient
relationship.
the nature of any particular optometrist-patient relationship might conceivably
approximate that of a doctor-patient relationship,
generally such relationships
would not. Certainly the professional relationship between Mr Ford and Patient A
way of contrast to the Medical Council’s Policy on Sexual Misconduct is
the Code of Professional Conduct of the Optometrists
Registration Board NSW
(‘the Code’)
[HCCC Docs, Tab 28]
.That document was apparently
promulgated in May 2005 and was revised in December 2006. It was presumably
prepared by the Board specifically
for practising optometrists.
opening paragraph of the Code says the rules of conduct in it
followed and then refers to the Code as a
. The only reference in
the Code to sexual matters is in Rule 7 which is in the following
An optometrist must not exploit his or her professional
relationship with a patient or any other person in the conduct of his or her
practice in any way, including sexually, emotionally or
financially.’
order to establish a breach of Rule 7 the HCCC must prove to the
standard that the respondent exploited his professional
relationship with Patient A in order to enter into and maintain a sexual
relationship with her. There is no evidence whatsoever that
Patient A’s Version of Events
A readily agreed in cross-examination that she was a willing participant in what
occurred. On her own version of events,
relevant conduct commenced during the
first consultation with Mr Ford on 12 March 2009. Even though she barely knew
him she was
happy to engage in an episode of kissing which lasted about 20
minutes. That was interrupted by a mobile telephone call from her
following the conclusion of which the kissing resumed for a further period of 5
to 10 minutes.
only treatment rendered by Mr Ford to that point had been a fairly standard eye
examination.
to Patient A no further treatment was rendered until a consultation in early
April 2009 at the end of which Mr Ford performed
... a very quick eye
examination which took about 5 minutes ...
[Exh C3 para 21].
In the interim the following had occurred:
20.1 on about 16
March 2009 another episode of kissing
[Exh C3 para 16]
20.2 towards the end of March, an episode of kissing; touching each other's
genitals over their clothing and Mr Ford's touching her
breasts which she
[Exh C3 para 18]
20.3 sexual intercourse in the treatment room prior to the
quick eye examination...
[Exh C3 para 18]
April and July 2009 Patient A claims she would attend the clinic to see Mr Ford
when sexual intercourse would occur but does
not allege that any treatment was
ever rendered.
A and Mr Ford agree that in July 2009 sexual intercourse occurred whilst Patient
A was on holidays at an apartment in Yamba.
They also agree that no further
such incident occurred until December 2009.
A alleges that the next incident occurred during a consultation on 20 January
A and Mr Ford agree that the sexual relationship continued throughout February
and March 2010 but no conduct took place at
the clinic premises. They also
agree the relationship was over by end March 2010.
Ford’s Version of Events
25. Mr Ford denies the following
allegations:
25.1 the extended hand-holding at the 12 March 2009
consultation;
25.2 the extended kissing episode on 12 March
25.3 the kissing episode on approximately 16 March 2009;
25.4 that sexual intercourse occurred at the clinic premises in early April
2009 or at any time during normal business hours when
other people were present,
including the consultation of 20 January 2010.
admits that at a consultation, probably on 3 April 2009, there was the kissing
and touching described by Patient A in paragraph
18 of her Statement
Particulars of Complaint
or about 12 March 2009, during a treatment session at the Eyecare Plus Clinic in
Grafton ('the clinic'), the practitioner engaged
in inappropriate physical
and/or sexual conduct with Patient A by doing the
(a) holding Patient A's hand;
(b) kissing Patient A on the lips.
Tribunal will not be comfortably satisfied that Patient A’s version of
what took place on that occasion is correct. In
relation to the hand-holding
she claims that occurred whilst Mr Ford was changing the lenses in the trial
frames with his right hand.
Mr Ford denies the allegation. Mr Henderson, the
Complainant's peer reviewer said that it would be extremely difficult to do that
with one hand and that in the normal course of practice it was most unlikely
that any optometrist would attempt to do it.
the Tribunal would prefer Mr Ford in relation to the extent of the hand-holding
which he says occurred when Patient A became
anxious after he had inserted
anaesthetic drops into her eyes, in response to which she took hold of his
the Tribunal will prefer Mr Ford as to the nature of the kissing which occurred
on that occasion. It is extremely unlikely
that what Patient A says took place
did in fact occur given that by her account she engaged in kissing Mr Ford for a
period of time
amounting to nearly 30 minutes whilst the eye examination itself
took significantly less time. If Mr Ford is preferred the Tribunal
conclude that Patient A was the instigator of the kiss which was brief.
or about 3 April 2009, during a treatment session at the clinic, the
practitioner engaged in inappropriate physical and/or sexual
conduct with
Patient A by doing the following:
(a) kissing Patient
(b) undressing in the presence of Patient
(c) engaging in sexual contact with Patient A;
(d) engaging in sexual intercourse with Patient
Ford has admitted this Particular to the extent of sub-paragraphs (a) and (c).
He denies sub-paragraphs (b) and (d). Whilst Mr
Ford concedes that he may have
engaged in sexual intercourse with Patient A at the clinic on 1 or 2 occasions
he contends that those
were occasions outside of normal business hours when
there were no other people present at the clinic premises.
Tribunal will not be comfortably satisfied that the events alleged by Patient A
in fact occurred. It is extremely unlikely that
the parties engaged in sexual
intercourse at the clinic during normal business hours whilst any number of
other people were present
on the premises. Patient A said that she did not turn
her mind at the time to whether or not the door to the treatment room was
locked. It is unlikely she would have engaged in conduct of that nature unless
she was satisfied the door was locked.
than the competing versions of Patient A and Mr Ford there is very little
evidence before the Tribunal which would lend support
to either version. One
such piece of evidence however concerns Patient A’s assertion in her
Statement that the first occasion
upon which drops were placed into her eyes was
when Jenny Stephens saw her at the clinic in May 2010
[Exh C3 para
Henderson was asked questions about the notes of Mr Ford’s final
consultation with Patient A on 23 February 2010
[Exh C6 p 41]
course of commenting upon that document he noted that Intra Ocular Pressures
were recorded. Given the equipment the practice
used to perform that test, Mr
Ford must have inserted drops into Patient A’s eyes on that occasion.
the notes of the initial consultation of 12 March 2009 do not contain any note
of what those pressures were, Mr Ford says it
would be his normal practice to
perform that test on an initial examination an there is no reason not to accept
or about 23 February 2010, during a treatment session at the clinic, the
practitioner engaged in inappropriate physical and/or
sexual conduct with
Patient A by doing the following:
(a) kissing Patient
(b) engaging in sexual contact with Patient A;
(c) engaging in sexual intercourse with Patient
35. Mr Ford denies these allegations. The submissions made in
paragraphs 31 to 34 above are repeated.
or about March 2009 until or about March 2010, the practitioner engaged in an
inappropriate personal relationship with Patient
(a) frequent telephone contact between the
practitioner and Patient A for non-therapeutic purposes; and
(b) sexual contact between the practitioner and Patient A, including
sexual contact at the clinic premises on more than one occasion,
and thereby breached Rule 7 of the Optometrists Registration Board NSW
Code of Professional Conduct.
Particular is really the essence of the Complaint against Mr Ford. He admits
Particular 4 save that he does not admit he breached
Henderson's view seems to be that it is not necessarily inappropriate for an
optometrist to have a sexual relationship with a patient.
His real criticism of
Mr Ford is that having commenced such a relationship with Patient A first, he
continued to treat her as an
optometrist and secondly, it was inappropriate for
any incident of such behaviour to have occurred at the clinic
relation to breach of Rule 7 Mr Henderson’s evidence was less clear and
less convincing. In chief he stated that he believed
Mr Ford breached Rule 7.
When asked ‘
’ he gave evidence in the following
... It's hard to know. She's making appointments. He's not discouraging
her. That's exploitation. It is taking advantage.'
cross examination he appeared to change his view and gave the evidence set out
in paragraph 34 above.
Tribunal must be comfortably satisfied that Mr Ford exploited his professional
relationship with his patient Patient A in a sexual
and/or emotional way. It
will not be.
evidence is that both Patient A and Mr Ford were having difficulties in their
respective marriages. Mr Ford said he felt flattered
by the attention and
interest shown by Patient A at the first consultation. Patient A left the
Tribunal in absolutely no doubt that
she was a willing participant in what
occurred. On her version of events she was content to engage in an extended
episode of apparently
passionate kissing with a man whom she barely knew.
Perhaps most tellingly she emphatically withdrew the claim made in her initial
complaint to the HCCC that Mr Ford ‘
... Took advantage of the trust,
he exploited my vulnerability, in order to have sex with
is simply no evidence of exploitation. The Tribunal will not be comfortably
satisfied that Rule 7 has been breached.
Code of Conduct does not purport to be an exhaustive statement of all
disciplinary ‘offences’ which optometrists might
commit (see
introductory paragraph). The formal Complaints are framed on the basis that the
conduct complained of amounts to either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct because firstly it ‘
demonstrates the
possessed by ... (Mr Ford)... in the practice of optometry is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
equivalent level of training or experience
.’ (s 139B(1)(a)). Secondly
it is said that Mr Ford ‘
engaged in improper or unethical conduct
relating to the practice of optometry
’ (s 139B(1)(l).
first basis is misconceived. Sub-section (1)(a) is directed to the clinical
performance of a health practitioner. There is no
complaint about the treatment
actually rendered by Mr Ford to Patient A.
of Mr Henderson’s evidence in chief was directed to answering whether or
not he was of the view that the conduct described
by Patient A in her Statement
was conduct that fell below the standard expected and whether or not it
attracted his strong criticism.
He answered both questions in the positive.
However when cross-examined he accepted that he was not saying that the conduct
demonstrated
Mr Ford’s judgment was below the expected standard and went
so far as to say he could not comment on that.
is the second basis of complaint which is relevant. Mr Henderson was not asked
any questions about impropriety or ethics.
was pointed out by the Chairperson at the commencement of the proceedings, this
is a specialist Tribunal which can form its own
view as to whether or not Mr
Ford’s conduct was improper or unethical. Mr Ford himself gave evidence
that the behavior he
admits having occurred on 3 April 2009 – as described
by Patient A in paragraph 18 of her Statement – was unethical because
engaging in it he crossed boundaries. He said his peers would find those
actions unacceptable and he regarded them so. Boundaries
needed to be observed
so that proper, objective, professional judgments could be
the absence of any evidence of exploitation; given Patient A’s evidence as
to her willingness to engage in the relationship
and Mr Henderson’s views
as to what he regarded as essentially inappropriate about the conduct, the
Tribunal should find that
Mr Ford’s admitted conduct at the 3 April 2009
consultation was improper and that he should not have continued to treat Patient
A as a patient after the relationship commenced in April 2009.
considering that matter the Tribunal should bear in mind that the parties are in
agreement that following the 3 April 2009 consultation
the treatment rendered by
Mr Ford to Patient A consisted of only 2 consultations – 20 January and 23
February 2010.
the investigation of a complaint against him by the Health Care Complaints
Commission ('the Commission') the practitioner supplied
the Commission with
false and/or misleading information in relation to his relationship with Patient
A by stating in his response
to the Commission signed and dated 15 October 2010
I had a sexual relationship with [Patient A] on and off between 19
March 2009 and December 2009. Our meetings occurred at my place
of residence
[Patient A's] place of residence or a hotel (when she was on
was only during Mr Ford’s cross-examination that it became clear the HCCC
is asserting by Particular 5 that the information
was misleading because Mr Ford
made no reference to there having been any sexual conduct at the clinic
Ford’s letter of 15 October 2010 is to be found at Tab 23 of the
Commission's documents. That letter responds to a Notice
To Give Information (p
282) which specifies 3 matters. Relevantly the Commission requested Mr Ford to
2. A response to the complaint that you had personal and sexual
relationship with Patient A and you between March 2009 and March
letter of 15 October 2010 does precisely that. The Commission was on notice
from the complaint made to it by Patient A that she
was alleging sexual conduct
had occurred at the clinic premises. It was open to the Commission to make a
specific request of Mr
Ford about that matter had it wished to. At that time it
did not. Put simply he truthfully responded to a request made by the
Commission. The statement of concern is palpably true. It is not false. Mr
Ford in his evidence denied any intention to mislead
Commission.
the Commission was in fact misled it was only temporary. Following receipt of
the letter of 15 October 2010 the Commission in
fact sought that very
information by way of an undated follow-up letter to Avant Law (p 290). A
response was made by Avant Law by
letter dated 19 November 2010 (p 291) in which
it was admitted on behalf of Mr Ford that he had sexual relations at the
on one occasion when it was closed.
regard to the matters above the Tribunal will not be comfortably satisfied that
the statement made by Mr Ford in his letter
of 15 October 2010 was false and/or
misleading.
Matters relevant to Protective Orders
doctors have provided reports indicating Mr Ford was suffering from depression
and possibly experiencing panic attacks.
He has been treated for those
conditions which are currently in remission.
Ford has undergone counselling with Mr Schilling including counselling as to
boundary issues and properly dealing with and relating
than the subject conduct Mr Ford is a person of good character – see
references from Reverend Annesley and Mr Schilling.
reconciled with his wife and children.
59. He has demonstrated insight
into the inappropriateness of his conduct.
60. He has expressed sincere
contrition for his actions to Patient A (see pages 17, 16).
practice partners are prepared to have him continue to work in the
David Ford, you have been found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
and professional misconduct.
The Tribunal found your conduct to be unethical and that your professional
judgment was significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a
practitioner of your level of training and expertise. You took advantage of
opportunities afforded you by virtue of
a patient seeking your clinical
assessment and treatment for your own sexual gratification. In doing so you
breached your professional
obligations to the patient, potentially weakened
public trust in the profession, and brought the profession into disrepute. You
reprimanded for this unsatisfactory conduct and professional misconduct.
The Tribunal noted that you have acknowledged that your conduct was
inappropriate and have expressed regret for any harm done to the
involved, but concluded that you did not fully comprehend the nature of the
professional misconduct central to the complaint.
The Tribunal also found that
you had not sought the appropriate clinical assessment and treatment for the
conditions you suggested
explained and mitigated your conduct.
The Tribunal has placed conditions on your registration designed to ensure
that you undertake formal study in professional ethics
and seek the assessment
of a psychologist or psychiatrist and a related program of therapeutic
treatment. You will be suspended from
practice to ensure you arrange such study
and commence such treatment. You will not be able recommence work until you have
with the Optometry Council your program of study, and only be able to
remove the condition on your practice relating to psychological
or psychiatric
treatment after nine months and if the Optometry Council considers it no longer
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.06 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter