URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDRGC/2012/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
In the matter of White [2012] NSWDRGC 1 (3 April 2012)
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation
In the matter of WHITE
[2012] NSWDRGC 1
Hearing Dates
6 March 2012
Decision Date
His Honour Senior Judge Roger Dive
Mr White is a suitable and appropriate person for the making of a second
Meaning of "eligible convicted offender", "suitable person", "appropriate in
all of the circumstances"- second application for a Compulsory
Drug Treatment
Order - new offences committed when released to parole supervision - legislation
aimed at "the most entrenched and
serious group of drug addicted
Legislation Cited
Drug Court Act 1998
Drug Court Act 1998
(Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
Cases Cited
[2005] NSWDRGC 2
Principal judgment
White, Michael (Offender)
Representation
R. Atkins, for Director of Public Prosecutions
M. Dalitz, Legal Aid
Commission, for offender
File Number(s)
1 The offender, Michael White, has been sentenced at both the Blacktown
and Parramatta Local Courts to some lengthy terms of imprisonment
for offences
of break, enter and steal. The sentencing courts referred him to the Drug Court
for the consideration of a Compulsory
Drug Treatment Order (CDTO).
There is no dispute that he is an
"eligible convicted offender"
Drug Court Act 1998
("the Act"). The Court must
now decide under
of the Act as to whether he is a
"suitable person"
for a CDTO, and whether
"it is appropriate in all of the circumstances that
the sentence be served by way of compulsory drug treatment detention"
issue is that Mr White had only recently been the subject of a lengthy CDTO, and
committed new crimes soon after release to
parole at the end of that
3 The Office of the DPP has traditionally assisted the Drug Court
by taking a role in screening referred offenders as to eligibility
appropriateness issues. In relation to Mr White, Ms Atkins, for the DPP, submits
that Mr White is not an appropriate person in
all the circumstances. Mr Dalitz,
from the Legal Aid Commission, has assisted Mr White to pursue the making of a
Background:
4 The following quite complicated factual background draws closely on the
5 Mr White has been to the CDTCC
before. In November 2007 Mr White was referred to the Drug Court for the
consideration of a CDTO
in relation to 16 counts of break, enter and steal, as
well as a number of offences to be taken into account on a Form 1. For those
offences Mr White received a sentence with a total term of six years and three
months, with a non-parole period of three years and
three months. When he
appeared before the Drug Court, Mr White was found to be eligible and suitable
for the CDTCC program, and the
Drug Court made a CDTO on 7 February 2008. Mr
White was, at the time of that referral, also subject to a balance of parole
for similar offending from Wagga Wagga District Court, with an expiry
date of 16 October 2008.
6 Mr White was transferred to the CDTCC on 12
February 2008, and remained on Stage 1 until progressing to Stage 2 on 15
October 2008.
He then progressed to Stage 3 on 23 April 2009. On 30 August 2010
a recommendation for parole was made, and he was released to parole
by order of
the Drug Court on 6 November 2010, with a balance of supervised parole until 25
October 2013.
7 Supervision with the Probation and Parole service began
on release, and Mr White reported on 8 November 2010 to Blacktown District
Office, and was supervised by that office until being taken back into custody.
Mr White was arrested on 1 March 2011 for re-offending
that had occurred on 18
February 2011, being one matter of break, enter and steal. Mr White was
sentenced on this matter by Blacktown
Local Court to a total term of two years,
with a non-parole period of 18 months. On 11 March 2011, Mr White's parole was
in relation to the balance of the sentence the subject of a CDTO, being
a period of 2 years 8 months and 8 days.
8 Whilst back in custody, Mr
White was charged with eight further counts of break, enter and steal. These
offences occurred between
20 January and 18 February 2011. These matters were
referred to the Drug Court for the consideration of a Drug Court program,
on 23 August 2011, Mr White was found to be unavailable for the Drug
Court program, as Mr White was still serving the un-expired
non-parole period
attached to the sentence imposed at Blacktown Local Court. All matters were
remitted back to Parramatta Local Court
on 30 August 2011.
9 On 30 August
2011 Mr White was sentenced in respect of the eight additional matters to a
total term of four years with a non-parole
period of three years, and then
referred to the Drug Court for consideration of a CDTO. At the time of referral,
Mr White's earliest
release date was 28 February 2014.
10 Mr White's
referral was screened by the DPP, and it was noted on screening, that, whilst Mr
White was an
"eligible convicted offender"
pursuant to
Drug Court Act
, there were two issues identified. The first issue is the
question of availability, as at the time of referral Mr White was parole
on the balance attached to the 2008 CDTO, which would see him remain in custody
until 8 November 2013. The second is the
"suitability"
"appropriateness",
as Mr White had re-offended within two months of being
released to parole from his previous CDTO.
11 The court convened a case
management meeting on 15 November 2011, and as a result a suitability assessment
report was sought from
the multi-disciplinary team to address the later
12 That report, dated 7 December 2011, assesses Mr White as being
both suitable and appropriate, and recommends that a CDTO being
supplementary report of 18 January 2012, which was sought to consider the
question of evidence as to drug addiction, provides
some evidence of such, and
does not depart from the earlier assessments and recommendation.
potential parole barrier has been removed, as there is a letter with the court
file from the Director and Secretary of the
State Parole Authority, indicating
that the Authority would give favourable consideration to rescinding the
revocation of parole
"Rescission is required to participate in the CDTCC,
the offender is otherwise eligible, and, it is considered appropriate for him
participate in CDTCC."
The submissions
14 Whilst a number of barriers to the making of a CDTO for Mr White have
been overcome, Ms Atkins has raised, as is the role of the
ODPP, the question of
suitability and appropriateness in the light of his immediate return to serious
crime and his poor response
to parole supervision.
15 The Drug Court has
long-standing policies in its original jurisdiction as to limiting return to the
Drug Court within, generally
speaking, a three-year period. No such policy has
been defined in relation to the CDTCC jurisdiction, and indeed an issue I
in this hearing was that the hearing was about Mr White's
application, and not about any perceived need for a policy regarding repeat
applications. There have been two previous applications by former participants,
however this is the first time the question
of appropriateness has been examined
16 There is no argument regarding the fact that the
legislation governing the CDTCC is beneficial legislation, and that its
should be construed generously (for authorities on beneficial
legislation see
[2005] NSWDRGC 2).
One of the objects of
compulsory drug treatment, as provided in
(Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
, is to provide for
"drug dependent
persons who repeatedly resort to criminal activity to support that
dependency"
. Mr Dalitz has noted that it is threshold condition of entry to
the CDTCC that the applicant has been sentenced to the higher tier
of available
penalties. It is also a threshold issue that they are recidivists, as they must
have been convicted of at least two
offences in the five years prior to the
sentence referred to the Drug Court.
17 In the Second Reading speech in
the Legislative Council, The Hon. John Della Bosca referred to the program
"a hard-core group of offenders with long-term drug addiction and
an associated life of crime and constant imprisonment. It is for
offenders who
have failed to enter or complete other voluntary or court-based treatment
And further
"The program sits at the end of the continuum of
drug diversion programs in N.S.W aimed at breaking the drug-crime cycle."
And further
"The aim is to achieve better outcomes for the state's most
desperately entrenched criminal addicts by assisting them to become drug
and crime free, to take personal responsibility, and to achieve a more
productive lifestyle"
18 So it is clear, from both the legislation
and the Second Reading Speech, that the legislation is specifically aimed at the
entrenched and serious group of drug addicted offenders.
19 Turning to Mr White's situation, a number of factors are
1. Mr White is a long-term, recidivist offender, and has spent
much of the last 15 years in custody.
2. He has not overcome his drug
addiction, or his strong inclination to fund that drug habit by committing
crimes. He very quickly
regressed when on parole, and even committed break and
enters on the day he was seeing his parole officer.
3. Mr White maintains
that he did not address a crucial issue from his childhood during his prior
CDTO, and only now appreciates that
he needs to address that issue.
The treatment partners at the CDTCC support his return, so there is no apparent
barrier to the establishment of a therapeutic relationship
20Mr White did extremely well in the CDTCC program between February
2008 and November 2010, which included 18 months in the community
on Stage 3,
and a total of over two years of access to the community. That is probably his
most successful period of recovery in
21 Repeated opportunities
of a CDTO cannot be the long-term answer to Mr White's recidivist behaviours,
and there is a legitimate
concern that Mr White may only be able to stay away
from crime and drugs with the highest levels of support and supervision. In my
view however the situation has not been reached whereby this second opportunity
of a CDTO should be refused.
22 The personal plans developed for Mr White
on each of the stages of his CDTO will need to be guided by what has occurred
last order. And any future access to the lower level of support of
parole will, of course, need to be guided by his recent history
of relapse to
both drugs and crime.
23 However, I am of the view that Mr White is a
suitable and appropriate person for the making of a second CDTO.
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment or
decision. The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment or
decision to ensure that the
intended use of that material does not breach any
such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of
Court or Tribunal in which it was generated.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (42.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (99.4 KB)
Plain text (ASCII) (12 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter