URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/82.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover Authority of NSW (Inspector Salway) v Bashford International Pty Ltd [2006] NSWCIMC 82 (21 June 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
WORKCOVER AUTHORITY OF NSW (INSPECTOR
BASHFORD INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD
Case Number:
20084942/06/2
Hearing Dates:
15 June 2006
Date of Decision: 21
Magistrate:
Legislation:
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
Sections 8(1)
Representation:
Solicitors for Prosecutor: Moray & Agnew
Solicitor for Prosecutor: Ms N Rouillon
Counsel for Defendant: Mr J De Meyrick
The Defendant is charged charge, briefly described is as follows:
On the 1 July 2004 at South Nowra the defendant being an employer failed to
ensure the health, safety and welfare at work with a breach
section 8(1)
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
on 1 July 2004. The of its
employees including Adam Bruce Smith (‘the worker’) while the worker
was accessing a mezzanine
storage area to obtain a mould he fell and suffered
injuries when his foot went through a gyprock ceiling as a consequence of which
he fell onto the flooring area of the mezzanine level sustaining injuries
including 2 fractured ribs.
The Defendant entered a plea of guilty to the charge at the first return
listed on 3 April 2006.
At the hearing Counsel for the defendant stated the plea of guilty was
entered to para 1(b) of the Court attendance notice, with the
submitting the other particulars not going to the cause of the incident or to
matters not arising out of the facts. Para
1(b) in its corrected form
It failed to provide any warning signs to indicate the risks associated with
the exposed gyprock ceiling area as distinct from the
part of the mezzanine
storage area which was constructed of chipboard flooring in accordance with the
requirements of clause 39 of
the Occupational Health and safety Regulation
Tendered to the Court by the prosecutor was:
An agreed Statement of Facts
Photographs
The Prosecutor’s Factual Inspection Report
A printout from the WorkCover Authority Prior convictions Database
A schedule of Costs
And the prosecutor’s written submissions.
Tendered to the Court by the defendant was:
Documentation regarding the defendant’s safety policies and
programmes.
Brief written submissions by the defendant.
The statement of Adam Bruce Smith (the injured worker) to the prosecuting
The statement of Rick Pinchen (witness to the incident) to the prosecuting
Mark Rowed, the defendant’s factory manager, and Robert Westaway, the
defendant’s quality assurance manager were called
as witnesses on behalf
of the defendant.
The facts relevant to the charge are set out in the statement of facts as
1. At all material times the informant was an inspector duly appointed
pursuant to clause 11 schedule 3 of the
Occupational Health & Safety
, 2000 under division 1 of Pt 5, and is empowered by s106 of the said Act
to institute proceedings in the within matter.
2. At all material times the defendant, BASHFORD INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD (002
was a company duly incorporated with its registered office at
Suite 110, Jones Bay Wharf 26-32 Pirrama Road, Pyrmont in the State
of New South
3. At all material times the defendant conducted its business undertaking
namely that of boat building from its factory premises located
at 4 Cumberland
Avenue, South Nowra in the State of New South Wales (“the
premises”).
4. At all material times the defendant operated under the trade name of
‘Sydney Yachts’.
5. At all material times the defendant was an employer.
6. At all material times the defendant employed Adam Bruce Smith (‘the
worker’) as a laminator having so employed him
since about February 2004.
7. At all material times on and prior to 1 July 2004 the defendant conducted
its actual boat building works from one of the industrial
units in the premises
at 4 Cumberland Avenue. It did not occupy the whole factory complex with other
units being occupied by other
On and prior to 1 July 2004 unit 6 of the premises had become unoccupied when
its tenant had moved out. The defendant held a set of
keys to unit 6 and used
part of this space within unit 6 for storage pursuant to some loose arrangement
with the owner of the premises,
even though unit 6 was not part of the
defendant’s leased work premises within the complex.
8. At an inspection of the premises by the prosecutor on 14 December 2004 the
following observations were made in relation to industrial
Unit 6 within the
• Unit 6 measured approximately 18.4 metres by 15.2 metres. Access
could be gained to it through a doorway cut into the shed
in the western corner
through a roller door. The floor of the unit was concrete.
• Within the eastern corner of Unit 6 was a sheet metal shed
(“shed”) measuring approximately 7.24 metres in length
metres in width. It was approximately 2.3 metres high. The walls and roof were
made from gyprock measuring approximately
12mm in thickness which were also
fixed to a metal frame.
• Over the top of the roof of the smaller building running in a
north/south direction were 6 metal perlins. The first perlin
was approximately
645mm from the edge of the roof of the small building. Each perlin was then
spaced approximately 1200mm apart.
On top of the perlins chipboard sheeting
approximately 20mm thick had been placed in position to form an overlaying
9. At all material times on and prior to 1 July 2004 the defendant utilised
the area on top of the shed in Unit 6 as a storage area
for placement of moulds.
These moulds were placed on the chipboard platform of the building.
10. On 1 July 2004 the worker and Richard Pinchen were instructed by the
defendant’s supervisor, Chris Capel, to go to Unit
6 and obtain a mould
which were needed in the construction of a new boat.
11. At all material times the worker was licensed to operate a forklift
12. The worker and Pinchen went to unit 6 pursuant to the instruction to
obtain a mould. The worker used a forklift vehicle with
an enclosed lifting
platform attached to the tines to lift Pinchen to the level of the storage area
on the shed in unit 6. The worker
then gained access to the storage area via a
ladder which was also stored near the small building.
13. At approximately 2.00pm on 1 July 2004 after having located the correct
mould Pinchen and the worker were carrying it over to
the forklift in order to
place it on the forklift which was positioned close to the edge of the small
building at the same level
as the storage area. While doing so, the workers foot
slipped of the edge of the chipboard platform ( which did not fully cover the
top of the shed) and onto a section of the gyprock ceiling of the shed where he
fell with one leg partly through that ceiling and
landing on his right elbow and
right side onto the chipboard.
14. The section of gyprock through which the worker partly fell through was
approximately 645mm in width and ran the length of the
smaller building within
Unit 6 adjacent to the first perlin upon which the chipboard flooring had been
15. At all material times on 1 July 2004 there was no edge protection or
barricading on the edge of the chipboard platform above the
first perlin to
prevent access to the gyprock ceiling of the shed.
16. At all material times on 1 July 2004 the chipboard platform was
approximately 100 to 200mm above the unprotected area of the gyprock
The worker gave evidence of not previously accessing the area in order
to retrieve moulds from Unit 6 prior to 1 July 2004.(not agreed)
The prosecutor contends with which the defendant disagrees, at all
material times on or prior to 1 July 2004 the worker had not been
given specific
instructions in relation to the dangers associated with the gyprock ceiling
within the storage area in Unit 6.
19. As a consequence of the fall on 1 July 2004 the worker suffered injuries
including two fractured ribs and was unable to resume
his normal work for a
period of in excess of 7 days after ceasing work the day following the incident.
20. The defendant fully cooperated with the Authority during the
investigations.
21. The defendant provided assistance to the injured worker following the
PENALTIES UNDER
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY ACT, 2000
The penalties set by the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
relation to the offence is (based on no prior offences)-5,000 penalty units
($550,000) for a corporation.
The maximum penalty available for the offence reflects the public expression
by Parliament about the seriousness of the offence and
indicates the gravity of
the offence as perceived by the community (
Camilleri’s Stock Feeds Pty.
Limited v Environmental Protection Authority
(1933) 32 NSWLR 683
principle 1). Despite the maximum penalty, if the matter is dealt with by a
Local Court, the maximum
monetary penalty that
the Local Court may impose for
any offence is $55,000:
OBJECTIVE SERIOUSNESS OF THE OFFENCES
The primary factor to be taken into account when determining the appropriate
sentence is the objective seriousness of the offence
The defendant company commenced carrying on business approx 20 years ago;
moving to South Nowra approx 15 years ago. With 75 employees
it is one of the
largest employers on the south coast. The defendant is a renowned yacht builder
and competes in the highly competitive
international market. It has a
reputation in the industry for it quality assurance and its commitment to
workplace safety. Its employees
possess a multitude of skills, covering all
trades. It enjoys a high retention rate of its employees. The defendant operates
high-risk industry. Graphs tendered to the Court demonstrate it enjoys a
low frequency injury rate, no doubt due to its occupational
health and safety
policies and programmes.
The prosecution contended that the charge should be characterised as falling
within the low to medium range of offences coming before
this court. The
defendant submitted the breach falls in the low range.
Statements tendered to the court indicate that the two men involved in the
obtaining of the mould in question had done this type of
work before. Mr Smith
was a competent trained forklift driver with prior manual handling training and
experience. Mr Pilchen, Mr
Smith’s direct supervisor, was equally versed
in manual handling practise and was aware of the need to perform an risk
of the task to hand before attempting to retrieve the mould.
It appears a number of factors contributed to this incident on the day.
These included; a failure to move items on the floor to allow
closer access of
the cage to the location of the mould and the inadvertent conduct of the injured
worker in accessing the danger
area by use of the ladder located nearby.
I cannot agree with the defendant’s submission regarding the charge as
particularised.
Although particulars 1(a) and 1(b&c) seem to be in the alternative, 1(b)
and 1(c) and 2.are made out on the facts before me and
have a causal nexus to
the injury sustained by Mr Smith on the day. Although a minor injury was
sustained by Mr Smith, present was
the potential for more serious
consequences.
The incident highlights the need for the defendant to formalise its work
method practices by work method statements and to ensure
when laying down safe
systems of work account is taken of the fact that workers will be inadvertent or
careless from time to time.
Where there is a risk with the potential for serious injury to people from
breaches of the Act, a defendant will generally have to
show that all due
diligence measures and/or all reasonably practicable precautions had been taken.
There is no such available inference
to be drawn from the evidence in this
matter at the time of the offence.
CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE OFFENDER
Regina v Way
[2004] NSWCCA 131
it was held that the Court
should exercise its sentencing discretion in accordance with established
sentencing practice and by reference
to the matters identified in ss3A (purposes
of sentencing), s21A (Aggravating, mitigating and other factors in sentencing),
plea to be taken into account), 22A (Power to reduce penalties for
pre-trial disclosure) and 23 (Power to reduce penalties for assistance
to law enforcement authorities) of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
1999 (“CSP, Act 1999”).
The prime objective remains one of imposing a sentence that is just and
appropriate having regard to all of the circumstances of the
offence of the
offender, and so as to give effect to the purposes mentioned in s.3A of the CSP
Having categorised the relative seriousness of the offence, the circumstances
of the offender must be taken into account.
The Court must take into account the principles of retribution,
accountability and the need for general and specific deterrence. General
deterrence must play a part to indicate to others the need for strict observance
to the objects of the Act. Here the need for a specific
deterrence factor is
negligible given the defendant’s past and present commitment to workplace
safety and the immediate steps
taken to ensure there is no repeat of this
SUBJECTIVE FACTORS
The Court is also required to take into account mitigating circumstances.
However, it is established sentencing practice that subjective
factors must play
a subsidiary role in the determination of penalty to the gravity of the offence
The factors mitigating for the Defendant are:
The defendant has no prior convictions.
There was an early plea of guilty entered. The early plea indicating the
defendant’s contrition and the utilitarian benefit
of the plea entitles
the defendant to the maximum 255 discount.
The defendant provided assistance to the injured worker.
The defendant is contrite and has shown remorse.
The prosecutor is instructed that the defendant has a positive attitude
towards O H & S and has taken remedial steps to rectify
the situation after
the incident.
There was full cooperation with the Authority.
APPLICATION OF
CRIMES (SENTENCING PROCEDURE)
The Defendant has asked the court to consider exercising its discretion under
in favour of the defendant. The prosecutor objects to the grant of the
benefit to the defendant.
provides for the dismissal of charges and conditional discharge of
an offender in certain circumstances. In deciding whether to make
referred to in subsection (1), the
is to have regard to the
following factors:
(a) the persons character, antecedents, age, health and mental condition,
(b) the trivial nature of the offence,
(c) the extenuating circumstances in which the offence was committed,
(d) any other matter that the
thinks proper to consider.
In the occupational health and safety jurisdiction, the application of
was considered and approved by the Full Bench of the Industrial
Relations Commission in Court Session decision of
WorkCover Authority of New
South Wales (Inspector Hopkins) v
Profab Industries Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWIRComm 142
(8 August 2000). In that decision the Full Bench said:
There is now clear and long-standing authority that in proceedings before
the Commission in Court Session (or its predecessors) the
ameliorative
provisions of s 556A will be available in only very limited circumstances. As
Fisher CJ observed in Schultz v Tamworth
City Council
(1995) 58 IR 221
The use of s 556A of the
, which in the light of
the strongly defined duty of care, clear public policy considerations in
and major penalties provided, ought to be rare indeed and
is not appropriate in the presence of long-standing adverse work practices.
Nevertheless, in occupational health and safety offences before this Court
the exercise of the discretion under s 556A (cf
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
) must be considered as extraordinary and highly exceptional.
When a defendant seeks its exercise cogent reasons must, in our view,
provided by the defendant for such exercise and also by the judge acceding to
that submission. The obligation is increased rather
then diminished in a
situation, such as the present, where the exercise of the discretion is not
sought by the defendant but raised
by the Court.
This Court must follow the Full Bench of the Industrial Relations Commission of NSW (as it then was) in respect of sentencing principles
in this jurisdiction. In the Court’s opinion there is nothing extraordinary or highly exceptional about this matter as would
warrant the benefit of
section 10.
Furthermore, this breach is not trivial.
The defendant was on notice of the risks associated with access and egress
in respect of the mezzanine storage area prior to the
date of the offence. This
is not an incident where the defendant could not have done anything to prevent
the offence. (see
Thorneloe v Filipowski
[2001] NSWCCA
Rather, the incident was foreseeable and could have been prevented by
better risk assessment, management, inspection, information,
training and
supervision.
Although I will not exercise my discretion under
in favour of the
defendant, I do agree the nature and gravity of the offence comes within the low
range of matters coming before
this court.
In conclusion
For the above reasons, and applying the 25% discount for the early plea and
its benefits, it is appropriate that a penalty of $13,000
be imposed.
The defendant is convicted and fined $13,000.
The defendant is to pay WorkCover’s costs agreed at $3,065.55
The moneys are to be paid to the Downing Centre Local Court within 28
There is a moiety of the fine to the prosecutor.
Acting Chief Industrial Magistrate
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (62.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter