URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HXE [2013] NSWGT 30 (15 October 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 30
(15 OCTOBER 2013)
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW OF THE REVOCATION OF AN ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY,
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW OF APPOINTMENT OF ENDURING GUARDIAN,
AND FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT APPLICATION
Application Concerning:
Ms ZDW, Mr LOP and Ms SAE
Enduring Guardians:
Date and place of hearing:
Ms FDS, Mr LOP and Ms SAE
15 October 2013 at
Application Concerning:
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Ms Elaine Connor
Professional Member:
Ms Sharon Flanagan
Community Member:
Ms Catherine Gerloff
Review of revocation of enduring power of attorney
– section 36(1) – determined not to carry out review of the
– no applications to review enduring power of attorney
appointments made - application dismissed.
Financial management
– capability to manage – best interests - financial management order
made – estate committed
to NSW Trustee and Guardian – enduring
powers of attorney suspended by operation of financial management
Review of enduring guardianship appointment – consent
to withdrawal of application.
Legal representation –
potential conflict of interest – solicitor as witness – application
REASONS FOR DECISION
Guardianship Act 1987
of Attorney Act 2003
Date of order
: 15 October 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal determined under
section 36(1)
Powers of Attorney Act
not to carry out a review of the revocation on 6 June 2013 of the
enduring power of attorney made by Mr HXE on 9 November 2012 and
dismissed the
application.
Tribunal appointed the NSW Trustee and Guardian as Mr HXE’s financial
manager, but excluded from management his pension,
his income from his supported
employment and his current savings and bank account.
Tribunal consented to the withdrawal of the application to review the enduring
guardianship appointment whereby Mr HXE appointed
Mrs BBI to be his enduring
HXE is a 44 year old man who lives with his wife, Ms FDS, and his father, Mr
LOP, in a house jointly owned by him and his father
in Regional Sydney. He
works in supported employment at company in Regional Sydney and is reported to
have a moderate intellectual
disability.
HXE has a niece, Mrs BBI, who is the applicant in the proceedings. She is on
occasions referred to in documentation as Mr HXE’s
9 November 2012 Mr HXE appointed Mrs BBI as his attorney and enduring
appointments were purportedly revoked by Mr HXE on 6 June 2013 and on the same
date Mr HXE purportedly appointed Ms SAE, Ms
ZDW and Mr LOP as attorneys jointly
and severally pursuant to an enduring power of attorney and Ms FDS, Ms SAE and
Mr LOP as his
enduring guardians.
10 October 2013 the Tribunal received the following applications from Mrs
application for the appointment of a financial manager for Mr HXE;
application for a review of the instrument executed by Mr HXE on 6 June 2013
revoking the appointment of Mrs BBI as his power of
application to review the instrument executed by Mr HXE on 6 June 2013
appointing Mrs BBI as his enduring guardian.
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate.
the course of the hearing, the Tribunal used its best endeavours to bring the
parties to a settlement. These endeavours
were partially
successful.
APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO LEGALLY REPRESENT THE
SUBJECT PERSON
to the commencement of the hearing the Tribunal was informed that Mr SBE of a
law firm in Regional Sydney, wished to seek leave
to represent Mr HXE in the
proceedings.
Tribunal asked Mr SBE to outline the circumstances in which he was approached to
represent Mr HXE. Mr SBE responded that he is
an employed solicitor of the law
firm in Regional Sydney and had been asked by Mr KAJ, a partner of the firm, to
meet with Mr HXE.
Mr KAJ certified the instruments executed by Mr HXE on 6 June
2013. Mr SBE stated that he understood that Ms ZDW had contacted the
she received notification of the Tribunal hearing.
Tribunal questioned Mr SBE as to whether he considered he may have any potential
conflict of interest should he be granted leave
to represent Mr HXE, given that
Mr KAJ, a partner in the firm by which he is employed, is potentially a witness
in the proceedings.
Mr SBE conceded that this might be the
Tribunal asked Mr HXE to outline how he had come to consult Mr SBE. Mr HXE was
unable to provide a meaningful account of the
circumstances leading up to his
meeting with Mr SBE. He responded that:
‘after Easter I went to a new lawyer; Ms ZDW told me about a new
lawyer; I went with Ms ZDW to change my will.’
the request of Mr SBE, the Tribunal stood the matter down briefly to provide him
with the opportunity to consult with Mr HXE and
to consider whether he wished to
press his application for leave to represent Mr HXE.
resumption of the hearing, Mr SBE submitted that he did not wish to seek leave
to represent Mr HXE but sought the agreement of
the Tribunal to assist him as a
McKenzie friend. The Tribunal consented to this request.
EVIDENCE AND THE TRIBUNAL'S REASONING
APPLICATION FOR APPOINTMENT OF A FINANCIAL MANAGER
Is Mr HXE capable of managing his affairs?
person’s capability to manage his or her affairs was considered by
Campbell J in the NSW Supreme Court in
Re GHI (a protected person)
Campbell J affirmed the approach enunciated in
2 NSWLR 700
by Powell J, at paragraph 7:
‘It is my view
that a person is not shown to be incapable of managing his or her own affairs
unless, at the least, it appears:
(a) that he is incapable of dealing, in a reasonably competent fashion with
the ordinary routine affairs of man; and
(b) that by reason of that lack of competence there is shown to be a real
risk that either
or she may be disadvantaged in the conduct of such affairs; or
such moneys or property that he or she may possess may be dissipated or lost ...
it is not sufficient in my view merely to demonstrate
that the person lacks the
high level of ability needed to deal with complicated transactions or that he or
she does not deal with
even simple or routine transactions in the most
efficient manner...’
HXE attended the hearing and the Tribunal asked him a number of questions about
his financial affairs. Mr HXE told the Tribunal
that he pays his bills by going
in person to the bank and that he goes food shopping with his wife. Mr HXE was
not able to clearly
articulate where his income comes from, but told the
Tribunal that he has approximately $6,000 savings in the bank. He stated that
occasions he needs assistance with matters such as
and insurance and that, when he needs help, he goes to (Ms
ZDW) for advice. He cited by way of example an occasion when he had a
accident and needed her assistance to deal with the insurance issues.
BBI told the Tribunal that she does not believe that Mr HXE can manage the
totality of his affairs by himself and that he needs
assistance with managing
any major assets. She also submitted that Mr HXE is vulnerable to exploitation;
asserting in her application
that there have been various incidents of this
including him giving away a motor vehicle and purchasing a caravan. She states
Mr HXE is unable to read or write.
ZDW submitted that she considers that Mr HXE has the capacity to manage his
finances and does not currently need an attorney.
She stated that she has been
‘dealing with issues’ with Mr HXE for seven and a half years.
Z, who holds a Bachelor of Social Work and is a Case Manager with a community
organisation, provided a Health Professional Report
which was received by the
Tribunal on 11 October 2013. She has known Mr HXE since 7 September 2012, but
last saw him on 26 April
2013 when he abruptly ended his relationship with the
organisation. In her report Ms Z notes that Mr HXE has a moderate intellectual
disability which is static in nature, and that he:
manage day to day buying but needs assistance with managing bilss (sic),
cheques, etc (larger payments)’.
Z also notes that:
‘It is my observation that Mr HXE likes
to please and therefore can be easily influenced’.
the hearing, Ms Z confirmed her view that she does not believe that Mr HXE has
the capacity to manage his own affairs.
Y, case manager at a disability services company where Mr HXE is employed as a
production worker, provided a Health Professional
Report which was received by
the Tribunal on 8 October 2013. Mr Y states that he has a Bachelor of Teaching
(Primary) and a Certificate
IV in each of Disabilities and Training and
Assessment and that he has known Mr HXE for five years. In his report he notes
Mr HXE has a moderate intellectual disability which is static in nature and
that he requires support and assistance with financial
matters such as budgeting
and paying bills. He also notes that:
‘Mr HXE takes people
and their opinions literally and this makes Mr HXE vulnerable to
misinformation.’
further states that Mr HXE:
‘...does require appropriate
support with managing his finances in the foreseeable future.”
Y reiterated this view at the hearing, stating that in his opinion Mr HXE does
not have the capacity to manage his own financial
considering the evidence the Tribunal was satisfied that Mr HXE is not capable
of managing his affairs.
(unreported) NSW Supreme Court 20 March 2000, in dealing with
the capacity test as it has been enunciated in NSW as outlined above,
dealing with the ‘
ordinary affairs of man’
does not simply
mean being able to go to the bank and draw out housekeeping money. Most
people’s affairs, his Honour said,
complicated than that, and the ordinary affairs of mankind involve at least
planning for the future, working out how
one will feed oneself and one’s
family and how one is going to generate income and look after capital.
Accordingly, whilst
one does not have to be a person who is capable of managing
complex financial affairs, one has to go beyond just managing household
Tribunal attached greater weight to the views of Mr Y and Ms Z, professionals
who have been involved with Mr HXE and who do not
appear to have any vested
interest in the outcome of the proceedings. The Tribunal also noted Mr
HXE’s difficulty in outlining
his income and assets and his own
acknowledgement that he needs assistance with managing various matters. He is a
person for whom
the Tribunal could make a financial management
Is there a need for another person to manage Mr
HXE’s affairs and is it in his best interests for a financial management
to be made?
HXE’s assets include his half share in the property at Regional Sydney in
which he resides, two vehicles and a caravan he
recently purchased for $4,000.
The caravan is reportedly insured for $12,000 following repairs to it which cost
$1,000. As previously
noted, Mr HXE stated that he has savings of $6,000 in a
bank account. Evidence was given that he receives approximately $403 per
fortnight from his employment at the Disability Services company, plus
approximately $320 per fortnight from his disability support
pension. He stated
that he does not smoke, gamble or drink. He contributes to household expenses,
pays for insurance and the maintenance
of his vehicles. The Tribunal was unable
to establish whether Mr HXE has savings in a superannuation fund as a result of
his supported
employment.
Tribunal was informed by Mr LOP that Mr HXE, his son, is the future beneficiary
under his will of the other half of the property
at Regional Sydney in which he,
Mr HXE and Ms FDS reside.
the hearing Mrs BBI submitted that she brought the applications for the
appointment of a financial manager and the review of the
revocation of the
enduring power of attorney because Mr HXE has been exploited by many people over
the years. She noted that he has,
for example, been charged excessively for a
taxi ride. Mrs BBI stated that she became concerned at the extent of the
involvement
of Ms ZDW in Mr HXE’s affairs, and more recently this has led
to conflict between her and Ms ZDW and between her, Mr HXE and
Mr LOP. Mrs BBI
expressed concern about the recent purchase of a caravan by Mr HXE and his wife
from Ms ZDW’s father. She believes
that a substitute financial
decision-maker is required for Mr HXE because her grandfather (Mr LOP) is not
well; she does not believe
Mr HXE can manage major assets himself; and she wants
to ensure that his assets are preserved for his benefit.
ZDW gave evidence that she first met Mr HXE and his father approximately seven
and a half years ago, initially as a result of Mr
LOP being involved as a
volunteer at the toy library by which she is employed. She stated that when she
accompanied Mr HXE to the
law firm, she was aware of the earlier enduring power
of attorney and enduring guardianship instrument being in place, and that the
primary purpose of the visit to the law firm was for Mr HXE to change his will.
She stated that she is not a beneficiary under the
will made by Mr HXE on 6 June
2013, but acknowledged that she is potentially a major decision- maker in
relation to his financial
affairs as a result of being appointed jointly and
severally under the enduring power of attorney. In relation to the sale of the
caravan by her father to Mr HXE, Ms ZDW stated that she had not considered there
to be any need for an independent valuation.
Tribunal concluded that there is a need for somebody to assist Mr HXE in the
management of his affairs. While he is able to attend
to the mechanics of paying
his bills and purchasing groceries, he is not able to manage complex financial
affairs. He has substantial
assets and is likely to inherit the other half of
the property in which he resides from his father.
Tribunal considered whether or not it is in Mr HXE’s best interests for a
financial management order to be made.
noted above, Mr HXE executed an enduring power of attorney on 9 November 2012
appointing Mrs BBI; revoked that enduring power of
attorney on 6 June 2013; and
executed a further enduring power of attorney on 6 June 2013 appointing Ms SAE,
Ms ZDW and Mr LOP as
his attorneys jointly and severally.
applications before the Tribunal included a request to review the revocation of
the enduring power of attorney executed by Mr
HXE on 6 June 2013, but no request
to review the enduring power of attorney made on that date appointing Ms SAE, Ms
ZDW and Mr LOP.
Tribunal decided it would not be helpful to carry out a review of the revocation
of the enduring power of attorney made by Mr
HXE on 9 November 2012. If such a
review was undertaken pursuant to
Powers of Attorney Act,
, and the Tribunal were to make a declaration that the enduring power of
attorney made on 9 November 2012 remains valid, there would
then be two
competing enduring powers of attorney in operation. This would potentially
create confusion and conflict.
the other hand, if the Tribunal were to make a declaration that Mr HXE did not
have the mental capacity to revoke the power of
attorney on 6 June 2013, it
would almost certainly follow that he could not have had the mental capacity to
execute an enduring power
of attorney on that date either. Furthermore, given
the reported and unchallenged static nature of Mr HXE’s intellectual
disability,
it would almost certainly follow that he could not have had the
mental capacity to execute an enduring power of attorney approximately
months earlier.
the Tribunal did not formally review the making of either of the enduring powers
of attorney executed by Mr HXE, in the context
of the hearing of the financial
management application, Mr HXE was asked to outline his understanding of an
enduring power of attorney.
He was unable to do so adequately. It was suggested
to the Tribunal that this was due to his being anxious. The Tribunal refuted
this suggestion; there was no evidence that Mr HXE was anxious during the
hearing and he stated that he felt quite relaxed and comfortable.
there was no substantiated evidence before the Tribunal of any significant
exploitation of Mr HXE to date, the Tribunal noted
the evidence that Mr HXE is
suggestible and open to exploitation and accepted that some minor incidents of
exploitation have occurred,
such as the excessive taxi fare he was charged. The
Tribunal also noted that Mr HXE’s father, with whom he lives, is unwell
and aging, and that this may lead to Mr HXE being increasingly vulnerable to
unscrupulous people. Without the appointment of a financial
manager, he could,
for example, be at risk of being influenced by other people who come into his
life to execute a further enduring
power of attorney in their favour. The
appointment of a financial manager will also provide Mr HXE with greater
protection in the
event that he is induced into entering in to contracts which
he does not understand.
Tribunal was satisfied that there is a need to appoint someone to manage Mr
HXE’s affairs and it is in his best interests
that an order be made.
However Mr HXE should be permitted to continue to manage his own day to day
affairs for as long as he is able
to do so. The Tribunal therefore excluded from
the financial management order Mr HXE’s income from work and from his
support pension and his current savings and bank account.
effect of the making of a financial management order is to suspend both the
enduring power of attorney dated 9 November 2012 and
the enduring power of
attorney dated 6 June 2013 for the duration of the financial management
Who should be appointed financial manager?
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under the
Guardianship Act
, the Tribunal must act with the interests of the
person concerned as the paramount consideration and in accord with the other
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
provides that, if the Tribunal
makes a financial management order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage
the person’s estate
or may commit the management of the estate to the NSW
Trustee and Guardian.
Holt & Anor
Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
Court said that the dominant consideration in making orders about financial
managers was the welfare of the person.
President of the Court of Appeal emphasised the Court’s broad discretion
in deciding who should be financial manager but
also set out possible
considerations as to the competing advantages of the Protective Commissioner and
a family member as the manager
of an estate.
NSW Trustee and Guardian now exercises the role of the Protective
Commissioner.
the side of the Protective Commissioner was seen to be the manifest independence
of the statutory office, the advantages of a dispassionate
and neutral approach
in situations of family conflict and divided views as to the best interests of
the person, expertise and experience
in managing estates, an impeccable
reputation and the security provided to an estate against loss or damage. The
advantages of the
appointment of a family member were more economic management
of smaller estates (i.e. freedom from fees) and a greater familiarity
assets and liabilities in smaller estates, a greater capacity of a person with a
disability to interact with the manager so
as to exercise a greater influence
over the broad directions of the management of the estate, love and affection
for and knowledge
of the protected person and concern for his or her quality of
life, and particular qualities or qualifications enabling family members
as managers.
her application for the appointment of a financial manager Mrs BBI proposes
either herself or the NSW Trustee. At the hearing,
Mrs BBI proposed that the NSW
Trustee be appointed as a result of the current conflict between her and Mr HXE
and his father.
HXE submitted that he would like Ms ZDW to be appointed to manage his financial
ZDW stated that while she is happy to assist Mr HXE with his day to day
finances, she would prefer the NSW Trustee to be appointed
in relation to his
Tribunal determined that it would be in Mr HXE’s best interest for an
independent and impartial financial manager to be
appointed to manage his
significant assets and to make significant financial decisions on his behalf.
The Tribunal appointed the
NSW Trustee and Guardian as financial manager of Mr
CONSENT TO WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION TO REVIEW THE
APPOINTMENT OF AN ENDURING GUARDIAN
reviewing an enduring guardianship appointment the Tribunal may revoke the
appointment or confirm the appointment with or without
varying the functions of
the appointed enduring guardian.
Tribunal asked Mrs BBI to outline why she had made the application to review the
enduring guardianship appointment made on 9 November
2013 whereby Mr HXE had
appointed her to be his enduring guardian. It became clear that Mrs BBI had made
an error in her application,
and had not intended to make an application for a
review of the instrument by which she had been appointed.
Tribunal discussed with the parties at the hearing the options before it, which
included considering an oral application from
Mrs BBI to review the later
enduring guardianship instrument made by Mr HXE on 6 June 2013. Pursuant to
section 6K(3)
Guardianship Act 1987
the Tribunal could also
proceed as if an application for a guardianship order under
Guardianship Act
had been made in respect of Mr HXE by Mrs BBI,
provided that the Tribunal first determined to revoke the enduring guardianship
made by him on 9 November 2013 appointing her. The Tribunal noted
that it does not have the legislative power to review the revocation
enduring guardianship instrument.
Tribunal briefly discussed with the parties whether or not there is any need for
a substitute decision-maker in relation to any
aspect of Mr HXE’s life at
this point in time. Mr HXE stated that he does not take any medication and that
he only attends
the doctor on an occasional basis if he is unwell. His
accommodation is stable and he is happy working at the Disability Services
company. The parties all agreed that there are currently no decisions which need
to be made by a guardian.
BBI requested consent to withdraw her application to review the appointment of
an enduring guardian by Mr HXE on 9 November 2012
and the Tribunal consented to
such withdrawal.
effect of this is that the enduring guardianship instrument executed by Mr HXE
on 6 June 2013 appointing Ms FDS, Ms SAE and Mr
LOP as his enduring guardians
remains in place. The Tribunal has not reviewed such instrument and makes no
findings as to its validity
or otherwise. If at any time in the future any
interested person considers it appropriate and necessary to do so, he or she is
to initiate a review of the enduring guardianship instrument and/or to make
an application for the appointment of a guardian for
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (158 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter