URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Thapa v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPICMR 20; (27 June 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
Thapa v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
[2025] NSWPICMR 20
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
MERIT REVIEWER:
Alexander Bolton
DATE OF DECISION:
27 June 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; merit review
application for payment of weekly benefits; at the time of accident claimant was
self-employed and earning $700 per
week in cash which the insurer accepted;
claimant lodged initial application for benefits five days post-accident but
only provided
certificates of capacity to 19 October 2023 and thereafter
provided no certificates of capacity until 30 May 2024; insurer denied
for this period and no certificates of capacity have been provided since;
insurer lost contact with the claimant and closed
its file in January 2024 but
the claimant provided limited certificates of capacity in June 2024; claimant
submits that he was unable
to work for the period in which no certificates of
capacity have been provided, due to surgery and recovery;
the insurer does not have to continue weekly payments for the period 20 October
2023 to 29 May 2024 until a certificate of capacity
is served by the claimant or
a notice of suspension is served by the insurer.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
claimant has failed to produce a certificate of capacity for the period
October 2023 to 29 May 2024.
the reasons provided, the insurer does not have to continue weekly payments for
the period 20 October 2023 to 29 May 2024 until
a certificate of capacity is
served by the claimant or a notice a suspension is served by the
INTRODUCTION
claimant alleges sustaining injuries in a motor vehicle accident which occurred
on 23 August 2023. It was a single car accident.
The road was wet and in the
course of driving his car along the City West Link, the claimant lost control,
crossed over onto the
other side of the road and crashed. The claimant has not
distributed fault for the accident.
claimant made an application for payment of weekly benefits.
his application for personal injury benefits (APIB) dated 28 August 2023, the
claimant stated that he was a self-employed cleaner
at the time the subject
accident occurred. He indicated he was earning $700 weekly in this employment.
The insurer understands and
says that the claimant was mostly paid in cash for
insurer accepts that the claimant was an “earner” within the meaning
of sch 1 cl 2(a) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
insurer’s calculation of the claimant’s pre- accident weekly
earnings (PAWE) has not been disputed.
dispute arises because the insurer cannot be satisfied that the claimant
incurred a loss of earnings/capacity as a result of injuries
sustained in the
subject accident from 20 October 2023 to 29 May 2024.
a claim was made on 28 August 2023 for statutory benefits, the insurer did not
commence payment until 12 June 2024, after the
disputed period of 20 October
2023 to 29 May 2024.
limited number of certificates of capacity/fitness have been provided. These are
25/08/2023 – 07/09/2023
Nil capacity
30/05/2024 – 30/06/2024
Fit or pre-injury work with some restrictions
11/07/2024 – 08/08/2024
8 hours/day, 5 days/week
09/08/2024 – 11/09/2024
8 hours/day, 5 days/week
certificates of capacity have been provided by the claimant for the period
20 October 2023 to 29 May 2024.The claimant says that this was a time after
his surgery and he was not capable of working however,
there is no documentary
evidence of this. Despite several assurances by the claimant, at
teleconferences, that he would obtain the
necessary certificates, none have been
forthcoming.
insurer provided the joint bundle of documents, including its submissions. No
submissions nor any documents have been produced
claimant is self-represented.
email dated 15 July 2024, the insurer explained the following to the
(a) the claimant’s claim was submitted in August 2023;
(b) despite the insurer’s efforts, the claimant was not able to be
(c) the insurer received an initial certificate of capacity which confirmed the
claimant was unfit for work for two weeks. The next
certificate of capacity was
received in June 2024 and covered the period from 30 May 2024 to
(d) as the insurer determined that the claimant was at fault for the subject
accident, his entitlement period ended after 52 weeks,
(e) without medical evidence, earning records, or certificates of capacity, the
insurer was not in a position to pay for a five month
gap period.
insurer says that for the period 8 September 2023 to 29 May 2024 the claimant
was not covered by any certificates of capacity.
The disputed period commences
on 20 October 2023 as, during the period from 8 September 2023 to 19 October
2023, the insurer accepted
that the medical documentation supported a temporary
period of incapacity following the fixation of the claimant’s right
humerus fracture.
insurer submits that it was only obliged to provide statutory benefits for the
periods that were covered by certificates up to
52 weeks, noting the position
taken regarding fault for the accident.
the absence of certificates of capacity/fitness covering the period 20 October
2023 to 29 May 2024, the insurer submits a determination
ought to be made that
the claimant was not entitled to weekly payments during that same period.
3.15 of the Act deals with the requirements for evidence for fitness for work.
Section 3.15 states:
“(1) An injured person must provide to
the insurer—
(a) certificates of fitness for work in accordance with this section in
respect of the period in respect of which the person is entitled
payments of statutory benefits under this Division...
(5) A certificate of fitness for work is of no effect to the extent that it
relates to a period that is more than 90 days before the
certificate is provided
by the injured person to the insurer.
(6) An insurer is not required to make weekly payments of statutory benefits
to which a person is entitled to under this Division
until the person has
complied with subsection (1).
(7) If a person fails to comply with a requirement under this section within
7 days, or another period prescribed by the regulations,
after the requirement
is communicated to the person by the insurer, the insurer may, subject to the
Motor Accident Guidelines, suspend
payment of weekly payments of statutory
benefits to the person under this Division for the period the failure to comply
(8) The person forfeits the person’s entitlement to weekly payments of
statutory benefits during the period of a suspension.”
insurer has also noted the Motor Accident Guidelines
(Guidelines) also
address the claimant’s responsibilities for ongoing weekly payments, and a
claimant’s responsibilities
to provide evidence of fitness for work. These
issues are dealt with at cls 4.67 to 4.69 as follows:
claimant must provide to the insurer a certificate of fitness for work to be
eligible for weekly payments. The required
form of a certificate given under
(3) of the Act is a
Certificate
(including the declaration of employment).
4.68 The first certificate of fitness for work must be given by the
claimant’s treating medical practitioner.
4.69 A second or
subsequent certificate of fitness must be in a form approved by the Authority
and given by:
(a) a medical practitioner, or
(b) if the injured person is receiving medical or related treatment for the
injury by a physiotherapist or psychologist who is appropriately
— the physiotherapist or psychologist.”
The Motor Accident Guidelines
relevant provisions in the Guidelines include the following under the heading
“non-compliance with providing evidence of
fitness for
“4.61 Before an insurer can suspend weekly
payments for failure of the claimant to comply with requirements for evidence as
to fitness for work, the insurer must:
(a) contact the claimant (via the claimant’s preferred method of
communication) to ensure that the claimant is aware of their
duty to provide
this evidence
(b) clearly state to the claimant the consequences of not providing the
(c) provide the claimant with a reasonable time within which to comply
(d) if the claimant is a participant in the Lifetime Care & Support Scheme,
the insurer must contact the Lifetime Care &
Support Authority of NSW ...
(e) provide the claimant with contact details of the Authority.
4.62 If the claimant continues to fail to comply without a reasonable
excuse, a suspension notice giving the claimant seven calendar
days to comply
must be sent in writing.
4.63 The suspension notice must clearly state the insurer’s reasons
for suspending weekly payments, actions the claimant must
take to avoid
suspension of their weekly payments and the claimant’s rights of review. A
copy of this notice must be provided
to the claimant’s legal
representative where the claimant is legally represented.”
CONSIDERATION OF THE ISSUES
What is required before payments can be suspended?
v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance,
Senior Member
Williams dealt with a dispute about the suspension of benefits and the
lawfulness of the notification from the insurer.
He said (emphasis
“[42] In short, cl 4.58 [now 4.62] of the Guidelines
required NRMA to provide Mr Leydon with a valid suspension
it had complied with cl 4.57 [now 4.61] of the
Guidelines,
Mr Leydon had failed to comply with the
requirement to provide a certificate of fitness that satisfied s
is a clear four step process which an insurer must follow before suspending
(a) the claimant must fail to comply with s 3.15(1) and must not have provided
the requisite certificate after being notified in
accordance with s 3.15(7);
(b) the notification must comply with cl 4.61, that is the claimant must be
for continued failure and
provide a time to comply (at least seven days in accordance with s 3.15(7));
(c) the insurer must, when the failure continues, then issue a suspension
notice that complies with cl 4.62, and must
(d) wait seven days before suspending payments.
payments for the non-disputed periods were first made on 12 June 2024. This is a
considerable time after the disputed period.
The insurer submits that the
claimant has not consistently obtained or supplied it with certificates of
capacity. The insurer has
confirmed that the period of 8 September 2023 to 29
May 2024, being 8 months and 21 days, was not covered by any certificates of
capacity. The insurer submits that in the absence of certificates of
capacity/fitness covering the period 20 October 2023 to 29 May
determination ought to be made that the claimant was not entitled to payments
during that same period.
Did the insurer comply with cl 4.61 of
the Guidelines?
4.61 of the Guidelines provides that “before an insurer can suspend weekly
payments ... the insurer must ...” do
at least three things:
(a) contact the claimant which is “to ensure he is aware of his
duty” to provide the certificate;
(b) clearly explain the consequences, and
(c) provide a reasonable time to comply.
those three things have been done, cl 4.62 provides for a suspension notice to
be given and for the claimant to have further
time (seven calendar days) to
the insurer had not been able to comply with the suspension payment provisions
as it lost contact with the claimant and
was unable to clearly explain the
consequences and provide a reasonable time to comply.
required “to ensure” that the claimant
was “aware of his
duty”. The claimant was not aware of the duty because he had not been
been made aware, informally at teleconferences
of the need for outstanding certificates of currency to be provided but to date,
not provided this. As far as I am aware though, no formal written notice
discretion to suspend payments under s 3.15(7)?
3.15(7) provides that after the injured person has failed to provide a
Certificate of Fitness and seven days after this has
been communicated with the
claimant, “the insurer
... suspend payment”
(emphasis added).
wording of this part of the section does not say “must” or
“should” or otherwise suggest it is mandatory
for payments to be
suspended in certain circumstances.
word “may” in the context of the whole of the section clearly
involves a discretion. The insurer was not required
to suspend payments because
of the absence of an updated certificate.
How is the discretion
to be exercised?
3.15(7) provides that the insurer’s discretion to suspend payment is
“subject to the Motor Accident Guidelines”.
4.62 in those Guidelines says that “if a claimant continues to fail to
comply without a reasonable excuse, a suspension
notice giving the claimant
seven calendar days to comply must be sent in writing” (emphasis
insurer did not commence to make any payments until 12 June 2024. This was only
for the period from 28 August 2023 to 19 October
2023. In the intervening period
up to 12 June 2024 when the first payment was made, the insurer was undertaking
various investigations
and enquiries to confirm firstly, whether the claimant
was an earner and secondly, if so, the amount of his loss of earnings and
thirdly, the insurer awaited provision of certificates of capacity from 20
October 2023.
was not until 12 July 2024 or thereabouts that correspondence ensued between the
insurer and the claimant concerning the missing
certificates of capacity. Since
that time, despite many requests by the insurer, the claimant has failed to
supply the insurer with
certificates of capacity for that period of 20 October
2023 to 29 May 2024.
insurer submits that in the absence of certificates of capacity/fitness,
covering the period 20 October 2023 to 29 May 2024, a
determination ought to be
made that the claimant was not entitled to weekly payments during that
insurer submits that as weekly payments were not formally commenced prior to the
disputed period, then a notice of suspension
was not required. However, the
insurer, by making the first payment on 12 June 2024 has, in my finding,
conceded that some payments
ought to be made. It is clear that the claimant must
provide certificates of capacity for ongoing payments and in this case, the
claimant has not done this. The problem though is that weekly payments should
continue until a notice of suspension is given. No
such suspension notice has
been provided by the insurer.
do not know if there has been an internal review of the insurer’s
decision. I do not know if the claimant has asked for this.
3.15 (7) enables the insurer to suspend weekly payments if there is a failure to
provide a certificate of fitness if it is
not provided within seven days after
the requirement is communicated.
this situation there is a failure to comply with the provisions of the Act in
the first instance by the claimant and secondly by
the insurer. Regarding the
claimant, he has consistently failed to provide a certificate of
capacity/fitness for the period
20 October 2023 to 29 May 2024. The Act says
that certificates of capacity must be provided.
is my finding that presently, the claimant is entitled to payment of weekly
benefits but as he has not provided a certificate of
capacity, no payment can be
made. The insurer however, has not provided a notice of suspension and until
that is done, the claimant
will be entitled to payments.
can make no determination for payment in this matter presently as the claimant
has failed to comply with the requirements of the
Act. Once he has done that
then he will be entitled to payments unless a compliant notice or suspension is
served by the insurer.
The insurer however, is liable to make those payments if
a valid certificate of capacity is served until such time as a notice of
suspension is served.
claimant failed to attend the last two teleconferences fixed by me. At the most
recent teleconference on 16 April 2025, the insurer
confirmed that the dispute
was suitable to be assessed on the papers. I am proceeding on this basis
although I was not able to ask
the claimant about this due to his
non-attendances.
receive statutory benefits for which the claimant is entitled, s 3.15 of the Act
states that the injured person
provide certificates of fitness in
respect of the period for which the person is entitled to weekly payments.
claimant had surgery as a result of the injuries suffered by him in the
accident. The insurer took into account this surgery and
a period of recovery
and rehabilitation. Without the benefit of any certificate or certificates of
capacity/fitness, the insurer
made payments representative of the period from 8
September 2023 to 19 October 2023, at its discretion. However, it was not until
30 May 2024 that a new certificate of capacity was provided.
claimant, despite informing me that he would obtain the necessary certificate or
certificates from his surgeon, has failed to
do this and no reason has been
provided about this.
am not of the understanding that the insurer has suspended any payments, it has
just not made any payments because the claimant
has not provided any certificate
of capacity evidencing his incapacity for the dispute.
is my finding that it was reasonable for the insurer, having allowed a period of
rehabilitation following the surgery, to 19 October
2023, to expect certificates
of capacity thereafter to verify any incapacity on the part of the claimant to
work. Despite the claimant
knowing that he must provide the certificates, he has
failed to do so.
the claimant has not provided a certificate of fitness for work for the period
20 October 2023 to 29 May 2024, there is no compulsion on the insurer to
make any payments for that period. I am satisfied that the
insurer has conveyed
to the claimant the necessity to produce a certificate of capacity for this
period, but the claimant has failed
to do this.
insurer has not suspended the payment of statutory benefits but has informally
communicated to the claimant that he needed to
provide a certificate of
capacity. Until a notice of suspension is served, the issue of payments might be
reactivated by the claimant.
claimant has failed to produce a certificate of capacity for the period
October 2023 to 29 May 2024.
the reasons provided, the insurer does not have to continue weekly payments for
the period 20 October 2023 to 29 May 2024 until
a certificate of capacity is
served by the claimant or a notice a suspension is served by the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (421 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter