URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kasim v Busways Blacktown Pty Ltd [2003] NSWCC 6 (26 May 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Kasim v Busways
Blacktown Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWCC 6
Busways Blacktown Pty Ltd
CASE NUMBER: 13010 of 2002
CATCH WORDS: Miscellaneous
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Neilson J
OF HEARING: 26/05/03
EX TEMPORE DATE: 26/05/2003
REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:
Mr P Barham instructed by Conomos &
Spinak appeared for the applicant.
FOR RESPONDENT:
Mr J H Hamilton Pearce
instructed by Leitch Hasson & Dent appeared for the
respondent.
1. Mr Anwar Kasim, whose full name from other documents appears to be Anwar
Ali Kasim, of Guildford, claims weekly payments of compensation
from 12 January
2001 to date and continuing for either total incapacity, or, alternatively,
partial incapacity. He also claims lump
sum compensation under
Workers Compensation Act 1987
for 15 per cent impairment of his neck, 20 per
cent impairment of his back, 5 per cent loss of efficient use in his right leg
or above the knee and 5 per cent loss of efficient use of his left leg at or
above the knee and a consequential lump sum under s
67 for pain and suffering
anxiety and distress resulting from those impairments and those losses.
2. The applicant was employed by the respondent as a motor bus driver. He
has followed that calling for many years. Mr Kasim was
born on 18 October 1952
and is currently 50 years of age. His wife works. He has dependent upon him
for support three children,
the eldest of whom is 13. The applicant commenced
working for the current respondent on 16 October 2000.
3. In the application for determination it is alleged that on 12 January
2001, whilst in the course of his employment driving a bus
in Doonside, the
applicant was the victim of an assault
“by passengers.”
applicant told me in his evidence-in-chief that he commenced work at 4 pm on 12
January 2001. His shift was due to finish
at 12.30 am on the following day. At
approximately 7.30 the applicant picked up passengers at the Blacktown railway
station. His
route was to take him eventually to the Doonside railway station.
At Blacktown the applicant picked up some elderly people and a
teenagers comprising six boys and one girl. The applicant told me that they did
not know the cost of the fare to their
destination, which was a bus stop at the
intersection of Hill End Road and Richmond Road. The applicant told me that the
young people
complained that they were being charged too much for the fare. The
fares for the teenagers were paid by the sole female amongst
applicant told me that before the party reached their destination they shouted
from the back of the bus that the applicant
was to take them to Doonside rather
than to Woodcroft. The applicant told the party at the back of the bus that his
route did take
him to Doonside but he had to go via Woodcroft. His evidence was
that there was a suggestion by the party of young people that the
really didn’t know the route that he ought take and that he, the
applicant, told them that they would eventually
be taken to where they wished to
4. The party commenced to alight from the bus at the intersection of Hill End
Road and Richmond Road. The young lady left first
followed by the six boys.
The applicant told me that the third or fourth boy to leave the bus stopped and
had a conversation with
him. In fact it is now common ground that it was the
fifth last boy who stopped and had a conversation with the applicant. Nothing
turns on this minor discrepancy. The applicant’s sworn evidence to me was
that the fifth last boy closed his fists and swore
at the applicant and called
“mother fucker.”
The youth is then alleged to have
“do you want to fight with me?”
The applicant told me
that he felt scared. He stood up and pushed the young man away and that is how
the fight started. He told
me in his evidence-in-chief that the young man was
trying to pull the applicant out of the bus cabin and that the young man’s
friends were trying to grab the applicant’s assailant and pull the
assailant out of the bus. The applicant told me that the
young man did leave
the bus but then returned to the bus and continued the fight. He told me that
eventually he pushed the young
man out of the bus and closed the door. He then
used the two-way radio to communicate with his employer and was told to report
the Blacktown Police Station which he did. He ceased work and went to
Blacktown Hospital after leaving the police station.
5. On the next day, 13 January 2001, the applicant went to see Dr Latif, and
subsequently came under the care of Dr Salim on 31 January
2001. Dr Salim was
eventually to refer his patient on to Dr Vijay Maniam, an orthopaedic surgeon.
Dr Maniam himself suggested that
the applicant see Mr Ben Ebel, a psychologist
and rehabilitation consultant. Mr Ebel
diagnosed a post-traumatic stress
disorder. The applicant has never returned to work for the respondent or anyone
since the time
of the assault.
6. That which the applicant told me about the circumstances of the assault is
not the way the applicant has previously portrayed the
event at all.
Fortunately a video surveillance camera that was installed in the bus is still
available and shows what actually happened.
In the course of giving evidence to
me the applicant told me that the group of young people at the back of the bus,
prior to their
alighting and prior to the assault, had been throwing tin cans
and other matter - which appeared from the applicant’s description
popper boxes, down the length of the bus and one of those objects hit the shield
behind the applicant and the applicant said
he felt as if it had hit him on the
back of the of the head. There is no soundtrack to the video surveillance film.
The video surveillance
film is only an excerpt of what was originally available.
For example, it does not show the group of young people entering the bus
first place.
7. The applicant in his evidence in cross-examination said that the young
people were throwing projectiles down the bus between the
time when the last lot
of passengers prior to the young people, alighted from the bus and the time of
the young people’s alighting
from the bus. The video film does not
suggest that at all. When the applicant was challenged about that he sought to
sworn evidence to suggest that the projectiles had been thrown at
some earlier time than in the interval between the last two lots
of passengers
alighting from the bus. Merely from the way in which the applicant gave his
evidence I had severe doubts as to his
accuracy and reliability.
8. Having seen the film, I am unable to accept him as an accurate, reliable
or honest historian or witness. When one looks at the
other material to which I
would refer and to the video film which I will describe soon, it is clear that
the applicant has made a
large number of mis-statements which are untrue. As
reluctant as any Court is to make such a finding of fact, it must be faced in
this case that Mr Anwar Ali Kasim is a liar.
9. The video surveillance film shows the fifth last young man stopping in
front of the applicant where he is seated in the bus driver’s
looking out the front entrance door, and saying something to the applicant. The
young man’s fists were not clenched
at all; they were being held, fingers
fully extended, by the side of his legs. It is clear that the young man was
saying something
to the applicant. The applicant then stood up and swung his
right arm and delivered a vicious slap to the young man’s head.
applicant then persisted with his assault on the young man. The applicant was
the aggressor in the assault which did occur.
10. It appeared to me that initially the young man was only seeking to defend
himself. The young man certainly did not fare well
in the fight. The
applicant held the young man’s throat with one hand and could use the
other hand to beat the young man.
The young man’s arm length was not as
long as the applicant’s so that the young man could not make contact with
applicant’s body and he grabbed the applicant’s shirt. During
the initial course of the fight, the young man, who was
wearing a white visor,
lost the visor. At one stage the young man went to retrieve the visor, no
doubt preliminary to escaping
from the bus, but the applicant closed the bus
door behind him, keeping the young man trapped in the bus. The assault was
and the young man did not retrieve the visor. He left the bus without
the visor eventually, but then returned, and the camera strongly
suggests, and I
find, that the young man returned for the purpose of collecting his headwear.
The applicant again commenced to assault
the young man who eventually got his
visor and fled the bus.
11. The applicant at all times was the aggressor in this assault. The young
man did depart the bus and re-enter it, but objectively,
not for the purpose of
continuing a fight or seeking revenge, merely to retrieve his headwear. The
film does not suggest any attempted
robbery. The young man does move towards
the front compartment of the bus where the driver is and the money is kept, but
that was for the purpose of retrieving his headwear and subsequently
it was for the purpose of trying to push the button to open
the doors so that
the young man could escape from the bus.
12. The applicant made a claim for compensation on 17 January 2001. The
applicant’s claim for compensation was supported by
his declaration that
the information given was true and correct. The declaration was witnessed by a
Justice of the Peace. When
asked to describe what happened, the following has
been written:
Passengers getting off bus at the last stop tried to rob the money and
assaulted me.
13. Only one person was involved in the fight and that person did not assault
the applicant. The applicant assaulted him. There
was no attempt to rob money
from the applicant. The statement made before the Justice of the Peace is
14. The applicant was interviewed by Constable Friend at Blacktown Police
Station on 28 January 2001. The applicant made a statement
to Constable Friend.
The relevant parts of the statement are these:
6. As I was driving the bus through Woodcroft the six boys and the girl
were calling out from the back of the bus. By this time the
middle-aged
passengers had already left the bus. The group of kids were all swearing and
calling me names. They were saying things
like “black cunt and fucking
idiot”. Some of them called out, “Driver, your suppose to be going
to Doonside”.
I said, “I have to go to Woodcroft first then to
7. I then completed the Woodcroft part of the route and headed back onto
Richmond Road. I then turned left into Hill End Road and
stopped at the bus
stop on the corner of Hill End Road and Richmond Road so I could let these kids
off. The girl got off the bus
first. As she got off the bus she did say
something to me but I couldn’t hear what she said. Then three of the boys
off the bus. The next boy came straight up to me and hit me with his
fist in the back of my head. This boy was about 5 foot 10
inches, thin build,
black short hair with a long fringe. He was wearing a coloured shirt and pants.
I then pushed the boy away and
he fell down the stairs of the bus. The boy
kicked his legs about and the next minute he was standing up again.
8. Then as the next two boys walked past me they started punching me in
the back. These two boys were short and stocky. I tried
to push these boys out
of the bus too but I couldn’t. The boy who punched me first then kept
trying to grab my money tray.
I covered my tray with my body to stop him from
taking it. The boy managed to pull me.
9. I was holding onto the bar with one hand so I wouldn’t get pulled
outside the bus. The boy pulled me again. This time it
ripped my shirt. The
other two boys then got off the bus and started pulling the other boy. At this
time the first boy was still
holding onto me.
10. I then somehow managed to press the door switch and close the door
while I was still inside the bus. I wanted to drive the boy
to the police
station. However, all his friends were standing just outside the bus. They saw
me close the door. They all then
forced the doors back open.
15. The statement that the young man hit the applicant with his fist in the
back of the head is untrue. The statements that two other
boys punched the
applicant in the back is untrue. The statement that the young man was trying to
rob money from the bus is untrue.
The statement that the applicant covered his
money tray with his body to protect his employer’s property is untrue.
16. On 20 March 2001 the applicant was interviewed by Mr J Sheringham who, I
assume, is a private enquiry agent retained by the employer.
The statement was
in handwriting and covers in handwriting 22 pages. The applicant signed the
foot of each page. The statement
concludes with a number of questions and
answers which appeared to mirror police practice. Those questions and answers
indicate that
the applicant had read the statement, that it was true and correct
and was made of the applicant’s own free will, and that
no inducement,
threat or promise had been held out to him to make the statement.
17. In the statement the applicant says that there was a discussion about the
appropriateness of the fare being charged by the applicant
for each of the young
people. The statement then continues:
At the time that the teenagers got onto the bus they were not behaving in
a threatening or rowdy manner and they did not do anything
that would cause me
to believe that they would cause any trouble for me.
18. The statement then continues to make the point that as the applicant
commenced the route through Woodcroft the teenagers started
calling out words to
the effect that the applicant was supposed to be going to Doonside. The
statement continues thus:
I replied with words to the effect of, “This is part of my run, just
hang in there, I will get you to Doonside. At this point
in time I did not feel
threatened by behaviour of the group of teenagers as I just thought they were
behaving like the usual noisy
kids that I come across when I am driving my
19. The statement then goes on to record that the applicant knew where the
group wished to alight from the bus because that had been
discussed when they
entered the bus when asking what the fare was. The statement does not suggest
that anything untoward happened
prior to the bus’s stopping at the
intersection of Hill End Road and Richmond Road.
20. The statement then continues thus:
The first teenager to get off the bus was the female. As she got off, she
said something to me. Because the other teenagers were
making so much noise I
could not clearly hear what she said to me, but it seemed to me that she was
making a complaint. She then
got off the bus and three of her companions
followed her off the bus. At this point in time, I was sitting on the
seat behind the steering wheel, waiting for the rest of the
passengers to get off. I did not feel threatened and I was not turning
to look behind me. As is my usual habit, I was sitting with my left hand
resting on the piece of board above the money tray.
Without warning, I felt a heavy impact against the back of my head as
though I had been hit with a clinched fist. Instinctively,
I moved over to the
right-hand side of the driver’s area near the driver’s window.
There was a protective screen behind
the driver’s seat and I wanted to
make sure that the screen protected me from being struck in the back of the head
I turned to face the doorway of the door and I could then look behind me
up the aisle of the bus. I saw one of the male teenagers
stand in front of me
looking into the driver’s area, straight at me. I also saw two of his
male companions standing in the
aisle-way behind him. All three of these
teenagers were trying to get into the driver’s area and they were all
swinging their
arms as they were trying to punch me or grab hold of me. They
were making a fair bit of noise, but it all happened so quickly, I
make out what they were saying.
As I moved back into the bus driver’s compartment I was leaning
forward towards the money tray with my hands extended towards
the money tray to
try and protect it. My boss had previously told me that if anyone tried to rob
me that I should not try to protect
the money and I should let the thieves take
the money. My boss told me that I should only try to protect myself and that I
not try to protect the money.
When these people attempted to rob me I forget what my boss had told me
that I did not want
these people to get my money. As I was reaching towards the money tray, I was
facing my three attackers, with
my head down. All three of the teenagers were
throwing punches at me and they landed a barrage of blows on the top of my head
on my back. I managed to push the male teenager in front of me back down
the stairs at the door at the front of the bus and he fell
down onto his back.
I then tried to kick him to get him all of the way off the bus. At this point
in time, I had managed to get
out of the bus driver’s area and I was in
the aisle way near the front door.
Everything happened so quickly that I do not know what happened to the
other two teenagers who had attacked and punched me. It all
happened so
suddenly that I can’t remember exactly what happened. They may have
managed to get off the bus when I was struggling
with them, while I was trying
to protect myself and my money.
21. The statement that the applicant was hit from behind with a clenched fist
or with a projectile is untrue. The applicant was never
hit from behind by
anyone or anything.
22. Three young men were not involved in this fight, only one young man was
involved in this fight. This fight was initiated by
the applicant, not by any
young man. Clearly the applicant attempted in his interview with Mr Sheringham
to induce the belief that
the young men were motivated to rob him of his money.
That was the reason that they assaulted him. Robbery was not a motive in
matter. The fight started because the applicant assaulted one young man.
23. Prior to making that statement - which is in many respects false - to Mr
Sheringham, the applicant had seen a number of doctors
and given histories. The
history contained in Dr Salim’s report of 24 August 2001 merely indicates
that the applicant alleged
to being assaulted by three persons. That history
given to Dr Salim is untrue. There was only one person involved in the fight
which had been initiated by the applicant himself.
24. On 2 March 2001 the applicant was seen by Dr Tim O’Carrigan, a
specialist surgeon for the insurer of the employer. The
applicant gave a
history to Dr O’Carrigan suggesting that the young people abused the
applicant verbally. The doctor’s
history continues thus:
He subsequently reached their bus stop and four got off but one tried to
grab the money. He attempted to stop the thief but he was
hit several times on
the head, left and low back which included punches and kicks. He fell over the
money and they pulled him out
of the driver’s seat and hit him several
times again. He did not lose consciousness and managed to close the door but
was still one assailant inside the bus. The others forced the door open
and let that person out.
25. Again the statements made by the applicant that one of the young men
tried to rob the bus of its money is untrue. The statement
that the applicant
was assaulted by a number of people is untrue and the statement that the
applicant was punched a number of times
and kicked a number of times does not
appear to be true from my viewing of the video surveillance film.
26. On 7 March 2001 the applicant saw Dr V. J. Maniam for the first time.
The applicant told Dr Maniam that the
young people tried to
rob the money from the box and that a number of young men attacked the
applicant, punching him and pushing
him over. The suggestions that robbery was
the motive, that robbery was attempted and the statement that a number of people
the applicant are all untrue.
27. On 27 March, a week after making the statement to Mr Sheringham the
applicant saw Mr Ben Ebel, a psychologist. The applicant
did tell Mr Ebel that
the youths began to yell at him that he should be going to Doonside when he
started to take the route through
Woodcroft. The applicant told Mr Ebel that
the youth began to verbally abuse him and that he attempted to calm them down by
that the route through Woodcroft was part of the normal route. The
applicant went on to tell Mr Ebel that he was struck on the back
of the head by
one of the youths exiting the bus. That statement is palpably untrue. The
applicant went on to tell Mr Ebel that
he was startled by the first blow and
then he was attacked by two more young men. That statement is palpably untrue.
The applicant
also told Mr Ebel that one of the youths was attempting to rob
money from the bus. That statement is also untrue.
28. On 16 April 2002 the applicant made an electronic record-of-interview
with Detective Senior Constable Gilbert at Merrylands Police
Station. Also
present was Senior Constable Bayliss. The applicant explained in his
record-of-interview that the young people, when
he started taking the route
through Woodcroft, started yelling from the back of the bus, calling him names.
Those names included
“black cunt”,
bastard’s useless”
and similar things. The applicant went on to
tell the police that it was from that time on that the young people started
noises, throwing cans and
“stuff like that.”
asked to explain what that was, he said it was
“papers and things left
by passengers in the bus.”
He was asked whether any of that material
hit him and the applicant said that it did not. It should be noticed that this
first occasion on which the applicant alleged that projectiles were being
thrown in the bus by the young people. This was the version
of events given to
me in cross-examination.
29. However, the applicant did not suggest to the police, as he did to me,
that any of the projectiles hit him or hit the protective
barrier behind him
such that it may have hit the applicant on the head. The applicant told the
police that the fourth young man
to leave the bus hit him on the back of the
head and that he could see a boy standing in front of him trying to grab the
In the record of interview the applicant also said that two other young
men were punching him and trying to grab him. However, he
was unable to
remember how many times they punched him. The applicant mislead the police. The
applicant was not hit on the head
being the commencement of the assault. The
applicant was not attacked by anybody other than one single youth and on my
the applicant attacked him rather than vice versa.
30. The police made available to the applicant the statement that he had made
to Mr Sheringham on 20 March 2001. The applicant confirmed
to the police nearly
everything that was contained in that record-of-interview as being true and
correct. The only disagreement
that the applicant had with any part of the
statement at that stage was the statement that the boss had told the applicant
should only try to protect himself. The applicant told the police that
the boss had told him to protect himself and the money as
well, otherwise the
applicant had no cavil with the content of the statement made to Mr Sheringham.
The applicant could have resiled
from the statement when being formally
interviewed by the police but he did not and he affirmed it in every way
possible. He again
confirmed that he was punched on the back of the head
without any warning.
31. Towards the end of the interview Senior Constable Bayliss asked some
questions. Those questions I think need to be considered:
Q189 Just one. Just take you back to when you were trying to protect the
money on the bus.
Q190 And you were saying that the first bloke was trying to get the
Q191 What was he saying at the time.
A It was very noisy, I couldn’t understand because the girl when
she got off the bus had said something, I couldn’t
understand either
because the children was running and they were making noise. I couldn’t
understand what they were saying.
Q192 Okay. What made you think he was going for the money then.
Q193 The boy.
A Because he was just looking at the tray.
Q194 Do you know if he was saying anything.
A There was something that he, but I didn’t understand what they
were talking about.
Q195 So they were talking but you just couldn’t understand what was
A Yeah, yeah.
32. It is to be noted that the applicant asked me to believe that he knew
exactly what his alleged assailant was saying. His alleged
assailant called him
“mother fucker”
and asked the applicant whether he wished
to fight with him. Yet, when asked to say what anyone had said at the time, the
did not understand what any of them were saying. The applicant has
misled Detective Senior Constable Gilbert and Senior Constable
Bayliss. The
curious thing that should be noted at this stage is that at the time the
applicant was interviewed by Detective Senior
Constable Gilbert and Senior
Constable Bayliss, he had seen the video film. He had seen it with his lawyers
prior to the interview
by the police. Unfortunately, but not unexpectedly, the
police equipment mal-functioned and they were unable to re-show the video
applicant. Prior to giving evidence before me the applicant had seen the video
a number of times.
33. The most recent health professional to interview the applicant was Dr
Wendy Roberts, a consultant psychologist. Dr Roberts interviewed
the applicant
on 27 November 2002. The applicant told Dr Roberts that the young people
started yelling at the applicant and throwing
cans at him whilst he was driving.
The applicant also told her that they were swearing at him. The applicant told
Dr Roberts that
they called him names and
“used the ‘f’
word and things like that.”
The applicant told Dr Roberts that in
the context of the young people’s remonstrating with the applicant about
their desire
to go to Doonside rather than to Woodcroft and the
applicant’s explanation that Woodcroft was part of the route to Doonside.
The history continues thus:
One of the boys stood in front of me and swore at my mother and wanted to
fight me. I stopped the bus at the corner of Richmond and
Huon Road in Doonside
..... on the boys [Scilicit, one of the boys] had his fists clenched and was a
bully and three of them got
off the bus with the girl and the two others stood
there while the others had clenched fists. I pushed the guy with a fist
because I was scared and that’s how the fight started.
That version of events is roughly similar to the version of events of which
the applicant told me in-chief.
34. This is a case in which I cannot accept anything that Mr Kasim has told
me unless corroborated or something which has been so
consistently reported as
to be common in this case and unless what he says be consistent with common
human experience. One datum
as far as I am concerned is that there was some
exception taken by the group of young people by the applicant’s taking the
route through Woodcroft rather than the route directly to Doonside. There is
something in the film which to me corroborates that.
Clearly at times the
applicant was looking up into a mirror looking down the back of the bus and
obviously at times he makes a comment
or two. I accept that there was some
verbal outburst at the back of the bus with a group of young people to which the
verbally responded. At no time does the film suggest the applicant
was in any way frightened or apprehensive, unhappy or worried.
35. The girl, followed by four young men, alighted from the bus. The fifth
young man, he who was wearing a white visor, stopped,
looked down at the
applicant and spoke to him. Whatever the young man said provoked a violent,
vicious response from the applicant.
He stood up and slapped him almightily
using his right dominant arm and then assaulted the young man. Objectively,
there was some
provocation. What the provocation was I do not know. The
applicant told me that it was because the young man used the word
“mother fucker”
which the applicant took to be an insult
directed at his mother. I do not know what was said, but, objectively, the
young man stopped,
spoke and said something which provoked the applicant.
36. Learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that not being able to
ascertain what the nature of the provocation was would
lead me to the view that
it could not be in the course of the applicant’s employment or related to
his employment causally.
I am unable to accede to that submission. There is no
suggestion here of any relationship between this group of young people and
particular the young man who wore the white visor other than the relationship of
driver and passenger. I accept that there was
some verbal altercation between
the group of young people and the applicant about the bus route. It may be that
the applicant said
something nasty to the young people and provoked one of them
to say something nasty back to the applicant. I do not know.
However it appears to me that whatever the young man said to the applicant
arose out of the relationship of passenger and driver and
therefore was related
to the applicant’s employment.
37. The applicant responded completely inappropriately. Whatever provocation
was offered to him the applicant’s assault upon
the young man cannot in
any way be justified. The assault did not last for a long time but obviously
had a number of parts to it.
That has led learned counsel for the applicant to
submit that two things happened. The applicant may have initiated the assault
but the applicant’s injuries only occurred when the young man came back
into the bus to
“continue the assault”
or to continue the
fight and that is when the applicant may have been injured because he would not
be injured whilst throwing a slap
or a punch at the young man. I am unable to
accede to that submission. This whole altercation between the applicant and the
man was one single event in my view, one single event because the
applicant commenced it, persisted with it and dislodged the young
headwear, and what happened thereafter appears to be merely the continued
attempt of the young man to both defend himself
and to retrieve his headwear.
Albeit that he was very angry, as one would no doubt expect him to be, when the
young man re-entered
the bus he held out his finger like a remonstrating parent
of a child when of course the relationship ought to have been the other
38. I will for the purpose of my continued ruling on this case assume that
the applicant has suffered personal injury. Did any such
injury arise out of or
in the course of the applicant’s employment with the respondent? The
first finding I reach is that
any injury did not arise in the course of the
employment. That is because when the applicant stood up and vehemently slapped
young man on the head he interrupted the course of his employment. He was
not required, expected or authorised in the course of
his employment to assault
one of Her Majesty’s subjects. Indeed, what he did appears to me to be
contrary to the criminal
law. If one need any authority for that one need only
Stojkovic v Telford Management Pty Limited
[1998] NSWCC 8
(1998) 16 NSWCCR 165
to [93]. However, in my view the only inference I can draw is that this
injury arose out of the employment because the only inference
I can draw is that
the reason for the young man’s conversation with the applicant which
clearly provoked him was something
that arise out of the relationship of driver
and passenger. There is no suggestion here that there was some other
relationship involved
which gave rise to any animus between the worker and the
39. There is no evidence to suggest for example that they were unreconciled
neighbours, that they were sporting enemies or anything
of that nature. In
Tarry v Warringah Shire Council
[1974] WCR 1, there is a dictum which
supports compensibility in the judgment of Hutley JA. I dealt with
Tarry’s case in par
75 of my judgment in
repeat shortly what I said:
In that case, the worker had died. He had had an altercation with a
fellow employee, which on the evidence led to cardiac arrest
causing the
worker’s death ten days later. The worker was a foreman at the Mona Vale
Garbage Depot. It was his duty to allocate
work to various tanker drivers, who
normally reported for work at about 4 am each morning. On the
morning of 17 October
1977, there was an oral dispute between the deceased
worker and a man called Ure. The deceased said to Ure: “ I will have
put you in your place” and Ure said: “When are you going to do
it?”. The deceased said, “one of these
days you’ll find
out”, whereupon Ure replied, “When you’re ready” and the
deceased said, “Right
now will do”. Thereupon the two men went
outside the gates of the depot and proceeded to take up striking attitudes and
a few tentative blows but neither person struck a blow. Ure slipped and
fell. Thereupon the deceased threw himself upon him and
Ure noticed the
deceased appeared to be having difficulty in breathing, then he slumped to the
His Honour, Judge Gibson made an award for the respondent. In reversing
that, Hutley JA said at 6:
In my opinion it is quite clear on the evidence that the injury from which
the deceased died arose out of his employment. It arose
out of an altercation
between two employees of the Warringah Shire Council about a matter which
concerned their respective authorities
and duties; it arose in a work situation.
It does not follow that the injury did not arise out of the employment because
in the course
of what he was doing the deceased was doing acts which were not in
accordance with his duties as a foreman. It is, of course, misconduct
foreman to settle matters of responsibility by engaging in fisticuffs with a man
under him. That, however, has really nothing
to do with the question.
The facts proved and established by his Honour show that the injury from
which he died was directly and unbrokenly connected with
his employment, that
is, things he was doing properly within the scope of his employment.
40. Here I accept that the applicant was provoked because of something that
arose out of the relationship of a driver and passenger.
A bus driver is under
an obligation to control those on his bus, to ensure the safety of all and the
proper management and control
of the bus on the carriage way. A bus driver must
bring an unruly passenger under control especially if his conduct is threatening
the way in which the bus is being driven or threatening the safety of the driver
or other passengers. I can accept that the worker
as a bus driver has some
rights and obligations to control the activities of others in the bus. If this
young man upbraided the
applicant because of the route he had taken or the way
he had driven his bus then that appears to me to rise out of the
applicant’s
employment. That is, it is causally related to it.
41. The judgment of Mr Justice Hutley indicates that doing what one is
entitled to do in an unauthorised fashion is misconduct rather
than breaking the
chain of causation between the event and the employment. I accept therefore
that any injury that the applicant
sustained arose out of the employment. A
bold submission was made by Mr Pearce for the respondent that even if I so
found, I would
not be satisfied that the employment was a substantial
contributing factor to any injury. The Court of Appeal in
Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
made the point that to be a
substantial contributing factor one need not have a causal relationship the same
as or greater than arising
out of employment. Therefore, if an injury arises
out of the employment, substantial contributing factor is ipso facto
established,
a point I have made many times since the decision of the Court of
42. The respondent raises then a defence under
If an injury to a worker is solely attributable to his serious and wilful
misconduct, compensation is not payable in respect of that
injury unless the
injury results in death or serious and permanent disablement.
43. Assaulting a passenger, even if he offered provocation, is misconduct.
The action of slapping and punching somebody is a deliberate,
that is a wilful
act. Assaulting a passenger, assaulting anybody, breaching the peace, is a
serious matter. I accept that the applicant
was guilty of serious and wilful
misconduct. I am unable to accede to Mr Barham’s submission that there
were two separate
events in this case. I accept that it was one event only and
therefore if the applicant was injured in the course of the struggle/
scuffle/altercation - that it is attributable to that event.
44. I therefore find that any injury sustained by the applicant is solely due
to his serious and wilful misconduct.
45. A submission was made that it might be one thing for the applicant to
assault somebody but it is another for that person to assault
the applicant
back. I am unable to accede to that submission. Common human experience
indicates that if one provokes an assault,
one can expect the victim of the
assault to seek to protect himself, which is all that I can see that happened
here in the altercation
on the bus.
46. The only remaining question is whether there is any serious and permanent
disablement. That issue I find against the applicant.
47. As I said earlier, the applicant said that he went after the assault
committed by him to Blacktown Hospital, but nothing has been
adduced from the
Blacktown Hospital. On the following day he went to Dr Latif, but nothing has
been adduced from Dr Latif. On
31 January 2001 the applicant went to see Dr
Salim. I have looked closely at Dr Salim's findings on examination on that day
they do not disclose any objective signs of organic disability.
48. On 3 February 2001 cervical spine x-rays and a CT scan of the cervical
spine were performed. What they show is long-standing
degenerative disc disease
of the neck. Plain x-ray and CT scan of the lumbar spine were performed on 19
March 2001. They show degenerative
disc disease and reactive bony changes in
the lumbar spine. MRI scan of the lumbar spine performed on 25 June 2001 shows
degenerative
changes and what are referred to as a small posterior disc
protrusion at L5-S1 but it did not compress the nerve roots. Therefore
recorded as being a small posterior disc protrusion is merely disc bulging
without impinging on any neural structure such
as to cause pain. An MRI scan of
the cervical spine does not suggest anything other than widespread cervical
degenerative disease.
49. Dr O'Carrigan expressed the view that the applicant had established
asymptomatic cervical spondylosis at the time of the alleged
assault on 12
January 2001. The assault, according to Dr O’Carrigan, rendered the
previously asymptomatic cervical spondylosis
to be symptomatic. The same merely
can be said for the condition of the applicant’s lumbar spine.
50. I have closely read all the medical evidence and there is very little
that would even suggest anything was really wrong with the
applicant other than
his mere say so. Dr O’Carrigan himself found an absent triceps jerk
bilaterally, but their significance
he does not state.
51. The applicant saw Dr Manniam on 7 March 2001 but he did not find any
neurological abnormality in the upper limbs. He found sensation
was normal in
the upper limbs and the reflexes were equal on both sides. The same was said of
the lower limbs.
52. The applicant saw Dr E D Price, an occupational health physician for the
respondent on 1 October 2002. Dr Price found no objective
signs of organic
disability but did find signs suggestive of fabrication of symptoms, namely
non-anatomical findings and embellishment.
He thought that any aggravation had
ceased and that any on-going problems were due to the naturally occurring
degenerative disc
disease of the lumbar and cervical spines.
53. Essentially, as far as the organic matters are concerned, that is
anything that is allegedly wrong with the applicant on a musculoligamentous
basis, all the evidence suggests is that there is degenerative disc disease in
his cervical and lumbar spines which has been long-standing.
The only injury
that one could find was an aggravation of such pre-existing conditions that was
caused during the altercation in
the bus on 12 January 2001. To make such a
finding, one would have to accept what Mr Kasim said as being accurate, reliable
honest. I am not persuaded on the balance of probabilities that the
applicant had any on-going incapacity.
54. Having said that, it is very hard for me to find when any incapacity
commenced, let alone ceased. There is nothing between 12
January and 31 January
2001. By 31 January 2001 there is no objective sign of organic disability.
Even giving the applicant the
benefit of the doubt, which is inverting the onus
of proof, I could not be satisfied that the applicant had any incapacity for
after the examination by Dr Price on 1 October 2002.
55. The applicant relies on a psychiatric diagnosis of post-traumatic stress
disorder. That is referred to by Dr Eli Revai who saw
the applicant on 30
October 2001 and he did not believe that the applicant was suffering from any
psychiatric disturbance. Dr Wendy
Roberts equally rejects the diagnosis of
post-traumatic stress disorder and thought the applicant was physically fit to
work. I am not persuaded on the balance of probabilities that the
applicant has had any on-going psychiatric problem causing an
incapacity for
work or any continuing disability after the time he was examined by Dr Revai on
30 October 2001.
56. Therefore I cannot be persuaded on the balance of probabilities that
there is any serious and permanent disablement. Not only
would such disablement
not be permanent but also in my view not serious. The applicant may have
noticed a few aches and pains after
his attack on the young man on 12 January
2001 but objectively they would not have persisted for very long at all.
Psychiatrically
the expert evidence of Dr Revai and Dr Roberts rebuts any
suggestion of any ongoing psychiatric disturbance.
57. I have enquired of the representatives of the parties whether any further
reasons for judgment are required. I am told that none
is so required.
58. I make an award for the respondent.
Mr P Barham instructed by Conomos
& Spinak appeared for the applicant.
Mr J H Pearce instructed by Leitch
Hasson & Dent appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (51.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter