URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2021/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Flanagan [2021] NSWNMPSC 1 (22 April 2021)
Professional Standards Committee Inquiry
Constituted Under Part 8 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National
to hold an Inquiry into a
Complaint in relation to:
Ann Margaret Flanagan
NMW0001208131
Dates of Inquiry:
23 and 24 February 2021
Committee members:
Mr Mark Paul
Ms Deborah Armitage
Dr Linda Gregory PhD
Dr Catherine
Berglund Phd
Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Emma Bayley, Legal Officer, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Mrs Ann Margaret Flanagan:
Decision date:
22 April 2021
The Committee made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
determined to caution, reprimand, and impose conditions.
Non-Publication Direction
Not to publish identifying information of Patient A.
STATEMENT OF DECISION
Our inquiry concerns the alleged improper or
unethical conduct by Mrs Ann Margaret Flanagan in her capacity as a
registered nurse.
The Health Care Complaints Commission alleges, by way of a
Complaint dated 23 April 2020, that on 25 June 2018 Mrs Flanagan
erroneously
made entries in electronic records of an event that did not take
place and work she had not performed, and later added a further
note that was
misleading and incorrect.
The Commission alleges each aspect of
Mrs Flanagan’s conduct amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct in that it was
improper or unethical within the meaning of section
139B(1)(I) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW), (the
Having undertaken our inquiry into the circumstances and
having heard from Mrs Flanagan we have decided the Complaint is
established.
Mrs Flanagan’s conduct in each respect was improper, and
also unethical, and amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
In order to
protect the public, we caution and reprimand Mrs Flanagan, and also impose
conditions on her registration.
The Complaint
The Complaint (Attachment 1,
without the schedule) sets out the background and gives particulars of the
allegation of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Throughout our decision we
refer to the pati ent as Patient A. On 17 November 2020 a non-publication
was been made to protect the patient’s identity, and that order
The essence of the Complaint is that although Mrs Flanagan
may have intended to make the telephone call she did not; and yet she made
entry in the electronic medical record as if she had made that call. She
recorded information about Patient A to the effect the
patient was
progressing well and might soon be discharged from the Mental Health service.
It is also alleged that Mrs Flanagan recorded that she had spent
specific amounts of time on care planning, report writing, education
administration, all relating to Patient A and that those activities, as well as
the telephone call, did not take place. Early
next morning the patient was
admitted through in the Emergency Department. When Mrs Flanagan became
aware of the admission, she
added an entry to the electronic medical record:
“Written in error – wrong client”. The Complaint alleges that
entry was misleading and incorrect.
Documents provided
The Commission
supported the Complaint with two folders of material tabbed 1 to 52 containing
its investigation material, communications
with Mrs Flanagan, records of
earlier s150 proceedings, information from Mrs Flanagan’s employer,
professional codes of conduct
and related policies, and a report from registered
nurse Ms Carol Martin, as an expert, providing her opinion on
Mrs Flanagan’s
conduct. One of the folders contained a print of the
electronic medical record for Patient A and the client activity details form
containing the entries as set out in paragraph 1(b) to 1(e) of the
particulars of Complaint.
Mrs Flanagan had been served with those
documents some weeks before our hearing.
At the commencement of the hearing
the Commission provided us with the following additional material, all of which
it had emailed
to Mrs Flanagan the day before:
(a) an email from Dr Yong to Mrs Flanagan and copied
to Jennifer Markham (Mrs Flanagan’s manager) dated
27 June 2018 (added
to Exhibit A as Tab 53);
(b) an email from Ms
Markham to Mrs Flanagan of 2 August 2018 concerning an interview on
20 July 2018 (added as Tab 54);
(c) a letter from
Mrs Flanagan’s then employer confirming termination of employment on
21 June 2019 (added as Tab 55);
(d) an employment declaration by
Mrs Flanagan dated 9 November 2019 (added as Tab 56);
(e) a file note by an officer at the Nursing and Midwifery Council of
conversation with Mrs Flanagan on 20 July 2020 (added as Tab
We were also provided with an evidentiary certificate
confirming Mrs Flanagan’s registration which we added to the material
At the commencement of the hearing the Commission made some
minor amendment to the documents by substituting the policy for Minimum
Standards of Documentation applicable in the relevant Local Health District to
that which had been included in the material (Tab
11). The Commission did
not seek to rely on the policy document at Tab 12 and we did not consider
We asked Mrs Flanagan whether she had any objections to this
material. She did not. On our assessment the material provided by the
Commission was relevant one way or another to our inquiry. We marked all of
this tabbed material from the Commission as Exhibit
materials provided by the Commission are records of Mrs Flanagan’s
explanations of what happened: the transcript
of the s150 proceedings, and her
responses to inquiries by the Commission. We have not taken those records as
written admissions
by Mrs Flanagan. Instead, we have proceeded upon what
it was that Mrs Flanagan told us and her acknowledgments of the correctness
those and other documents as being correct.
The course of our hearing
undertook our hearing on Tuesday 23 and Wednesday 24 February 2021.
By s171G of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) (“the
National Law) the proceedings were recorded. We confirmed that the proceedings
were public, as would be our decision.
All members of the committee were
present at the one location and were assisted by Elly Lowery of the Nursing and
Midwifery Council
of New South Wales. The Commission was represented by
Ms Emma Bailey a legal officer with the Commission, and she appeared by
videoconference.
Mrs Flanagan appeared on her own behalf.
before our hearing Mrs Flanagan had contacted Ms Lowery to say she was
unable to participate either by attending in person
or by video conference. She
said she had responsibility for the care of aged parents, and also for her
brother and sister both of
whom had disabilities. She said she did not have the
equipment or technological ability to participate in a video
conference.
Arrangements were made for her to participate by telephone and
she did so throughout the course of the hearing. We took breaks in
of the proceedings to allow Mrs Flanagan to attend to her parents and we
also adjourned the hearing early on Tuesday 23
February on her
We wish to thank Mrs Flanagan for being cooperative throughout
the hearing and assisting us with our inquiry. We informed Mrs Flanagan
that the proceedings were not disciplinary or punitive, but rather to inquire
into the events and decide if anything needed to be
done for the benefit of the
public more generally. In our assessment she did the very best she could to
assist us, even though,
as she said, the process was stressful.
Tuesday morning we heard from Carol Martin by video conference. It is apparent
that she has significant experience in professional
aspects of nursing and since
2009 has been an assessor for the Australian Council on Health Care Standards.
Ms Martin’s input
was valuable and assisted us to consider how the
alleged conduct might be improper or unethical. Ms Martin answered
questions from
the Commission and from us. Mrs Flanagan did not ask any
question of her even though she was invited to do so.
When we resumed on
the morning of Wednesday 24 February, we asked Mrs Flanagan if she was
willing to answer questions from us and
the Commission even though she was not
obliged to do so. She said she would. Mrs Flanagan’s answers
assisted us to understand
Mrs Flanagan’s assessment of her own
We accept that she did her best to truthfully answer our questions.
Mrs Flanagan did not dispute the basic facts of what had happened,
acknowledged she had made mistakes.
We advised Mrs Flanagan and the
Commission that we would first consider the question of unsatisfactory
professional conduct and then
decide if there was a need for us to make any
protective orders.
After an adjournment to consider the Complaint, we advised
Mrs Flanagan and the Commission of our finding that unsatisfactory
professional
conduct had been established as alleged in the Complaint.
Commission provided a list of its proposed protective orders, which we then
discussed with Mrs Flanagan and the Commission. Mrs
Flanagan did not
have much to say other than to acknowledge that she understood what orders would
mean for her as she was already
subject to conditions following the s150
proceedings. When pressed, Mrs Flanagan said she might want to put
something in writing.
We directed the Commission to provide us and
Mrs Flanagan with any further submissions and authorities by Friday,
26 February. Mrs
Flanagan was permitted to provide any submissions
she wished to make by 5 March, and the Commission to reply by 12 March
timetable was met, and we have considered the material
There is no dispute from Mrs Flanagan, and no doubt on our
part, that the essential components of what happened are set out in the
Complaint. However, in order to better understand the events and what
protective orders are appropriate we review the background
and explain the
events in more detail. There is no dispute about what happened. What is
unclear is an explanation for Mrs Flanagan’s
and history
Mrs Flanagan worked in the Older Persons Mental Health Team
at South West Sydney Local Health District at Liverpool Hospital, in an
outpatient clinic. One of her responsibilities was to make contact with the
patients or their families as part of an assessment
of their care and progress.
Mrs Flanagan had participated in a multi-disciplinary team (MDT)
meeting when Patient A was discussed. Mrs Flanagan was assigned
make contact and assess the patient’s progress so at the next MDT meeting
consideration could be given to possible discharge
of Patient A from the
program, to the care of her general practitioner.
Mrs Flanagan prepared
to make that phone call on 25 June 2018. Mrs Flanagan told us
that at that time she was “stressed”.
She was having difficulty
looking after her elderly parents and her brother and sister, and she was
receiving phone calls whilst
at work. There was a new Staff Specialist working
in the team who had asked for changes to the way entries were made in the
medical records. This was a fairly recent change and
Mrs Flanagan said she was finding it difficult to meet those requirements.
Although she had received training on the electronic medical record system
Mrs Flanagan said she was not adept at making entries
as required.
preparation for the phone call and to help her in making the related entries in
the medical record she “pre-wrote”,
on a piece of paper, the
questions and topics she intended to ask. Mrs Flanagan also
“pre-wrote” the information she
expected to receive when making the
phone call. As best as she could explain she said she did so with the intention
of making any
necessary changes to the “pre-written answers” if she
received contrary information during the phone call.
Mrs Flanagan did
not make that telephone call and she readily admitted she did not make the phone
call that she had prepared to make.
She thinks she may have begun to make the
call and was then interrupted by “other phone calls” and so never
connection and did not speak to Patient A or anybody on the
patient’s behalf.
Sometime after those interruptions she opened the
electronic medical record for Patient A and then entered into the record
the questions
and answers that she had “pre-written”. That medical
record appears at Tab 52, page 719 of Exhibit 1 being the
set under the heading Progress Note. The entries she made were under
the headings Situation/Subjective, Objective, Assessment, and
Plan, being the
format requested by the new Staff Specialist.
It is important to note that
the entries read as if information was obtained during the call. Some entries
may repeat information
obtained at an earlier time, but much of the record can
only be read as immediately relating to the present:
There is a note of a
discussion with the patient’s son (name recorded) about relapse
prevention, that he feels he is aware when
his mother is sick, and that he is
pleased with her “current functioning and mental state”. There is a
note that “client
has stated, via her son and husband that she knows the
warning signs of her ‘sickness’.”
Under the Plan heading
Mrs Flanagan noted that she would present the outcome at the next MDT for
consideration of possible discharge
“as client remains stable, is aware of
relapse signs”. There is no doubt that Mrs Flanagan made the
entries. It is
not clear why she did so, or whether she knew the entries were
wrong but proceeded nonetheless.
Mrs Flanagan has given a number of
explanations for what she did. She told us she made a terrible mistake, that
she was distracted,
that she was under stress, but she was unable to explain how
it came to be that she created and then entered into the electronic
record a detailed but entirely fictitious report of a telephone conversation
that never took place. In making that observation
we do not believe that there
was a reason which she withheld from us. Rather it is that Mrs Flanagan
herself seems unable to understand
why she did what she did. She has no idea
what her motivation might have been, and she is confused and dissatisfied with
explanations.
Sometime after making the entries, she disposed of the
‘pre-written’ paper in the secure destruction bin.
Later during
her shift Mrs Flanagan made entries in the Client Activities Details form
(Tab 50, pages 431-432 of Exhibit 1) setting
out the time she had
spent with respect to Patient A as being:
45 minutes of care planning,
40 minutes of
documentation and report writing,
20 minutes of education, and
10 minutes of administration.
Mrs Flanagan acknowledged that she did not spend
anywhere near that amount of time on those tasks. All she said she did was
the “pre-written” topics for questions and the expected
answers, and then enter that material into the electronic medical
When Mrs Flanagan returned to work the next morning, she saw
from a list of admissions to the Mental Health Unit that Patient A had
admitted. Mrs Flanagan said she was prompted to read Patient A’s
medical record as she would usually do for any patient
under her care who was
Mrs Flanagan was not able to recall, but it is likely that she
then saw and read the entry that had been made by the attending medical
practitioner in the Emergency Department upon the patient’s admissions
(Exhibit 1, Tab 51, pages 467-468).
The entry opens with a
reference to the entry that Mrs Flanagan had made the day before and the
apparent discussion with the patient’s
son – As per EMR her case was
discussed on 25/06/18 with son [Name]. After recording information obtained
from Patient A’s
son, the medical practitioner had written:
he did not speak to MHS yesterday.
Whether she read those words or not, and
we think it more likely that she did, Mrs Flanagan went to the entry she
had made the previous
day and added the comment:
Written in error –
wrong client.
We could not discern when the realisation of her error came to
Mrs Flanagan; whether it was shortly after she made the entry, when
read of the patient being admitted, when she saw the ED entry in the medical
record, or when she looked at her own record from
the day before.
Mrs Flanagan did not otherwise draw to anybody’s attention that
she had not made the phone call, that her record of it was erroneous,
the entry should be ignored. When asked why she did not, she said she thought
at the time that her corrective entry in
the medical record was sufficient, and
that the error would become apparent at the next MDT meeting when discussing the
She also said that there was nobody to whom she could report because
the Unit Manager was acting in another position and had not
been replaced. The
only others in the unit were a social worker and the Staff Specialist.
accept that the Unit Manager had been and was then acting in another position.
Nevertheless, the evidence shows that she maintained
attended the MDT meetings. If she was not at that time within the unit, she was
not by that fact out
of contact by Mrs Flanagan. Indeed, it was later on
that same day the Unit Manager came to the unit to see Mrs Flanagan and
her to a meeting by saying, “You know what this is about”.
Mrs Flanagan went to that meeting, and the Staff Specialist
The best record there is of what was discussed at the meeting is
contained in an email from the Staff Specialist to Mrs Flanagan sent
next day (Tab 53, Exhibit 1). It is useful to set out the relevant portion of
that email:
1. You stated that on 25/6/18, you had written some notes on
paper regarding what you would discuss with [patient’s son].
were not able to get hold of [son].
3. However you managed to get hold of
[another patient’s] daughter and discussed her discharge with
4. When you went to document for this contact with [the other patient]
on the electronic record, you said you got your wires crossed
and instead
documented what you had written on paper regarding Patient A in
Patient A’s electronic record. You’re not
sure why the
activity was logged as it was.
5. You did not realise you had documented this
until you reviewed Patient’s A electronic record on 26/6/18 after noting
presented to hospital. You then marked the entry in error.
6. We advised
that this will be investigated further to clarify the sequence of
Mrs Flanagan told us that she agreed with the summary
in the email. She says she spoke to the second patient. She is not clear about
whether she had “pre‑written” questions and answers for that
patient, but in any event instead of entering those
notes or the results of the
phone conversation into the second patient’s electronic record she entered
the pre-written notes
for Patient A in Patient A’s
Any notes that she may have made for the second patient she had also
placed in the secure destruction bin.
Mrs Flanagan has not been able to
identify the second patient even though the email contains the initials of that
patient. The Commission’s
investigations have not revealed any patient
allocated to Mrs Flanagan on 25 June 2018 as being the second patient.
When asked to
review the list of patients allocated to her on
25 June 2018 Mrs Flanagan could not say which of them was the
second patient. None
of them have the initials given by Mrs Flanagan as
recorded in the email.
On 20 July 2018 Mrs Flanagan was
interviewed by the Local Health District’s Workforce Manager, with the
Unit Manager present.
On 2 August 2018 Mrs Flanagan received an
email from the Unit Manager with a summary of the interview.
In response to
the question, “Can you describe what occurred?” the email summarised
Mrs Flanagan’s answer as:
Advised that she intended to contact
client’s son to discuss how the client was going and pre-wrote her
clinical notes down
for the client before making contact. She had done the same
thing for another client – had pre‑written the notes and
She then received a personal call and became confused
and when she returned to
her duties she entered the clinical notes for both clients into eMR.
the heading Mitigating Circumstances the email records that
Mrs Flanagan:
... advised that she has concerns regarding her
documentation and was just trying to get it right as her documentation is
returned to her 3 or 4 times to correct. Advised she felt under
stress and required further training with the formulation.
The email invited
Mrs Flanagan to make any corrections. Mrs Flanagan said she did not
make any. She told us that the email was correct
as a record of what she said
and what was her explanation.
If Mrs Flanagan did make an entry in the
clinical notes for the other patient it has not been possible to find those
The essence of what is recorded in those emails has been repeated by
Mrs Flanagan since that initial interview. She gave similar
responses in
the disciplinary process which ultimately led to her termination of employment.
She said much the same during the s150
proceedings and also in response to the
Commission’s queries during its investigation.
What is apparent to us
from Mrs Flanagan’s evidence overall is that she does not, even on
reflection, have an understanding
of how it was that she came to enter
information from a non‑existent phone call. She says she was under
stress, she was distracted,
and that she was trying to make entries in the form
required by the Staff Specialist. Mrs Flanagan has no real explanation for
it was that she took the time to copy the pre‑written responses into
the electronic medical record without it occurring to
her during that process
that she had not made the phone call that she was entering into the record. Nor
is she able to explain how
she then completed the Client Activity Detail form
listing time, quite extensive time, that she agrees she did not spend in dealing
with matters concerning Patient A, other than the preparation of the
“pre-written” notes.
We asked Mrs Flanagan whether she
thought that at the time she was under some particular stress that may have had
an impact on her
mental state. She said she had received some counselling
through the EAP (Employee Assistance Program) and elsewhere but did not
raise any of those matters with us as they were confidential and “there
was a lot of other personal stuff”.
We suggested to Mrs Flanagan
that she may have spent a lot of time at work attending to family phone calls so
that she missed making
the call about the patient and then made the entries in
the Client Activity Detail form to cover for the time she may have spent
family telephone calls. We asked her if that was a fair observation. She
agreed it was “fair observation” but
said that was not what she was
As set out we have concluded that the factual basis of the Complaint
and its various components is made out.
Did the conduct amount to
“improper or unethical conduct”?
The Complaint alleges that the
conduct of Mrs Flanagan was unsatisfactory professional conduct within
s131B(1)(l) of the National
Law in that it was improper or unethical conduct.
That legislative statement of unsatisfactory professional conduct does not
on any assessment of Mrs Flanagan’s of her training or
experience.
In support of that aspect of the Complaint the Commission relied
upon the opinion of Ms Carol Martin as set out in her report of
October 2019 at Tab 8, page 83 of Exhibit 1.
Aspects of Ms Martin’s report examined Mrs Flanagan’s
conduct. In her
view the conduct in the Complaint was significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of her level of training
experience, being unsatisfactory professional conduct set out in s139B(1)(a) of
the National Law. The Commission submitted that
even if the conduct might fall
within s139B(1)(a) of the National Law, the conduct also amounted to improper or
unethical conduct
as provided by s139B(1)(l) of the National Law.
there may be some aspects of overlap in the analysis of the conduct, we have
approached the matter as alleged in the Complaint
being that of improper or
unethical conduct.
The Commission submitted that the question of whether
the conduct was improper or unethical was established by the way in which
Flanagan conducted herself at the time and also subsequently. This was
not a case of a lack of skill or knowledge or judgment in
Mrs Flanagan’s practice of nursing but rather of conduct that was no
part of what is to be expected of any Registered Nurse,
and in that sense was
The Commission submitted there is no basis for a nurse in any
circumstance to enter into a medical record information that was not
real events. Although Mrs Flanagan may have prepared a document containing
information she expected to receive, she did
not receive it, but she recorded
that information as if she had obtained that information. The Commission
submitted this was improper
conduct in and of itself, and we agree. We come to
that conclusion even though we are unable to make a determination about what
was that motivated Mrs Flanagan to do what she did. What is improper is to
be assessed on an objective basis. Mrs Flanagan herself
acknowledges what
she did was the wrong thing to do.
Ms Martin expressed the view that
Mrs Flanagan’s conduct was contrary to the expectations of the
profession of nursing and referred
to the Code of Conduct for Nurses
(Tab 44) and the Registered Nurses Standards for Practice (Tab 45)
published by the Nursing and
Midwifery Board of Australia, and also the ICN Code
of Ethics for Nurses published by the International Council of Nurses. Those
documents are significant in establishing the expectation of the profession of
its members. While not exclusively the hallmark of
ethical conduct the
profession’s expectations of the conduct of its members can be
characterised as the ethical standards of
a profession.
The professional
expectations of conduct are generally stated in those publications in a positive
sense and in terms of general application.
There is no explicit disapproval of
the conduct of pre‑writing answers which are then erroneously entered into
medical records.
Nevertheless, we take the general tenor of those documents to
be critical of the conduct of Mrs Flanagan precisely because it does
meet the expectations that nurses set for themselves. In this sense her conduct
was unethical.
Criticism can be made of Mrs Flanagan’s incorrect
time entries. This is not a mere matter of timekeeping, but information that
assists in assessing the nursing attention received by each patient.
Mrs Flanagan gained nothing by the entries, but the practice
suffered by her act of creating a false record of her work as a nurse. That
conduct was improper.
The entry “Written in error – wrong
client” was limited, unhelpful and misleading. Significantly she did not
that the telephone conversation had never been made. Nor did she say
that none of the information contained in the record should
be taken account of.
She did not identify the “wrong client”. The comment “wrong
client” was misleading
in the sense that it suggested that the information
in the entry applied to another client but not Patient A. That was incorrect
the information in its terms did relate to Patient A and did not relate to any
other patient. Her conduct was improper.
Mrs Flanagan needed to take
responsibility for her error and its correction, particularly as she knew at the
time that others had
read her earlier note. It is difficult to understand how
Mrs Flanagan continued with the ‘written in error – wrong
when she spoke to the Unit Manager later that day and then a few
weeks later when interviewed more formally.
How does Mrs Flanagan see
her conduct?
Mrs Flanagan may have been confused about what she had done
and why, but from the outset she did not take the opportunity to be open
cooperative about what had happened. Perhaps Mrs Flanagan had no idea how
to deal with having made the mistake nor how she could
correct her error without
making things look much worse. Mrs Flanagan struggled to articulate what
exactly had happened and how
it was that she had made the mistakes that she did.
In answering our questions, though she did say it was her mistake, she
continued to lay the blame elsewhere. She told us that she
was stressed at work
because a work colleague had been poorly treated. She said the work environment
of the unit was tense. She
said she was having difficulty meeting the
requirements of the Staff Specialist when making entries into the medical
record. She
said there was nobody she could speak to or report to about what
had happened.
Mrs Flanagan did say that she would never make such a
mistake again and in one sense that is an expected response to an event which
cannot be fully understood. The issue of concern is that Mrs Flanagan does not
fully understand nor explain how it was that she
came to make the mistake in the
first place, why she followed the “Written in error- wrong client”
path of explanation,
and then how she continues to believe the explanation lies
elsewhere. Mrs Flanagan said to us:
“All I can is I know I made
an horrendous mistake but not through thought or malice. It was just I made a
mistake, a series
of mistakes, in hindsight I should have done something, but
the situation was rather stressful. I thought I was trying to make myself
better. In the end I killed everything.”
Consideration of protective
The Commission submitted that the appropriate protective orders were a
reprimand, and restrictions to practice under direct supervision,
undertake agency nursing, to notify change of practice details and to undergo
education. The Commission submitted that Mrs
Flanagan lacked insight and
looked to others as explanation for what happened. There is some merit in these
We informed Mrs Flanagan our decision would displace the
conditions imposed in the s150 proceedings. Mrs Flanagan took up the
opportunity
to provide a written response to the Commission’s proposals.
In her email of 5 March 2021, she said she thought the lack of
allegation was unfair as, “Not a day goes by that I have not kicked myself
for my actions”. As for blaming others
she “was only attempting to
portray the circumstances I was working under at the time which I found
extremely stressful.”
Mrs Flanagan has not worked as a nurse
since losing her employment in March 2019. She would like to work again in the
near future.
She said she has always viewed herself as a good nurse, and
“nursing is the only career I know and dearly miss it.”
She said she
is researching courses and remains willing to follow any directions set.
considering protective orders we have taken into account that Mrs Flanagan
had been working as a registered nurse since 1979 and
that she had been in her
present workplace and position for some years.
In our assessment, Mrs
Flanagan continues to require supervision as she has little understanding of her
motivations when she made
the original entry to the medical record, her
subsequent conduct when adding to the record, and later when saying there was a
up between patients. There remains a real risk of her again being blind to
her professional obligations in ways similar to these
events. Working in a
supervised environment will be a support for Mrs Flanagan and will enhance
the likelihood of her responding
positively to the caution we propose.
from the unsatisfactory conduct there is no adverse information about her
general practice of nursing. We do not see the need
for immediate, close or
day-to-day supervision. It is relevant that the events took place when the
Nursing Unit Manager had not
been present in the unit for a period and was not
immediately accessible in the Unit. Mrs Flanagan said she felt she had nobody
to whom she could turn, although that was not the case. We consider that the
public will be protected if Mrs Flanagan is supervised
by somebody who is able
to oversee her work and provide regular advice if need be, though without
constant observation.
The Commission proposed that Mrs Flanagan attend
two courses, one covering clinical documentation, and the other dealing with
This was not a case of weakness in clinical documentation. Had the
phone call taken place as recorded then then the quality of
the entries would
have been satisfactory. Whilst the conduct was improper and contrary to ethical
standards, we do not see Mrs Flanagan’s
conduct as arising from a
knowing departure from professional obligations or from a lack of awareness of
ethics. In our view what
is required is education, a refresher, of professional
obligations and the important role of the registered nurse.
In accordance
with s146B(1)(a) we will caution Mrs Flanagan to pay attention to when she
is experiencing pressures and events at work
or otherwise that may be affecting
her ability to practise the profession of nursing. If similar circumstances
arise again, she
should be ready to seek guidance or assistance before there is
a risk of her conduct not being to the standard expected. If she
mistake, of whatever kind, we caution her to take immediate steps to inform
those she works with or others who may be
able to offer any assistance whether
in a formal or informal sense. We also caution Mrs Flanagan to reflect on
her mistakes and
not be ready to blame other people or circumstances.
accordance with s146B(1)(a) we propose to reprimand Mrs Flanagan for her
conduct in “pre‑writing” information
before it has been
received, entering information in a medical record when the events have not
occurred, recording time taken for
work not done, making inadequate correction
to the medical record, failing to report a mistake immediately on becoming aware
and failing to be open and cooperative when questioned.
In accordance
with s146B(1)(b) we will impose conditions (set out in more detail below)
requiring that she practise under indirect
close supervision, not undertake
agency nursing, and keep the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW informed about
matters relating
to her employment.
In accordance with s146B(1)(d) we will
require Mrs Flanagan to complete an educational course focussed on
professional responsibilities.
The course to be undertaken before her return to
practice as a nurse or within a short time of commencement. In making this
we are mindful of the view expressed by the Commission that we specify
a particular course. But given the availability of a specified
course may vary
from time to time we will allow for a course to be one approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of NSW.
Under section 146B(1)(a) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law, we caution the
practitioner.
Under section 146B(1)(a) of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law, we reprimand the practitioner.
Under section 146B(1)(b) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law, we direct that the following
Conditions be imposed on
the practitioner's registration as a nurse:
practise under indirect close supervision in accordance with the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales Regulatory
Supervision Policy (version 3
August 2018) and as subsequently determined by the appropriate review
2. To nominate a supervisor for approval by the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW, prior to commencing practice.
3. Not to practise until a
supervisor has been approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of
4. To authorise the approved supervisor to provide written reports to
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW at three monthly intervals,
specified by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW.
5. To authorise the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW to provide nominated and approved
supervisors with a copy of the Professional
Standards Committee
6. To forward evidence to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW
within seven days of commencing work as a nurse, that the practitioner
provided a copy of the Professional Standards Committee decision to her
7. Within seven days of a change in the nature or place of
practice, the practitioner is to forward evidence to the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW that she has provided a copy of the Professional Standards
Committee decision to her employer.
8. To authorise the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW to exchange information with current and future persons or
organisations
at places where the practitioner works as a nurse/midwife in
Australia, regarding any issues arising in relation to compliance with
conditions.
9. Not to undertake agency nursing.
10. The practitioner is
responsible for the costs associated with complying with this
Under section 146B(1)(d) of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law, the Professional Standards Committee directs that the
Conditions be imposed on the practitioner's registration:
complete before or within six months of commencing work as a nurse a course or
seminar focusing on professional responsibilities
Professional Issues
in Contemporary Nursing Practice
provided by the Australian College of
Nursing, or as approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW.
a month of completing the abovementioned course, the practitioner is to provide
documentary evidence to the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales of
satisfactory completion.
practitioner is responsible for the costs associated with complying with this
The Nursing and Midwifery Council is the appropriate review body for the
purposes of Division 8 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
Sections 125 and 127 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law are
to apply while the practitioner’s principal place
of practice is anywhere
in Australia other than NSW, so that a review of these conditions can be
conducted by the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia.
Mrs Flanagan has the right to appeal this decision
to the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of the
written statement of decision.
DISTRIBUTION OF DECISION
A copy of this written statement of our decision may
be provided to:
Ann Margaret Flanagan,
Health Care Complaints Commission,
National Board, and
required by the conditions imposed.
_________________________
Chairperson
Date: 22 April 2021
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (19.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter