URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2008/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Awad [2008] NSWPB 6 (8 October 2008)
[2008] NSWPB 6
Health Care Complaints Commission v Victor
Andrew Awad
8 October 2008
The amended complaint of professional misconduct alleged that the pharmacist
was guilty of professional misconduct in demonstrating
a lack of adequate
knowledge, skill judgment or care in the practice of pharmacy and other improper
and/or unethical conduct. The
alleged misconduct consisted of two incidents. In
the first incident (particular one) occurring in August 2001 the pharmacist
a female customer (Ms A) to remove her clothing and permit him to examine
her vagina. The pharmacist did not recall this incident.
Particular two of the
original complaint was dismissed. The second incident (particular three)
occurred in August/September 2001
involved inappropriately touching a female
pharmacy assistant in the naval area. The pharmacist admitted to touching the
assistant’s
shirt, looking down her top and touching her belly ring. The
pharmacist did not give evidence at the hearing.
privileges accorded to pharmacists in community pharmacy practice engender the
expectation that pharmacists will maintain high
standards of
The Board has regard to the pharmacist’s failure to give sworn evidence at
the hearing however, it is unnecessary to do so
with respect to the first
incident as the pharmacist cannot recall the incident. The customer had a good
recollection of events,
which was corroborated by a third party.
Board is comfortably satisfied that the pharmacist asked Ms A to remove her
clothing and to permit him to examine her vagina.
pharmacist’s failure to give sworn evidence regarding the second incident
in the face of admitting the particular and offering
no explanation for his
conduct gives rise to the inference that his evidence would not have assisted in
resisting a finding of professional
misconduct.
the particulars of the amended complaint are proven and the Board is comfortably
satisfied that this conduct amounts to professional
misconduct. The conduct
represents a deliberate departure from acceptable standards of
the conduct occurred in 2001 the pharmacist has continued to operate his
pharmacy business and he has not been the subject of
any subsequent disciplinary
complaints. The Board is satisfied that there is little risk of a reoccurrence
of professional misconduct.
parties accepted that the pharmacist should be reprimanded and the Board orders
that in the circumstances of this case that the
pharmacist be
reprimanded.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on 18, 19, and 22 June and 24
September 2007 into a complaint of professional misconduct made
provisions of the
Pharmacy Act 1964
Health Care Complaints Commission (“
the Complainant
against Victor Andrew Awad (“
the Respondent
”) of 74 Pacific
Highway, Wyong NSW 2259, a pharmacist registered in New South
1. THE AMENDED COMPLAINT
Complaint dated 17 November 2004 (“
”) the Complainant alleges that the Respondent has been
guilty of professional misconduct pursuant to
section 19A
of the Act, in that
the Respondent:
Demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgement or care in
the practice of pharmacy; and
Has engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
1.2 Particular 2 of the Original Complaint dated 17 November 2004 was
dismissed.1.3 Particular 1 of the Complaint states:
On 16 August 2001 at the Pharmacy the pharmacist inappropriately asked a
female customer, Ms A, to remove her clothing and permit
him to examine her
1.4 The Respondent has provided a written response to Particular 1 in the
following terms:
I have read the statement of
and state that I cannot recall
this incident. I have attached hereto my Business Summary Sheets for 16 August,
2001 showing that
on that date I saw 159 customers with scripts and perhaps saw
many others who did not have prescriptions but were making general
enquiries or
attending the store.
Having said that, even though I don’t have any specific recollection
attending the Pharmacy or of any conversation with her, I can
indicate that I have never conducted a vaginal examination of a customer
or any other Pharmacy during my career as a Pharmacist and I can’t
understand why I would make such a request as I
consider it would not be
appropriate to ask a customer to assess if she had thrush or not.
If I did say what
alleges, I think it could have been only
to exclude some external condition. I find it hard to believe that I would make
such a request
however, as I would have no way of knowing whether she had thrush
1.5 Particular 3 of the Complaint states:
On about August or September
2001 at the Pharmacy the Pharmacist;
inappropriately touched a female pharmacy assistant, Ms C, in the area of
her navel; approximately one or two weeks after the incident
described in 3(a),
pulled Ms C’s shirt away from her body and looked down the top of her
1.6 The Respondent has made a written admission to Particular 3 of the
Complaint in the following terms:
I have read the statement of
I admit the conduct alleged in that I admit touching her shirt and looking
down the top and touching her belly button ring.
I regret the
embarrassment caused to
and I apologise for
2. THE RESPONDENT
2.1 The Respondent is a registered pharmacist in New South Wales, having
first become registered on 2 February 1995.
3. EVIDENCE BEFORE THE BOARD
3.1 An agreed tabulated folder of documents (“
) was submitted in evidence to the Board containing the
Tab 1 Amended Complaint filed pursuant to the
Pharmacy Act,
17 November 2004.
Tab 2 Copy Statutory Declaration DSC Laska dated 1 July 2003.
Tab 3 Certificate under
Pharmacy Act
Tab 4 Statement Ms A dated 8 September 2001.
Tab 5 Statement Ms C dated 11 September 2001.
Tab 6 Transcript of evidence of Ms C (on voir dire) 18 January 2003 (pages
Tab 7 Statement Liane Mary Rowlinson dated 25 September 2001.
Tab 8 Transcript of evidence of Liane Mary Rowlinson (on voir dire) 18
January 2002 (pages 50-57).
Tab 9 Copy letter from the Health Care Complaints Commission to Mr David
North, pharmacist, dated 2 August 2004.
Tab 10 Copy of report of Mr David North (undated) (page 4 C.1(i)-(iv); page 5
paragraphs number 2, 3 and 4; Curriculum Vitae - David
North; Letter from Mr
North to HCCC dated 18 August 2004; and Peer Reviewer Declaration dated 18
August 2004).
Tab 11 Copy Pharmaceutical Society Code of Professional Conduct dated 4 May
Tab 12 Copy letter from the Health Care Complaints Commission to Mr Awad
dated 15 July 2004.
Tab 13 Copy letter from JR Lawyers to HCCC dated 20 October 2004.
Tab 14 Memorandum from Ian Anderson to Greg Ella dated 5 July 2004.
Tab 15 Two page undated document entitled “Incident Involving [Ms
A]” (paragraphs 61, 62 and 63).
Tab 16 Handwritten document of the Respondent entitled “Re: [Ms
C]” (served 18 June 2007).
Tab 17 Statement of Father Yacoub Magdy (undated)
3.2 The following witnesses were called by the Complainant to give evidence
and were cross-examined by counsel for the Respondent
at the hearing: Ms A ;
Liane Mary Forsyth; Ms C; and Mr David North.
3.3 The Respondent did not give evidence at the hearing.
4. Professional Misconduct
4.1 Section 19A of the Act relevantly defines “professional
misconduct”, in relation to a pharmacist, as including:
conduct that demonstrates a lack of adequate:
(i) knowledge, (ii) experience, (iii) skill, (iv) judgment, or (v) care,
by the pharmacist in the practice of pharmacy, and ......
(g) any other improper or unethical conduct of the pharmacist relating to
the practice of pharmacy.
4.2 There is no category of “unsatisfactory professional conduct”
under the Act. This is in contrast to the position under
section 37 the
Pharmacy Practice Act
, 2006 (which is not applicable to this Complaint)
and to protective legislation governing other health professionals.
4.3 When looking at the issues of “
improper or unethical
” in relation to a pharmacist, one of the matters the Board
will have regard to is the Code of Professional Conduct (“
published by the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia and
endorsed by the National Council March 1998. The Code establishes a set
fundamental principles to guide pharmacists in discharging their
responsibilities. The Principles statements in the Code capture
philosophical concepts which form the foundation of the Code. The Obligations in
the Code are more detailed statements to inform
pharmacists of standards of
professional behaviour they are required to meet.
4.4 The section of the Code of particular relevance to the Complaint is:
Principle TWO
A pharmacist must at all times
uphold the reputation of the profession and adhere to the legislation applicable
to the practice of
Obligations
2.1 A pharmacist must act according to the laws and regulations governing
the profession and adhere to the code of professional conduct.
2.2 A pharmacist must act with honesty and integrity having due regard for
standards of behaviour accepted within the profession and
reasonably expected by
the community and other health professionals.
2.3 A pharmacist offering services directly to the public must do so in
the premises which reflect the character of the
profession.
5. Standard of Proof Required
5.1 Although the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this
allegations and the gravity of the consequences, the Board must be comfortably
satisfied that the particulars of the Complaint
have been established.
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Dixon, J said
at 362-363:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters “reasonable satisfaction” should not be
produced by inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect references...This
does not mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the
satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the
reasonable satisfaction which in a civil
issue may, not must, be based on a
preponderance of probability. It means the nature of the issue necessarily
affects the process
by which reasonable satisfaction is attained.
5.3 The jurisdiction exercised by the Board is protective, not punitive.
There are dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
; (1960) 104 CLR at 201-202, the High Court
Although it is sometimes referred to as the “penalty of
disbarment” it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that the abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
6. Special Position of Pharmacist
6.1 Pharmacists in private practice have great privileges conferred upon
them. Trust is the foundation underlying these privileges.
6.2 A corollary of these privileges is that obligations are imposed. There is
an expectation that they will maintain very high standards.
6.3 The trust placed in pharmacists is analogous to that placed in medical
professionals because of the necessity for the client to
disclose highly
personal information to the pharmacist in the course of being treated. The
following words of Priestly JA in
Richter v Walton
unreported New South
Wales Court of Appeal 15 July 1993, concerning the obligations of medical
practitioners, which were adopted
by the Court of Appeal in
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638 are equally
applicable to pharmacists:
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give their doctors may vary
according to the condition which takes the patient to the
doctor. Even in regard
to the most commonplace medical matters the trust a patient places in a doctor
is considerable. In some cases,
of which the present seems to me to be an
example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost absolute. The
power in regard to the patient in such cases is also very great.
I do not mean in an abstract way but as a matter of fact; the extent
power will vary according to the temperament of the patient, but the doctor with
some patients and for limited periods, because
of the relationship in which they
are temporarily placed, is in a position to do whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient.
This is one of the reasons why doctors are subject to
correspondingly great obligations and are expected to maintain very high
all this being very much in the public interest. When the maintenance
of those standards and the protection of the public interest
are considered in
relation to what happened in the present case, I do not think that it can be
said that the orders made by the Tribunal
were inappropriate.
6.4 Counsel for the Respondent submitted that whilst pharmacists were relied
upon in a preliminary sense to offer assistance, it is
not the same level of
assistance or trust that people place in medical practitioners and that
They don’t share the same power, or they are not in the same
degree as vulnerable as medical practitioners’ patients who
vulnerable on a couch, or who are receiving prescribed medication which might
have mind altering effects
6.5 It is the Board’s opinion that the degree of trust which patients
necessarily give their pharmacists may vary according
to the condition which
takes the patient to the pharmacist, as with doctors, and that the above quote
of Priestly JA is applicable
in the circumstances of this case. Furthermore, as
submitted by counsel for the Complainant, and accepted by the Board, if the
were to take the view that the pharmacist was acting in a manner similar
to that of a doctor in seeking to examine the patient, the
pharmacist should be
held to the same standard in terms of the level of trust that is expected.
to Particular 1 - Ms A
7.1 At the time of the incident, the
subject of Particular 1, Ms A was 22 years of age and a mother of three children
aged eight,
six and two. The two older children went to school and the youngest
child, Sharon, was at home with Ms A.
7.2 Ms A alleges that at or about midday on 16 August 2001 she was suffering
from thrush and went to the Pharmacy to buy some Canesten
cream. She drove to
the Pharmacy along with her friend, Nathan, and she had her daughter Sharon in
the car as well.
7.3 Ms A alleges that she parked the car out the front of the Pharmacy and
left Sharon in the car with Nathan while she went inside.
7.4 In Ms A’s statement dated 11 September 2001 she states:
was served by a girl, I think her name was Leanne and asked her for the cream. I
then asked her some advice (I WAS DUE TO GET
MY PERIOD ON THE SATURDAY, WHICH
WAS A COUPLE OF DAYS AWAY, AND THE CREAM HAS TO BE USED FOR SIX DAYS. I WANTED
TO FIND OUT IF IT
WOULD BE ALRIGHT TO CONTINUE TAKING MY CONTRACEPTIVE PILL
WHICH WOULD IN EFFECT STOP ME FROM HAVING MY PERIOD) Leanne than went and
to the pharmacist, Victor.
then said, “I will speak to her a minute.” I heard him say that to
Leanne. I waited a moment or two and then Victor
spoke to me. He said
“Just come out here” and I then followed him behind the counter, to
an area where drugs are kept.
It was still possible to see the shop from there,
but people who were just going to the counter wouldn’t have seen us. I
he was taking me to a private area to discuss the matter, just so that
other people wouldn’t hear.
he said to me, “Have you had it before?” I said, “Yes.”
He said, “Come over here and show me and
I’ll tell you if it is
definitely thrush. I said “No.” He said, “Just come and slip
your pants down, it will
only take a minute, I’ve seen it plenty of times
before, there is nothing to be embarrassed about.” I said, “Look
know what it is, I just want to know about skipping my pill.” He then
rubbed my arm and said, “It’s alright.”
[DELETED] but I said,
“It’s alright.” I then walked back out the front to the
think Victor walked back to where he was making up scripts, but he didn’t
speak to me again. I then spoke to Leanne again,
and got the Canesten cream and
left. I didn’t say anything to her about it. I then dropped Nathan off to
his place and went
they suggested that I go in and speak to them in person. A bit later on,
Sharon was asleep, I got Nathan to come to my place to watch her and I went to
the Police Station and spoke to a male Police
Officer and he got my name and
details from me and made some notes about what I told him. The next time I went
to the doctors, I
saw Dr Singh-Panwar and told her what happened. She told me to
let her know if nothing was done about the matter by the Police and
follow it up.
I went to the pharmacy I only wanted to get some advice about using my
medication with the contraceptive pill. Had I wanted an
examination or treatment
of my condition I would have gone to the doctor.
have been going to Blooms Pharmacy for about four or five years and I have been
there a number of times since Victor began working
7.5 The evidence Ms A gave before the Local Court on 18 January
2002 is consistent with the version of events as contained in her
However, in addition, the Board notes that in cross-examination in the Local
Court proceedings Ms A was asked if she had
ever been taken to the rear of
Blooms’ Chemist before, to which she answered “No”. Ms A was
asked if she had ever
been taken to the rear of a chemist when buying thrush
cream anywhere else, to which she answered “No”. Ms A was also
if she had been diagnosed by a health professional as to the fact that it was
thrush that she had, to which she answered that
she had on a prior occasion when
she was pregnant. She gave evidence that on that occasion she was examined by a
doctor and it was
a physical examination.
7.6 Ms A impressed the Board in the way she gave her evidence at the hearing
before the Board. She gave her evidence in a forthright
manner and seemed to
have a clear recollection of the events, the subject of the Complaint.
7.7 There was very little cross-examination of Ms A before the Board. In
particular, the Board notes that there was no cross-examination
relation to the following conversation:
He said, “Come over here and show me and I’ll tell
you if it is definitely thrush. I said “No.” He said, “Just
come and slip your pants down, it will only take a minute, I’ve seen it
plenty of times before, there is nothing to be embarrassed
7.8 Further, there was no dispute that Ms A acted the same day to report the
incident, the subject of particular 1 of the Complaint,
to police. Ms A’s
formal statement was taken by police following a complaint by another woman
three weeks later. Ms A gave evidence before
the Board that she did not know the details of the other complaint, other than a
had been made by another woman about the Respondent. Ms A gave
evidence that at the time she made the statement she clearly recalled
the subject of the Complaint. She also gave evidence that when she gave evidence
before the Local Court she refreshed
her memory by reading her statement, but
she also still clearly recalled the events at that time. There was some
cross-examination
at the hearing before the Board as to whether Ms A’s
memory could have been affected by the passage of time. Ms A was unmoved
her position concerning her recollection of the pertinent events. Her only
concession was that she may not remember the precise
words. In this regard, the
Board notes that it was Ms A’s evidence that when she gave her statement
to police that whilst she
may not have recalled the conversations
” she described her recollection of the words as
pretty, fairly accurate
They would have
been the majority of the right words”
[T90]. Further, there was no
evidence before the Board, nor was it put to Ms A in cross-examination, that she
had any ulterior motive
for making such allegations about the Respondent.
7.9 In evidence before the Board was the statement of Ms Liane Rowlinson to
Police dated 25 September 2001, together with the transcript
Rowlinson’s evidence at the hearing before the Local Court on 18 January
2002. Ms Rowlinson also gave evidence at the
hearing before the Board.
7.10 Ms Rowlinson was the retail manager of the Pharmacy. She had worked at
the Pharmacy for about seven years as at the time of the
alleged incidents, the
subject of Particulars 1 and 3 of the Complaint.
7.11 The Board notes that Ms Rowlinson’s evidence corroborates Ms
A’s statement that Ms A attended the Pharmacy to seek
advice in relation
to a thrush condition. Ms Rowlinson’s evidence also corroborates Ms
A’s statement evidence that the
Respondent took Ms A out the back of the
7.12 Further, Ms A gave evidence before the Local Court that she had only
ever seen [Ms A] go out the back of the Pharmacy. The Board
also notes the Ms
Rowlinson gave evidence before the Local Court that ladies came into the
pharmacy to discuss or needed cream for
thrush nearly every day and that the
Respondent had never taken those ladies out the back the Pharmacy. It was Ms
Rowlinson’s
evidence that the Respondent would usually talk to those
ladies behind his computer. She further explained that: “
asked for Canesten and then I - if it’s for them personally then he would
say - he’d just ask them like the
questions, like if they’ve got a
temperature or - he’d just ask them the normal questions and then if that
was that he’d
give it. I’d be able to give it to the
7.13 In his unsworn “statement” concerning this incident the
Respondent states that he cannot recall the incident, but
I can indicate that I have never conducted a vaginal examination of a
customer at this or any other Pharmacy during my career as a
Pharmacist and I
can’t understand why I would make such a request as I consider it would
not be appropriate to ask a customer
to reassess if she had thrush or
If I did say what
alleges, I think it could have been only
to exclude some external condition. I find it hard to believe that I would make
such a request
however, as I would have no way of knowing whether she had thrush
to Particular 3 - Ms C
8.1 At the time of the incident, the
subject of Particular 3, Ms C was 15 years of age. Ms C had completed year 9 at
Wyong High School
in December 2000. She returned to Wyong High School in 2001,
but did not complete year 10, having left school in April 2001.
8.2 In August 2001 Ms C commenced employment as an assistant at the Pharmacy.
She was initially put on a one month trial. About two
weeks after she started
work at the Pharmacy she obtained a traineeship.
8.3 After the first week of employment at the Pharmacy, Ms C was given a set
and rotating roster. Her roster was Monday 12 midday
to 8 pm; Tuesday 10 am to 4
pm; Wednesday 9 am to 4 pm (every fourth week); Thursday 9 am to 4 pm; Friday 10
am to 2 pm; Saturday
2.30 pm to 9 pm (every second week) and Sunday 11 am to
8.4 Ms C’s duties involved the service of customers, cleaning, restock
of products and receipt of deliveries. Ms C would usually
work with two to three
other people. On Saturdays and Sundays she would work at the Pharmacy with a
pharmacist known as Don. Monday
night was the only time Ms C worked alone with
someone. On Mondays Ms C would work alone with the Respondent from 5.30 pm to 8
8.5 In Ms C’s statement to Police dated 8 September 2001 she
remember that I had only been working at the chemist for a couple of weeks. I
can not remember what day it was and I can not remember
whether I was alone with
Victor [the Respondent] yet I was behind the dispensary with Victor. I was
wearing an open collar shirt
and Victor said, “What is that on your
neck.” At this time he pointed to my neck. I went to the back of the store
looked in the mirror. I saw that I had a red mark similar to if I had
scratched myself. He walked up to me and said “Do you
have it anywhere
else.” I said, “No”. He said, “Show me your
belly.” I lifted my short up a little
bit to my belly button. He reached
towards me and touched my belly button with one of his fingers. I have a bar
bell in my belly
button and he was just feeling it with his finger and thumb. He
did this for about 30 seconds and I felt very awkward. I can not
remember what I
said but he stopped and I just continued working.
one or two weeks later after he touched my belly button I was in the chemist on
the rear of the dispensary. I was getting a
prescription off Victor and he said,
“What’s that.” I had a mark on my arm which I had covered with
a band-aid.
I said, “I don’t know it looks disgusting so I put a
band aid on it.” He said, ‘Come out the back and show
walked to the back of the shop near the sink and said, “Show me your
belly.” I lifted my short a couple
of centimeters [sic], just showing the
skin on my stomach. He said, “Lift it up, its okay, I have seen this kind
of thing before.”
I shook my head and said, “Amt amt.” He had
his hands in front of him moving them together up and down and indicating
lift my top up. I again said “Amt, amt”. He said, “Well you
have a look then.” I looked down for a second
and said “Yeah nothing
there.” He reached towards my top and held it with one of his hands and
pulled it away from my
body. He leant forwards and looked down the top of my
shirt. I stepped back and moved away from Victor.
8.6 The Board notes that Ms C’s statement was taken by Police
in the course of investigating a complaint in relation to another
woman (as in
the case of Ms A). In this regard, the Police approached Ms C and in the course
of interviewing her in relation to the
circumstances of the other complaint, Ms
C revealed the circumstances, the subject of Particular 3. There was minimal
cross-examination
of Ms C at the hearing before the Board. The Board further
notes that the conduct, the subject of Particular 3, has been admitted
Respondent in his unsworn "statement" served 18 June 2007. The Board further
notes that the Respondent offers no explanation
of his conduct in his
8.7 In Liane Rowlinson’s statement to Police dated 25 September 2001
she states:
Jan and I approached [Ms C] and Jan said: “Has Victor [the Respondent]
ever done anything to you?” [Ms C] appeared
shocked and it looked like she
was going to cry. I said, “It’s okay you can tell us.” [Ms C]
said, “I had
a rash here (indicating her wrist) and he asked me to lift my
shirt up. He grabbed my shirt and looked down the front of it.”
very quickly but I am sure that she said words very similar.....
to silence and Inferences
9.1 The Respondent did not give
evidence before the Board. A question therefore arises here as to whether any
inference can more readily
be drawn against the Respondent because he did not
give evidence in the disciplinary proceedings before the Board.
Bowen-James v Walton
(NSWCA, 5 August 1991, unrep) (Samuels,
Meagher and Handley JJA) (followed in
[2007] NSWPB 2
(12 September
2007)), the Court said:
In our opinion there is no right to silence or any privilege against
self-incrimination upon which a medical practitioner answering
a complaint
before the Tribunal, is entitled to rely. Indeed, we would endorse the
observations made by Hope AJA in Ibrahim. There
is public interest in the proper
discharge by medical practitioners of the privileges which the community accords
to them, and in
the due accounting for the exercise of the influence which the
nature of the occupation permits them, and indeed requires them, to
their patients. They are not, of course, officers of the Supreme Court and,
accordingly, the precise force of the decision
in Re Veron; Ex Parte Law Society
of New South Wales (1966 84 WN (NSW) (Pt 1) 136, particularly of what was said
at 141-2, cannot
apply. Nevertheless, we are of the opinion that if a medical
practitioner fails to answer by giving his or her account of the matters
charged, there can be no complaint if the Tribunal draws the unfavourable
evidentiary inference which absence from the witness box
NSW Bar Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 340
(6 December
2006), considerable weight was placed by Tobias JA (with whom Bryson JA and
Basten JA agreed) on a barrister’s
failure to give sworn evidence in
disciplinary proceedings brought against him in relation to allegations of
overcharging. In that
case, the Court said:
[77] Yet these were the very matters which were wholly within the
knowledge of the respondent and which he did not offer to answer
in the witness
box. On the contrary, he chose the safety of the well of the Tribunal.
Notwithstanding the advice of his then senior
counsel, the respondent’s
refusal to enter the witness box and provide evidence with respect to the
matters referred to should
have been the subject of harsh criticism by the
Tribunal. Moreover, if that evidence had otherwise been relevant to the issue,
refusal to provide it would have significantly detracted from the weight to
be attached to the tendered character references. In
these circumstances, the
only inference one can draw from the respondent’s refusal to give sworn
testimony in this matter was
that his evidence would not have assisted his case
in resisting a finding of professional misconduct.
[78] The Tribunal should not have been required to speculate as to the
basis upon which the respondent charged the fees he did. As
an experienced
barrister, with an unblemished record, one would have expected him, as Meagher
JA expressed in Coe, to have mounted
the witness box and explained the mysteries
surrounding charges which had been found to be grossly excessive. In my opinion
the failure
of the respondent to give sworn evidence was inexcusable.
Council of the NSW Bar Association v Power
[2008] NSWCA 135
June 2008) (proceedings against a barrister for professional misconduct arising
from possession of child pornography), it was
ascertained that the F Drive on
the barrister’s computer had been removed. The barrister was asked by
letter to provide information
as to the whereabouts of the F Drive but he did
not do so. The Court held that it could have regard to the barrister’s
to offer any explanation of what happened to the F drive, or to give
evidence concerning the matter, in considering whether to draw
inferences from
the material before it.
9.5 Accordingly, the Board is of the opinion that it can have regard to the
Respondent’s failure to give sworn evidence at the
hearing in considering
whether to draw inferences from the material before it.
9.6 Counsel for the Respondent submitted that [T169]:
...it is an unusual case where you haven’t heard from the
Respondent. Normally that happens but in these circumstances where
Respondent has admitted to particulars concerning
and has not
sought to challenge the account she gave, and where it’s clear that the
Respondent has no recollection of the incident
one of those unusual cases where evidence from the Respondent as to the factual
matters is simply not available to him,
so I could call him, I suppose, and say
have him confirm what is already known to you from the two statements he has
given concerning
complaint and the
complaint, but short of that, I would have nothing to ask him of a factual kind
relating to the particulars of the complaints.
9.7 The Board is of the view that it is unnecessary to draw any inference in
relation to the Respondent’s failure to give sworn
evidence in relation to
the matters, the subject of Particular 1 concerning Ms A. It is the
Respondent’s position that he does
not recall the incident. On the other
hand, the Board found Ms A to have a good recollection of the events, and she
prepared a statement
within a few weeks of the incident. Her version of events
was further corroborated by the statement of Ms Rowlinson and by her actions
reporting the matter to the police the same day. There is no suggestion that Ms
A had any ulterior motive for making these allegations
against the Respondent.
In the circumstances, the Board accepts the evidence of Ms A and is comfortably
satisfied that on 16 August
2001 at the Pharmacy the Respondent asked Ms A to
remove her clothing and permit him to examine her vagina.
9.8 In relation to the matters, the subject of Particular 3 concerning Ms C,
the Board notes that the Respondent has admitted the
particulars of the conduct,
but does not offer any explanation for the conduct. The Board should not be left
to speculate as to the
basis upon which the Respondent acted in the way that he
did with Ms C, a fifteen year old school-leaver who had just commenced
with the Respondent. As an experienced pharmacist with an unblemished
record, one would have expected him to mount the witness box
and explain the
circumstances surrounding his actions which, on their face, clearly appear to be
sexually motivated, predatory and
opportunistic. In these circumstances, the
only inference the Board can draw from the Respondent’s failure to give
sworn testimony
in this matter is that his evidence would not have assisted his
case in resisting a finding of professional misconduct:
10.1 In evidence before the Board was the peer review
report of Mr David North.
10.2 Mr North expressed the opinion in his report in relation to the events,
the subject of particular 1, that:
(i) There is a recognized standard within the pharmacy profession to
conducting consultations and the suggestion that a client should
submit to an
intimate examination to confirm a case of thrush is improper and
(ii) Mr Awad in suggesting to [Ms A] to submit to an intimate examination
departed from recognized standards. [Ms A] and the public
have the right to a
more moral standard of care than that practiced by Mr Awad;
(iii) Mr Awad in suggesting to [Ms A] to submit to an intimate examination I
believe was improper and unethical and invites my strong
disapproval. This is
not the accepted standard of care that the pharmacy profession and the community
expect of a practicing pharmacist.
(iv) Mr Awad in
suggesting to [Ms A] to submit to an intimate examination I believe would invite
the strong disapproval of the general
body of my colleagues of competence and
good repute.
10.3 Mr North also gave evidence at the hearing before the Board that he had
completed a Masters of Clinical Pharmacy in 2004 and
that as part of those
studies he had cause to consider the question of examinations or observations
undertaken by pharmacists.
10.4 Mr North was cross-examined at length by counsel for the Respondent as
to the circumstances that might involve a person having
to remove their pants or
trousers when attending on a pharmacist. One example Mr North was asked to
consider was if a person had
a rash on their buttocks or thigh. Mr North was
adamant that he did not think the removal of pants even in those circumstances
appropriate. In this regard, Mr North gave evidence that he believed
it could be examined by exposing the section, but the clothing
doesn’t have to be revealed
”. Mr North also gave evidence
Q. You apply a strict rule in relation to the removal of trousers or
pants, do you?
not necessarily a view shared by other pharmacists or competence or good repute,
is it? Rather, it is your personal opinion.
think the people I have worked with, and I consider them being competent and of
good repute, I have never known anybody to ask somebody
to remove pants to
examine a rash on a hip or thigh. Even though we don’t see it now, when
boils were in existence, boils were
often on the backside and it was very easy
for somebody to just reveal, just by lowering part of their pants to show it was
Never in my life have I asked anybody to remove a pair of pants or
clothing like that.
think that is particularly sensitive—
of one’s garments that you shouldn’t ask to remove regardless of the
location of the rash, for example?
don’t think it is a pharmacist’s job to carry out intimate
examinations. I just don’t believe that. I think that
is a job for a
medical practitioner.
10.5 In relation to the conduct the
subject of Particular 3 in relation to Ms C, Mr North states in his report:
denying him “to show her
belly” and Mr Awad proceeding to touch her navel against her wishes, was
inappropriate. This
pharmacy profession and the community.
of blouse and looking down same
This behaviour is
unacceptable. Sexual harassment in the workplace in
undesirable and
cannot be condoned in the community or the pharmacy profession.
touching belly button in order to feel piercing
inappropriate for Mr Awad to touch
navel. He gave no
reason and proceeded without her consent and against her wishes.
10.6 During cross-examination counsel for the Respondent questioned Mr North
as to whether it would have made a difference if he knew
that the Respondent did
not touch Ms A on the skin, but rather, on the metal that was attached to her
skin. Mr North still expressed
disapproval and stated that he thought Ms
A’s dignity had been compromised.
10.7 Mr North was also asked by counsel for the Respondent:
because you assume he was motivated in doing the acts you assumed he did for
some form of sexual gratification. That’s
why you called it sexual
harassment is it not?
guess it comes down to the definition of sexual harassment, but sexual
harassment to me is virtually imposing your behaviour, which
is of a sexual
nature, on another person so on that basis, yes, I guess it is sexual
harassment, but as far as him getting gratification
out of something like that,
I don’t know.
made no assumption that it was for the purpose of looking to see if there sexual
gratification, or form some other purpose; is
A. I’d say so, yes.
10.8 Moreover, in submissions, it was suggested by counsel for the Respondent
that the Respondent’s actions in touching the
belly button ring as opposed
to Ms A’s actual belly button “
paints a far less likely scenario
of sexual gratification or sexual harassment
a greater likelihood that there was a rash that was the subject of the
investigation
”. This submission is not accepted by the Board.
10.9 As pointed out in submissions in reply by counsel for the Complainant,
we have Ms C’s evidence that she had a red mark
on her neck similar to if
she scratched herself. The Respondent then asked if she had it anywhere else, to
which Ms C replied “
”. How does then one get from that to
the Respondent’s next comment “
show me your belly
”? There is a total absence of any logical explanation as to the
sort of proper professional enquiry. These "
yawning gaps
" were left
completely unexplained by the Respondent.
10.10 Counsel for the Respondent also questioned Mr North in
cross-examination as to whether he was prejudiced by having received
information
concerning the matters the subject of Particular 2 of the Complaint in relation
to the incident with Ms B, which has
been dismissed. The Board finds that Mr
North, having been made aware of the fact that the complaint in relation to Ms B
was dismissed
and being instructed by the Board to disregard that part of the
evidence, gave his evidence before the Board in a manner which did
not suggest
that his views in relation to the matters of Ms A and Ms C were prejudiced.
Board’s Findings of Fact
11.1 The Board finds all of
Particulars 1 and 3 of the Complaint established.
Board’s Findings in relation to Misconduct
12.1 Having
found all of Particulars 1 and 3 of the Complaint to be made out, the Board is
comfortably satisfied that this conduct
amounts to Professional Misconduct in
that it demonstrates a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgement or care in
the practice
of pharmacy; and that the Respondent has engaged in improper and/or
unethical conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy.
12.2 In making this determination, the Board has found that the
Respondent’s acts, the subject of Particulars 1 and 3, were
errors of judgement or carelessness on the part of the Respondent and
represented a deliberate departure from accepted standards
or such serious
negligence as, although not deliberate, would portray indifference and an abuse
of the privileges which accompany
registration as a pharmacist:
[No. 2] NSWLRJ 197 at 200C.
Consequences
of Misconduct & Orders
13.1 The protective orders available
to the Board following a finding of Professional Misconduct are set out in
section 20 of the
13.2 The Board is concerned that it has no evidence before it of any insight
by the Respondent into the conduct the subject of the
Complaint in the lengthy
intervening period. At best, the Respondent seems to acknowledge that his
conduct in relation to Particular
3 may have embarrassed Ms C for which he
apologizes in his short “statement”. However, as noted earlier in
this judgment,
the Respondent did not give sworn evidence at the hearing and has
not offered any explanation as to his conduct. Further, the Board
finds the age
of Ms C, and the authority the Respondent held over her as a result of the
employment relationship, are aggravating
factors in assessing his conduct. The
Board is also left to speculate, given the absence of explanation from the
Respondent, as
to what exactly the Respondent understands that his apology is
13.3 On the other hand, the conduct occurred in or about August/September
2001. The Respondent has continued to operate his own pharmacy
present. He has not been the subject of any subsequent complaints to the Board.
In evidence before the Board is also a
character reference by Father Yacoub
Magdy. Given the absence of an explanation by the Respondent as to his conduct
or his insight,
it is difficult to attribute any significant weight to this
character reference, as it also fails to explore this aspect of the matter.
Although, the Board notes that Father Yacoub has known the Respondent for
sixteen years and considers the conduct, the subject of
the Complaint, to be
totally out of character on the part of the Respondent. Father Yacoub also
states that the Respondent has been
a Sunday school teacher for the past eleven
years and he has only ever received good feedback from parents, students and
other members
of the parish regarding the Respondent’s commitment,
integrity and honesty in fulfilling his duty as a Sunday school teacher.
13.4 In all the circumstances, the Board is satisfied that there is little
risk of the recurrence of further professional misconduct
by the Respondent.
13.5 Both counsel for the Complainant and the Respondent submitted that in
the event of a finding of Professional Misconduct against
the Respondent, the
Respondent should be reprimanded. The Board agrees that in the circumstances of
this case, the Respondent should
be reprimanded and so orders.
13.6 The effective date of these orders is one month after Victor Andrew Awad
has been notified by registered post of these orders
at his address as it
appears on the register of pharmacists in New South Wales.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (108 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter