URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1336.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Watson v Albury City Council [2025] NSWSC 1336 (14 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Watson v Albury City Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1336
Hearing Date(s):
20 June 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
(1) Grant leave to the plaintiff to file and serve a
Further Amended Statement of Claim, providing that such pleading is filed and
served on or before 19 December 2025.
(2) Order the
plaintiff to pay the costs of and occasioned by the filing and service of the
Further Amended Statement of Claim,
which costs are to include all reserved
costs, the costs of the first, second and third judicial case management
hearings, and the
costs of the hearing of the Notice of Motion filed 19 March
(3) Order that the third defendant, Mr Gooding, is to
be entitled to the payment of his costs forthwith, once agreed or
(4) Reserve to Mr Gooding the right to make
application to the Court for an order that the costs be assessed in a gross sum.
(5) Otherwise dismiss the Notice of Motion filed 19 March
(6) Stand the matter over before the Common Law
Registrar on 2 February 2026.
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE – Pleadings – Amendment – Where a
defendant opposes the filing of a further Amended Statement of
Where a defendant submits that proceedings ought be summarily dismissed –
Whether plaintiff had been given sufficient
opportunity in the past to re-plead
such that further leave should not be granted – Where defendant subject to
real prejudice
as a result of costs incurred by continued failed attempts to
adequately re-plead cause in action – Where plaintiff entitled
ventilate their claim in circumstances where they were a victim of sexual abuse
– Where failure of plaintiff’s solicitors
to adequately draft an
appropriate pleading is not to be attributed to the plaintiff so as to prevent
the matter being litigated
– Leave granted
Legislation Cited:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
Cases Cited:
Not Applicable
Texts Cited:
Not Applicable
Sarah Watson (P)
Albury City Council (D2)
Paul McDonald Gooding
Representation:
J Sheller SC / D Elliott (P)
F McGinley (D2)
Solicitors:
Gerard Malouf & Partners (P)
Mills Oakley
DiLaw Group Lawyers (D3)
File Number(s):
2024/114186
Publication Restriction:
Not Applicable
26 March 2024, the plaintiff commenced proceedings by filing a Statement of
Claim against three parties, seeking damages as a consequence
of physical and
sexual abuse which she pleaded had occurred to her in the period between 1985,
when she was 10 years old, and 1993,
when she turned 18 years of age.
three defendants to the proceedings were the Albury Basketball Association Inc.,
(“the Basketball Association”); Albury
City Council (“the
Council”); and Mr Paul Gooding.
27 June 2024, with the consent of each of the three defendants, the plaintiff
filed an Amended Statement of Claim (“ASOC”).
that ASOC, the plaintiff pleaded, in a slightly more coherent fashion, that the
third defendant, (“Mr Gooding”), had
inflicted sexual abuse of
various kinds upon her in the course of their interactions when Mr Gooding was
the coach of a club team
for which the plaintiff played, and also a local, but
representative, team.
plaintiff also pleaded that the abuse also occurred whilst Mr Gooding was
carrying out his duties as the Stadium Manager of the
Albury Basketball Stadium,
and in his capacity as an employee of the second defendant, the Council. The
plaintiff pleaded that the
two organisations, namely, the Basketball Association
and the Council, were vicariously liable for the conduct of
Mr Gooding.
Initial Judicial Case Management Hearing
matter came before me for judicial case management on 6 September 2024. Counsel
for Mr Gooding drew the Court’s attention
to the fact that, in the ASOC,
whilst there were pleadings directed at Mr Gooding, no claim for damages was
directly pleaded against
him. Counsel drew attention to the fact that the way in
which the ASOC was pleaded meant that there were claims against each of the
Basketball Association and the Council for vicarious liability, arising from the
conduct and actions of Mr Gooding, but there was
no alternative pleading
directly making a claim against him, in circumstances where he was joined as a
drew attention to the unsatisfactory state of the pleadings. He informed the
Court that he did not feel able, on behalf of
his client, to file a defence at
that time. He pointed out that significant requests for particulars had been
made in an attempt
to elicit the real case against his client, and that his
client was entitled to know what the pleaded case against him would
Second Judicial Case Management Hearing
20 September 2024, Senior Counsel appeared for the plaintiff. He raised various
matters and indicated that he was of the view,
and had so informed legal
representatives of the other parties, that his client required to further amend
her ASOC. Senior Counsel
conceded, with respect to Mr Gooding, that a clear
cause of action against him had not been identified.
parties did not object to the plaintiff having further time to re-plead. Counsel
for Mr Gooding sought that the question of costs
be reserved because, as he
“... the case is now really going to start in four weeks’ time when
we get the further Amended Statement of Claim ...”
was also confirmed at that time that, for a period, the plaintiff had been an
employee of the Council. Counsel for Mr Gooding noted
that there may be
significant complex questions and issues arising from that employment, and
whether the plaintiff’s claim
for damages was caught by any of the various
alternative claim for compensation damages regimes.
that occasion, I made orders that the plaintiff was to serve on the defendants,
any proposed ASOC, and that the solicitors for
the defendant were to notify the
plaintiff of their attitude to that proposed ASOC.
reserved all questions of costs.
plaintiff circulated a proposed further ASOC (“FASOC”) in accordance
with the timetable. Each of the defendants notified
their opposition to the
claim being filed.
Third Judicial Case Management
matter returned before the Court for further directions on 1 November 2024.
During the course of the directions hearing, certain
matters were raised and
dealt with. At the end of that hearing, I made the following orders:
“1. ... grant leave to the plaintiff to file a Further
Amended Statement of Claim (FASOC) generally in accordance with the
draft, providing that such FASOC is filed and served on or before 15 November
2. Order the plaintiff to pay the costs of and occasioned by
the amendment.”
matter was then stood back into the list before the Common Law Registrar.
reason that the order granting leave to file a proposed ASOC included the word
” was because there had been some discussion,
during the course of the directions hearing, about some other matters which
attention in the proposed pleading. Senior Counsel for the plaintiff
indicated that those matters would be attended to. It was unnecessary
each of them in the order.
Common Law Registrar – 10
February 2025
the time the matter came back before the Common Law Registrar, on
10 February 2025, the claim against the Basketball Association
resolved consensually by the entry of judgment in favour of it, the first
defendant, against the plaintiff, with there being
no order as to costs.
was apparent that, on the morning of that directions hearing, before the Common
Law Registrar, the plaintiff, had not filed an
ASOC in accordance with the
Court’s order of 1 November 2024, but had only a few days earlier
circulated a proposed pleading.
As the defendants had not had time to consider
that pleading, orders were made by the Common Law Registrar that the defendants
their attitude to the proposed pleading and, if the defendants did not
consent to it, the plaintiff was to file a Notice of Motion
Notice of Motion – 19 March 2025
19 March 2025, because the remaining defendants opposed the grant of leave to
file an ASOC, the plaintiff filed a Motion seeking
leave to file a further
correspondence between the parties indicated that the FASOC which was proposed
to be filed was different, in significant respects,
from the circulated draft
referred to in the Order set out at [
] in respect of which leave had been granted in
November 2024.
letter from the solicitors for the third defendant, indicating its opposition to
the filing of the FASOC, set out the background
to the proceedings, including
the various orders which had been made with respect to the plaintiff amending
her Statement of Claim.
letter went on to draw attention to the fact that the proposed pleading had not
attended to the observations which I had made
in the course of various
directions and noted that, insofar as the case against their client was
concerned, the basic elements of
the torts relied upon had not been pleaded. As
well, the letter noted that particulars which are required by the
Civil Procedure Rules
(NSW) when a pleading for aggravated damages and
exemplary damages is made, had not been addressed in the proposed pleading.
letter finished off with this description:
“The proposed further amended statement of claim also does not contain the
fundamental structure of a summary of only material
facts and the document read
as a whole is incoherent.”
proceedings came before me on 6 May 2025, for directions generally, including
the determination of the Notice of Motion.
for Mr Gooding made clear his client’s position:
“Our position is that we oppose the amended Statement of Claim in its
current version because, quite frankly, it doesn’t
do anything so far as
we’re concerned, and the matters were raised on 22 February 2025, not to
be opportunistic or to be smart
in a way, but simply just to tell the plaintiff
that these are the real problems that appear to have been ignored. My client as
individual can’t afford this and he’s a very elderly man, and
obviously he would want to have this matter disposed of.”
that day, I fixed the hearing of the Motion to take place on 20 June 2025.
to the Motion being heard, in accordance with the Court’s directions,
written submissions were filed by counsel for the
plaintiff. Those submissions
contended that leave ought be granted to file and serve the further
Hearing of Notice of Motion for Leave to Amend
second defendant, the Council, did not oppose the filing of the further
Gooding submitted that the amendment ought not be allowed, that so defective was
the existing pleading that it ought be summarily
dismissed, and that the
plaintiff should be required to pay his costs of the proceedings after 2024 on
an indemnity basis, such costs
to be payable forthwith.
submissions of each party did not seem to constructively address each of the
contentions of the other side. Each party professed
not to understand the other
party’s submissions. Accordingly, it became necessary, in the course of
oral argument, to raise
with each counsel quite what it was that their clients
were saying to either support the proposed pleading or oppose it.
was further discussion between Senior Counsel for the plaintiff and the Bench,
after which it became apparent, and Senior Counsel
accepted, that it was
appropriate that the plaintiff be granted a further period to redraft her
Statement of Claim to reflect the
discussion which had occurred.
defendant, Mr Gooding, contended that the plaintiff had had a sufficient
opportunity to re-plead, and that the Court would not,
in the exercise of its
discretion, grant any further leave to the plaintiff.
addition to the lengthy history of attempts to plead the case, counsel for
Mr Gooding drew attention to the existence of real prejudice
to his client
in terms of the fact that Mr Gooding was an uninsured party, was
responsible for paying his own costs, and that he
was being severely prejudiced,
not only by the delay, but by the fact that he has had to outlay costs for all
of the proceedings
during which the plaintiff has attempted to formulate an
adequate Statement of Claim.
Discernment
plaintiff’s lawyers have had significant difficulty in adequately pleading
a claim on behalf of the plaintiff.
there was a complication because of the involvement of the Basketball
Association, but by the time of this Motion being
heard, it had been removed as
a party for a period of about six months or so.
Thereafter,
conceptually, the plaintiff’s claim became somewhat simpler to plead.
plaintiff alleges that she was abused by Mr Gooding over a number of years. Part
of that abuse occurred whilst he was interacting
with the plaintiff in his
capacity as a coach of one or more basketball teams; part of the abuse occurred
when he was acting in the
capacity of the Stadium Manager, and an employee of
the Council.
Council is sued in respect of only that latter part of the abuse. It is said
that, because Mr Gooding was an employee of the Council,
the Council is
vicariously liable for that conduct. As well, there is one element of a
particular of negligence against the Council
with respect to issues of
employment.
Gooding is sued for the intentional torts of assault and battery. The claim
against him covers all periods and all abuse. The claim
against him is
straightforward and lacks complexity.
or not the Council is liable, either directly to the plaintiff in the tort of
negligence, or vicariously liable to the plaintiff
by reason of the abuse which
occurred when Mr Gooding was in the course or his duties as Stadium Manager, is
a separate question
involving the Council, and does not complicate the
intentional tort claim directly against Mr Gooding.
plaintiff is entitled to have an opportunity to ventilate her claim. The fact
that her lawyers have been unable to satisfactorily
put together a pleading
which complies with all of the obligations for a proper pleading in the
proceedings, is not to be held against
the plaintiff, nor should it result in
the termination of her claim against the person whom, she pleads, is responsible
for abusing
those circumstances, I do not propose, as Mr Gooding submits I should, to
terminate the proceedings summarily in his favour.
to addressing the real prejudice suffered by Mr Gooding with respect to costs,
it is appropriate to allow the plaintiff an
opportunity to replead her claim.
That prejudice can be appropriately addressed by an order for costs, which are
to be made payable
note that, having regard to Mr Gooding’s advanced age and in order to
protect against any risk that he may be unable to give
evidence in due course,
it is always open to the solicitors for Mr Gooding to seek to have his evidence
taken on commission in advance
of any hearing, subject, of course, to persuading
the Court that that step is appropriate in all of the circumstances which then
Accordingly,
I make the following orders:
(1) Grant leave to the plaintiff to file and serve a Further Amended Statement
of Claim, providing that such pleading is filed and
served on or before 19
December 2025.
(2) Order the plaintiff to pay the costs of and occasioned by the filing and
service of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, which
costs are to include
all reserved costs, the costs of the first, second and third judicial case
management hearings, and the costs
of the hearing of the Notice of Motion filed
19 March 2025.
(3) Order that the third defendant, Mr Gooding, is to be entitled to the payment
of his costs forthwith, once agreed or assessed.
(4) Reserve to Mr Gooding the right to make application to the Court for an
order that the costs be assessed in a gross sum.
(5) Otherwise dismiss the Notice of Motion filed 19 March 2025.
(6) Stand the matter over before the Common Law Registrar on 2 February 2026.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (250 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter