URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/291.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nomchong v Ku-ring-gai Council [2013] NSWADT 291 (19 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Nomchong v Ku-ring-gai Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 291
Hearing Date(s):
10 December 2013
Decision Date:
19 December 2013
General Division
Magistrate N Hennessy, Deputy President
The application is dismissed
Catchwords:
MERITS REVIEW - whether applicant has applied for review of a decision to
charge a fee for the release of his vehicles - whether the
Tribunal has power to
extend the time for the making of the application
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Impounding Act 1993
Cases Cited:
Attorney-General (Cth) v Oates
[1999] HCA 35
(1999) 198 CLR 162
Harding v Coburn
[1976] 2 NZLR 577
Parks and Playgrounds Movement Inc v Newcastle City
[2010] NSWLEC 231
Re Bland Brothers and the Council of the Borough
of Inglewood (No 2)
[1920] VicLawRp 95
[1920] VLR 522
Texts Cited:
Pearce & Geddes, Statutory Interpretation in Australia, 6th ed
Interlocutory applications
Gregory Nomchong (Applicant)
Ku-ring-gai Council (Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
G Nomchong (Applicant in person)
T Messenger (Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Introduction
Kur-ring-gai Council impounded two of Mr Nomchong's motor vehicles (Y67032 &
P85293). Mr Nomchong says that the two vehicles
were registered and legally
parked when they were impounded. He received the impounding notice on 18
September 2013 and moved the
vehicles to another place in the same street. But
the vehicles were impounded the next day and Mr Nomchong had to recover them
Pickles Auctions yard.
Nomchong has applied to the Tribunal for a review of the impounding decision. He
applied more than 28 days after he was notified
of that decision. Mr Nomchong
also says that he has applied for a review of the decision to charge a fee for
the release of the vehicles.
The Council does not accept that Mr Nomchong has
made the second application.
preliminary issues arise:
(1) whether Mr Nomchong has applied for a review of the decision to charge a
(2) whether the Tribunal has power to extend the time for the making of the
application;
(3) if the Tribunal has power to extend time, whether the time should be
Has Mr Nomchong applied for a review of the decision to charge a fee for
the release of the vehicles?
Impounding Act
the owner of an impounded item may apply
to the Tribunal for a review of the decision to impound the item. The owner may
for a review of any fee or charge required to be paid for the release
of the item. The relevant parts of
are set out below:
(1) The owner of an impounded item may apply to the Administrative Decisions
Tribunal for a review of the decision to impound the
item, but only on the
ground that the impounding of the item was unlawful.
(2) The owner of an impounded item may apply to the Administrative Decisions
Tribunal for a review of any fee or charge required to
be paid for the release
of the item (whether to an impounding authority or an occupier of private land),
but only on the ground that
the fee or charge has been improperly charged or
incorrectly calculated or is excessive.
Council accepts that Mr Nomchong has applied for a review of the decision to
impound his vehicles. It does not accept that Mr
Nomchong has also applied for a
review of the fee charged by the Council to release the vehicles. Mr Nomchong
said that that was
his intention.
Nomchong filled in the application for review himself. He does not have legal
representation. Under the heading "A brief description
of the decision to be
reviewed is . . .", Mr Nomchong wrote:
The council impounded two of my registered and legally parked vehicles and I
did move them as required by the impound notice and re-parked
them in the same
street and the following day the council removed them from the street.
another part of the application form, Mr Nomchong wrote that, "The Council
illegally removed registered and legally parked vehicles
after compliance with
'Impound Notice' and caused damage and loss of property."
Council has provided Mr Nomchong with a statement of reasons for its decision to
impound the vehicles. No reasons were provided
in relation to whether or not the
fees had been improperly charged, incorrectly calculated or were excessive.
is a pre-requisite to the filing of an application under
Impounding Act
that the person give Council notice in writing of an
intention to apply to the Tribunal:
(3) An application cannot be made under this section until the owner of the
impounded item has given the impounding authority or occupier
concerned notice
in writing of intention to apply to the Administrative Decisions Tribunal.
(4) If notice of intention to apply to the Administrative Decisions Tribunal
is given, the authority must not sell or otherwise dispose
of the impounded item
until the time limit for an application has expired or until it has been
notified that any application made
has been refused or withdrawn.
2 October 2013, after receiving advice from the Ombudsman's office, Mr Nomchong
emailed Tony McCormack, Team Leader Rangers, in
the following
You are hereby notified that I intend to lodge a review of council's decision
to impound my legally registered and legally parked
trailers with the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal.
was no evidence of Mr Nomchong having advised the Council in writing of his
intention to apply for a review of the decision
to charge a fee for the release
of the vehicles.
Nomchong did not make it clear in his application to the Tribunal that he was
applying for a review of the decision to charge a
fee for the release of the
vehicles. More significantly, he has not complied with his obligation to notify
the Council of his intention
to make such an application. In all the
circumstances, I am not satisfied that Mr Nomchong's application for review
includes an application
for review of the decision to charge a fee for the
release of the vehicles.
remainder of these reasons deals solely with Mr Nomchong's application to review
the decision to impound his vehicles.
Does the Tribunal have power to extend the time for the making of the
application?
Nomchong accepts that he was notified of the impounding on 18 September 2013.
Twenty-eight days from that date is 17 October 2013.
Mr Nomchong did not lodge
his application until 25 October 2013, 8 days after the 28 day period. He cannot
apply for a review of
the decision unless the Tribunal has power to extend the
question is whether the words, "This section has effect despite the provisions
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
" ("the overriding words") in
Impounding Act
mean that the Tribunal has no power to extend
time beyond the 28 day period provided for in
For the reasons given
below I consider that there is no power to extend time.
relevant provision is
(1) This section has effect despite the provisions of the
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(2) The time limit for making an application for review of an impounding
decision is 28 days from the date on which impounding was
(3) However, if the owner of an impounded item is not notified of the
impounding of the item, there is no time limit for making an
application for a
review of the impounding decision.
(4) The time limit for making an application for review of any fee or charge
required to be paid for the release of an impounded item
is 28 days from the
date on which application was made for the release of the impounded item.
(5) Nothing in this section affects the operation of
section 24.
to Pearce & Geddes,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(2006) (Pearce & Geddes), [12.4], 'Despite' is now being used by drafters,
particularly of Commonwealth legislation,
in circumstances where 'subject to'
was formerly used. It is a synonym for "notwithstanding":
Attorney-General
(Cth) v Oates
[1999] HCA 35
(1999) 198 CLR 162
[1999] HCA 35
164 ALR 393
principle was stated in
Harding v Coburn
[1976] 2 NZLR 577
Cooke J in the following terms:
... The qualification 'subject to' is a standard way of making clear
which provision is to govern in the event of conflict. It throws no light,
however, on whether there would in truth be a conflict
without it. As was said
by Megarry J in
C & J Clark Ltd v Inland Revenue Commissioner
[1973] 2 All ER 513
, 'where there is no clash, the phrase does
nothing: if there is a collision, the phrase shows what is to prevail' (ibid,
Parks and Playgrounds Movement Inc v Newcastle City Council
[2010] NSWLEC
, the Land and Environment Court was interpreting
which states that:
A roads authority may, despite any other Act or law to the contrary, remove
or lop any tree or other vegetation that is on or overhanging
a public road if,
in its opinion, it is necessary to do so for the purpose of carrying out road
work or removing a traffic hazard.
J interpreted the words "despite any other Act" as an intention to exhaustively
exclude the application of all other statutes.
His Honour set out the principles
of statutory construction relevant to the interpretation of that provision at
[70] to [85]. Of
particular relevance to this case is the observation at
Conflict between statutory provisions can be present even where there is no
direct contradiction between them. For example, where
it appears, as a matter of
construction, that special provisions were intended exhaustively to cover their
particular subject matter
and where general provisions, if held to be applicable
to the particular subject matter, would constitute a departure from that
by encroaching on that subject matter:
Fernance v Nominal
(1989) 17 NSWLR 710
at 720 per Gleeson CJ (Clarke JA agreeing at
731), quoting
Refrigerated Express Lines (A'sia) Pty Ltd v Australian Meat
and Live-stock Corporation
[1980] FCA 38
(1980) 44 FLR 455
at 468-469 (Deane
J adopted a process of analysis for legislation containing such a phrase as set
Re Bland Brothers and the Council of the Borough of Inglewood
[1920] VicLawRp 95
[1920] VLR 522
where the Full Court construed a section of an Act commencing
"Notwithstanding anything in this Act contained". It was held at
As to the introductory words, the section should first be construed without
them, and then, if there is anything in the other provisions
inconsistent with the interpretation so arrived at, these other provisions must
these steps, the first task is to construe
without the overriding words in
sets a time limit of 28 days for making an
application for review of an impounding decision. That decision is to be
calculated from
the date on which impounding was notified.
Section 39(3)
provides for the situation where the owner is not notified of the impounding of
the item. In that case, there is no time limit for
making an application.
Section 39(4)
gives a separate date, (the date on which application was made for
the release of the impounded item) as the date from which the
28 days is to be
calculated in relation to a review of the decision to charge a fee for the
release of the vehicles. There is no
power given in the
Impounding Act
for these time limits to be extended.
second step is to ask whether any provision of the
Administrative Decisions
Tribunal Act
(ADT Act) contradicts the operation of
provisions of the ADT Act which govern the timing of an application to the
Tribunal are in Chapter 5, Part 3, and Division 1 -
"Applications for Review".
The general rule is that a person may apply to the Tribunal only if "the
application is made within the
period or by the time prescribed by or under the
enactment under which the application is made": ADT Act, s 55(1)(d). That
states that:
(1) A person may apply to the Tribunal for a review of a reviewable decision
(d) the application is made within the period or by the time prescribed by or
under the enactment under which the application is made
or, if no such period or
time is prescribed, by the end of the default application period for the
57 of the ADT Act provides for late applications to the Tribunal:
(1) Despite section 55(1)(d), the Tribunal may, on application by an
interested person seeking to make a late application to the Tribunal,
time for the making by that person of an application if the Tribunal is of the
opinion that the person has provided a
reasonable explanation for the delay in
making the application.
(1A) An application by an interested person under subsection (1) must be in
writing unless the Tribunal dispenses with the requirement.
(2) The time for making an application for a review of a reviewable decision
may be extended under subsection (1) although that time
has expired.
(3) In this section, "late application" means an application not made within
the period or time referred to in section 55(1)(d).
ADT Act does not directly contradict
Impounding Act
not provide for a different time limit, it merely provides for a default time
period where no time period is prescribed.
this is a case where, as a matter of construction, the special provisions in
were intended exhaustively to cover their particular subject matter, that is
the time limits for any application for review. The
words "despite the
provisions of the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
" means all the
provisions of that Act, including
which would allow an extension of time.
final step is to obey the overriding words and ignore what would otherwise be a
contradiction of any part of
In this case, I must obey the overriding
words and ignore s 57 of the ADT Act. The Tribunal may not extend the time for
of the application.
purpose and scheme of the
Impounding Act
supports this construction.
objects of this Act are:
(a) to empower authorised persons to
impound and deal with animals and articles in public places and places owned or
under the control
of certain public authorities if, in the case of animals, they
are unattended or trespassing or, in the case of articles, they have
abandoned or left unattended, and
(b) to empower occupiers of private land to impound and deal with animals
trespassing on their land, and
(c) to provide for the release of impounded animals and articles that are
claimed by their owners, and
(d) to provide for the disposal of impounded animals and articles that are
not claimed by their owners and, if they are disposed of
by sale, to provide for
the disposal of the proceeds of sale.
of the Act sets out a strict regime for a person wishing to apply for a review
of an impounding decision. That strict scheme is necessary
partly because an
impounding authority must cause an impounded item to be offered for sale if the
item is not released before the
deadline for release:
It is critical that
any application for review be lodged promptly to avoid the sale of the impounded
item. That is why the owner
must give the impounding authority notice in writing
of the intention to apply to the Administrative Decisions Tribunal:
is also at least one of the reasons that there is no power to extend time for
applying to the Tribunal.
The application is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (147 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter