URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/264.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HJK v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force [2025] NSWCATAD 264; (27 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
HJK v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 264
Hearing Date(s):
15 September 2025
Date of Orders:
27 October 2025
Decision Date:
27 October 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
EA MacIntyre, Senior Member
(1) The administratively reviewable decision of the Respondent under review
is affirmed.
(2) Pursuant to
and (c) of the
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), the disclosure of the names of any of
the following persons is prohibited: the Applicant, his parents, his brothers,
of the Applicant or of his brothers or the spouse or partner of any of
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - reviewable decision - correct and preferable decision
- Civil and Administrative Tribunal - merits review
LICENCING -
firearms - licence - genuine reason - fit and proper person - public
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Firearms Act 1996
Firearms Regulations 2017
Cases Cited:
Commissioner of Police v Toleafoa
[1999] NSWADTAP 9
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Service
[2002] NSWADT
Meacham v Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAP 107
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAP 10
Pemberton v
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2022] NSWCATAD 288
Commissioner of Police
[2021] NSWCATAD 275
Tolley v Commissioner of Police,
[2006] NSWADT 149
Ward v Commissioner of Police
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
HJK (Applicant)
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police (Respondent)
Representation:
Applicant (Self-Represented)
McCullough Roberston Lawyers
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00162812
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
and (c) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW), the disclosure of the names of any of the following persons is
prohibited: the Applicant, his parents, his brothers, any child
of the Applicant
or of his brothers or the spouse or partner of any of them.
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an application for review of a decision of the Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force, the respondent in these proceedings
(“Respondent”) to
revoke a firearms licence held by the applicant (“Applicant”). He
held that licence under
Firearms Act 1996
”). The Applicant contests the revocation of his licence.
matters at issue are whether;
(1) the Applicant has a genuine reason for possession of a firearm;
(2) the Applicant is a “fit and proper” person to hold a firearms
(3) it is in the “public interest” for the Applicant to continue to
hold a firearms licence.
questions arise in the context of a dispute between members of the
Applicant’s family and escalation of that
The Applicant and his family
Applicant’s parents live at a property in rural NSW. Farming activities
have been conducted on the property.
Applicant lives at a different place about 31 km away from his parent’s
property. His partner is W.
Applicant has three brothers. Each will be referred to in these reasons as T, K
and J respectively. Both T and K have a spouse
or partner.
is a third generation. T has a son, A, by a former partner. A has a partner D. K
and his partner have a son, Z.
Dispute about property
Applicant’s father had owned a 200 acre property (“Property”).
He later sold a part of it to his son T. The
father also leased to T about 90
acres of the Property for use as a dairy farm and leases part to K. The
incidents in issue mostly
took place on various parts of the Property.
the sale to T, there was a road leading into the Property which provided access
to the father’s home. I will refer to
that right as a right of carriageway
T acquired his part of the Property, he moved into a dwelling on the land next
to the ROC. The father believed that when he sold
the part of the Property to T,
he retained the ROC to access his own residence.
complained about the use of the ROC, including the speed at which users
travelled along it. He believed he owned the ROC and had
a right to control its
use. He placed speed calming devices, signs and other objects on the ROC close
to his home.
dispute had been litigated. T said that the dispute
had been ongoing for a
period of years. The father had issued T an eviction notice for part of the
Property leased to T. Proceedings
concerning the dispute were ongoing at the
time of the hearing of this matter.
matters have given rise to personal conflict between members of the
Applicant’s family. That conflict involves a number
of specific incidents
described below.
Conflict within family
dispute over the Property resulted in conflict between members of his family.
The Responded describes the dispute within the family
as in part involving acts
that were “childish” and “petty”. However, at times the
Respondent says that the
dispute “occasioned significant police
intervention”. The dispute has also resulted in criminal charges and
apprehended
violence orders (“AVOs”) being made to protect members
of the family from other members of the family. Specific events
are described
further in the following paragraphs.
12 March 2024, the father made a report to police alleging that on 8 March 2024,
T approached his house “enraged” and
made certain hostile remarks to
the father. They included the alleged statement: “I wish you were
dead”. The father informed
the police that there were such incidents
involving T occurring on six occasions. The father on one occasion expressed
his physical safety. Police subsequently seized a firearm that T
informed the police that he had not contacted his father since January 2024. He
also denied saying: “I wish you were dead”.
father believed that T wanted the father’s farm and wanted to combine it
with T’s farm and sell it together. The father
also believed that T and
his partner thought that the father and his wife had “lived too
29 March 2024, T’s partner informed the police of ongoing issues with the
father. She alleged that the father had been intoxicated
and attended a camp
site that she ran with T. She said that she had previously asked the father not
to attend but he “did not
listen”. T and his partner alleged that
the father frequently drove to the vicinity of the campers on the Property
of his “declining mental and physical health”.
5 June 2024, the police came to T’s property after receiving separate
calls from both K and T’s partner. The report
was that K had come to the
property with a loaded cattle truck and attempted to drive through T's property
rather than driving around
to his own property entrance. T, T’s son,
T’s partner and the son’s partner, stopped K and refused K entry for
“biosecurity reasons”.
alleged that K made threats to T’s son and that one of the son’s
uncles told the son: “it is war until death”.
T also alleges that
the father then drove his vehicle to the gate and commenced revving his car
engine at T’s son’s partner.
then left in his cattle truck and delivered the cattle but later returned in
another vehicle to the front gate claiming the others
were restricting him from
going to his father's house. T and T’s son alleged that they had only
asked K to drive an alternate
way through their property to see their father as
they were repairing the roadway. K then sat at the front gate for another two
before leaving.
expressed fears about K’s possession of a firearm. T’s partner also
expressed certain fears. The father in turn expressed
9 June 2024, T informed the police that speed signs on the ROC had suffered
damage and a fence cut down.
11 June 2024, solicitors for the father and his wife sent a letter to T’s
solicitor in relation to allegations of trespass,
verbal abuse, intimidation and
obstructing a registered right of carriageway.
a result of events described above, the police seized firearms that T, K and
K’s son held.
13-14 July 2024, the police again attended as a result of further incidents of
alleged obstruction of K and the Applicant
on the ROC. T alleged that the
Applicant had driven near T’s residence and sounded his horn for 2-3
minutes at about 11pm on
13 July 2024 before driving away.
police after they arrived said that they spoke with the Applicant and that he
was “unsteady on his feet, slurring his words
and frequently yelling over
police”. The police thought he was affected by alcohol. The Applicant
denied this saying he had
had “only four drinks”. He also said that
his condition was due to being woken up from his sleep. He denied both driving
the vehicle and sounding the horn.
police seized the Applicant’s firearm. The police said that the Applicant
had difficulty with finding the key to his gun
safe. The Applicant was alleged
to have made various hostile remarks about T.
11 August 2024, the Applicant attempted to remove speed humps on the ROC. This
resulted in a further verbal altercation between
the Applicant and T’s
son. He alleges that T’s son physically assaulted him but T’s son
denied this. K said that
Alec had “barged into” the Applicant and
“wrestled the tools off him”. Later that evening, the
Applicant’s
partner was woken up by the lights of a car on high beam.
Subsequently,
T’s son was issued with an apprehended violence order (“AVO”)
for the protection of the Applicant.
25 September 2025, a further incident on a road occurred as between T and his
brother J. T is alleged to have told J: “move
out of the way or I will run
26 September 2024, the Applicant’s surveillance camera captured a slow
moving vehicle near his residence. The next day, the
Applicant found the word
“Rapist” sprayed on his driveway. The Applicant reported the matter
to the police.
28 September 2024, K had placed surveillance cameras on T’s property. T
complained to the police. K subsequently retrieved
the cameras. He said that
they had been placed to “capture the persons who had damaged a property
sign at his parent’s
25 November 2024, T complained to the police that his father had left a hostile
voicemail on his phone.
father on 1 January 2025 reported a verbal argument with T’s son to police
after the son had allegedly closed a gate, hitting
the father’s car when
verbal altercations occurred between 10 and12 January 2025 between K and his
partner on the one hand and T and T’s son
on the other. The altercation
involved allegations that K’s son had stolen cattle, the cutting of a
fence by T and T’s
son and moving K’s son’s cattle onto a
field. K alleged physical assault at the hands of T, assault by K’s
upon T and the throwing of rocks by T and T’s son at K’s
vehicle. K’s partner also alleged that T and T’s
son had thrown
mobile phones belonging to K and her into a paddock.
a further dispute on 12 January 2025, the police attended. They described the
Applicant as being “very argumentative
and in a heightened emotional
Subsequently,
interim AVO’s were issued against T, T’s son and K’s partner.
T, T’s son and K’s partner
were charged with “common assault
domestic violence related” contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
22 March 2025, the Applicant, his partner and other family members were having
lunch at a club. T’s son then approached the
Applicant and “verbally
abused him”.
further hostile interaction between the Applicant and T occurred on 4 April
2025. That interaction involved an allegation that T
had been filming and
“intimidating” the Applicant. T told the police that the Applicant
was “volatile, he is the
one I have been concerned about right from day
further incident occurred on 30 April 2025. The event involved allegations of K
filming T’s son.
6 July 2025, the father alleged to police that T had damaged a bridge and
signage. The father however said that he did not wish
to see the police or for
them to attend.
Firearms licence
Applicant has held firearms licences from at least 1998.
Respondent suspended the Applicant’s firearms licence on 17 July
10 January 2025, the Respondent made a decision revoking the Applicant’s
category AB firearms licence.
2 February 2025, the Applicant sought internal review of the Respondent’s
decision. Following internal review, the decision
to revoke the
Applicant’s firearms licence was affirmed.
28 April 2025, the Applicant commenced these proceedings in the Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (“Tribunal”) seeking
administrative review
of the Respondent’s decision.
Applicant nominated what he said was the genuine reason for having a firearms
licence, namely primary production.
Applicant’s rights of
Firearms Act
, a person may relevantly apply to the Tribunal
for administrative review under the
Administrative Decisions Review Act
(NSW) (“ADR Act”) of a revocation of a licence or permit
issued to the person.
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) allows
on the Tribunal under the ADR Act.
was not in dispute that the Tribunal has jurisdiction for administrative review
of the decision of the Respondent in this matter,
in circumstances where the
Respondent had revoked the Applicant’s licence under the
Firearms Act
The Tribunal’s powers on review are set out in s 63 of the ADR Act as
“(1) In determining an application for an administrative review under
this Act of an administratively reviewable decision,
the Tribunal is to decide
what the correct and preferable decision is having regard to the material then
before it, including the
(a) any relevant factual material,
(b) any applicable written or unwritten law.
(2) For this purpose, the Tribunal may exercise all of the functions that
are conferred or imposed by any relevant legislation on
the administrator who
made the decision.
In determining an application for the administrative review of an
administratively reviewable decision, the Tribunal may decide:
(a) to affirm the administratively reviewable decision, or
(b) to vary the administratively reviewable decision, or
(c) to set aside the administratively reviewable decision and make a
decision in substitution for the administratively reviewable
decision it set
(d) to set aside the administratively reviewable decision and remit
the matter for reconsideration by the administrator in accordance
directions or recommendations of the Tribunal”.
Consideration
statutory scheme governing the issue or refusal of a licence is relevant to
determining when a licence may be revoked. This is
because the
Firearms Act
that a licence may be revoked for any reason for which the licensee would be
required to be refused a licence of the same kind.
statutory scheme for the licencing of firearms is set out in the
Firearms Act
Under that scheme, the Respondent “may” issue a licence in respect
of an application, or refuse any such application
As such, the
Respondent’s power to issue a licence is discretionary.
sets out the underlying principles of the
Firearms Act
in the following
“Principles and objects of Act
(1) The underlying principles of this Act are—
(a) to confirm firearm possession and use as being a privilege that
is conditional on the overriding need to ensure public safety,
(b) to improve public safety—
(i) by imposing strict controls on the possession and use of
firearms, and
(ii) by promoting the safe and responsible storage and use of
firearms, and
(c) to facilitate a national approach to the control of firearms.
(2) The objects of this Act are as follows—
(a) to prohibit the possession and use of all automatic and
self-loading rifles and shotguns except in special circumstances,
(b) to establish an integrated licensing and registration scheme for
all firearms,
(c) to require each person who possesses or uses a firearm under the
authority of a licence to prove a genuine reason for possessing
or using the
(d) to provide strict requirements that must be satisfied in relation
to licensing of firearms and the acquisition and supply of
(e) to ensure that firearms are stored and conveyed in a safe and
secure manner,
(f) to provide for compensation in respect of, and an amnesty period
to enable the surrender of, certain prohibited firearms”.
paramount principle derived from
is ensuring public safety (
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Service
[2002] NSWADT 218
[24]). This is the “overriding need” that must be given effect under
the legislation.
of fact relevant to determination of the question must be proved under the
required standard of proof, namely the balance
of probabilities. However, there
is no onus of proof. The Applicant, in particular, does not bear the onus of
Meacham v Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAP 107
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
NSWCATAP 10
, at [34]).
manner in which evidence is to be received has been described in the following
terms: “the parties put on such evidence
as they wish and, in a matter of
this kind involving the exercise of a discretion, it is a matter for the
Tribunal to properly consider
all relevant materials and ignore all irrelevant
matters in exercising the power of the relevant administrator in review
proceedings.
This is especially the case where a decision has been taken on a
discretionary basis in light of the public interest”. The
Tribunal is
required to base its findings of fact on “logically probative
material” (
, at [82] – [83]).
exercising the discretionary power under
, what is required is an assessment
of risk in allowing an applicant to have a firearms licence. The test is
stringent. The Tribunal
must be satisfied that there is “virtually no
Ward v Commissioner of Police
[2000] NSWADT 28
says when a licence must
Section 11(3)
“A licence must not be issued unless—
(a) the Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant is a fit and
proper person and can be trusted to have possession of firearms
without danger
to public safety or to the peace,
(4) Without limiting the generality of subsection (3) (a), a licence must
not be issued if the Commissioner has reasonable cause
to believe that the
applicant may not personally exercise continuous and responsible control over
firearms because of—
(a) the applicant’s way of living or domestic circumstances, or
(7) Despite any other provision of this section, the Commissioner may
refuse to issue a licence if the Commissioner considers that
issue of the
licence would be contrary to the public interest.”
requires that an applicant must have a genuine reason for possession or using
a firearm. It says:
12 Genuine reasons for having a licence
(1) The Commissioner must not issue a licence that authorises the
possession and use of a firearm unless the Commissioner is satisfied
applicant has a genuine reason for possessing or using the firearm”.
says when a licence may be revoked. It provides:
24 Revocation of licence
(2) A licence may be revoked—
(a) for any reason for which the licensee would be required to be
refused a licence of the same kind, or
(c) if the Commissioner is of the opinion that the licensee is no
longer a fit and proper person to hold a licence, or
(d) for any other reason prescribed by the regulations”.
Firearms Regulations 2017
(NSW) (“Regulations”)
also makes provision for when a licence may be revoked. It says:
20 Revocation of licence—licence not in the
public interest
The Commissioner may revoke a licence if the Commissioner is satisfied that it
is not in the public interest for the licensee to
continue to hold the
24(2)(a) says that a licence may be revoked for any reason for which the
licensee would be required to be refused a licence
of the same kind. Provisions
setting out when a licensee would be required to be refused a licence of the
relevant kind are found
in s 11 and 12 described above. Accordingly, how s 11
and 12 may or may not apply to the Applicant, were he to apply for a licence,
relevant to determining whether the revocation of his licence should stand or
questions for determination by the Tribunal in the present case are as
(1) Does the Applicant have a genuine reason for possession of a firearm;
(2) whether the Respondent can be satisfied that the Applicant is a “fit
and proper person” to hold a licence within
the statutory meaning and can
be trusted to have possession of firearms without danger to public safety or to
(3) is it in the public interest for the Applicant to continue to hold a
firearms licence;
Does the Applicant have a “genuine reason” for possession and
use of a firearm?
reason the Applicant nominated for having a firearm was for primary production.
The Applicant said that he should not lose the
necessary ability to keep his
firearm for his farming. He said that he needed his firearm for pest
Applicant said that he had a “significant problem with feral dogs and
rabbit infestation”. He said that he had lost
calves to wild dogs. He said
that: “I only get my firearm out when necessary for farming
practices”.
locating his firearm to hand them to the police, he said: “I never use the
damn thing”; “I only bought it cause
we got a lot of rabbits”
and “I have not used it in the last 528 days”.
are some inconsistencies in the evidence. The Applicant on the one hand says
that he has a significant problem with feral dogs
and rabbits and has lost
calves to wild dogs. He says he needed his firearm for control of these animals.
However, he also told police
that he had not used his firearm in the 528 days
before the police seized the firearm. He did not explain why he had not used his
firearm for such a long period if he had a problem of the kind he described. He
also did not give evidence of dates and instances
when he used his firearm for
pest control. The Applicant’s claim that he needed the firearm for pest
control sits uneasily
with the absence of use for a long period.
these circumstances, I do not think that there is sufficient evidence to
determine that the Applicant had a “genuine reason”
for firearms
within the meaning of s 12, particularly having said, at the time of seizure of
his firearm, that he had not used his
firearm for 528 days.
“Fit and proper person”
next question is whether the Applicant is a “fit and proper person and can
be trusted to have possession of firearms without
danger to public safety or to
the peace” within the meaning of
Firearms Act
. A licence
must not be issued to the Applicant unless the Respondent is so satisfied. If
not so satisfied, these are grounds for
revocation of a licence by reason of
, a licence may be revoked if “the Commissioner is of the
opinion that the licensee is no longer a fit and proper person to
licence”. The additional words found in
asking whether the
person “can be trusted to have possession of firearms without danger to
public safety or to the peace”
do not appear in
s 24(2)(c).
applies where the person in question is “no longer” a fit
and proper person. This indicates, in my opinion, that
refers to an
earlier time when the person satisfied the description of a “fit and
proper person”. Given that an applicant
had to be a “fit and proper
person” under
to obtain a licence in the first place, this must
mean that the reference to a “fit and proper person” in
carries the same meaning as in
and not some different meaning.
the Applicant is a fit and proper person within the meaning of the legislation,
does not involve consideration of the Applicant’s
character as an abstract
matter. The question must be asked within the particular statutory context.
Specifically, it is whether
the Applicant is a “fit and proper person and
can be trusted to have possession of firearms without danger to public safety
to the peace”.
particular question, in the present instance, is whether specifically the
Applicant “may not personally exercise continuous
and responsible control
of firearms” because of his domestic circumstances. This is one of the
matters set out in
going to determining whether or not a licence should
Respondent made submissions concerning the Applicant’s own conduct. He
said that the Applicant’s conduct “demonstrated
a tendency to act
with irrationality, volatility and with disregard for public safety”. The
Respondent also raised concerns
had with members of the NSW Police Force. Some of these matters are described at
[76] below.
accepting that the Applicant and his immediate family had at times been victims
in relation to domestic incidents, the Respondent
relied on the following
matters in support of his submission:
(1) At around 11:00 PM on 13 July 2024, the Applicant drove near T’s
residence and sounded his horn for two to three minutes
before driving away (at
[26] above);
(2) when police spoke to the Applicant in relation to this incident, the
Applicant is described as “frequently yelling over
police” (at [27]
(3) when police spoke with the Applicant in relation to incidents occurring on
11 and 12 January 2025, the Applicant was “very
argumentative and in a
heightened emotional state” and “continued to argue and was
belligerent towards police”
(at [37] above).
Respondent says that they had reasonable cause to believe that the Applicant may
not personally exercise continuous and responsible
control of a firearm because
of his domestic circumstances within the meaning of
He says that the
history of domestic conflict gave rise to a reasonable cause to believe that
there will continue to be conflict
at the Property and at the Applicant's
residence and that in such a situation, the Applicant may not be able to
personally exercise
continuous and responsible control over his firearms either
personally or because another person who is not licenced to possess a
may gain access to the firearm.
if the Property and Applicant’s residence were about 31 kilometres apart,
the Respondent said that the Applicant frequently
visited the Property and had
been continuously involved in the domestic incidents with members of his family.
Respondent’s submission was that the circumstances described above, and
the issue of AVOs created risk.
was evidence of a long running dispute between the Applicant and members of his
family, in particular his brother T and T's
son. The period beginning in 2024,
on the evidence, saw an escalation in the dispute as set out at [15] –
[42] above. That
dispute resulted in criminal charges being laid against some
members of the family (at [38] above), AVOs being issued against some
the family (at [30] and [38] above), evidence of assault and fears being
expressed by members of the family for their
personal safety (at [15] and [22]
evidence is that the underlying cause of the dispute between family members was
their civil dispute concerning the ROC. The evidence
was that T wished to sell
his part of the property but had difficulty selling it unless the ROC had been
extinguished. That dispute
had not been resolved at the time of the hearing.
do not think that the evidence is sufficient to give rise to concerns at the
required level about the Applicant himself and his
possession or use of
firearms. While there is evidence of emotional behaviour on his part during
interactions with police and otherwise,
I do not find that this behaviour was,
on the evidence, threatening or dangerous in a material way. There is no
evidence of particular
threats of violence being made by the Applicant or his
partner against other members of the family or police.
was no evidence of defaults by the Applicant in the way in which he stored his
firearms. The Respondent did not say that there
was any such default.
safe storage of firearms of itself does not provide the required degree of
assurance of safety when firearms are taken out
and used. The evidence shows
that the Applicant and members of his immediate family are genuinely fearful of
T, T’s son and
another person associated with them. The evidence is that
they hold fears of potential violence against themselves. I rely in particular
on the evidence of actual violence having been perpetrated upon the Applicant
and other members of the family, the laying of criminal
charges and the issue of
AVOs. The incidents in evidence occurred both on the Property and where the
Applicant lived.
these circumstances, I accept that risk arises out of the Applicant’s
possession of firearms because of the potential on
the part of T and persons
associated with T from having access to those firearms, for example where the
firearms had been removed
from the safe in which they were held, and taken for
use outdoors.
is well established that there is no basis for differentiating, in the context
of a firearms licence, between conduct of an applicant
themselves and conduct of
another person which may impact on public safety (
Tolley v Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police
[2006] NSWADT 149
Pemberton v
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2022] NSWCATAD 288
, at [52]).
question is whether or not the Applicant “may
not personally
exercise continuous and responsible control over firearms” because of his
“domestic circumstances”.
I do not think that
applies only
to situations where a failure to exercise control occurs because of what the
Applicant himself does or does not do.
The provision, in my opinion, extends to
cases where despite the best intentions of the Applicant and the degree of care
the Applicant, the actions of other persons may prevent the Applicant
from exercising the required control, particularly when the
firearm has been
taken out for use. The circumstances of conflict within the family, including
the incidences of actual violence
and the issue of AVOs, in my opinion, evidence
domestic circumstances that may prevent the Applicant’s personal exercise
control of his firearms in the manner required by
do not, however, think that the risk in the present case is a high one. However,
the test is not whether the risk is a high one
or even likely. There needs to be
“virtually no risk”. The present case does not involve circumstances
where I can be
satisfied that the Applicant’s possession and use of
firearms pose “virtually no risk” for the reasons set out
– [87] above.
Public interest
Respondent’s submission is that it is not in the public interest for the
Applicant to hold a firearms licence.
What is the “public
interest” is not defined in the
Firearms Act
Saxby v Commissioner
[2021] NSWCATAD 275
, the Tribunal said, at [14]:
“The expression “public interest” is not defined in
, nor elsewhere in the Act, and a decision in relation to the public
interest in this context is particularly informed by the underlying
and objects of the Act and the strict controls under the Act in relation to
licensing. In
Commissioner of Police v Toleafoa
, at [25], the Appeal Panel said that the ‘public interest'
is an inherently broad concept giving the Commissioner (and hence
the Tribunal
on review) the ability to have regard to a wide range of factors in deciding
whether to exercise a discretion adversely
to an individual. Public safety
is to be given paramount consideration:
Hill v Commissioner of Police,
New South Wales Police Service
[2002] NSWADT
Commissioner
of Police v Toleafoa
[1999] NSWADTAP 9
, at [24], the Appeal Panel
"... public interest is a term embracing matters against others, of standards of
human conduct and of the functioning of government
and government
instrumentalities et cetera established and accepted to be for the good order of
society and for the well being of
its members. The interest is therefore the
interest of the public as distinct to the interest of the individual or
individuals.
The "public interest" is an inherently broad concept giving the appellant the
ability to have regard to a wide range of factors in
choosing whether to
exercise a discretion adversely to an individual. As the possibility of refusing
an application on the ground
of character is dealt with elsewhere in the same
section, it is reasonable to infer that the Parliament intended that the public
interest discretion operate in areas to which the character ground was not
relevant or, possibly, in circumstances where an objection
on character grounds
would not be sufficient in its own right to warrant refusal... ".
accept the Respondent’s submission that public interest weighs against the
Applicant being granted a firearms licence. It
cannot be said that there is
“virtually no risk” in the Applicant holding a firearms licence
having regard to the matters
set out at [85] – [87] above. In these
circumstances, I am satisfied that grounds for revocation of the
Applicant’s firearms
licence would have been established on the basis of
public interest.
No questions of character
Applicant expressed concerns that the record contained a statement that he was
not a “fit and proper person”. What
is a “fit and proper
person” for the purposes of the
Firearms Act
, however, depends on whether
or not a person satisfied certain statutory criteria. These are not criteria
that, in the circumstances
of the case, involve the Applicant’s character
in a general sense. The conclusion of the Tribunal arises out of matters
the Applicant’s particular situation of family conflict.
Consequently,
any finding that the Applicant was not a fit and proper person within the
statutory meaning, does not carry any imputation
that he is not a fit and proper
person in the general sense as a lay person may understand.
was evidence of de-escalation of the conflict within the family in recent times.
If that continues and family relations regain
stability, I see no reason why the
Applicant should not at a later date obtain a firearms licence, should he
reapply. He will also
need to provide further evidence and particulars as to the
problems he says he faces with feral dogs and rabbits, in order to establish
genuine reason for possession and use of firearms.
the reasons set out at [70], [87] and [91] above, the Respondent has made out
his case for the revocation of the Applicant’s
firearms licence.
(1) The administratively reviewable decision of the Respondent under review
is affirmed.
(2) Pursuant to
and (c) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NSW), the disclosure of the names of any of the following persons is
prohibited: the Applicant, his parents, his brothers, any child
of the Applicant
or of his brothers or the spouse or partner of any of them.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (309 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter