URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chase v Clarence Valley Council; Marno v Clarence Valley Council [2025] NSWCATCD 66; (5 September 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Chase v Clarence Valley Council; Marno v Clarence Valley Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 66
Hearing Date(s):
22 August 2025
Date of Orders:
05 September 2025
Decision Date:
5 September 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
G Sarginson, Deputy President
(1) The procedural orders and directions are set out at
the end of this decision. A copy of the orders and directions is to be
the Tribunal Registry to the parties in all of the proceedings that were listed
for directions at the Tribunal on 22 August
2025 separately to these
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE- Power of Civil and Administrative Tribunal to order
mediation – Large number of proceedings - Whether mediation
appropriate and if so on what terms
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2022
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Rules 2014
Contracts Review Act 1980
Holiday Parks
(Long-term Casual Occupation) Act 2002
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules 2015
Local Government Act
Local Government (Caravan Parks and Camping Grounds) Regulation
Native Title Act 1994 (NSW)
Residential (Land Lease)
Communities Act 2013
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2017
Cases Cited:
Archibald v Powlett
(2017) 53 VR 645
[2017] VSCA 259
ASIC v Rich
Australian Postal Corporation v Lux Cuttings Pty Ltd
NSWCATAP 316
Australian Postal Corporation v Williams
[2024] NSWCATAP
Cappello v Hammond & Simmons NSW Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 57
Hobart Pty Ltd v Cawthorn
(2022) 276 CLR 216
[2022] HCA 16
Commonwealth v
Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394; [1990] HCA 39
Coscuez International Pty Ltd v
The Owners-Strata Plan No 46433
[2022] NSWCATAP 147
Harman v Secretary of
State for Home Department
[1983] 1 AC 280
Hawach v A & A Building
Services Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATAP 138
Hearne v Street
(2008) 235 CLR 125
[2008] HCA 36
JL v Anglican Church Property Trust Diocese of Sydney
Lam v Steve Jarvin Motors Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWCATAP 186
Scenic Tours Pty Ltd
(2020) 268 CLR 326
[2020] HCA 17
Old v McInnis and
[2011] NSWCA 410
Promina Design & Construction Pty Ltd v The
Owners-Strata Plan No 97449
[2023] NSWCATAP 252
Steak Plains Olive Farm Pty
Ltd v Australian Executor Trustees Ltd
[2015] NSWSC 289
Sunaust Properties
Pty Ltd t/as Central Sydney Realty v The Owners-Strata Plan No 64807
The Owners-Strata Plan No 55468 v Silberstein
[2025] NSWCATAP
Walsh v The Owners-Strata Plan No 10349
[2017] NSWCATAP 230
Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
(2023) 278 CLR 208
[2023] HCA 31
Texts Cited:
NCAT 2023-2024 Annual Report
Procedural rulings
Case Number 2025/00140234
Simon Chase (Applicant)
Clarence Valley
Council (Respondent)
Case Number 2025/00140385
(Applicant)
Clarence Valley Council (Respondent)
Representation:
Case Number 2025/00140234
(self-represented)
Solicitors:
Local Government Legal
(Respondent)
Case Number 2025/00140385
Solicitors:
Geer (Applicant)
Local Government Legal (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00140234 and 2025/00140385
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a procedural decision arising from a directions hearing on 22 August
the dispute involves a large number of parties (who are involved in separate
proceedings) and the profile of the dispute, I have
determined it appropriate to
publish reasons for my procedural directions. Although only Mr Chase and Ms
Marno have been identified
as applicants on the cover page of the reasons, the
orders apply to all of the matters listed for directions on 22 August 2025.
have conducted the directions hearings in the proceedings to date. The purpose
is to case manage a large number of proceedings.
However, my case management to
date does not mean I will necessarily be conducting the final hearings in the
proceedings (if they
do not resolve); nor any mediations.
this decision, any reference to “casual occupants” is a reference to
the applicants in matters where it has been identified
by the applicants that
Holiday Parks (Long-term Casual Occupation) Act 2002
(NSW) (HP Act)
applies rather than the
Residential (Land Lease) Communities Act 2013
(NSW) (RLLC Act).
Introduction
respondent in the proceedings, Clarence Valley Council (‘the
Council’), is the operator of 4 holiday parks, which
colloquially referred to as ‘caravan parks’.
legislation applicable to occupants of such parks is usually the RLLC Act or HP
Differences Between the RLLC Act and the HP Act
is unnecessary to set out in detail the differences between the RLLC Act and the
HP Act. However, it is useful to understand the
major provisions of the
respective Acts.
RLLC Act applies to communities (as defined in s 4 of the RLLC Act) where there
is a site agreement between the home owner (as
defined in s 4 of the RLLC Act)
and the operator where the home owner uses the site only as a place of residence
(s 36(a) of the
RLLC Act). There are provisions of the RLLC Act dealing with
sale of homes; formation of residents committees; site fee increases;
termination of agreements. Termination notices can only be issued by the
operator on certain grounds, but an application can
be made to terminate for
serious misconduct without issue of a termination notice (Part 11, Divisions 1-3
of the RLLC Act). Termination
by the operator occurs by order of the Tribunal if
the home owner does not vacate (s 130 of the RLLC Act). There are provisions of
the RLLC Act dealing with mediation, including the provisions in Part 12
Division 2 of the RLLC Act.
respect of the order making power of the Tribunal under the RLLC Act (separately
to other order making powers, such as orders for
termination and possession that
are set out in ss 130-131), s 157 states as follows:
157 Orders that may be made by Tribunal
(1) The Tribunal may, on application by a party to a dispute or other
matter before the Tribunal, or in any proceedings under this
Act, make one or
more of the following orders—
(a) an order that restrains an action in breach of this Act or a site
agreement or collateral agreement,
(b) an order that requires a person to comply with an obligation
under this Act or a site agreement or collateral agreement,
(c) an order that relieves a party to a site agreement or collateral
agreement from the obligation to comply with a provision of
the agreement,
(d) an order for the payment of an amount of money,
(e) an order for the payment of compensation,
(f) an order that a party to a site agreement perform such work or
take such other steps as the order specifies to remedy a breach
(g) an order that requires payment of part or all of the site fees
payable under a site agreement to the Tribunal until the whole
or part of the
agreement has been performed or any application for compensation has been
determined,
(h) an order that requires site fees paid to the Tribunal to be paid
towards the cost of remedying a breach of the site agreement
or towards the
amount of any compensation,
(i) an order directing an operator to give a former home owner or
person authorised by a former home owner access to a residential
site or home on
the site for the purpose of recovering goods of the former home owner,
(j) an order for anything else necessary or desirable to resolve a
(2) An order under subsection (1)(a) or (b) may be made even though it
provides a remedy in the nature of an injunction or order
for specific
performance in circumstances in which such a remedy would not otherwise be
(3) The Tribunal must not make an order for—
(a) the payment of an amount that exceeds the amount (if any)
prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this section, or
(b) the performance of work or the taking of steps the cost of which
is likely to or will exceed the amount (if any) prescribed
by the regulations
for the purposes of this section.
(4) An order for the payment of compensation to a party is not to be made
for loss or damage to the extent the loss or damage could
have been avoided or
limited by taking reasonable steps to mitigate the loss or damage.
(5) A provision of this Act that enables a resident to apply for a
determination by the Tribunal and the Tribunal to determine a
matter or make an
order also applies, where appropriate, to a former resident.
(6) The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to award compensation for
damages arising from personal injury.
(7) Except as provided by subsection (6), nothing in this section limits
the orders that the Tribunal may make under this Act.
This Act also confers other order-making powers on the Tribunal, including other
specific powers to make termination orders and to
declare that a residential
site has been abandoned.
HP Act applies to the following:
5 Act applies to long-term casual occupants
(1) This Act applies to any occupation agreement in relation to a
(a) entered into by an occupant who has a principal place of
residence somewhere other than the site, and
(b) under which the occupant installs the occupant’s own
moveable dwelling on the site and leaves it there all of the time
occupation agreement continues in force, and
(c) under which the occupant can occupy the site for no more than 180
days in any 12-month period (in a continuous or broken period),
(d) under which—
(i) the occupant agrees, with the consent of the park owner, to be an
occupant on a casual basis for at least 12 months, or
(ii) the occupant has, with the consent of the park owner, been an
occupant on a casual basis for at least 12 months.
(2) This Act applies whether the relevant occupation agreement was entered
into before or after the commencement of this section,
unless a particular
provision provides otherwise.
(3) Subject to sections 14 and 16, if this Act applies to an occupation
agreement, it so applies despite the terms of any such occupation
agreement or
any other contract, agreement or arrangement, whether made before or after the
commencement of this section.
the HP Act, a park owner who proposes to enter into a site agreement must
provide a document that answers specific questions
(s 9 HP Act). The HP Act
requires a signed written agreement (ss 5 and 15 of the HP Act) but oral
agreements, or agreements that
are partially in writing and partially oral are
still enforceable (ss 13, 15, 16 of the HP Act). There are certain standard
incorporated into the agreement (ss 11 and 15; Sch. 1 of the HP Act).
1 of the HP Act contains extensive terms. They deal with obligations of
occupants and park owners. Sch. 1 Cl. 6 states:
6 What happens when this agreement ends?
When the time for this agreement ends—
(a) the occupant can stay on the site at the same occupation fee (or
at an increased fee if the fee is increased in accordance with
this agreement)
and otherwise under the same terms unless or until this agreement is ended in
accordance with this agreement, or
1 includes obligations by the occupant that movable dwellings must comply with
the law; and must be kept in a condition allowing
it to be moved (Cl. 25-26).
The occupant agrees not to sell the moveable dwelling while it is on site
without prior written permission
of the park owner or order of the Tribunal (Cl.
23). The occupant agrees not to renovate or alter the moveable dwelling on site
the park owner’s prior written permission. The park owners
obligations are set out in Sch. 1 Cl. 27-31, including a family
another person to temporarily occupy the site if the person has the prior
consent of the occupant and the park owner (Cl.
Sch. 1 Cl. 39, the park owner may issue a notice of termination for breach of
the agreement by the occupant. Under Sch. 1 Cl.
40, the park owner may give a
notice of termination without any breach. Clause 40 states as follows:
40 Notice of termination by park owner without any reason
(but not for a fixed term agreement that has not finished)
(1) The park owner and the occupant agree that the park owner may give
notice of termination of this agreement without having to
give any reason.
(2) The park owner and the occupant agree that a notice of termination
given under this clause must give at least 90 days’
notice as to the day
on which vacant possession of the site will be delivered up to the park
(3) This clause does not apply if the agreement creates an occupancy for a
fixed term and the notice of termination specifies that
it takes effect before
that term finishes.
40 and 41 specify the details that must be contained in a notice to terminate
(Cl. 40) and how the notice may be served (Cl.
41). There are also service
provisions in s 47 of the HP Act.
respect of fixed term agreements, s 18 of the HP Act states:
18 Fixed term agreement may specify that it continues
If an occupation agreement that creates an occupancy for a fixed term includes a
provision for its continuation after the fixed term
ends, that provision has
park owner or occupant may terminate the agreement when the fixed term ends (s
19 of the HP Act). However, if there is no termination
of the agreement and the
fixed term ends, s 20 of the HP Act states:
20 Continuation of fixed term agreements if park owner or
occupant does not terminate
(1) This section applies if—
(a) an occupation agreement creates an occupancy for a fixed term,
(b) the occupation agreement has no provision in it for continuation
after the fixed term ends, and
(c) neither the park owner nor the occupant has terminated the
occupation agreement when the fixed term ends.
(2) An occupation agreement to which this section applies is to continue
to apply on the same terms as those applying immediately
before the day on which
the fixed term ends, other than the term that set the fixed term for the
agreement and the term fixing the
amount of the occupation fee.
(3) The occupation agreement continues on the basis that the occupant is
holding over under a periodic occupancy, that is, on the
basis that the
occupation fee is paid and accepted at regular fixed intervals and the occupancy
of the occupant continues indefinitely
from one period to the next until
terminated by notice equal to the length of the applicable period.
46A of the HP contains a penalty if the park owner gives, “in purported
compliance with any requirements of this Act”,
any information which the
park owner knows is false or misleading in a material particular. Section 49
prohibits contracting out
of the HP Act. Section 50 states that nothing in the
Act limits the operation of the
Contracts Review Act 1980
s 28 of the HP Act, a park owner can recover possession of the site or the
occupation agreement without the need to obtain an
order of the Tribunal.
However, if it does so unlawfully, s 29 of the HP Act provides for a penalty,
and under s 29(3) the potential
for compensation to the innocent party. Section
30 provides that if the Tribunal makes an order for termination, it may
subsequently
issue a warrant for possession.
26 and 27 of the HP Act deal with applications to the Tribunal and orders that
the Tribunal can make. They state as follows:
26 Applications to the Tribunal relating to a breach of an
occupation agreement or to a disagreement
(a) a park owner or an occupant under an occupation agreement claims
that a breach of a term of the agreement has occurred, or
(b) a disagreement occurs between a park owner and an occupant
concerning a matter that could form the basis of a breach of the
agreement (other than an increase in the occupation fee or any other matter of a
kind prescribed by the regulations),
the park owner or the occupant may, not later than 30 days after becoming aware
of the breach or the disagreement, apply to the Tribunal
for an order in respect
of the breach or disagreement.
(2) (Repealed)
(3) An application under this section may be made during the currency of
or within 30 days after the termination of an occupation
agreement. In addition,
an application may be made whether or not the occupation agreement was
27 What orders can the Tribunal make?
(1) The Tribunal may, on application by a person under section 26, make
one or more of the following orders—
(a) an order that—
(i) restrains any action in breach of the occupation agreement or the
cause of the disagreement, or
(ii) requires any action in performance of the agreement or to
resolve the disagreement,
(b) an order for the payment of an amount of money,
(c) an order that the park owner give the occupant the correct notice
of termination of the occupation agreement,
(d) an order that a party to the occupation agreement perform any
work or take any other steps that the order specifies to remedy
a breach of the
agreement or to resolve the disagreement,
(e) an order as to compensation, including (without limiting the
Tribunal’s power to make such an order)—
(i) compensation for loss of occupation fees, and
(ii) compensation where a park owner withholds or refuses consent to
the removal of any fixture owned by the occupant, and
(iii) compensation for any other breach of the occupation agreement
or for any other loss,
(f) an order terminating the occupation agreement and an order for
possession of the site.
(2) An order under subsection (1) (a) may be made even though it provides
a remedy in the nature of an injunction or order for specific
performance in
circumstances in which such a remedy would not otherwise be available.
time period in s 26 of the HP Act can be extended under s 48 of the HP Act, and
s 41 of the NCAT Act.
Factual Background
some applicants, the van or dwelling is their permanent residence. For others,
the van or dwelling is occupied on a casual basis
and is not their permanent
parks are located at Minnie Water; Brooms Head; Iluka; and Wooli.
13 March 2025, the Council issued Notices to Terminate site agreements on
approximately 130 van owners in the parks. The Notices
required vacant
possession on 30 June 2025.
events then occurred, including media interest in the dispute and discussions at
Council meetings. A number of van owners formed
the Clarence Valley
Semi-Permanent Van Group Incorporated. Mr Chase is the Secretary of this
Proceedings in the Tribunal and Directions of the
in April 2025, a large number of van owners commenced proceedings in the
Tribunal. There are currently approximately 100
proceedings before the
for representation has been granted to the parties under
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
NSW) (NCAT Act). In a small number of
matters, the applicants are legally represented by Legal Aid NSW. In one matter
(where Ms Marno
is the applicant) the applicant is legally represented by
Thomson Geer Solicitors. In one matter (Bradfield and Lawrence) the applicants
are self-represented, with Mr Bradfield appearing. In the majority of matters,
the applicants are represented by Mr Chase.
matters were listed for a directions hearing on 14 May 2025.
Directions Hearing on 14 May 2025
that stage, there were approximately 63 proceedings, but that figure has now
14 May 2025 procedural directions were made. The applicants were directed to
file and serve Points of Claim. The parties were also
directed, by their
representatives, to confer and discuss whether alternative dispute resolution
was feasible. Parties were encouraged
to obtain legal advice.
the directions hearing, one of the issues I pointed out was that the Tribunal
only has jurisdiction conferred upon it by statute
(ss 28 and 29 of the NCAT
Act) and the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is not unlimited.
is unnecessary for the purpose of this decision to set out in detail the many
authorities that discuss the scope of the Tribunal’s
the plethora of legislation that confers powers upon it (for example,
Steve Jarvin Motors Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWCATAP 186
in respect of consumer
The Owners-Strata Plan No 55468 v Silberstein
[2025] NSWCATAP 102
Coscuez International Pty Ltd v The Owners-Strata Plan No 46433
[2022] NSWCATAP 147
in respect of strata disputes). In strata matters,
the Tribunal does not have the general power to grant the remedy of a
declaration,
unless there is a specific statutory power (
Walsh v The
Owners-Strata Plan No 10349
[2017] NSWCATAP 230).
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to consider purely equitable causes of
action, although it has jurisdiction to consider equitable
Plains Olive Farm Pty Ltd v Australian Executor Trustees Ltd
[2015] NSWSC
Hawach v A & A Building Services Pty Ltd
NSWCATAP 138
. It also does not have jurisdiction to consider claims
or defences raised under Commonwealth legislation if the claim or defence
genuinely raised and not incapable on its face of legal argument:
Hobart Pty Ltd v Cawthorn
(2022) 276 CLR 216
[2022] HCA 16
Postal Corporation v Lux Cuttings Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCATAP 316
Postal Corporation v Williams
[2024] NSWCATAP 168.
In appropriate
circumstances, the Tribunal can transfer proceedings to a Court (Sch. 4 Cl. 6 of
the NCAT Act).
reason I raised the issue of jurisdiction is that, in correspondence Mr Chase
had sent to the Tribunal and the Council, he had
raised alleged breaches of
local government planning legislation; work, health and safety legislation, and
native title legislation
as a basis for asserting that the Notices of
Termination issued by the Council were invalid. It was also unclear that the
he (and the applicants he represents) were seeking were within the powers
of the Tribunal under the RLLC Act or HP Act.
Points of Claim were to set out:
(a) The orders sought.
(b) The legislation that the Tribunal has the power to consider that is relied
(c) Brief details of why the orders should be made.
the Tribunal noted the undertaking of the Council that it would not seek to take
possession of the sites in respect of which
Notices to Terminate had been issued
without further order of the Tribunal or a Court. Directions were also made
granting the parties
liberty to approach the Tribunal if the Council sought to
be relieved of the undertaking.
Claim sought 9 orders. Those orders are summarised
as follows:
(1) That the Notices to Terminate “be set aside and declared to have no
(2) All “existing agreements” continue “in full force and
effect according to their terms as they stood immediately
prior to the issue of
the Notices to Terminate”.
(3) All “enforcement actions” be immediately suspended.
(4) The Council be “restrained from undertaking any further compliance or
enforcement activity” which may “prejudice
the rights or
interests” of the van owners who had taken NCAT proceedings.
(5) The Council be “restrained from issuing any further notices, warnings
or actions in relation to alleged non-compliance
where such alleged
non-compliance arises from, or is attributable to, prior approvals or omissions
by the Council or its predecessors”.
(6) A declaration made that the conduct of the Council was
“unlawful” and/or “in breach of its statutory
obligations”
in respect of “historic approvals or regulatory
(7) The Council be ordered to “bear the cost of any lawful rectification
works required to address non-compliance”.
(8) An unspecified amount of “compensation” be awarded to the van
owners for “economic loss”.
(9) An order allowing the existing HP Act van owners to “stay on the site,
at the same occupation fee (or an increased fee
if the fee is increased in
accordance with this agreement)...until this agreement is ended...”
Chase’s Points of Claim set out “brief grounds for orders” and
“submissions” that run for a number
of pages. He refers to a
resolution passed by the Council at a meeting on 11 April 2025 that the Council
would withdraw the Notices
to Terminate and enter into new long term casual
occupation agreements, and would consider formulation of Plans of Management
local government legislation with “the full involvement of
traditional owners in accordance with the
Native Title Act 1993
”. Mr Chase
asserts that the General Manager of the Council refuses to accept that
resolution and implement it.
Points of Claim then assert a series of purported breaches by the Council of the
local government legislation (including the
Local Government Act 1993
(NSW)); the
Local Government (Caravan Parks and Camping Grounds) Regulation
(NSW)); the
Crown Land Management Act 2016
(NSW); Native Title
legislation (
Native Title Act 1994
(NSW)); and work, health and safety
legislation (
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and
Safety Regulation 2017
in the Points of Claim (and submissions) is an assertion that the Council
“has been aware for up to 9 years”
that occupancy agreements would
be terminated, but continued to permit the sale and purchase of vans located on
sites at the parks;
and encouraged or required van owners to invest in
“substantial and costly adjustments” to their vans to comply with
planning and compliance requirements, many of whom made the vans
“effectively unmovable”.
Chase’s initial Points of Claim are broad, and some of the issues and
legislation raised does not clearly fall within the
scope of the HP Act. He does
not plead that his agreement falls under the RLLC Act.
Hearing on 23 June 2025
23 June 2025, the proceedings were again listed for a directions hearing. The
Tribunal made extensive procedural directions comprising
of 4 pages. It is
unnecessary to set out in detail those procedural directions. However, in
summary, the parties were to identify
(set out in direction 4):
(1) Matters in which the applicant alleged they were permanently residing in the
van and the RLLC Act arguably applies.
(2) Matters in which the applicants were not permanently residing in the van and
agreed the HP Act arguably applies.
(3) Matters in which the applicant sought to remain in possession of the site
permanently (subject to any future lawful right of
the respondent to
terminate).
(4) Matters in which the applicant sought a further long term casual agreement
under s 5 of the HP Act.
(5) Matters in which compensation orders were sought.
(6) Matters where the parties agreed to a mediation.
(7) Matters where the parties did not agree to a mediation, and if so, why.
(8) If mediation was ordered, whether the mediation should be conducted by a
private Mediator or Member of the Tribunal appointed
as a Mediator under Sch 1
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2022
(NSW) (NCAT
Regulation).
(9) Details of how any mediation would be conducted, considering the large
number of proceedings. Such details included whether the
mediation would be in
person or by audio-visual link and how much time would be allocated to each
(10) The applicants to file and serve any Amended Points of Claim (APOC). Any
APOC must set out:
(a) The orders sought (including, if compensation is sought, the amount of
compensation and the legal basis for compensation).
(b) The statutory provisions relied upon.
(c) Details of why the orders were sought.
(d) An explanation as to how the Tribunal has the power to make the orders
sought under the provisions of the RLLC Act or HP Act,
or any other legislation
to which the Tribunal has power to apply.
was also noted that there had been a dispute regarding Mr Chase issuing a
Summons to Produce Documents to the Council. Mr Chase
had applied for a Summons,
but a Tribunal Registry officer determined not to issue the Summons, for reasons
that do not require elaboration.
The procedural directions identified that Mr
Chase could either make an application to issue a fresh Summons, or if he chose
on with the Summons that had been refused, he could make a
miscellaneous orders application for the issue of the Summons, to be referred
procedural directions also identified that if a fresh Summons was issued and the
Council sought to have that Summons set aside
in whole or part, the Council
could file and serve a miscellaneous orders
application.
Procedural Events Prior to the Directions Hearing on
22 August 2025
representatives of the parties conferred and prepared an extensive spreadsheet
that dealt with all of the issues raised by direction
4 of the Tribunal. The
representatives of the majority of the van owners (Legal Aid NSW; Thompson Geer
and Mr Chase) prepared a document,
and the Solicitors for the Council prepared a
separate document in respect of matters where it was asserted the HP Act
applied, rather
than the RLLC Act.
were a small number of matters where both parties agreed to hold a mediation
with a private mediator selected from the Law Society
of NSW as a first step to
resolving the dispute. In most of those matters, the applicant is legally
represented by Legal Aid NSW.
In those matters, the applicant is permanently
residing in the van.
the matters where both parties agree to a private mediation, I have determined
it appropriate to make an order under s 37 of the
NCAT Act that the parties hold
a mediation before a private mediator, and then those matters be listed for a
further directions hearing
not earlier than 8 weeks from the date of this
decision. There are 13 matters that fall into that category.
Chase’s Amended Points of Claim
24 July 2025, Mr Chase filed and served a document that he relies upon as
Amended Points of Claim. He asserted at the directions
hearing on 22 August 2024
that this document is also the Amended Points of Claim in all of the proceedings
where he represents the
applicants.
I pointed out at the directions hearing on 22 August 2025, there is no
‘representative’ or ‘class action’
involving this type of dispute in the Tribunal. It is also problematic that, at
this stage, there is no signed
document from the applicants that Mr Chase
represents to state that they agree to, adopt, and rely upon the Amended Points
that Mr Chase has prepared and relies upon.
Amended Points of Claim (APOC) seek the following orders:
(1) The current termination notices issued to 136 van owners at Wooli, Brooms
Head, Minnie Water and Iluka “are invalid”.
(2) The park owner “withdraw” the current notices of termination.
(3) The park owner be “restrained from taking possession of the sites
without further or other order of the Tribunal or a Court”.
(4) The park owner “fully comply with the requirements of all
sections/clauses pursuant to Schedule 1 of the Holiday Park Act
(sic) and the
Occupation Agreement”.
(5) The park owner “namely the General Manager, the person in authority
partake in mediation with the applicants to resolve
the disagreement”.
(6) The park owner “pay all applicants compensation for breaches of the
occupation agreement and for any financial losses,
costs, detriment and harm
to the previous directions of the Tribunal, the document then sets out how it is
said the Tribunal has the power to make
the orders sought.
Chase refers to Cl. 7 of Sch 1 of the HP Act (that the park owner and occupant
agree to comply with the terms of the agreement)
and ss 26 and 27 of the HP Act.
In particular, he refers to s 26(1)(b) of the HP Act, which refers to “a
disagreement...between
a park owner and occupant concerning a matter that could
form the basis of a breach of the occupation agreement...”
Chase makes the following assertion:
“The grounds raised by the applicants are many and varied and the
following grounds raise an argument that Council has failed
to comply with
several requirements of legislation under the Holiday Parks Act and have
breached the terms of the Occupation Agreement
which the applicants disagree
with. This falls within NCAT’s jurisdiction under s 26 of the Holiday
Parks Act”.
APOC refers to statutory interpretation principles, on the basis that it is
submitted the HP Act is beneficial legislation that
should be given a broad
interpretation in favour of van owners.
APOC sets out the specific provisions of the HP Act and occupation agreement it
is asserted have been breached by the Council.
They are as follows:
9 of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts that “many” of the applicants did
not receive a written occupation agreement,
or a document required by s 9 of the
HP Act prior to entering into the agreement.
10 of the HP Act and Sch. 1 Cl. 34. Mr Chase asserts “many” of the
applicants did not receive a copy of the park
rules before entering into a site
11 of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts that “many” applicants did not
have the “blank spaces” of the site
agreement (that contains any
additional terms other than the terms set out in Sch. 1) filled out.
12 of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts that “many” applicants were not
provided with a copy of any site agreement
and “despite attempts to obtain
a copy from park managers and council (sic) no written or oral agreement can be
file and no record exists of it ever being in place”. He
further submits that “the absence of any occupation agreement
is in breach and occupants cannot be expected to be bound by terms never
disclosed to them”.
15 of the HP Act. Mr Chase identifies that failure to provide a complete written
occupation agreement to the occupant is a
penalty offence. It is further
submitted that “many” applicants were not provided with the
disclosure document; the park
rules and Sch. 1 of the HP Act “at no time
before, during or after” entering into the site agreement.
18 of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts “if” applicants have a fixed term
agreement of 12 months and “if”
the term of the agreement states the
agreement can continue “otherwise under the same terms unless and until
this agreement
is ended in accordance with this agreement” then there is
“in effect an automatic extension on the same terms”
agreement remains a fixed term agreement) so the Notice to Terminate has
“no effect” because it was issued
within the fixed term period.
1 Cl. 41 of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts that by reason of Sch. 1 Cl. 41(b) the
notice of termination must state the address
and site number of the site. He
asserts that termination notices issued by the Council only contain reference to
the site number,
and omit the address. Accordingly, he submits the notices are
1 Cl. 46A of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts that the Council knew, or ought to
have known, when it entered into site agreements
or renewed site agreements that
sites were not “lawfully usable as a residential site” due to being
“situated on
a road reserve, not within the approved caravan park
area”; or “the site and structures breach applicable Local
Regulations”. Mr Chase asserts that the Council “allowed
or approved the construction of structural additions such as
annexes, carports
and decks, that rendered the dwelling immovable, further undermining the
assumption of mobility”. The Council
then issued a termination notice
“relying on the assumption that the dwelling could be
relocated”.
1 Cl. 27(b) of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts the Council has failed to ensure
that there was no legal reason the site could not
be used as a residence for the
term of the agreement.
46A of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts that the Council engaged in misleading or
deceptive conduct; and/or conduct that was harsh,
unconscionable or oppressive,
because the Council allowed or encouraged site occupants to alter and modify
their vans, despite knowing
“for at least 9 years” that termination
of occupancy agreements was under “active consideration”. It is
the Council permitted the sale or transfer of vans and entered into new
site agreements but “withheld” information regarding
“likely or foreseeable termination of those agreements”.
Chase asserts that applicants have suffered “economic loss, stress and
hardship” because of (a) loss of value of vans;
(b) inability to sell or
relocate; and (b) costs associated with “defending the termination”.
It is asserted that the
Council allowed applicants to alter their vans with
“additions such as an annex, carport, decking and plumbing” which
made the van immovable.
1 Cl. 3 of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts the dimensions (width and depth) of the
site were not set out in site agreements.
1 Cl. 5 of the HP Act. Mr Chase repeats his assertion that the occupation
agreements are ongoing fixed term agreements and, accordingly,
the notices to
terminate are invalid.
1 Cl. 6 of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts that the Council “resolved to
withdraw the termination notices” and the General
Manager did not have the
delegated power to terminate, or press for termination, of the site
agreements.
1 Cl. 8 of the HP Act. Mr Chase asserts that the Council has charged occupation
fees that have not been set out in the agreements.
APOC concludes with a sub-heading “Compensation”. That sub-heading
contains a narrative. It does not specify what
amounts are claimed by the
particular casual occupants. Mr Chase assert that the Council has previously
“negotiated and paid”
compensation when causal occupants were
“relocated” and by issuing the notices to terminate, the Council has
from a “precedent” previously established. It is asserted
that many casual occupants are “elderly” and
“vulnerable”.
APOC acknowledges that Sch. 1 Cl. 45 of the HP Act states no compensation is
payable for termination of the occupation agreement.
However, Mr Chase asserts
that applicants seek “compensation for market value loss of each van and
compensation for any losses
or costs and harm incurred by failing to comply with
law and because of improper termination procedures”.
Marno’s Amended Application With Points of Claim
Marno is a casual occupant of the Illuka park (as is Mr Chase).
is represented by Thompson Geer Solicitors in the proceedings.
25 July 2025, an amended application with Points of Claim was filed and
Marno seeks the following orders:
(1) The Council pay compensation due to breach of Cl. 23 of the site agreement
“in the range of $140,000-$180,000” (s
27(1)(e)(iii) and 27(1)(b) of
the HP Act).
(2) The termination notice dated 13 March 2025 be set aside or the Council be
“restrained” from acting upon it (s 27(1)(a)(i)
of the HP Act) or in
the alternative:
(a) A declaration that the termination notice has no effect, and which
“restrains” the Council taking action which is
the cause of the
disagreement (s 27(1)(a)(ii) of the HP Act).
(3) The Council be “required” to offer the applicant a
“continuing occupation agreement for a further reasonable
period of 12 months in accordance with Clause 6 of the Agreement dated 21
November 2016” (s 27(1)(a)(ii) HP Act).
(4) The Council be “restrained” from issuing any further notices to
terminate “without reason” in the period
of the next fixed term (s
27(1)(a)(i) HP Act).
Marno asserts that her husband and another family member entered into a site
agreement with the Council on 21 November 2016. Ms
Marno and her husband had
occupied the site for many years. Ms Marno’s husband (and the other family
member who entered into
the original agreement) have passed away. Ms Marno
believes that she has inherited the rights of her husband under the agreement.
Between January 2018 and March 2023 her husband invested significant monies in
respect of improvements to the van and site.
8 July 2024, Ms Marno asserts she entered into an “Annual Site Agreement
Renewal” for the period 1 July 2024 to 30
October 2024, Ms Marno asserts that a purchaser for the van had been identified,
and in October 2024 she sought permission of the
Council to sell the van. At
this time, she had a market appraisal of the value of the van and site. The
appraisal valued the van
at approximately $160,000 to $180,000.
to Ms Marno, in December 2024 the Council indicated that they would approve the
sale, and she continued to take measures
to facilitate the sale. However, the
sale was not approved prior to the Council issuing the notice to terminate. The
Council has
subsequently asserted that it would not pay any compensation to Ms
Marno and has only offered to remove the van on the basis that
Ms Marno vacates
Mr Chase, Ms Marno asserts that by reason of the operation of ss 18 and Sch. 1
Cl. 6 of the HP Act, the original fixed term agreement
continues as a
“repeated 12 months agreement” if it is not terminated according to
its terms and accordingly the Council
had no power to issue the notice to
terminate in March 2025 as the notice was issued during the fixed
Summons to Produce Documents on the Council Issued by Mr
Chase and Ms Marno
Ms Marno and Mr Chase have issued a Summons to Produce Documents on the Council.
Mr Chase’s Summons is a second Summons
that has been accepted and filed by
the Tribunal Registry, and has been served on the Council.
Council has informally produced documents in respect of Ms Marno’s
7 August 2025, a Solicitor from Thomson Geer emailed the Tribunal stating that
the legal representatives of Ms Marno seeking leave
of the Tribunal to
“share” the documents produced with the other applicants, including
information about what documents
had not been produced.
Regrettably,
that email was not copied to the Solicitor for the Council, and at the
directions hearing on 22 August 2025, the Solicitor
for the Council (Ms Caban)
stated that she was unaware of the correspondence and application for an
interlocutory order until it
was orally raised at the directions hearing.
will be discussed later in this decision, I have made procedural orders to deal
with the application by Ms Marno’s Solicitors,
which involves the
principles that arise from
Harman v Secretary of State for Home
[1983] 1 AC 280
Hearne v Street
235 CLR 125
[2008] HCA 36).
the future, it is important that legally represented parties comply with their
obligations regarding communications with the Tribunal
and their opponents under
Reg. 22.5 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’
Conduct Rules 2015
(NSW). By reason of ss 36 and 38 of the NCAT Act, it is
also usually inappropriate for non-legally represented parties to send
correspondence
to the Tribunal Registry without providing a copy of that
correspondence to the representative of the other party. Exceptions may
urgent ex parte applications and applications under s 64 of the NCAT Act, but
those issues do not currently arise in these proceedings.
respect of Mr Chase’s Summons, on 31 July 2025 the Solicitors for the
respondent filed a miscellaneous orders application
with written submission
seeking to have the Summons set aside, on the basis it lacked a legitimate
forensic purpose. At the directions
hearing on 22 August 2025 (the date of the
return of the Summons) Mr Chase asserted he had not been served with a copy of
the miscellaneous
orders application and the submissions. It is unnecessary to
repeat what I have said in the previous paragraph. Later in this decision,
have made procedural directions to deal with the application to set aside the
Directions Hearing on 22 August 2025
with previous directions hearings, the matters were grouped according to the
particular caravan park, with lists at 9.15 am (Minnie
Waters matters); 11.15 am
(Brooms Head matters); 1.15 pm (Wooli matters) and 2.15 pm (Illuka
Chase and Ms Caban (Solicitor for the Council) appeared in all of the lists.
Solicitors from Legal Aid NSW (Ms Hyde and Mr Blaxland)
appeared in some lists.
Ms Mulherin and her colleague Ms Sunarko appeared for Ms Marno in the 2.15 pm
party in the 9.15 am list was self-represented (Mr Bradfield). Mr
Bradfied’s matter was not a matter where the Council agreed
to mediation.
Mediation of the Matters to Which the HP Act Applies
discussed previously, the parties in the matters where the van is the permanent
residence of the applicant (i.e. it is arguable
the RLLC Act applies rather than
the HP Act) have agreed to a private mediation to attempt to resolve the
dispute. That mediation
will be conducted by a private mediator, selected by the
parties from the list of mediators held by the Law Society of NSW.
that does not deal with the vast majority of the proceedings.
those matters, the applicants are asserting that the HP Act applies and
accordingly appear to accept that their agreements are
casual occupancy
agreements.
are approximately 90 matters to which it is asserted the HP Act applies.
respect of mediation, the positions of the parties are summarised as
Council opposes the HP Act matters being listed for a mediation. The basis for
the opposition is that there is no prospect of
resolution in circumstances where
the applicants seek a further occupancy agreement, and the Council is not
prepared to offer one.
However, if a mediation is ordered by the Tribunal, the
Council asserts it should be a privately organized mediation before a mediator
selected from the Law Society of NSW panel of mediators. The parties should
contribute equally to the costs of the mediation. The
Council opposes the
General Manager personally attending the mediation because (a) there is no power
to order a particular person
to attend a mediation; and (b) the
applicants’ animosity towards the general manager will not produce a
successful mediation
in any event.
Chase and the Solicitors for Ms Marno submit that there should be a mediation in
all the HP Act matters. That mediation should
be before a Member of the
Tribunal, rather than a private mediator. Mr Chase submits that many of the
applicants are of limited financial
means and cannot afford to contribute
towards the cost of a private mediator.
Chase submits that it is essential the General Manager be ordered by the
Tribunal to attend the mediation personally. The basis
of this submission was
elaborated upon at the directions hearing on 22 August 2025. According to Mr
Chase, the applicants have not
“had the opportunity to be heard”
The Tribunal’s Power to Order
37 of the NCAT Act states as follows:
37 Tribunal to promote use of resolution processes
(1) The Tribunal may, where it considers it appropriate, use (or require
parties to proceedings to use) any one or more resolution
See section 59 for the power of the Tribunal to give effect to a settlement
reached by the parties following the use of a resolution
(2) A resolution process is any process (including, for example,
alternative dispute resolution) in which parties to proceedings
are assisted to
resolve or narrow the issues between them in the proceedings.
respect of the power of the Tribunal to make other orders to facilitate the
performance of a mediation, Section 58 of the NCAT
Act states as
58 Power to impose conditions
A power of the Tribunal to make an order or other decision includes a power to
make the order or other decision subject to such conditions
exemptions) as the Tribunal specifies when making the order or other decision.
Tribunal’s powers under s 37 of the NCAT Act are broad, and must be
considered in conjunction with:
(1) The ‘guiding principle’ of the Tribunal under s 36(1) of the
NCAT Act that the practice and procedure of the Tribunal
be focussed upon the
just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings; and
(2) The obligation of parties and legal practitioners under s 36(3) to
co-operate with the Tribunal to give effect to the guiding
power under s 37 of the NCAT Act in the Consumer and Commercial Division
includes parties being directed to conciliate at the
Tribunal; and for Tribunal
Members to conciliate from the Bench in appropriate circumstances (NCAT Consumer
and Commercial Division
Guideline August 2017-’Conciliation and hearing by
the same Member’).
mediation is a more formal and structured informal dispute resolution process
than conciliation. The Tribunal’s power
to conduct a mediation facilitated
by a Member of the Tribunal (or Registrar, or other person that the Tribunal
regards as appropriate)
is contained in Sch. 1 of the
Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2022
(NSW) (NCAT Regulation).
the provisions in Sch. 1 of the NCAT Regulation provide that:
(1) Parties who have been referred to mediation have a duty to participate in
good faith (Sch. 1 Cl. 7 NCAT Regulation).
(2) The cost of mediation is to be borne by the parties in proportions agreed
between themselves or, in the absence of agreement,
as ordered by the Tribunal
unless the Tribunal determines to bear the cost itself (Sch. 1 Cl. 8 NCAT
Regulation).
(3) The Tribunal may make orders to give effect to any agreement reached at
mediation (Sch. 1 Cl. 9 NCAT Regulation).
(4) Privilege applies in respect of the mediation, and documents created for the
purpose of the mediation (Sch. 1 Cl. 10 NCAT Regulation).
(5) The circumstances in which the mediation can disclose information is set out
in Sch. 1 Cl. 11 of the NCAT Regulation.
(6) The mediator may, by order, give direction regarding the preparation and
conduct of the mediation (Sch. 1 Cl. 11 of the NCAT
Regulation).
Analysis of the Costs and Benefits of a Mediation
benefits of alternative dispute resolution are well established. Parties often
become involved in litigation without understanding,
or being prepared to
acknowledge and confront, the risks and the costs. Expectations may be inflated
and unrealistic.
uncertainty of litigation was encapsulated by Beazley JA in
Old v McInnis and
[2011] NSWCA 410
“Litigation is not a process for the faint hearted. It is a costly and
time consuming process and usually productive of stress,
all of which, of their
nature, have adverse effects upon those involved in the process. In some, if not
most, cases that come before
the courts, it is a necessary evil.”
respect of parties who believe that mediation will serve no purpose because the
parties are ‘too far apart’, Austin
J stated in
ASIC v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 489
“In my opinion, this combination of consumption of time, escalating costs
and strain on the Court’s resources provides
an ample basis for the Court
to exercise its power of mandatory mediation. The making of a mediation order
may provide the opportunity
for the parties to take stock of their positions
away from the battleground of the courtroom. An independent mediator should be
to encourage the parties to look at the issues from a different perspective
and in a different light, and mediation may provide the
occasion for the parties
to obtain advice from a broader range of sources than the specifically legal
sources used in litigation.”
can be ordered at an early stage of proceedings. In
JL v Anglican Church
Property Trust Diocese of Sydney
[2017] NSWSC 1611
, Schmidt J stated at
“There is no issue between the parties that the proceedings concern
alleged sexual abuse of a young child many years ago. Prior
to commencement of
the proceedings there had been not only discussion between the parties about
mediation, but a mediator was appointed.
The mediation then arranged was set
aside, while investigations by the defendant continued.
The result was that eventually the proceedings were commenced in September 2016.
There has as yet been no defence filed, but the
defendant’s solicitor
indicates that investigations which have continued, have led to a position where
it is considered that
the proceedings will have to be defended, given that no
corroborative evidence to support the plaintiff’s allegations has been
discovered. There is a concern as to the vulnerability of the plaintiff about
which there is no issue and a concern as to the consequences
for her, of a
mediation which is unlikely to resolve what is in issue.
There is no question that under s 26 the Court has the power to order the
parties to pursue the mediation which is proposed. Such
orders have been made in
other cases where one party or the other has objected to mediation on the basis
that it is unlikely to result
in a resolution of what lies in issue between the
parties. Nevertheless, as I observed to the defendant’s legal
representative,
what arises to be discussed at a mediation, includes all that
lies between the parties, including the difficulties which confront
them in the
respective cases which they advance, not just whether the proceedings can be
finally resolved.
On what is now before the Court, there are problems in the litigation
confronting both parties, which could usefully be discussed
at a mediation. At
the least it will assist the parties by enabling them to identify, early in the
litigation, what really lies between
them, consistently with the obligation
imposed by s 56 of the
Civil Procedure Act
on both parties and
their legal representatives, as well as on the Court, to facilitate the
overriding purposes there specified,
that is the just, quick and cheap
resolution of the real issues in the proceedings.
In those circumstances, I do not consider that the proposed mediation would be a
futility, given the early stage of the litigation
it is proposed that the
mediation be conducted. That, in my view, raises the prospect of considerable
benefit potentially to both
there are other factors to take into account.
respect of the Tribunal organising a mediation, providing a Tribunal Member as
mediator, and bearing the cost of organising the
mediation, there are
significant public resource issues to consider.
the 2023-2024 financial year, the Consumer and Commercial Division of the
Tribunal received 52,028 applications (NCAT 2023-2024
Annual Report). The
Consumer and Commercial Division has an extensive jurisdiction, that includes
residential tenancy disputes; consumer
disputes; strata disputes; home building
disputes; retirement village disputes; and retail lease disputes.
Tribunal, like all public entities, has finite resources.
the Tribunal was to order a mediation before a Tribunal Member (or multiple
Tribunal Members) and determines to bear the costs
of the mediation (other than
the legal costs that the parties incur themselves in preparing for and
participating in the mediation)
it is diverting resources away from other
proceedings.
mediate approximately 90 sets of proceedings is a massive undertaking. Although
there may be similar issues in a number of the
proceedings, every matter has
different factual circumstances and parties would need to be given an adequate
opportunity to participate
in the mediation of their particular matter,
including giving instructions to the person representing them.
mediation venue needs to be arranged. If the mediation is conducted by
audio-visual link, this is more straightforward. If an in
person mediation is
ordered, the appropriate venue is likely to be a courthouse in reasonably close
proximity to Grafton unless the
mediation can be held at a Tribunal venue such
as the venue in Sydney. The Tribunal has to share access to courthouses with
such as the Local Court and the District Court. An appropriate venue may
not be available within a short period of time; and if the
Tribunal allocates a
long period of time to the mediation to accommodate the large number of parties,
an appropriate venue may not
be able to be located.
parties and their representatives may agree for the mediation to be held in
person at the Tribunal’s venue in Sydney. However,
this would involve the
representatives and parties involved in the mediation travelling to Sydney. This
may be something they are
not prepared to do. Other Tribunal venues, such as
Newcastle, may not have sufficient facilities to conduct a mediation while also
dealing with hearing rooms being used for hearings.
the allocation of a Tribunal Member to mediate removes that Member from being
able to hear other matters during the period
allocated for the Mediation.
Undoubtedly, this litigation is important to the parties. However, other parties
to litigation in the
Tribunal would likely argue their litigation is just as
important, if not more important. The Consumer and Commercial Division of
Tribunal deals with a large number of matters that may involve urgent
considerations, such as the domestic violence provisions
Residential
Tenancies Act 2010
(NSW) (RT Act); lockouts under the RT Act; repairs to
common property in strata disputes; and relief against forfeiture in retail
lease disputes. Diverting Tribunal resources to mediate the HP Act disputes is a
decision that has to take into consideration the
other resource commitments of
the Consumer and Commercial Division.
consideration is that, if the HP Act proceedings are not resolved, or the issues
narrowed, the Tribunal will be faced with
hearing and determining approximately
90 matters. Those matters will have to be heard and determined separately. As
discussed previously,
there is no mechanism for considering all the proceedings
as a ‘class action’ and even if there were, that may not be
appropriate in any event. The time, cost and resources of the Tribunal involved
in hearing and determining all of the HP Act matters
significant.
If a Mediation Were Ordered, How Would It Be
Structured?
discussed previously, the Council submits that if a mediation is ordered, it
should be up to the parties to organise a private
mediator and contribute
equally to the cost of mediation. Their position will be set out in detail later
in this decision.
such an order would be straightforward. The problem is, however, a private
mediation has limited prospects of coming to fruition.
Although I do not have
any evidence of the financial circumstances of the HP Act applicants, I have no
reason to disbelieve the submission
of Mr Chase that many of them have limited
financial means. The difficulty in getting those persons to contribute in shares
that the applicants in the HP Act proceedings contribute half the cost of a
private mediation is self-evident. It is highly unlikely
any private mediator
would agree to be engaged without confidence and security their mediation fee
would be paid, as well as associated
costs such as booking a venue.
private mediator would also have to engage with the duration of a mediation
involving approximately 90 applicants, unless the
parties were to agree to a
small group of matters being mediated first.
detailed positions of the parties regarding mediation are as
a mediation is ordered, it should be in Mr Chase’s matter as the
‘representative’ proceedings, with an estimated
duration of 2 hours.
The mediation should be conducted by a private mediator from the panel of
mediators of the Law Society NSW.
An audio-visual mediation is preferrable due
to “costs and location”. Both parties should share the costs of the
equally. If an in person mediation is conducted, it should be at the
head office of the Council in Grafton, with 2 hours allocated.
Council opposes the General Manger being ordered to attend the mediation. The
Council asserts that there is no power to direct
the General Manager to appear
in person, and even if there was, it would not be appropriate. It is sufficient
that the legal representatives
of the Council are able to obtain instructions
from their client on the day of the mediation.
Mr Chase (and the
Parties He Represents)
7 August 2025, Mr Chase sent to the Tribunal a 5.5 page submission, which he
elaborated upon at the directions hearing on 22 August
Chase asserts that he spoke to “two private mediation firms” , who
emphasized that mediating a large number of disputes
would involve
“multiple sessions, tailored approaches for smaller groups and significant
preparatory work”. Neither private
mediator was prepared to indicate the
likely cost, but according to Mr Chase it would be “substantial and
potentially prohibitively
expensive”.
Chase submits that the mediation should be before a Tribunal Member. He asserts
a “hybrid approach” where applicants
who can attend in person do so,
and applicants who cannot attend in person can appear by audio-visual link.
respect of there being a “representative” matter, Mr Chase submits
that this is not appropriate, because it would cause
applicants to believe that
they were “not being heard” and would be “procedurally
Chase submits that the General Manager of the Council should attend in person
because “it is central to the credibility,
fairness and
effectiveness” of the mediation process. The General Manager has not given
an explanation for the decision to
issue the notices to terminate, and, Mr Chase
submits, the participation of the General Manager is “not only
appropriate, but
essential”.
Chase proposes the following structure before a Tribunal Member as
(1) 3 hours at Maclean between the Committee of the Clarence Valley Semi
Permanent Van Group Inc and the Council (with the General
attendance).
(2) 3 hours at Maclean for the Iluka park matters, with Mr Chase also in
attendance with the applicants and the General Manager of
the Council in
attendance.
(3) 3 hours at Maclean for the Brooms Head park matters, with Mr Chase in
attendance with the applicants and the General Manager
of the Council in
attendance.
(4) 3 hours at Grafton for the Minnie Waters park matters, with Mr Chase in
attendance with the applicants and the General Manager
of the Council in
attendance.
(5) 3 hours at Grafton for the Wooli park matters, with Mr Chase in attendance
with the applicants and the General Manager of the
Council in attendance.
(6) 3 hours by audio-visual link for the applicants unable to attend in person.
Mr Chase attending with the applicants and the General
Manager of the Council in
attendance.
Further Matters for the HP Act Parties to Consider in the Dispute
present, there does not appear to be any compromise between the parties or
acknowledgement that compromise may be in the best interests
it is clear from the submissions (both written, and at the directions hearings)
that many, if not all, of the applicants
regard the decision to issue the
notices to terminate to be a personal decision of the General Manager, rather
than the decision
of the operator of various parks.
is counterproductive if litigation becomes consumed in personalities, or
personal grievances. It is also counterproductive if parties
misapprehension as to what the legal process involves. As discussed previously,
notwithstanding the subjective views of the
parties about the dispute generally,
the Tribunal has a duty to conduct legal proceedings to achieve the just, quick
and efficient
resolution of the
real legal issues
(emphasis added) in
dispute under the legislation to which the Tribunal has jurisdiction.
are the real legal issues must be assessed objectively, not from the subjective
perception of the parties and their representatives.
As discussed previously,
parties have a duty to conduct litigation in the Tribunal in a manner that
assists the Tribunal to achieve
the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real
legal issues in the dispute. That involves the parties focussing upon and
themselves to the real legal issues in the Tribunal proceedings, not
necessarily what they perceive as the issues or what they may
beneficial to a particular outcome they seek.
this regard, it is important the parties to consider the risks and the potential
complexities. I raise such issues not because
I have formed any concluded view
parties and to encourage
the parties to give strong consideration to resolving
the dispute by being prepared to compromise.
the perspective of the applicants, if the proceedings are heard and determined
by the Tribunal (and each matter will have to
be heard separately) there is a
risk they will lose. Under s 60(1) of the NCAT Act, parties are to bear their
own costs, unless “special
circumstances” are established under s
60(2) of the NCAT Act, taking into account the matters under s 60(3).
an exception to that is Reg. 38 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NSW) (NCAT Rules). If the amount “claimed or in
dispute” in the proceedings exceeds $30,000, Reg. 38 applies and allows
costs order without “special circumstances” having to be
established. In Ms Marno’s matter, the amount claimed
or in dispute
clearly exceeds $30,000. In the matters in which Mr Chase purports to file
Amended Points of Claim applying to all
of the HP Act matters where he
represents the applicants, no amount is specified. However, it appears from the
substance of what
is submitted by Mr Chase (and what he set out in his original
application), those applicants are seeking more than $30,000 in damages
compensation.
some of the orders sought by the applicants are not straightforward. I have
previously referred to the principles pertaining
to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. Section 26 of the HP Act makes clear that the order making power of
the Tribunal is limited
to breaches of the occupancy agreement, or disagreements
Subject to any legal argument to the contrary or the parties identifying any
legal authorities that assert otherwise, Section 26
of the HP Act focusses upon
breach of contract, or matters that could form the basis of breach of contract.
order making powers in s 27 of the HP Act do not refer to the Tribunal having
the power to grant the remedy of a declaration.
Parties seeking a declaration
will need to demonstrate how the Tribunal has the power under s 27 of the HP Act
to make such an order,
as well as the relevant breaches (or disputes that could
form the basis of a breach) of the occupation agreement that are sufficient
cause the Tribunal to make such an order.
are also other problematic aspects to the Amended Points of Claim filed by Mr
Chase. I have referred to two such issues previously.
Firstly, individual
applicants need to confirm in writing to the Tribunal and the Council that they
agree to, and rely upon, the
Amended Points of Claim. Secondly, the claim for
damages or compensation is unquantified. Different applicants will have
factual basis for claiming damages. The amount sought, and the basis
the amount sought, will need to be set out. Due to the flexibility
the Tribunal
has under s 38 of the NCAT Act in respect of pleadings (see, for example,
Sunaust Properties Pty Ltd t/as Central Sydney Realty v The Owners-Strata
Plan No 64807
[2023] NSWCA 188
), I do not propose at this
stage to make further orders granting leave to file and serve further Amended
Points of Claim.
without determining whether there should be further Amended Points of Claim, at
the very least each applicant will need to
file and serve a schedule that
clearly sets out the damages and compensation claimed that quantifies the
amount, and identifies each
ground of compensation or damages (e.g. general
damages; damages for economic loss; damages for loss of opportunity).
are also legal issues as to whether a site agreement under the HP Act is the
to make an order for general
damages due to distress, upset, or inconvenience caused by any breach by the
Council (see the discussion
of the applicable principles in
Archibald v
(2017) 53 VR 645
[2017] VSCA 259
Cappello v Hammond
& Simmons NSW Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 57
Moore v Scenic
Tours Pty Ltd
(2020) 268 CLR 326
[2020] HCA 17
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
(2023) 278 CLR 208
[2023] HCA 31).
are other problematic aspects of the Amended Points of Claim filed by Mr Chase.
Some of the orders are very broad (e.g. an injunctive
order that the operator
cannot take possession of sites without order of a Court or the Tribunal).
Another order sought (that the
General Manager attend mediation) is not an order
that can be made on a final basis under s 27 of the HP Act.
the perspective of the Council, there are also risks involved in the proceedings
being litigated to finality. As discussed previously,
there are potentially
between 90-100 sets of proceedings that will need to be heard and determined by
the Tribunal. Unsuccessful
parties have potential appeal rights under s 80 to
the Appeal Panel of the Tribunal, and from the Appeal Panel, with leave to the
Supreme Court. The potential legal costs to the Council are very significant,
and any costs orders in favour of the Council may (a)
be on party/party basis
rather than on an indemnity basis; and (b) may not be easily recovered.
the applicants in the HP Act proceedings succeed on either or the arguments that
(a) the notices are invalid because they do not
comply with the applicable
provisions under the HP Act; or (b) they remain as ongoing fixed term
agreements, then it does not appear
the Council will be able to enforce the
the claims for compensation and damages may succeed. If they do (which is a
matter of speculation) the Council may be liable
for a significant amount of
money, considering the number of applications. Ms Marno’s application for
damages for the purported
loss of ability to sell her van involves a significant
amount of money.
Chase and Ms Marno also refer to the Council (as operator for the parks)
knowingly allowing site occupants to modify vans so that
the vans are no longer
movable. That allegation may raises issues of waiver and estoppel
Commonwealth v Verwayen
(1990) 170 CLR 394; [1990] HCA 39). I express no
view as to whether the Tribunal would have the power to consider such legal
under the HP Act nor the potential outcome.
if any cause of action or defence is outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal,
the possibility exists that a party, or the
Tribunal of its own motion, may
transfer proceedings to a court of competent jurisdiction under Sch. 4 Cl. 6 of
the NCAT Act (
Promina Design & Construction Pty Ltd v The Owners-Strata
Plan No 97449
[2023] NSWCATAP 252).
the above discussion, the complexities of the litigation and the risks to all
parties should be abundantly clear. I am not purporting
to give parties legal
advice, nor to express any views on the legal merits of the disputes. The above
discussion is only to amplify
to the parties the uncertainty of the outcome of
the litigation in this dispute, and the benefit to the parties putting emotion
one side and being prepared to compromise.
Should Mediation of
the HP Act Matters Be Ordered, and What Form Should It Take?
are aspects of Mr Chase’s submissions regarding mediation that I do not
accept. Ms Marno’s Solicitors did not express
any written position on the
issue of mediation, but did not disagree with the position expressed by Mr
am unpersuaded that the proposed ‘hybrid’ model where a mediation
would occur over 4 days with some persons appearing
in person and others by AVL
would have any realistic prospect of success. Even with position papers being
circulated before the mediation,
organising parties into break out rooms and
scheduling the dispute so that each individual matter could be discussed and
instruction
obtained is not feasible in the period of time proposed.
I do not accept that a large number of mediations where parties appear by
audio-visual link have good prospects of success.
Both the Council and Mr Chase
have referred to audio-visual link mediations. In person mediations have a much
better prospect of
success, as they avoid technology problems such as the link
dropping out, miscommunication, and confusion.
is another problem with an audio-visual link mediation that also applies to an
in person mediation. The submissions of Mr Chase
make no reference to the
applicants being prepared to sign a mediation agreement. Examples of mediation
agreements are found on the
Law Society of NSW website; and the Bar Association
of NSW website. Mediation agreements emphasise that the documents and
information
pertaining to the mediation are confidential, and cannot be
disclosed other than in limited circumstances (see Cl. 19-21 of the Law
of NSW Short Form Mediation Agreement).
would not be prepared to order a mediation unless all parties agree to, and
sign, a mediation agreement that protects the confidentiality
of the materials
prepared for the mediation and the discussion which occur. Confidentiality is an
important part of all mediations,
as without it there is no real prospect that
parties will be able to engage in full and frank discussions so as to negotiate
parties (and representatives) appeared by audio-visual link there is a prospect
that even if the parties signed a mediation agreement,
other persons not bound
by such a confidentiality agreement may have access to the mediation.
do not accept that an order should be made that the General Manager of the
Council attend a mediation. Even if the Tribunal has
the power to make such an
order as a condition of the order to mediate (ss 37 and 58 of the NCAT Act), I
am not satisfied it is appropriate.
I accept that many of the applicants feel
the decision is that of the General Manager and they want to be
express their displeasure. However, in the context of a
mediation, that will be unproductive. Rather than putting emotion to one
and focussing upon the objective benefits of the parties compromising to resolve
the dispute, emotions will be amplified. A
mediation used as a vehicle for
applicants to express anger or grief focused upon the Geneal Manager with the
General Manager physically
present at the mediation is inappropriate, and will
be unproductive.
weighted up the competing considerations, I am prepared to order that there be a
mediation before a Tribunal Member at a date
to be determined (with the Tribunal
bearing the cost of organizing the mediation, other than the legal costs
incurred before the
parties), but only on the following conditions:
(1) The applicants select 4 HP Act matters to be mediated. The can do this by
whatever appropriate mechanism, such as organising
a meeting of the Clarence
Valley Semi Permanent Van Group Inc. Those matters are to be selected within 14
days of the date of this
decision. The Council is to be notified in writing of
the matters selected.
(2) The mediations of those 4 matters are to be conducted before a Tribunal
Member with the parties of those matters and their representatives
to attend in
(3) The parties are to confer with each other and determine whether they prefer
the mediations be listed at a courthouse venue near
Grafton, or at a Tribunal
venue that they are prepared to travel to (and if so, which venue).
(4) The General Manager of the Council is not required to attend in person, but
the legal representatives of the Council are to attend
in person. However, the
legal representative of the Council must be able to obtain instructions on the
day of the mediation from
a person who has suitable authority to bind the
Council in respect of offers and any settlement agreement.
(5) The 4 matters are to be listed together for mediation for a duration of 1
(6) 21 days prior to the mediation, all parties and representatives who will be
attending the mediation are to sign a Mediation Agreement
in the form set out in
the Law Society of NSW Mediation Agreement, with any agreed modifications to
that document. A signed copy
of the mediation agreement must be filed with the
Tribunal by 14 days prior to the date of the mediation, and the mediator will
a copy signed by the mediator and all parties and practitioners.
(7) No person can attend the mediation unless they have signed, and agree to be
bound by, the Mediation Agreement.
(8) If there is no agreed and duly signed Mediation Agreement prior to the
commencement of the mediation, the mediation will not
(9) By 7 days prior to the mediation, the parties and their representatives are
to file with the Tribunal and serve on the other
party a position paper (not
exceeding 4 pages).
(10) If the parties resolve the dispute at the mediation, the parties may file
signed proposed consent orders, or in the alternative,
the applicants may
withdraw the proceedings under s 55(1)(a) of the NCAT Act.
(11) The Tribunal Member appointed as mediator may issue further directions
prior to the mediation to deal with any other matters
necessary to ensure the
mediations can proceed in an efficient manner.
(12) The proceedings are to be re-listed for a directions hearing no earlier
than 7 days after the date of the mediation. At that
directions hearing, the
Tribunal will consider whether there is any utility in ordering further matters
to be mediated, and if so,
how such mediations are to occur. If there is no
utility in ordering further mediations, then procedural directions will likely
made setting matters down for hearing in a structured way that the Tribunal
regards as appropriate.
my view, it would only be feasible to conduct mediations in 4 matters on the day
of mediation. If those mediations were successful,
the Tribunal would then
consider at a later procedural directions hearing whether more matters should be
listed for mediation. The
prospects of resolving the disputes should become
clearer after the first 4 matters are mediated.
What Happens if
the Parties Do Not Agree To The Proposed Mediation Structure?
proceedings are to be re-listed before the Tribunal for further procedural
directions in any event.
do not propose to make an order under s 37 of the NCAT Act in respect of the HP
Act matters until that directions hearing. Other
than any minor changes, the
conditions I have set out previously will determine whether or not I make an
order under s 37. If the
parties strongly oppose the conditions (in particular,
the applicants are not prepared to mediate on the conditions previously set
I may determine that there is no utility in ordering mediations before a
Tribunal Member in the HP Act matters.
the alternative, if the parties agree to mediations before a private mediator in
the HP Act matters, and can work out an agreed
schedule, I may make an order
under s 37 of the NCAT in similar terms to the orders made in the 10 proceedings
where the parties
and representatives have agreed to a mediation before a
private mediator.
the HP Act matters are not going to proceed to mediation, then matters need to
be set down for hearing unless there is some compelling
reason not to do so. A
‘holding pattern’ of further directions hearings that do not advance
the proceedings is not consistent
with ss 36(1) and (3) of the NCAT Act.
in my view it is not appropriate to make procedural directions setting
approximately 90 matters down for hearing. At this
stage, and subject to any
further submissions from the parties, my view is that there is utility in one or
two matters being set
down for hearing so that the decisions in those matters
may give some guidance to the parties in the other matters. That issue was
raised in previous procedural directions.
the directions hearing on 22 August 2025, I enquired with Mr Chase, Ms Mulherin
and Ms Caban whether there were one (or possibly
two) matters that could be set
down for hearing first. Ms Mulherin submitted that Ms Marno’s matter was
not necessarily representative
of the issues in the other HP Act matters,
because of the allegations regarding sale of the van and the amount of damages
Chase submitted that he could not identify any particular
‘representative’ matter that should be determined first,
every matter was equally important.
acknowledge that matters are important to each individual party. However, I have
to work out a way to hear and determine in an orderly
and structured way the
large number of HP Act proceedings. That does not mean the Tribunal is
‘favouring’ a particular
my view, the matters to be set down for hearing first are Mr Chase’s
application and Ms Marno’s application. They would
not be set down for
hearing together before the same Member. Rather, they would be set down for
hearing individually at the next
directions hearing (unless there was some
compelling reason not to) with appropriate procedural directions for the filing
and serving
of documentary evidence; and any other appropriate directions to
facilitate an efficient and procedurally fair hearing.
raised with Mr Chase how long he would seek to file and serve documentary
evidence, including witness statements setting out relevant
factual events and
expert reports. He indicated 8 weeks because there were many persons he wanted
to obtain witness statements from.
is unnecessary at this stage to make directions regarding the filing and serving
of documentary evidence in Mr Chase’s matter,
as that will be a matter for
consideration at the next directions hearing. However, it is pertinent to point
out that the proceedings
that his proceedings involve his own dealings with the
Council relevant to the claims made by him under the HP Act, and a matter
listed for hearing first does not mean that all of the applicants are giving
evidence in Mr Chase’s proceedings. The
Tribunal has the power to
structure any of its hearings in a way that achieves compliance with its
obligations under ss 36 and 38
of the NCAT Act.
The Application
By Ms Marno to Disclose Documents and Matters Pertaining to the Summons.
interlocutory dispute is to be determined in the following way:
(1) Ms Marno is to file and serve a miscellaneous orders application with any
documents and submissions in support of the orders
sought by 7 days from the
date of this decision. Such submissions are to include whether the party agrees
to the decision being made
on the papers under s 50(2) of the NCAT Act, and if
not, why not.
(2) The Council is to file and serve any documents and submissions in response
to the miscellaneous orders application by 14 days
from the date of these
directions. Such submissions are to include whether the party agrees to the
decision being made on the papers
under s 50(2) of the NCAT Act, and if not, why
(3) The miscellaneous orders application will either be determined on the
papers, or after oral submissions made at the next directions
The Application By the Council to Set Aside the Summons to Produce
Documents Issued By Mr Chase
interlocutory dispute is to be determined in the following way:
(1) The Council is to serve a copy of the miscellaneous orders application and
its submission and documents on Mr Chase by 7 days
from the date of this
decision. Such submissions are to include whether the party agrees to the
decision being made on the papers
under s 50(2) of the NCAT Act, and if not, why
(2) Mr Chase is to file with the Tribunal and serve on the Council all
submissions and documents in opposition to the application
for miscellaneous
orders by 14 days from the date of this decision. Such submissions are to
include whether the party agrees to the
decision being made on the papers under
s 50(2) of the NCAT Act, and if not, why not.
(3) The miscellaneous orders application will either be determined on the
papers, or after oral submissions made at the next directions
Other Procedural Issues
to the very large number of matters listed at the directions hearing on 22
August 2025, it will take the Registry a period of
time to generate and issue
the orders to all parties. The orders will be generated and sent to the parties,
but it will take an unspecified
period of time.
assist the Registry, and so the parties are quickly informed of the orders I
have made, the parties are directed that:
(a) In respect of the 10 matters that are to be listed for a mediation before a
private mediator, the Solicitor for the Council is
to inform the Solicitors
acting for the applicants from NSW Legal Aid of the orders made by email by 1
business day from the date
of this decision.
(b) In respect of the other matters, Mr Chase is to inform the applicants
(including Mr Bamford, but not Ms Marno) of the orders
made by email by 1
business day from the date of this decision.
(c) Mr Chase and the Solicitor for the Council do not have to email a copy of my
reasons. It is sufficient they inform the other
party of the orders made.
(1) Case Numbers 2025/00140114 (Applicant-House); 2025/00154143
(Applicant-Fuller); 2025/00194150 (Applicant-Johnson); 2025/00139939
(Applicant-Adamson); 2025/00140663 (Applicant-H.Walker); 2025/00144924
(Applicant-Gillespie); 2025/00159752 (Applicant-Matheson);
2025/00212727
(Applicant-Smith); 2025/00138157 (Applicant-Harvey); 2025/00140657
(Applicant-Watchorn); 2025/00234293 (Applicant-Stone);
2025/00140293
(Applicant-Goff); and 2025/00194454 (Applicant-G. Walker) are directed to
participate in a mediation conducted by a
private mediator pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW). Those matters are
to be listed for a further directions hearing not earlier than 8 weeks from the
date of this decision.
(2) In all other proceedings that were listed for a directions hearing on 22
August 2025, the matters are to be listed for another
directions hearing at a
date to be fixed by the Tribunal Registry. At that directions hearing, the
Tribunal will consider matters
including (a) whether some matters are listed for
a mediation in accordance with the reasons in this decision; and (b) if not,
matters are listed for hearing in accordance with the reasons in this
decision. Parties are directed to provide relevant information
to assist the
Tribunal, including the applicants identifying 4 matters to be listed for
mediation in accordance with the reasons
in this decision, and any unavailable
dates for 1 day mediation in the period to 31 December 2025.
(3) In Case Number 2025/00140385 (Applicant-Marno) the application regarding
relief from an undertaking is to be determined as follows:
(a) Ms Marno is to file and serve a miscellaneous orders application with any
documents and submissions in support of the orders
sought by 7 days from the
date of this decision. Such submissions are to include whether the party agrees
to the decision being made
on the papers under s 50(2) of the NCAT Act, and if
not, why not.
(b) The Council is to file and serve any documents and submissions in response
to the miscellaneous orders application by 14 days
from the date of these
directions. Such submissions are to include whether the party agrees to the
decision being made on the papers
under s 50(2) of the NCAT Act, and if not, why
(c) The miscellaneous orders application will either be determined on the
papers, or after oral submissions made at the next directions
(4) In Case Number 2025/00140234 (Applicant-Chase) the application for
miscellaneous orders filed by the respondent in regard to a
Summons is to be
dealt with as follows:
(a) The Council is to serve a copy of the miscellaneous orders application and
its submission and documents on Mr Chase by 7 days
from the date of this
decision. Such submissions are to include whether the party agrees to the
decision being made on the papers
under s 50(2) of the NCAT Act, and if not, why
(b) Mr Chase is to file with the Tribunal and serve on the Council all
submissions and documents in opposition to the application
for miscellaneous
orders by 14 days from the date of this decision. Such submissions are to
include whether the party agrees to the
decision being made on the papers under
s 50(2) of the NCAT Act, and if not, why not.
(c) The miscellaneous orders application will either be determined on the
papers, or after oral submissions made at the next directions
(5) In respect of the matters that are to be listed for a mediation before a
private mediator, the Solicitor for the Council is to
inform the Solicitors
acting for the applicants from NSW Legal Aid of the orders made by email by 1
business day from the date of
this decision.
(6) In respect of the other matters, Mr Chase is to inform the applicants
(including Mr Bradfield, but not Ms Marno) of the orders
made by email by 1
business day from the date of this decision.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (423 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter