URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Riju Ramrakha [2013] NSWMT 8 (12 April 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Riju Ramrakha
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 8
Hearing Date(s):
4, 5, 6 and 7 February 2013
Decision Date:
12 April 2013
Judge P Lakatos SC
Dr Susan Messner
Dr Saw-Hooi Toh
Respondent reprimanded and subjected to conditions. See paragraph [110]
for orders.
Catchwords:
MEDICAL PRACTITIONER - alcohol abuse by practitioner - inappropriate sexual
comments in presence of patients - violent, aggressive
or threatening behaviour
to staff and patients - conducting consultations whilst under influence of
alcohol - practice of inappropriate
prescription of restricted Schedule 4D and
Schedule 8 drugs - adequacy of records kept by practitioner - protective orders
and practice
conditions.
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (National) - Sections 139B,
139B(1), 139E and 139E.
Medical Practice Regulation 2003
(repealed) -
Schedule 2.
Medical Practice Regulation 2008
(repealed) - Schedule 1.
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Spicer v New South Wales Medical Board and
Others (unreported, 19 February 1981),
HCCC v Karalasingham [2007] NSWC 267
A Solicitor v Council of the NSW Law Society [
2004] HCA 1
[2012] NSWCA 90
King v HCCC
[2011] NSWCA 253
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr Riju Ramrakha
(Respondent)
Representation
L Fernandez for the Applicant
M Lynch for the Respondent
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Holman Webb Lawyers
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Restriction on publication of any material that could identify the
complainants
Health Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), by Notice of Complaint alleges
that Dr Riju Ramrakha (the respondent) is guilty
of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct under sections 139B and 139E respectively,
of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (the National Law).
was granted for the HCCC to proceed on an Amended Complaint. The HCCC firstly
alleges that the respondent:
i. engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill judgment
possessed, or care exercised by him in the practice of
medicine is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of equivalent level of
training or experience;
ii. contravened a provision of the
Medical Practice Regulation 2008
repealed); and/or
iii. engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of medicine.
second complaint alleges that the respondent engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct either in one instance or more than
one instance, and that
conduct is sufficiently serious to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration.
conduct is particularised in paragraphs 1 - 36 of the particulars, as
i. the respondent prescibed excessive quantities of addictive drugs (Valium
or diazepam, oxazepam, Endone, OxyContin and oxycodone,
Panadeine Forte, tramal
or tramadol, Panamax, MS Contin, and Xanax or alprazolam) in the treatment of
nine patients (Patients A to
I) between November 2005 to November 2008
(paragraphs 1 to 31 of the complaint). Although the particularised conduct
varies in minor
respects as to each of the patients, it is generally alleged
that the respondent's conduct was deficient in that:
he failed to
exercise responsible medical judgment as to whether it was appropriate to issue
such prescriptions;
he prescribed
medication for a duration in excess of recognized therapeutic standards as to
what is medically appropriate;
he failed to
have appropriate consultations with the patients;
he prescribed
for a purpose not in accordance with recognized therapeutic standards as to what
is medically appropriate;
he did so when
he ought to have known that the drugs prescribed were being or were likely to be
he prescribed
these drugs when this was contraindicated as it was known or should been known
to the respondent that the patient was
on a methadone program (Patients A and
the respondent
prescribed specified drugs to Patients B and C for a period exceeding two months
without obtaining the requisite authority,
contrary to
and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
the respondent
failed to adequately manage Patient D's anxiety condition and
ii. the respondent failed to keep proper records in respect of 10 specified
patients in accordance with the requirements of Schedule
Practice Regulation 2003
(now repealed) and of Schedule 1 of the
Practice Regulation 2008
(now repealed) (paragraph 32);
iii. between July 2005 and 18 December 2008, the respondent consumed alcohol
or illicit substances in a manner which affected his
mental health and behaviour
(paragraph 34 a.); used illicit substances on his professional premises during
consulting hours while
patients were present on the premises (paragraph 34 b.);
made inappropriate comments of a sexual nature in the presence of patients
(paragraph 34 c.) and behaved in a violent, aggressive or threatening manner to
staff and/or patients (paragraph 34 d.);
iv. the respondent failed to observe professional boundaries in that he
accompanied patients from his surgery to a local public bar
and consumed alcohol
and socialised with them during consulting hours (paragraph 35);
v. between July 2005 and 18 December 2008, the respondent made inappropriate
comments of a sexual nature to his receptionist on several
occasions (paragraph
36 a.); shouted and used abusive or offensive language in the presence of
patients and two members of staff
(paragraph 36 b.); consulted with patients,
whilst under the influence of alcohol or illicit substances (paragraph 36 c.)
and accessed
adult websites on computers in his practice and responded to
messages received from those websites during consultations with patients
(paragraph 36 d.).
the outset of the hearing, counsel indicated that the respondent admitted
paragraphs 1 to 32 of the amended complaint (there being
no paragraph 33). As
the proceedings progressed, the respondent admitted all the remaining complaints
save for paragraph 34 b. and
d. and paragraph 36 d. In some cases, there were
areas of contest about some of the facts which the HCCC led in support of the
complaints, but the area of dispute was not extensive. Consequently,
the respondent accepted that by reason of his conduct, he was
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct.
respondent is nearly 54 years of age, having been born in Newcastle and raised
in Sydney. After a distinguished high school career,
he attended at the
University of Sydney, completing his medical degree in 1983 and graduating in
1984. The respondent completed an
internship at St Vincent's Hospital in
Darlinghurst, New South Wales and became the Resident Medical Officer at St
Vincent Hospital,
being seconded to other suburban hospitals during the same
period. After a short stint as Resident Medical Officer at Prince of Wales
Hospital, in 1986, the respondent became a partner at the general practice owned
by his father in Balmain. The respondent continues
to run that practice to the
present day.
respondent says that he was a moderate but regular consumer of alcohol up until
the year 2000. He was a victim of an assault in
September 2000, which resulted
in pain and disabilities to his left leg, groin and back. The continuing
symptoms left him depressed.
The respondent brought legal proceedings against
his assailant, which proceedings concluded in early 2007 adversely to him. The
dealt with the consequences of stress by drinking to excess.
Furthermore, the respondent reported that from about 2004 onwards, his
and his uncle (both general practitioners at the subject practice), retired for
various reasons. This had the effect of dramatically
increasing the respondent's
workload at the practice, which then had rooms at Balmain, Pyrmont and
Drummoyne. Additional stressors
for the respondent about this period were the
deaths of two uncles, which affected him significantly.
November 2007, the respondent was driving his motor vehicle and was stopped by
police for random breath test. The ensuing drug
test showed the presence of
cannabis, ecstasy and amphetamines in the respondent's blood. In December 2007,
the respondent consulted
a psychiatrist for counselling, and in an attempt to
reduce his alcohol intake. In early April 2008, the respondent was persuaded
his cousin (and mentor) Dr Sanjay Ramrakha and another relative to admit himself
into a private hospital, due to the severity
of his conditions and their
observations that his personality had changed. On 3 April 2008, the respondent
voluntarily admitted himself
to St John of God Hospital in Burwood, under the
supervision of psychiatrist Dr Selwyn Smith in relation to his depression and
alcoholism.
The respondent was discharged on 24 April 2008.
respondent stated that he has been entirely abstinent of alcohol since his
admission and discharge from St John of God Hospital.
The Tribunal notes that
since approximately 2008 to the present time, the respondent has undergone a
number of drug tests for alcohol
and drugs, which have proved
Pharmaceutical Services Branch (PSB) in relation to the prescribing
(oxycodone) to a patient known to be drug dependent.
August 1998, the respondent was interviewed by officers of the PSB in relation
to prescribing Rohypnol (flunitrazepam) on two occasions
in early 1998 to a
patient who was a relative by marriage to the respondent. The respondent
admitted that in each case, he did not
consult with the patient in relation to
those prescriptions, and he provided the prescriptions upon the request of a
pharmacist,
who was then under investigation by the PSB. The respondent was
subject to action by the NSW Medical Board and was found guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. He was reprimanded and practice conditions
relating to Schedule 8 drugs, were imposed upon his
registration. The respondent
was required to satisfactorily complete the "Issues in General Practice
Prescribing" and "Ethics" courses
and the PSB prescribing course, to ensure that
he had a proper knowledge of prescribing procedures and requirements. In March
the respondent satisfactorily completed those courses and the NSW Medical
Board's Conduct Committee resolved to remove the practice
conditions previously
January 2008, the respondent disclosed to the Medical Board that he had been
charged with the driving under the influence of drugs
offence in November 2007.
Shortly thereafter, the Health Committee of the NSW Medical Board resolved that
an Impaired Registrants
Panel Inquiry be convened. In August 2008, the
respondent consented to the imposition of Practice Condition 1 (that is that he
not to prescribe, supply, administer or dispense Schedule 8 drugs of
addiction without prior written authority) and a number of Health
Conditions.
current proceedings arise out of a complaint received by the PSB in August 2008
from a police officer that persons were provided
with "prescriptions as a result
of payment rather than medical need" and that such prescription drugs were
resold into the broader
community. The Tribunal notes that it is not suggested,
nor is there any evidence, that the respondent was complicit in these alleged
activities. However, as a result of that complaint, investigations were
commenced, relating to the prescribing history of the respondent.
In the event,
nine patients were identified and their prescribing histories examined. In broad
compass, the complaints which the
respondent has admitted establish that between
2005 and 2008, he prescribed significant quantities of Schedule 4 and Schedule 8
to those patients inappropriately.
Paragraphs 1 to 29 - Inappropriate Prescribing
complaints are particularised in paragraphs 1 to 7; 9 to 16; 19 to 27 and 29 and
were admitted by the respondent. The respondent
admits prescribing excessive
quantities and inappropriate drugs to nine patients (being identified as
Patients A to I) over a period
of time sometimes spanning up to three years.
evidence established that in relation to Patient A, between September 2007 and
October 2008, the respondent prescribed a total
of 20 prescriptions for Valium.
The respondent accepted in his evidence that he knew that Patient A had a
severely dysfunctional
background. She had hepatitis C and had previously used
benzodiazepines for anxiety, going back many years. She had also been prescribed
Valium, had been charged with a serious criminal offence and drank alcohol very
heavily. The respondent admitted that there was a
real risk in mixing of
benzodiazepines and alcohol so far as this patient was concerned. The patient
stated that she could not take
Valium due to severe adverse reactions. Against
this background, the respondent conceded that the correct thing to do would have
been not to prescribe Valium at all. He did not do so because he fallaciously
thought that if he did not prescribe Valium, the patient
would go doctor
shopping and he wished to continue to manage her overall
respondent admitted that he had no effective written plan for the management of
Patient A but asserted that he had a mental plan.
Furthermore, he conceded that
prescribing Valium to a patient on the methadone program was something which
fell significantly below
the standard expected of a practitioner of his
experience.
relation to Patient B, between March 2006 and May 2008 the respondent wrote a
total of 60 prescriptions for diazepam, oxazepam,
Endone, OxyContin and
oxycodone and Panadeine Forte.
respondent accepted that Patient B had provided a history of having been on a
methadone program at some stage in the past and
he was mindful of the fact that
prescription of serious drugs to such a patient may be problematic. Whilst the
respondent accepted
that he did not apply for authority to prescribe Schedule 8
medications to Patient B, he had some confusion concerning the rules
regulations about prescribing when an authority was required.
Tribunal has some concern about this evidence, given that by 2003 following
earlier disciplinary proceedings, the respondent had
undergone additional
training courses relevant to prescribing such drugs.
respondent accepted that when he prescribed the multiple drugs to Patient B for
a period of approximately 26 months, he should
have had regard to the fact that
there could be serious side-effects to the patient and that there was a risk of
possible inappropriate
disposal of those drugs by the patient to
addition, the respondent admitted failing to adequately or appropriately manage
Patient B's medical conditions in that he concurrently
prescribed multiple
psycho-active drugs in a manner not in accordance with recognized therapeutic
standards; that he prescribed narcotics
to a patient with a history of
intravenous drug use in circumstances where he knew or should have known that
Patient B was on a methadone
program and that he prescribed Endone, OxyContin or
oxycodone for a period exceeding two months without obtaining the requisite
from the Director-General of the New South Wales Department of
November 2005 and November 2008, the respondent admitted that on 315 occasions,
he prescribed Patient C drugs, being diazepam,
tramadol, oxycodone and Panadeine
C provided the respondent a history of serious injuries due to a road accident
in 1985, and that he was already taking diazepam
and Panadeine forte.
Furthermore, he was drinking heavily and was suicidal. The respondent was aware
that the patient had a number
of dependency issues, and might be a person who
went doctor shopping. In these circumstances, the respondent admitted that he
prescribed very high dosages of Valium, sometimes writing multiple
prescriptions on the one day. The respondent accepted that the
patient was a
very difficult one. He agreed that he had no written management plan in relation
to Patient C.
February 2006 and October 2008, the respondent admitted prescribing Valium and
Panadeine forte to Patient D on 145 occasions.
The respondent was aware that
Patient D had used amphetamines which she had ceased to do in 1998. She had also
used heroin in 1986.
Accordingly, the respondent was aware of the difficulties
involved in her having an addiction. The respondent was also aware of the
addictive qualities of benzodiazepines and accepted that he should not have in
these circumstances, prescribed that drug or compound
codeine to Patient D.
relation to Patient E, between August 2006 and November 2008 the respondent
wrote a total of 52 prescriptions for Valium. The respondent
was aware that this
patient was severely unwell for much of the period that she was under his care.
She complained of sleep and breathing
difficulties. She also experienced severe
pain. The respondent stated that he was attempting to wean Patient E off
benzodiazepines,
but he considered this a secondary matter to dealing with her
immediate pain problems. He recognized the possibility that this patient
doctor shopper. The respondent did not use pain scales and accepted that he did
not monitor any tolerance the patient might
have built up in relation to use of
diazepam for pain management.
relation to Patient F, between July 2005 and November 2008 the respondent wrote
142 prescriptions for Valium and Panadeine forte.
The petitioner was aware that
Patient F had chronic pain issues. She had severe anxiety problems resulting
from sexual abuse as a
child. The patient had used Serepax very heavily in the
past. Furthermore her child had died in 2000 and the respondent recognized
she had a real potential for dependence on drugs. The respondent admitted that
despite him sending Patient F a letter in mid-August
2005, advising her to avoid
taking Codalgin forte and Panadeine forte every day, in that period he regularly
prescribed her Valium
and Panadeine forte. The respondent accepted that he
failed to keep written records in relation to this patient.
December 2005 and November 2008, the respondent wrote 100 prescriptions for
Patient G for Valium, Panadeine forte, and MS
Contin. The respondent was aware
that Patient G suffered from severe pain. He prescribed the patient MS Contin
for a period in excess
of a year, and never initiated a reduction of the dosage.
The respondent said that this was because he thought the patient was seeing
specialist and he was awaiting the specialist's assessment. He accepted
retrospectively that he should have reduced the medication
relation to Patient H, between April 2007 and November 2008 the respondent wrote
66 prescriptions for Valium, Xanax and OxyContin
(the complaint alleges over-
prescription of the latter drug between 24 March 2006 and 4 May 2006). The
respondent was aware that
this patient was a person with severe psychological
problems. He was also a person who had used recreational drugs in the past. The
respondent acknowledged that he prescribed Patient H with diazepam and Xanax for
a significant period of time.
between January 2005 and January 2008, the respondent wrote 89 prescriptions for
Patient I for Panadeine forte and Xanax.
The respondent was aware that this
patient had an extremely disturbed psychological background. Nevertheless for a
period in excess
of three years, the respondent prescribed the drugs to referred
respondent accepted that he was aware of the risks of prescribing the various
drugs to Patients A to I. These risks were the potential
misuse of those drugs,
the risks associated with persons taking strong medication on a long-term basis
and the actual risks inherent
in relation to the drugs prescribed. He accepted
that the quantities of the drugs he prescribed were in the most part very high
he had an awareness of the dangers of prescribing serious drugs to
expert on behalf of the HCCC, Dr Chung was generally highly critical of the
respondent's conduct as set out in these complaints.
In most cases, he concluded
that the conduct fell significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of equivalent
level of training or experience applicable at the
time the conduct occurred. Generally, he disapproved or strongly disapproved of
the respondent's treatment of the patients involved in these
complaints.
the light of the respondent's admission of these complaints and Dr Chung's
expert opinion about the lack of professional propriety
of that conduct, the
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that each of the complaints has been
established. In particular, the Tribunal
accepts the submissions of the HCCC
that the respondent's conduct was serious given the following features: each
patient was a complex
patient with complex personal history. The respondent
prescribed serious drugs to each of them and he did so, over an extended period
of time. There was an actual risk to each patient as a result of the drugs
prescribed by the respondent and as a result of the period
over which the drugs
were prescribed. The respondent should have been aware of the dangers to the
patients, including the potential
for addiction or misuse of the drugs, or in
which the prescriptions were contraindicated. The conduct involved nine patients
period spanning 3 years and 10 months between January 2005 and November
2008. In these circumstances, the conduct cannot be characterised
as an isolated
lapse of judgment especially as the respondent was previously counselled for
prescribing problems and his conduct
took place after having done remedial
Tribunal accepts the further contention that the respondent did not provide a
satisfactory explanation as to why he prescribed
medication to the patients in
the ways described, but we have formed the view that the effect of his excessive
alcohol intake and
his psychological problems together, contributed to his
extended lack of judgment in acting as he did.
Paragraph 32 - Inadequate Record Keeping
respondent admitted this complaint and the Tribunal is comfortably satsified
that this complaint is established. The evidence
before the Tribunal shows that
in the years since 2008, the respondent has taken proper steps to remedy this
deficiency and to deal
with other shortcomings in relation to his practice.
relation to the remainder of the complaints, the respondent admitted some of
them but contested the detail of them as indicated
below. He denied other
complaints entirely. Generally, the HCCC relied upon the evidence of a number of
patients, a former IT employee
Mr Christopher Moloney and a medical student (now
a qualified doctor), Dr Sukarma Tanwar, who was employed at the respondent's
between June 2007 and July 2008.
the outset of the proceedings, counsel for the respondent indicated that Dr
Tanwar's account was not disputed. Since many of the
contested complaints are
supported in many respects by that account, the Tribunal is relieved of the task
of resolving issues of
fact, where there is dispute between the respondent's
evidence and the evidence of the HCCC witnesses, Dr Tanwar
Paragraph 34 a. - Alcohol Use
his written statement to the Tribunal, the respondent stated that up until 2000,
he drank alcohol in moderation. As a result of
a number of traumatic events
which occurred between September 2000 and approximately 2007, the respondent's
alcohol consumption increased.
The problem came to a head, according to the
respondent in November 2007 when he was stopped whilst driving for a random
breath test.
from a general description about his consumption, the statement did not specify
the quantities of alcohol or the frequencies
of his consumption. His evidence in
these proceedings in this regard was not wholly satisfactory. He was asked by
his counsel whether
he admitted the allegation that he consulted with patients
while under the influence of alcohol. His reply was in our view, somewhat
guarded as follows: "There was alcohol in my blood stream, yes". That answer was
not responsive to the question; it did not in terms,
constitute an admission to
the complaint and avoided the central issue of the impairment of the
respondent's judgment.
respondent admitted that probably around 1999 or 2000, he commenced drinking
heavily. His consumption escalated in periods of
stress. The level of
consumption was at least two beers in the evening and at least a bottle of wine.
This occurred during the weekdays
and possibly more on the
asked to describe his peak level consumption of alcohol, the respondent said
that he rarely previously drank spirits but he started
to drink vodka. He did
not specify at this point the amount of vodka he consumed nor the circumstances
in which that occurred. We
note that he apparently told his psychiatrist, Dr
Selwyn Smith in October 2012, that he had been consuming at least a half bottle
of vodka every day.
respondent's admission concerning his driving whilst under the influence of
drugs charge, was also guarded. When asked by his
counsel what he had consumed
leading up to that charge, the respondent said: "The analysis indicated
cannabis, amphetamines and ecstasy"
and when pressed as to whether that was what
he had taken, he admitted that he had taken those drugs some hours before. He
he was encouraged to engage in these drugs by a younger woman, whom he
counsel returned to the issue of his drinking, asking how his excessive drinking
would affect his mood. The respondent stated
that he was irritable in the last
hour before lunch, and then consumed two to three glasses of wine, adopting the
"fallacious reasoning
at that time ... that by four o'clock, I'd be under the
legal limit". He admitted that at times he had more than three glasses of
at lunch. Furthermore, he said that in last month before admission to hospital
on April 2008, he woke up in the early hours
of the morning and drank vodka to
go to sleep.
cross-examination, the respondent stated that during 2005, he consumed a bottle
of wine and at least two beers a day, although
he said he could not say with any
certainty. The respondent did not accept that he was intoxicated in 2004 to 2005
"for the very
pragmatic and simple reason that I wanted to be able to drive a
motor vehicle." The respondent stated that he had the erroneous thinking
he was under .05 he would be okay. Even when he was asked to look back and
reflect upon his state of intoxication, he continued
to use the formulation: "I
had alcohol in my blood".
respondent confirmed that by late 2007 that he consumed vodka in the early hours
of the morning. When it was put to him that on
those occasions from late 2007
onwards, he arrived at his practice intoxicated, the respondent answered in
these terms: "It depends
on one's definition of intoxication, but I admit there
was alcohol at my bloodstream which there should not have been." The respondent
accepted that some days he was intoxicated and others he simply had blood
alcohol (both of which he thought were equally bad). He
reluctantly conceded
that his alcohol consumption "potentially" affected his performance as a doctor
but he did not know "whether
there was any particular adverse outcome on any
particular day with any particular patient". The Tribunal accepts the
respondent's
thinking between 2000-2008 might well have been adversely affected
by his alcohol intake. It is easy to understand that at that time
he may have
lacked insight into the effects of his abuse of alcohol. Given that he has
admitted that in that period of time, he significantly
over prescribed dangerous
drugs to multiple patients, his statement that he was unaware of any particular
adverse outcome is somewhat
surprising and we consider lacks
manner in which this evidence came out (noting that it was initially in response
to questions asked by his own counsel) indicated
to the Tribunal that
notwithstanding his asserted present insight, the respondent has difficulty in
making frank admissions in an
unqualified way as to what he did, even though his
position now is that he has been abstinent from alcohol and illegal drugs since
April 2008.
respondent's case was put on the basis that his alcohol abuse, along with a
major depressive disorder, were the precipitating
causes of his lack of judgment
in relation to his professional practice. It is not suggested that depression
alone would have caused
or precipitated such errors of judgment in the
respondent.
Consequently,
the conundrum implicit in accepting the respondent's evidence about the effect
on him of his excessive consumption of
alcohol is self-evident: if his level of
impairment was not significant, then his unsatisfactory professional conduct
relating to
overprescribing cannot be easily explained by reference to the
effect of the alcohol. If on the other hand he was significantly affected
would explain his unsatisfactory conduct but his failure to acknowledge this,
reflects adversely on his insight. It is substantially
for this reason that the
Tribunal considers it necessary to continue the application of the restrictions
which regulate the respondent's
conduct at the present time. We recognize that
the medical and psychological professionals whose reports are part of the
before the Tribunal differ from this conclusion, but it does not
appear that their opinions were based on the equivocal nature of
respondent's position as exhibited in his evidence.
effects of such alcohol consumption were well-documented in evidence. Patients J
and B, each gave consistent evidence that they
observed the respondent spraying
Baygon on his skin, because he thought he had "bugs" on him. The credibility of
those witnesses
was attacked. However, Dr Tanwar confirmed their evidence in the
following terms:
Dr Ramrakha was obsessed with the thought that he had bugs crawling over his
body. He used to spray Baygon on his skin for the purpose
of removing the bugs
which he believed were there. I didn't ever see any bugs on his skin, but he
believed they were there. As a
colleague, I checked his skin on two or three
different occasions. I didn't see any bugs. I only saw scratch marks where he
scratching. When he sprayed Baygon or eucalyptus oil on himself, the
smell was strong. He often sprayed those things and it was not
possible to smell
alcohol after he had been drinking.
respondent himself gave evidence that he had sprayed his skin with Baygon, but
did so only once out of desperation. This was at
a time that he was using
alcohol to excess.
Furthermore,
Dr Tanwar indicated that after the respondent returned from the hotel at
lunchtime, he exhibited signs consistent with
being affected by alcohol, namely,
he would stare, walk differently, drag his feet and be agitated and speak to
staff rudely.
Tribunal concludes that the evidence of Patients J and B added to the
uncontested evidence of Dr Tanwar, together form a sufficient
basis to be
comfortably satisfied that this complaint has been established.
respondent has admitted that in that general time period, he had taken cannabis,
ecstasy and amphetamines, but only on weekends
in a social context. However, he
denied that he indulged in illicit drugs at any time during surgery hours and at
his surgery.
summary, the Tribunal has reservations about some of the evidence that the
respondent gave. In relation to the effect of his alcohol
intake, the respondent
tended to give qualified answers which in the view of the Tribunal, appeared to
be an attempt to minimise
or downplay the effects of the alcohol on his judgment
and the extent of his misconduct. This led to a contradictory approach to
respondent's defence and/or explanation of the various complaints made against
him. On the one hand, he relied upon the fact
that he was "a terrible alcoholic"
to provide an explanation for the over-prescribing complaints. On the other
hand, he denied being
under the influence of alcohol or being
intoxicated.
is a matter which reflects adversely on his insight in relation to carrying on
professional practice, whilst under the influence
of alcohol. It also
demonstrates his inability to view the problem of his alcohol addiction in terms
of the potential harm it might
do to his patients.
Paragraph 34 b. - Using Illicit Subtances at Surgery during Consulting
J provided a statement in which she stated that in early November 2007, she
observed the respondent returning from the local
hotel very intoxicated. She saw
him going into one of the consultation rooms and shutting the door. Patient J
opened the door and
observed the respondent with "a thing like a bong, which had
white crystals in the base." She asked the respondent whether it was
ice, and he
said that it was. Patient J confirmed this account in her oral evidence before
the Tribunal, describing the bong as having
bulbous bottom with plain water and
white crystals on the bottom. There is some support in the respondent's own
evidence for these
allegations. He admitted that about this time he was using
illicit drugs including methamphetamines or ice, but only away from the
and on weekends.
respondent denied the allegation of drug use at his surgery. His counsel
robustly cross-examined Patient J about her memory, the
circumstances in which
she belatedly came before the Tribunal, and other matters relevant to her
credibility. It is not necessary
to repeat that evidence.
The Tribunal accepts Patient J as an honest witness, we considered that Patient
J presented as a person with many medical
difficulties. The evidence disclosed
that she had been charged with perjury or false swearing. Furthermore, the
evidence disclosed
that she had on a number of previous occasions, made
complaints against other people, which were subsequently either withdrawn or
proceeded with by the police. These raise significant questions about the
reliability of Patient J's evidence.
the seriousness of this allegation, the Tribunal is not comfortably satisfied
that the evidence is sufficiently reliable to
justify the conclusion that this
complaint has been made out.
Paragraph 34 c. - Inappropriate Comments of Sexual Nature in Presence of
was led from Patients J and B, Mr Moloney and Dr Tanwar in support of this
complaint. None of these witnesses gives evidence
the various incidents they deposed to are similar. It is not necessary to refer
in detail to the claims
made by each of them. Suffice to say, they involved the
respondent making personal comments about his sex life in front of patients,
well as making suggestive comments to his staff and making sexual gestures
towards them.
the respondent admitted the complaint, he gave a more benign complexion of his
acts and words. He accepted that he had made
inappropriate comments to female
patients, but mainly to female staff members. Furthermore, the respondent
admitted that the comments
were made whilst patients were "probably within
Tanwar's evidence was as follows:
I have witnessed Dr Ramrakha making horrible comments about his receptionist
in front of patients. ... Dr Ramrakha would make dirty
comments to her, he would
say personal comments about his sex life in front of patients and other people.
It was very embarrassing.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the complaint that the respondent made
inappropriate comments of a sexual nature in the
presence of patients is made
out by the evidence led by the HCCC.
Paragraph 34 d. - Behaving Violently, Aggessively or Threateningly to
Staff and/or Patients
respondent denied this complaint. Mr Moloney gave evidence that the respondent
would call patients "stupid". He would scream in
loud and bullying terms to
staff in front of patients and would use foul language. Patient J also gave
evidence of the respondent's
conduct towards her, consistent with this manner of
Tanwar stated in his statement that the respondent: "On a few occasions he used
to be really crazy. He would shout at staff members
and make bad comments like
swearing at them. He would do this when patients were present in the
Tribunal accepts the evidence of the witnesses for the HCCC and is comfortably
satisfied that this complaint has been established.
Paragraph 35 - Failure to Observe Professional Boundaries
complaint is admitted by the respondent. Patient J stated that when she was at
his surgery, the respondent invited her to the
local hotel where they drank
alcohol together. Dr Tanwar stated: " I have witnessed Dr Ramrakha offer
patients alcohol. I have seen
him in the surgery invite patients to go with him
to the pub across the road. ... while we were having lunch at the pub we would
be joined by patients who would sit down and drink with Dr Ramrakha. I have seen
Patient J join him in the pub quite a number of
times." The Tribunal is
comfortably satisfied that this complaint has been established.
Paragraph 36 a. - Inappropriate Sexual Comments to Staff
Moloney said that the respondent used to proposition his receptionist in front
of patients. This had occurred on several occasions.
Dr Tanwar gave substantial
support to that version of events. The respondent admitted that complaint and
the Tribunal is comfortably
satisfied that the complaint has been established.
Paragraph 36 b. - Abusive or Offensive Language in presence of Patients or
is a substantial overlap between this complaint and the complaint referred to
above in paragraph 34 d., although the HCCC relies
upon evidence from different
sources. Based upon the evidence of Mr Moloney and Dr Tanwar, referred to above,
at paragraphs 63 to
65, the Tribunal is satisfied that this complaint has been
established.
Paragraph 36 c. - Consulting with Patients whilst Under Influence of
Drugs/Alcohol
is a substantial overlap between this complaint and the complaint referred to
above in paragraph 34 a. The respondent admits
so much of this complaint as
alleges that he was under the influence of alcohol. The evidence of the
patients, supported by Dr Tanwar's
evidence, is conclusive of the fact that the
respondent was significantly affected.
Tribunal is not persuaded that he was affected by drugs (a complaint which was
substantially based upon the evidence of Patient
J) but is otherwise satisfied
that the complaint has been established. However, the level of his intoxication
and his irrational
behaviour, consequent upon it, render the distinction between
the cause of the intoxication as alcohol or drugs, of little consequence.
Certainly, the effect of his intoxication upon his professional capacity and
judgment from the perspective of his patients, is not
affected by this
distinction.
Paragraph 36 d. - Accessing Adult WebSites
complaint was denied
by the respondent. This complaint relies on the
evidence of Mr Moloney who was employed by the respondent for a short time. Mr
left the employment of the respondent in unhappy circumstances, claiming
that the respondent had not paid him his proper wages. Counsel
respondent submitted that his evidence ought not to be accepted because he was a
disgruntled employee with an axe to grind.
The Tribunal rejects that submission,
concluding that he was an honest witness.
are two aspects to Mr Moloney's evidence, which potentially impact upon the
respondent's professional integrity and competence.
The first is his resorting
to so-called "adult websites" during professional consultations and responding
to messages; the second
is the vulnerability of the system to outside hacking.
The respondent himself gave evidence that during consultations, he sometimes
took account of and responded to messages on a computer communication system,
which was on his desk. However, he denied that he accessed
adult i.e. in the
sense of pornographic, websites at all.
Moloney, in his statement, described the websites as "adult websites", "live
chat sites" and recalled the names of the sites as
"Red Hot Pie (or similar)"
and "Adult Friend Finder". He stated that the respondent was always waiting for
new messages, which beeped
when he was involved in consultations during
consulting hours. In his evidence before the Tribunal, Mr Moloney agreed that
the websites
could be properly described as "dating websites", although he later
described them as pornographic sites. He was clear that the respondent's
to these sites was during consultations.
respondent gave evidence that he did not consult pornographic websites during
consulting hours; and only consulted dating websites
like RSVP and eHarmony, on
his home notebook computer. He denied that any of these websites were open on
other computers in the surgery.
Tribunal accepts the main thrust of Mr Moloney's evidence. However, given his
various descriptions of the relevant websites, we
are not satisfied that they
were "pornographic websites". Nevertheless, we consider that the main thrust of
the complaint is that
the respondent was engaging in personal interests, at a
time when his sole focus should have been on his professional duties to the
patients he was seeing. In so far as this aspect is concerned, we accept Mr
Moloney's evidence.
follows that we are comfortably satisfied that this complaint has been
established in the terms we have discussed.
diminishing the seriousness of the conduct in the complaints particularised in
paragraphs 34 to 36, the Tribunal considers
that in most cases, they were
manifestations of the underlying psychological and alcohol/drug abuse problems
suffered by the respondent.
We consider that if the underlying causes are
effectively dealt with, a repetition of conduct of this kind by the respondent
is unlikely.
following statutory enactments and legal principles apply in proceedings of this
kind. Section 139B(1) of the National Law defines
"unsatisfactory professional
conduct" as including:
(1) "Unsatisfactory professional conduct" of a registered health practitioner
includes each of the following-
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
the practitioner's
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner's profession.
139E defines "professional misconduct" as:
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when
the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration.
Tribunal accepts in accordance with the authorities that such complaints
asserting serious improper conduct must be established
on the balance of
probabilities. But according to the standard expressed in
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
i.e. on the balance of
probabilities "subject only to the rule of prudence that any tribunal should act
with much care and caution
before finding that a serious allegation ... is
established".
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
, the Court of Appeal stated that at
Disciplinary proceedings against members of a profession are intended to
maintain proper ethical and professional standards, primarily
for the protection
of the public, but also for the protection of the profession.
Court of Appeal in
Spicer v New South Wales Medical Board and Others
(unreported, 19 February 1981), Hope JA, (Reynolds and Hutley JJA agreeing)
wrote as follows:
Strict adherence to the statutory requirement relating to the use of drugs of
addiction is required in medical practitioners ... any
medical practitioner who
prescribes drugs of addiction other than in accordance with the law is seriously
misconducting himself in
a professional respect.
It is clear beyond argument that the proper handling and prescribing of drugs
by medical practitioners is of the greatest importance
to the community. If a
medical practitioner handles or carries out that very great responsibility in a
way that is reckless and which
shows a disregard for the law, it cannot be said
he is fitted at such a time to be a medical practitioner.
principles remain as valid today as they were thirty years ago and the Tribunal
is duty bound to apply them.
Tribunal accepts that its role is to protect the public by ensuring there is no
repetition of misconduct, acknowledging that any
decision will have a deterrent
effect on others who might transgress against the high standards required, and
will have the effect
of encouraging the maintenance of high standards in medical
profession, as well as maintaining public confidence in it. We also recognize
the countervailing factor that any decision would not necessarily deprive the
public of services of a medical practitioner.
Tribunal accepts that a finding of professional misconduct does not
automatically lead to cancellation of a medical practitioner's
registration -
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWC 267 at [67].
Furthermore,
the Tribunal accepts that normally a pre-requisite for making orders for the
de-registration of a medical practitioner,
is that it must find that he or she
is currently probably permanently unfit to practise. It is fitness at the time
of the hearing,
which is of central importance - see
A Solicitor v Council of
the NSW Law Society
2004] HCA 1
is incumbent upon the Tribunal to recognize that the specific purpose for which
orders are made is protective in the public interest
and not punitive with
respect to the individual. Nevertheless, it must recognize that such orders may
be punitive in effect, and
hence such punitive effects may be relevant in
formulating a protective order. The Tribunal must also recognize in an
appropriate
case, that the "harrowing experience of disputed proceedings,
together with the real threat of loss of livelihood, may have opened
the eyes of
the individual concerned to the seriousness of his or her conduct so as to
diminish significantly the likelihood of its
repetition, and to produce a level
of insight into his or her own character or misconduct, which did not previously
[2012] NSWCA 90
assessing the central question of the respondent's fitness to practice, it is
important to have regard to the steps he has taken
since this conduct
Events after 2008
respondent was reviewed by a Review Panel on 12 June 2012. The report summarised
the respondent's history with the Impaired Registrants
Panel since approximately
August 2008. It noted that on 28 April 2009, Section 66 proceedings were
convened to investigate concerns
time, the delegates expressed a number of concerns about the respondent's
practice in
that he failed to request authority to prescribe drugs of addiction
to patients, whom he was aware had a history of drug dependence;
that he had
been over prescribing for patients; and that he failed to keep adequate medical
records. The delegates ordered a performance
assessment which occurred in August
2009. The respondent's performance was assessed as satisfactory in all domains
except as to the
content of his records and his office facilities which were
unsatisfactory. On 4 March 2010, a Performance Review Panel found the
professional performance of the respondent was unsatisfactory in that his
knowledge, skill and care in the practice of medicine were
below the standard
reasonably expected for a practitioner of equivalent level of training or
experience in the area of medical records
content and office
facilities.
respondent was previously reviewed on 11 May 2011, at which time his sustained
commitment to the rehabilitation were summarised
as follows:
Dr Ramrakha remains well and stable. He is committed to a comprehensive
support programme of medical, psychological and professional
follow-up to
long-term sobriety and to an Alcoholics Anonymous approach to recovery. He has
now been sober for over four years. His
practice has successfully passed the
accreditation process, he continued to maintain regular links with mentors and
he has been able
to respond to Council queries about prescribing in an organised
respondent was noted to have remained fully compliant with the conditions of his
practice and was working towards a full practice
accreditation. The Reviewers
agreed with the Council appointed psychiatrist's view, that but for the HCCC
enquiry, the respondent's
conditions should be eased with a view towards
approximately 2008 or 2009, the respondent has been assessed by a psychiatrist
on behalf of the Medical Council, Dr Anthony
Samuels. The Tribunal was provided
with reports from Dr Samuels, the most recent being dated April 2011, and 2 May
2012. In the earlier
report, the respondent declined to disclose matters about
the disciplinary proceedings, because the matter was "sub judice". He claimed
that a person who performed volunteer work for him had made "a spurious
complaint". He labelled the complaints "malicious", and somewhat
"bizarre". He
expressed concern about the adverse publicity.
respondent stated that he continued to see his psychologist on a regular basis.
He regularly consulted his psychiatrist Dr Selwyn
Smith and was on medication.
He labelled himself "a celebrity", in his after-care group having been there for
three years.
Samuels concluded:
Dr Ramrakha seems to be very stable from a mood point of view. He certainly
continues along the path of sobriety and he continues
to access all the supports
that are in place. He is very committed and enthusiastic about the changes he
has made in his life.
Samuels conducted the respondent's routine annual review in May 2012, and his
views were not materially different. Dr Samuels confirmed
that the respondent
continues to do very well and is compliant with all the conditions upon him. The
report notes that he has been
abstinent from alcohol for four years, things in
his practice seem to be going well and the respondent continues to be well
with the support groups and his therapists. Dr Samuels saw no impediment
to easing back on some of the conditions presently on him
and moving the
respondent towards exiting the Impaired Registrants Program, once these
proceedings have concluded.
respondent relied upon a number of expert reports, in his own case, which it
should be said, contained similar opinions to those
already referred to
immediately above.
Selwyn Smith psychiatrist, furnished a report dated 17 October 2012, in which he
confirmed that the respondent is a patient under
his clinical care. Dr Smith
recorded that his progress to date included the following matters: the
respondent has not consumed alcohol
or drugs of addiction since his discharge
from St John of God Hospital. He continued to attend Alcoholics Anonymous, as
well as the
after-care program at the hospital. He has had ongoing regular
appointments with Dr Smith. The respondent has also undergone regular
screening through a mandated program of the Medical Council of New South Wales.
Smith opines that the respondent experienced a major depressive episode
associated with generalised anxiety to the point of panic.
The report sets out
the symptoms and Dr Smith's overall conclusion that the respondent had been
decreasingly active, effective and
productive. Dr Smith was of the view that the
respondent had benefited considerably from his admission to hospital. He has
compliant with treatment and attended at professionals and various
programs as directed. Dr Smith was of the view that with further
treatment, the
likelihood of any relapse would be low. He found the respondent to be a genuine
man who has displayed significant
remorse, shame and humiliation for his
conduct. Dr Smith remained optimistic in regard to an excellent prognosis. It
was Dr Smith's
opinion that the respondent is fit to continue to practise
Justine Corry, psychologist worked with the respondent on a weekly basis for
approximately 23 months (and he consulted Ms Corry's
colleague for 16 months
previously). In that time he has been sober. The aim of the treatment was to
maintain his sobriety, for the
respondent to understand the triggers for his
drinking and to improve his capacity to regulate negative emotions and to
examine this
interpersonal relationships to develop healthy boundaries. Ms Corry
reports that the respondent has maintained his sobriety and reported
no cravings
to drink alcohol; his mood has been positive, and generally is better able to
cope. She concluded that his prognosis
was excellent, and he was committed to
maintaining his sobriety. In Ms Corry's view, the respondent demonstrated all
the characteristics
of somebody who has made a full recovery, and his risk of
relapse was negligible. Accordingly, she considered he posed no risk to
community as a medical practitioner.
respondent's mentor and cousin Dr Sanjay Ramrakha provided a similar opinion in
his letter of 5 November 2012.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that all the complaints (on the basis set out
in the reasons above) have been established (with
the exception of paragraph 34
b.). The Tribunal concludes that the respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Furthermore,
the Tribunal concludes that the conduct
considered together, occurred over an extended period and was sufficiently
serious to justify
the respondent's registration being suspended or cancelled
i.e. that the respondent is guilty of professional misconduct.
3A of the National Law provides that the protection of the health and safety of
the public must be the paramount consideration.
Section 149A of the National Law
provides that the Tribunal in exercising its clearly protective and not punitive
impose various sanctions including imposing conditions it
considers appropriate on the doctor's registration - subparagraph (b).
Furthermore, section 149C of the National Law provides that where the Tribunal
finds a respondent guilty of professional misconduct,
it may suspend his
registration for a specified period or cancel his registration.
HCCC contended that suspension or registration was the appropriate protective
order to be made. That submission is consistent
with the principles we have
referred to above concerning the serious nature of the respondent's misconduct
over more than three years,
and the potential harm that he exposed patients to
in that period.
almost five years have passed since that conduct last occurred. The evidence
establishes that the respondent has undergone
personal and professional
assistance to address the underlying precipitating causes of his behaviour and
according to the professional
opinions of Drs Samuel and Smith, he has been
successful in so doing.
have expressed reservations about aspects of the respondent's evidence in these
proceedings, especially regarding the extent of
his alcohol problems between
2000 and 2008. We recognize, however, that we have only had the opportunity to
assess the respondent
in a somewhat artificial and stressful process of a
disciplinary hearing over some days. Drs Samuels and Smith (whom we regard as
careful and competent psychiatrists) have assessed the respondent over a much
longer period. We are reassured by their consistent
opinions about the
respondent's progress, and also by his unblemished professional history since
2008. The evidence suggests that
since 2008, the respondent has continued to
practise subject to conditions in a professional and competent fashion.
that background, the Tribunal considers that the doubts it has about the
respondent's evidence in attitude, can be accommodated
in so far as the
considerations set out in section 3A of the National Law are concerned, by the
orders we propose to make.
it it should be noted that the HCCC conceded that since 2008, the respondent has
acted without blemish in a professional
sense and has undertaken the necessary
medical and professional assistance (including drug and alcohol testing and also
a restriction
on his prescribing schedule 8 drugs) required to ensure that his
professional practice achieved the appropriate standard. That concession
was agreed between the parties that given the majority of the complaints and the
fact that the respondent was guilty of professional
misconduct were both
admitted and all relevant material was before the Tribunal, it was unnecessary
to have a separate hearing on
the issue of consequential orders cf
[2011] NSWCA 253.
The parties were content to rely upon the evidence
already before the Tribunal in this regard.
Tribunal has determined that it is appropriate that the respondent be allowed to
continue to practise but subject to conditions,
particularly as to having a
mentor and subjecting himself to drug and alcohol testing. The respondent's
present mentor is his cousin
Dr Sanjay Ramrakha who has practised as an
emergency physician at the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital since 1998. We do not
Dr Sanjay Ramrakha is well qualified and enjoys a good reputation
amongst his peers, but we consider it more appropriate that the
respondent's
mentor should be an independent, experienced and practising general practioner.
Furthermore, we consider that the respondent
should subject to a condition that
he regularly submit himself to the EtG test.
Tribunal makes the following orders:
a. the respondent is reprimanded;
b. the respondent complies with the conditions in Annexure A;
c. the respondent pays the HCCC's costs less one day (consistent with the
order made on 7 February 2013).
DR RIJU RAMRAKHA
Practice Conditions
1. Not to possess, prescribe, supply, administer or dispense Schedule 4
Appendix D drugs. Dr Ramrakha's Schedule 4 Appendix D drug
authority is to
remain withdrawn by the Pharmaceutical Services Unit.
2. Not to prescribe, supply, administer or dispense Schedule 8 drugs of
addiction without the prior written authority of the Pharmaceutical
3. Any future change to his Schedule 8 and Schedule 4D authorities must be in
accordance with the Council's protocol. This includes
consultation with the
Council prior to thesubmission of any variation application to the
Pharmaceutical Services Unit.
4. To obtain approval of the Council prior to changing the nature or place of
5. To authorise the exchange of information between the Pharmaceutical
Services Unit, the Council and Medicare Australia in order
to facilitate
compliance with these conditions.
6. The Council may notify any employer/s of any issues arising in relation to
compliance with these conditions.
7. To complete within 12 months of the date of this Decision and at his own
expense the distance education course "Issues in General
Practice Prescribing"
conducted by the Department of General Practice, Monash University.
a) Within one week of the date of enrolment he must provide evidence to the
Council of enrolment in the Issues in General Practice
Prescribing course.
b) Within two weeks of completing the Issues in General Practice Prescribing
course, he is to provide documentary evidence to the
Council that he has
satisfactorily completed the course.
8. To complete within 18 months of the date of this Decision and at his
expense the course "Medical Ethics" conducted in distance
mode by the Department
of General Practice, Monash University.
a) Within one week of the date of enrolment, the practitioner must provide
evidence to the Council of enrolment in the Ethics course.
b) Within two weeks of completing the Ethics course, the practitioner is to
provide documentary evidence to the Council that he has
satisfactorily completed
the course.
9. To complete within 18 months of the date of this Decision and at his
expense the course "Depression & Anxiety Disorders in
General Practice"
conducted in distance mode by the Department of General Practice, Monash
University.
a) Within one week of the date of enrolment, the practitioner must provide
evidence to the Council of enrolment in the course.
b) Within two weeks of completing the Depression & Anxiety Disorders in
General Practice course, the practitioner is to provide
documentary evidence to
the Council that he has satisfactorily completed the course.
10. To complete within two years of the date of this Decision and at his own
expense the course "Introduction to Pain Management"
conducted in distance mode
by the School of Medicine, Sydney University.
a) Within one week of the date of enrolment, the practitioner must provide
evidence to the Council of enrolment in the course.
b) Within two weeks of completing the "Introduction to Pain Management"
course, he is to provide the Council with documentary evidence
of satisfactory
completion.
11. Within twenty-one days, the respondent is to provide for approval by the
Council the name and professional address of a registered
medical practitioner
specialising in general practice who has agreed to act as his professional
mentor. The nature and frequency
of contact with the mentor is to be determined
by the mentor in accordance with the Council's Guidelines for Mentors. The
is to be provided with a copy of the Guidelines and a copy of the Medical
Tribunal Decision upon which these conditions are based
and these Orders. The
respondent is to ensure that:
(a) He and the mentor meet on a monthly basis for at least one hour, the first
meeting to occur within one fortnight of being advised
that his nominated mentor
has been approved.
(b) He is to authorise the mentor to report, in an approved format, to the
Council every two months about the fact of contact, and
to inform the Council if
there is any concern about his professional conduct, health or personal
(c) He is to authorise the mentor to notify the Council of any failure to
attend, termination of the mentoring relationship against
the advice of the
mentor or any other matter the mentor considers appropriate.
(d) In the event that the approved mentor is no longer willing or able to
continue as mentor, he is to nominate another mentor for
approval by the Council
within 28 days of the cessation of the original mentor
relationship.
(e) He is to be responsible for any costs associated with the mentoring process.
(f) The meetings should include discussion of the respondent's personal and
professional development as a registered medical
practitioner.
Health Conditions (not for publication on the public register)
Review Provisions
The Medical Council of New South Wales is the appropriate review body for the
purposes of Division 8 of Part 8 of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National
Law (NSW). In accordance with section 163 of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW), the conditions
may be reviewed by the Medical Council of New
South Wales provided that the practitioner's principal place of practice is in
South Wales. However, sections 125 to 127 inclusive of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law are to apply whilst the practitioner's
principal place of practice is anywhere in Australia other than in New South
Wales, so that a review of these Conditions can be conducted
by the Medical
Board of Australia.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (285 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter