URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWRT/2002/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:11:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kearns & Kearns v Zuber [2002] NSWRT 9 (31 January 2002)
Kearns & Kearns v Zuber [2002] NSWRT 9 (31January 2002)
File No. 01/37807
RESIDENTIAL TRIBUNAL
: Kearns & Kearns
(Landlords)
APPLICATION
: Abandonment of
APPEARANCES
: Ms McGrath for the landlord; the tenant
in person on some occasions.
: Queanbeyan 11 October
2001, 7 November 2001
Legislative issues
Section 57 (1) and (2)
Residential
Tenancies Act 1987
Residential Tribunal Act 1998
Notices of Termination by tenants; avoidance of
service of documents: ex parte hearings; Costs
Cases cited:
2001 NSWSC 486
Blundell-Felisak
(RTT 97/023358);
Dupont and Rowe
(RTT 97/022753);
(unreported QCA 27/10/97);
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs
51 ALD 519)
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
2001 VSC 35
Lismore Women’s and Children’s
RT 01/09100.
Tenant’s notice of
termination; avoidance of service of documents;
The tenant is to pay the landlord the sum
of $7800.68 immediately being:
$8224.50 for
$75 for water
$1503.95 for
advertising
less the sum of $2080 received
from the bond.
The tenant is to pay the landlord’s
costs of $614.00 for:
$200.00 agent fees for
$380.00 for the landlord’s
cost of a reletting fee to the agent
for the Tribunal application fee
the development of photographs for service on the tenant and the
REASONS FOR DECISION
These are reasons prepared at the tenant’s request in relation to a
decision handed down at Queanbeyan on 7 November 2001.
Money received from bond Board for advertising costs till
25/08/01 and repairs only: $2,080.00
Balance due up to
today’s date: $8,060.68
The above amount is now due and
payable. If we have not heard from you within 7 days we will proceed with the
tribunal lodgement.
Money received from bond Board for advertising costs till
25/08/01 and repairs only: $2,080.00
Balance due up to
today’s date: $8,060.68
Interim orders were made on 11 October
2001 which read:
The landlord is to serve on the
Tribunal and Tenant copies of statutory declarations from all witnesses she
relies upon including
trades persons alleged to have had difficulty contacting
the tenant.
The tenant is to serve on the
Tribunal and Landlord a statement setting out her response to landlords claim
and statutory declarations
from all witnesses relied
Each of the above orders is to
be complied with within 2 weeks.
The tenant should note that if
she failed to appear on the next occasion the matter may proceed in her
The matter was next listed before the
Tribunal on 7 November 2001 at Queanbeyan. Prior to this date the landlord filed
in the Tribunal
an 8 page documents setting out their case and the history of
the matter, which read:
for rental The Canberra Times @ $520 per week Saturday 24/2/01
new executive home fully furnished)
... Zuber inspected Tuesday
27/2/01 & placed an application to rent the property @ $520 per week, she
stated she wished to occupy
the house ASAP & at the latest by Tuesday 6/3/01
(7 days later)
We accepted her application & moved to my
parents home Monday 5/3/01.
... was told the landscaping would be
completed & the heating metre ordered for connection. These were the only
works still to
be completed.
... moved into house Tuesday
noted by letter 21/5/01 items needing
attending, all problems were attended to immediately or had already been
attended too.
... sent a solicitor letter McGuinness Ely, 25/5/01,
maintenance problems outlined giving us 14 days pursuant to Clause 6C of the
annexure to the lease to remedy the problems. Otherwise, ... will move to
terminate the lease.
I & Century 21 faxed a letter to ...
solicitor responding to all our attempts to rectify the problems 28/5/01. I
stated once again
our endeavours to rectify any problems with ...
co-operation.
Several attempts made to contact ..., she did not
I again wrote to ... & placed another letter under
her door 28/5/01, as she had now disconnected the home
29/5/01 a letter from ... was pushed under Century
21’s door, stating her intention to vacate our property on the Monday
Century 21 faxed ... solicitor 29/5/01, stating no breach
of lease & that if she proceeds with the termination of the lease she
liable for costs.
My solicitor Hansen & Co. 31/5/01 faxed a
letter to ... solicitor outlining our attempts at rectification works, her
lease having dogs without approval & ... upon vacating the
property will be "breaking" the lease & liable for associated
6/6/01 we received a letter from ... solicitor, stating ...
had vacated the property & will return the keys 7/6/01.
... solicitor stated ... had vacated & left the keys inside the
9-11/6/01 ... did not respond to Century 21’s phone
calls / message requesting her to attend the checkout.
Century 21 check out. ... did not attend. The property was found to have 16
items with damage or cleaning required. This was
notified by fax 13/6/01 to
...’s solicitor.
14/6/01 ...’s solicitor stated ...
was uncontactable & that we should proceed with quotes for rectification
22/6/01 Century 21 posted ... a letter of costs to
10/9/01 Century 21 posted ... a letter advising a suitable
tenant had been found & a total of the final costs / account to be
11/10/01 Tribunal Hearing Court House Queanbeyan, ... did
not attend.
12/10/01 Century 21 posted ... a copy of all
correspondence (2
time) & an offer was made to discuss a
reduced payment & for ... to contact Century 21. ... has again not responded
ITEMS NEEDING ATTENDING – LETTER FROM ... 21/5/01
Landscaping
The landscaping works completed that week to be ready by Tuesday
6/3/01 were:
Irrigation system installed
Top soil, plants
Retaining walls
Outdoor entertaining area
The Lawn Doctor booked to complete spray on turf in March
(the only landscaping not yet completed was the grass –
this was booked approx. 15/2/01 & would be done asap in March
The Lawn Doctor made the following attempts to spray the
Called 4 times in March 2001 to
complete works, he stated wither too wet as it had rained, or their were 2 dogs
in the backyard.
front yard only 3/4/01, the dogs were still in the rear
Note: the dogs (breach of the lease) as we did not
know they were there, The Lawn Doctor notified us as he could not spray the turf
as they were in the yard & there was dog faeces everywhere.
dogs were never removed or the faeces.
The Lawn Doctor was unable to
spray on turf, due to dogs or faeces not being removed from the backyard after
many visits.
... was advised by Century 21 to remove the animals
& pick up the faeces on several occasions, neither was done. Therefore
Kearns purchased & spread lawn seed on the 11/4/01 & again on
Upon ... vacating dog faeces were left in the back yard
& dirt trails from the dogs running paths. The garden beds were full of
& several plants were dead.
Heating Metre Connection
The heating meter was order 15/3/01, ready for collection 11/5/01 (see
Project Lighting letter, regarding the delay for the electronic
meters required
by Great Southern Energy). On the 12/5/01 Shane Kelly our electrician was given
the meter to be installed.
The following attempts were made to install
the heating metre:
Phoned ... 12/5/2001 no answer
– several different times, message left to contact
Phoned ... 17/5/2001 no
answer, message left that the electrician would install the metre 18/5/01,
stated if she was not able to be
at home to leave the internal door in the
garage open for the electrician to gain access for
installation.
Electrician
arrives 18/5/01 to install the metre, no one home & door not left open. The
electrician waited & he & I tried
calling several times that afternoon.
Again the electrician visited the property at 5pm with still no one at home or
any returned
phone call from
... never contacted
Century 21, us or the electrician, we all tried that week to contact her without
... disconnected the
28/5/01 I placed a
letter under the door requesting ... to contact our electrician to install the
Leaking Showers & Tap
noted by letter 21/5/01 a leaking tap in the en
suite & leaking showers. The following attempts were made to
21/5/01 I phone Furie Nadi
Plumbing to inspect the problems house plumber with works still under warranty.
Furie stated too busy that
afternoon but would visit the house & call ... to
arrange a time.
Furie stated
he tried phoning ... several times with no
Furie again phoned ...
11am 28/5/01 & stated the phone was
disconnected.
Upon inspection
after ... vacated the property –
was found in the tap of
the ensuite as stated by
Upon inspection after ...
vacated the property – the showers were leaking & Stegbar (under
warranty) fixed the problem.
Watering System
The irrigation watering system was fully functional. ... stated in her
solicitor letter 25/5/01 that she was requested not to alter
the pre-set
watering system. ... was
never instructed not to alter the watering
, the opposite occurred. ... was instructed in March 2001 that the
watering system had been set to water the lawn 3 times a day to
ensure new grass
growth, once the grass was up the system was again set to water the lawn once a
day. The Lawn Doctor suggested the
times & amount of water to be
... was shown by Matthew Kearns on 2 occasions how to adjust the
system (system extremely basic) if their was too little or not enough
instruction manual was also left in her possession for a guide.
system should have been adjusted if there was too much water, causing problems
such as no new grass growth in the backyard or
pooling of water. This can only
be gauged by the tenant with common sense, who has an obligation by lease to
maintain the gardens
& correct any problems ie. by adjusting the irrigation
system, as previously shown, referring to the instruction manual or requesting
Matthew to return (Matthew had verbally stated to ... to call him if she had any
problems & left his contact numbers with her).
If ...was not
capable or confident enough to control the watering system, we stated in our
letter 28/5/01 that the watering system
could be turned off & we would
supply moveable sprinklers for her use.
... ZUBER – TENANCY PROBLEMS
The following problems I wish to draw to your attention regarding ...
Zuber as an unsuitable / unreliable tenant:
... gave us 7 days to vacate
our property for her to rent. We ‘bent over backwards’ to have the
house landscaped &
available for her & her children to move into within
the week. She was eager to rent as she was going through a divorce &
family home in Red Hill was to be sold. ... knew upon acceptance of the property
lease that the grass was still to be grown
& that the heating metre would
need to be ordered and
... advised of
problems & we responded immediately. ... was then uncontactable by home
phone or mobile or rarely at the property,
this cause great difficulty advising
trades for works.
responded or replied to any messages on her phone or letters, proving her
unwillingness to
... made false
statements on 2 occasions: a) stated in her solicitors letter dated 25/5/01 that
she was "instructed not to alter the
watering system", the opposite occurred see
Matthew Kearns statutory declaration. B) ... stated in her letter to Century 21
needing attention 21/5/01 that "the tap in the ensuite pours out nozzle
when turned off". Upon inspection no leak was
... kept 2 dogs at the
property. The dogs cause many problems with landscaping – growing grass.
The dogs were also a breech
of the lease agreement & kept without our
knowledge. Once we found out about the dogs, through the Lawn Doctor (not
through...),
... said they were only their for a short time. They were never
moved or a Pet Agreement signed by..., as requested by Century 21
occasions. Even on vacating the property dog faeces were left in the
... did not attend
the final inspection with Century 21, or advise them that she could not
... ignored 2 notices
from the Queanbeyan City Council in relation to the incorrect use of the green
waste bin. The Council stopped
collection & I had to phone then 13/6/01 to
inform them the tenant had vacated the property & that we would like the
service re-started. The Council noted that I was the owner & the
complaint regarding the tenant’s contamination of green
collection service was re-started the following
... left the property
with 16 items of damages & cleaning required to be rectified. ... did not
fix or pay for any problems caused
by her, Century 21 had to obtain quotes for
these works & organise the rectification works for the property to be
suitable for
re-letting.
Some damages include:
flyscreen damaged by
dint in internal
garage wall
sliding door
pulley system
dishwasher left full of
dirty dishes
rubbish bins left
overgrown weeds in garden
dog faeces in the back
... did not attend our
Tribunal Hearing appointment 11/10/01, she did not phone or write to let us or
the Tribunal know of her absence.
This wasted work time for myself, Century 21
Janice McGrath & the Tribunal as the Tribunal will now set another date,
to be advised).
has made no attempt to pay for our loss of rent, advertising costs to find a new
tenant or rectification works to fix problems
caused by her. This has put a
huge financial strain
on us, the owner, to pay the mortgage & all
associated costs because ... broke our lease
... stated in her
‘Application for Tenancy’ & information gathered through her
referees, that she was financially
stable (her occupation was home duties),
drove a Mercedes 4WD, children attended Canberra Grammar School & she owned
EVERY ATTEMPT MADE TO FIND A NEW TENANT
... left the property on 8/6/01 in an unsatisfactory condition. See
Century 21 letter 13/6/01. Many items damaged or required cleaning
fixed before the property could be shown to a new tenant. ... made no attempt to
rectify these works, Century 21 obtained
quotes & organised rectification
I obtained advice / guidance from the Tenancies Tribunal on the
29/5/01 & the 7/9/01 with regards to re-letting our property &
a new tenant & costs that could be billed to ... for her breech of our lease
agreement. I was advised to advertise the
property at the same rental at which
... was paying & reduce the rent every couple of weeks until I found a
suitable tenant.
Our property was advertised in The Canberra Times
every Wednesday and Saturday, the 1
ad was placed Wednesday 13 June
2001, on the Century 21 web site, letters sent to the Embassies & I also
listed the property
for rent with Maurie O’Connell, Peter Blackshaw &
L J Hooker Real Estates to increase the exposure of the house. Century
a suitable tenant to take over the remainder of...’s lease @ $380 per week
to 8 March 2002. I once again phoned the
Tenancies Tribunal & again
explained my situation, they stated I should accept the tenant if the rent they
negotiated to pay
was fair & reasonable & to proceed with the new lease
agreement & send ...a final statement of costs. ... was sent a
statement by Century 21 10/9/01 – we have had no response from ... to
The property is an executive new home fully furnished & with
a 6 month lease.
This property has a limited clientele; this is why
the property took several months to find a suitable tenant.
mitigate any loss we accepted our new tenants offer of $380 per week & for
them to move in the next day 8/9/01.
As stated in correspondence from myself; Century 21 Real Estate
Managing Agent; statutory declarations & letterheads from various
solicitor Hansen & Co & advise from the Residential Tenancies Tribunal,
... Zuber ‘broke’ the lease
agreement by vacating our property
8/6/01 & is liable / responsible for all costs associated totaling
Our intention was to rent our property for 12 months,
move back to my parents home & save to pay extra off our mortgage. We want
to have a baby but wanted to be financially stable on one income once we moved
back into our home. As noted above & in other
correspondence we rented our
property to a tenant whom did not treat our property or us with respect. ...
Zuber was only in our property
several month months, she noted several items
that required maintenance which we promptly acted on without any cooperation
... also dealt with her solicitor not Century 21 or us in her
complaints which made it extremely difficult to contact her & organise
rectification works. She also left our property with many items damaged or
requiring cleaning etc.
... vacated our property leaving us with
no income, a fully furnished vacant property (we felt uneasy with no one there,
as our property
& furnishings were left an easy target for vandals or
thieves). We were & are still financially in debt due to ... not
contributing
financially to any advertising costs, rental or rectification works
for damage caused by her.
I & Century 21 Janice McGrath will
attend our next hearing (date still to be determined) & hope that judgement
will be awarded
to compensate all associated costs for ... Zuber
‘breaking’ our lease agreement.
A copy of this letter
& all associated paperwork has been forwarded to Pappas J Attorney, Leslie
Strong, by mail on 23/10/01.
(... Zuber’s
new solicitor
longer McGuinness Ely. I phone McGuinness Ely 22/10/01 to check where to send
this information to ensure she receives
it, they advised me they no longer acted
for ... & gave me the new solicitors details). Pappas J Attorney advised me
has again moved but would not advise of her new address. Any previous
mail that was posted to ... at her Deakin address had return
address information
printed on the back of the envelopes – no mail was ever
I phone Pappas J Attorney on 22/10/01 to advise them I
had documents to be given to..., they said they acted for her but would have
back on 23/10/01 stating they had talked to ...
advised them not to
accept any documents.
On receiving this information I was extremely
frustrated with...’s refusal to accept documents, so I phoned the
of Fair Trading – Renting Services who advised me to serve the
documents on her solicitor.
Information you may
Pappas J Attorney, Leslie Strong
31-33 London
Circuit, Canberra City
Phone 6257 6956
Once again...’s
refusal and unwillingness to cooperate has surfaced. She has not notified us of
her new solicitor or change
of address details ...’s instructions to her
solicitors to decline acceptance of documentation proves here efforts to avoid
the Tribunal’s orders.
The landlord filed in the Tribunal a
number of statutory declarations from witnesses:
... Jerrabomberra
lawns quoted on
price accepted around
Area not ready ie
levelling or irrigation till end of Feb/early March
Called 4 times during march
01, either too wet or dogs out or
Finally seeded on 3/4/01
front only, dogs out in the
In 6 visits to the property
from early march 2001 the dogs were loose in the rear of the yard and one visit
were shut in the garage
but dogs faeces were left in the
(b) Mathews Kearns:
Landscaping –
Backyard lawn
I purchased and spread lawn seed in the
backyard on 11April 2001 and again on 28 May 2001.
Watering Irrigation
In March 2001 I instructed ... Zuber, our new
tenant on how to operate the watering system. I also explained the setting was
how to adjust it as required. I left the instruction manual on how to
operate it in her possession and asked her to call me if she
Leaking showers and
Upon ... vacating our property I inspected the
showers, they were not sealed properly by Stegbar. Danielle contacted Stegbar
under warranty, resealed the shower bases.
The ensuite tap
was not leaking as reported by....
(c) Furie Nadre:
21/5/2001 Danielle Kearns phoned me to report that the tenant had complained of
leaking showers and a leaking tap. I told Danielle
I was too busy that afternoon
to visit the property but took the tenants details to phone to organise a
suitable time to check the
I tried phoning the home number
and mobile of the tenant with no answer several times.
28/5/2001 I phoned Danielle at 11am to inform her that the tenant’s home
phone number was disconnected.
(d) Shane Kelly:
May 2001 I was asked by M & D Kearns to connect the in floor heating to the
above address. They informed me that they
had the Great Southern Energy Metre
and that they would deliver this to me the following day.
May 2001 Danielle Kearns gave me the remote control for access to the garage and
metre and said that she would phone the
tenant and arrange for a time convenient
for the heating to be connected.
I was phoned by Danielle on the 17
May 2001 to inform me of a time on the Friday afternoon that I could complete
the connection. I
was informed that the tenant would be at home or that the
garage internal door would be left open for me to ascertain entry into
for testing procedures.
On the 18 May 2001 I arrived to find no one
suggested I try again later. I called past the property again later that
afternoon to find the same situation.
I again informed Danielle who
tried continuously to contact the tenant to no avail, messages were left with my
phone number for the
tenant to contact me to arrange a suitable time for the
connection.
I never received a returned phone call from the tenant.
The heating was connected upon ... vacating the property and Danielle Kearns
giving me access to the property.
The landlord produced a copy of the
tenant’s application for the tenancy which indicated that the tenant had a
cat but no dogs
and a copy of the tenant’s rent
The agent tendered a copy of a letter to
the tenant dated 12 October 2001 which read:
attending the tribunal hearing yesterday, the owners of the above property and I
had further discussions and would like to try
and settle this as soon as
I have enclosed again, a copy all of the documents,
which have been lodged with the tribunal.
The owners are willing
to discuss a reduced payment for the total outstanding amount claimed
The agent tendered a letter from Pappas
J, attorney dated 24 October 2001 which read:
We refer to
the documents you forwarded to this firm under cover of your letter dated 23
October 2001. We also refer to the telephone
conversation you had with Jeanie of
this office on the morning of 23 October 2001.
We confirm once
again that we do not have instruction to accept service of any documents (other
than Family Court documents) on behalf
of Mrs Zuber.
We therefore
return the documents herewith.
On the 7 November 2001 the tenant did
not appear and the agent sought to precede
. The Tribunal
received no communication from the tenant to explain her
The agent gave evidence that she rang
Pappas J attorneys and spoke to a solicitor there. The agent said that the
following conversation
Agent: "are you acting for
Solicitor" yes"
Agent: "I have documents to serve on her can I
have her address"
Solicitor: "No"
Agent: "Can I send them to
Solicitor: "We can’t accept service without the consent of the
The next day the solicitor rang the
agent and said "Ms Zuber has said not to accept
FINDINGS OF FACT
The tenant claims that the premises were
defective from the commencement of the lease by reason of:
leaking shower,
ensuite and main bathroom-outside shower frames and onto
No grass in back
yard-landscaping incomplete-children have nowhere to
Watering system flooding
front and back yard.
In relation to the underfloor heating,
the landlord’s admitted that it was not functional at the commencement of
In their letter forwarded to McGuinness Ely on 28 May 2001 the
landlords maintain that the delay was due to the unavailability of
parts. These parts became available on 11 May 2001 and the agent then made
arrangements with the tenant for the electrician
to fit them. In the
communications to McGuinness Ely the agent and landlord both allege that the
tenant failed to keep to the arrangements
made to provide access to the
electrician. They allege that the electrician thereafter made a number of
efforts to contact the tenant
to carry out the work, but the tenant did not
return any of the calls. The landlords then wrote to the tenant on 28 May 2001
advised her of the contact details of the electrician for her to contact to
make suitable arrangements for the work to be done. The
electrician, Shane
Kelly, testified in his statutory declaration that the tenant did not at any
time contact him. A chronology of
the attempts to contact the tenant to arrange
the installation is contained in the landlord’s 8 page summary document at
7 above and includes attempted contacts on 12 May, 17 May, 18 May and
In her letter of 28 May 2001 to the
agent, the tenant maintains that she contacted the receptionist at the agents
office on 6 occasions
to have the problem fixed. There is no mention of these
attempts in the agents records. Further, in McGuinness Ely’s letter
May 2001 they maintain on the tenant’s behalf that she had been
endeavouring unsuccessfully to contact the electrician.
For reasons given below
relating to the tenants general failure to make contact or repond to the agents
correspondence, the considerable
reservations the Tribunal has concerning the
tenants credibility and the absence of any explanation as to why the tenant
agent’s office beyond the receptionist on 6 occasions, the
Tribunal is not
inclined to believe this assertion by the tenant.
The Tribunal has no evidence as the
extent or nature of the inconvenience caused to the tenant by reason of the lack
of underfloor
heating. This situation arises because the tenant has failed to
comply with the interim orders of the Tribunal and, for reasons given
appears to have deliberately avoided service of landlord’s particulars of
claim to which the tenant was required to
respond. The absence of this evidence
on behalf of the tenant is entirely the tenant’s own
The Tribunal finds that the underfloor
heating was not in place at the commencement of the lease on 6 March 2001, but
would have been
installed by 12 May 2001 had the tenant not failed to co-operate
with the landlord in arranging access to the premises for the
installation.
In relation to the leaking shower, the
landlord asserts that they were only put on notice of the defect on 21 May 2001
and made immediate
arrangements for its rectification through Furie Nadi,
plumber. The plumber attended the property on the same day but could not gain
entry and could not contact the tenant by phone to make other arrangements. The
agent wrote to the tenant on 28 May 2001 advising
her of the details of the
plumber for the tenant to make direct contact.
The only evidence before the Tribunal
concerning the extent of the problem caused by the leaking shower is that
contained in the letter
of McGuinness Ely of 25 May 2001. Again the absence of
any evidence from the tenant on the nature and extent of the problem caused
entirely the tenant’s own doing by reason of her deliberate actions to
avoid service of the landlord’s particulars
of claim and the
tenant’s failure to comply with the interim orders.
The problem of the grass in the back
yard stems from three sources:
the tenant’s failure to respond to
the attempted contacts by the Lawn Doctor (Ian White) or by the
agent/landlord;
the destructive effect of
the tenant’s dogs in the back yard, whose present was a breach of the
lease by the tenant; The presence
of the dogs not only eroded the existing turf,
but their presence prevented the tradesmen from entering the back yard to carry
the work in the tenant’s absence. The presence of dog faeces
throughout the back yard was also a
the failure of the tenant to
adjust the automatic sprinkling system. The tenant had been shown how to work
the system by the landlord
on two occasions, but in any event could either have
sought a second lesson on the topic or have turn it off and use movable
sprinklers.
Simply to do nothing and allow damage to accrue to the property
without contacting the agent is probably a breach of sections 26(1)(b)
(c) of the 1987 Act by the tenant.
Factors (b) and (c) above both amount to
breaches on the tenant’s part and thus hardly form a basis of complaint by
the tenant.
The tenant’s failure to make contact with the agent or the
Lawn Doctor to make suitable arrangements is at least a failure
tenant’s part to mitigate her losses (section 15 1987
Through out the documentary evidence set
out above the constant theme is that the tenant has failed to make any contact
with the agent,
the landlord or the tradesmen. The agent sent the tenant a
letter dated 26 April 2001 in which the agent complained of her inability
The tenant was thus on notice of difficulty the
agent was having contacting her.
The tenant had her home phone disconnected and apparently would not, or could
not access the message
bank on her mobile phone. Further, the tenant appeared
not to have rang any of the above persons herself, and not to have personally
attended the agent’s office other than on 21 May 2001, in response to any
of the messages or correspondence.
The tenant attended the agent’s
office in person on 21 May 2001 and delivered a letter asking for the four items
to be done. Without further contact with the agent the tenant then
instructed her solicitor, McGuinness Ely to serve a notice dated
25 May 2001 on
the landlord to remedy the defects, giving 14 days for the landlord to carry out
the maintenance and repairs. Then
without waiting for the 14 days to elapse the
tenant purported to serve on the landlord a notice of termination of the lease
on the landlord’s alleged breaches. The notice itself was served by
being placed under the agent’s door on 28 May 2001.
In the meantime the agent responded to
McGuinness Ely by letter dated 28 May 2001 informing them of the difficulties
experienced in
The letter makes it clear that the repairs can be done as soon
tenant’s co-operation is achieved in securing access to the premise. On 28
May 2001 the landlords left at the premises
a list of tradespersons so that the
tenant could make direct contact if she choose. On 29 May 2001 the agents wrote
to the tenant
at the premises again outlining the communication problems and the
arrangements for the repairs and warning the tenant that any abandonment
lease on her part will result in a claim by the landlord for foregone rent.
There is no reason to suppose that the tenant
did not receive this letter in the
ordinary course of the post. Without making further contact with the landlord,
the tenant then
vacated the premises on 6 June 2001.
After the tenant’s letter of 28
May 2001 neither the agent nor the landlord were able to secure any further
with the tenant. The tenant left no forwarding address and did
not answer calls to her mobile phone. The agent and landlord only
had contact
with the tenant’s solicitor.
The agent endeavoured to communicate
with the tenant through her solicitors, McGuinness Ely. The tenant’s
solicitors were informed
of the nature of the landlord’s claim and the
items of damage to the premises allegedly caused by the tenant, by Hanson and
Co, solicitors for the landlord by letter of 31 May 2001 and by letter of 28 May
2001 from the agent. The Tribunal has no reason
to suppose that McGuinness Ely
did not pass on these pieces of correspondence to the tenant and notes that by
letter of 6 June 2001
McGuinness Ely appears to have had contact with the tenant
on that day. The Tribunal does note however that McGuinness Ely, in their
of 14 June 2001 say that their last contact was on 8 June 2001 at which point
further instructions were obtained, but they
had been unable to contact the
tenant since. The Tribunal is thus satisfied that the various letters sent to
the tenant’s premises
prior to the beginning of June and the letters,
faxes and telephone communications to McGuinness Ely prior to 8 June 2001 would
come to the tenant’s attention and therefore she was well aware of
the existence and nature of the landlord’s claim against
On 20 June 2001 the agent spoke with Mr
Ely by phone who apparently informed the agent that he too had been unable to
make further
tenant directly at her new home, the address of which the solicitor
gave to the agent (being 24 Macgregor Street, Deakin in the ACT). Thereafter the
agent wrote to the tenant at that address
setting out the full nature of the
landlord’s claim including the letters of 25 June, 10 August, 22 August
and 10 September
2001. The Tribunal has no reason to believe that these letters
did not come to the tenant’s attention.
The landlord’s made a claim on the
rental bond by letter of 28 June 2001. It is normal practice for the Rental Bond
advice of the claim. Presumably this was done and the tenant
became further
aware of the landlord’s claim. As it transpires the tenant did not contest
the release of the bond and the sum
of $2080.00 was paid out to the
The Tribunal made interim orders on 11
October 2001 which required both the landlord and the tenant to serve particular
of her case
on each other and the Tribunal within 2 weeks. The orders also
specifically noted that if the tenant did not appear the matter may
The landlord complied with the interim
orders in so far as they served the documents on the Tribunal, the tenant did
not. The agent
had endeavoured to serve the documents on the tenant by mail but
the mail was "returned to sender" with the notation that the tenant
lived at that address.
The agent advised that on 22 October
2001 they contacted McGuinness Ely to arrange service on the tenant of the
documents required
by the interim orders. They were then told that McGuinness
Ely were no longer acting for the tenant, the new solicitors were Pappas
attorneys. The agent then rang Pappas J who advised that the tenant had since
moved address again but they were not at liberty
to advise the new address or to
accept service of the documents with out the tenant’s instructions. On the
next day Pappas
J advised by phone that the tenant had expressly instructed them
not to accept service of the landlord’s
Section 27 (3) of the 1998 Act requires
provides that the Tribunal should act with as little informal as the
circumstances of case
permit and according to equity, good conscience and the
substantial merits of the case. Section 27(5)(a) requires that the Tribunal
as expeditiously as possible. The tenant had ample notice of the
landlord’s claim and was fully aware of the proceedings
Tribunal. The Tribunal formed the view that the tenant was avoiding service of
documents from the landlord and had shown
no interest in actively defending the
proceedings in the Tribunal, rather she was seeking to avoid the proceedings.
The tenant did
not advise the Tribunal of her move from Macgregor St Deakin in
the ACT so that any new notice of hearing could be sent to her new
address, she
made no inquiry of the Tribunal as to any new hearing date, and she instructed
her solicitors not to disclose her new
address to the landlord and not to accept
service of any documents (in any event, presumably the tenant in fact received
of hearing from the Tribunal dated 23 October 2001 via any
arrangements she made for the re-direction of her mail). In these circumstances
the Tribunal saw little value in further adjournment of the proceedings and
could not see that any such adjournment would promote
expedition or the
ascertainment of the substantial merits of the case (
Lismore Women’s and Children’s Refuge
01/09100). Section 27 reads:
27 Procedure of Tribunal
(1) The Tribunal may, subject to
, determine its own procedure.
Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inquire into and inform
itself on any matter in such manner as it
thinks fit, subject to the rules of
natural justice.
(3) The Tribunal is to act with as little formality as the
circumstances of the case permit and according to equity, good conscience
the substantial merits of the case without regard to technicalities or legal
(4) The Tribunal is to take such measures as are reasonably
practicable to ensure that the parties to the proceedings before it understand:
(a) the nature of the assertions made in the proceedings and the legal
implications of those assertions, and
(b) the procedure of the Tribunal and
any decision or ruling made by the Tribunal that relates to the proceedings.
(5) The Tribunal:
(a) is to act as expeditiously as is practicable, and
(b) is to ensure, as far as practicable, that all relevant material is
disclosed to the Tribunal so as to enable it to determine
all of the relevant
facts in issue in any proceedings, and
(c) may require evidence or argument
to be presented in writing and decide on the matters on which it will hear oral
evidence or
argument, and
(d) in the case of a hearing may require the
presentation of the respective cases of the parties before it to be limited to
the periods
of time that it determines are reasonably necessary for the fair and
adequate presentation of the cases, and
(e) may require a document to be
served outside the State, and
(f) may adjourn proceedings to any time and
place (including for the purpose of enabling the parties to negotiate a
settlement),
(g) may dismiss at any stage any proceedings before it for
want of prosecution by the applicant (and must, at the applicant's request,
allow the applicant to withdraw the application), and
(h) may dismiss at
any stage any proceedings before it if it considers the proceedings to be
frivolous or vexatious or for any other
reason that appears to it sufficient,
(i) may, at any stage in proceedings before it, order that the
proceedings be stayed.
(6) The Registrar or Deputy Registrar is to give to
any party to proceedings that have been stayed under subsection (5) (i), and
was not present or represented when the proceedings were stayed, a notice that
the proceedings are stayed.
The Tribunal has the power to control
its own processes (s27(1)) which includes preventing an abuse of process by a
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
51 ALD 519).
This power includes the power to determine a
(notwithstanding
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
2001 VSC 35
to the contrary), but if
any doubt existed on this point then regulation 24
Residential Tribunal
Regulations 1999
("the 1999 Regs") explicitly provides such a power and the
Tribunal is satisfied that both reg 24(a) and, in the alternative reg
are apposite:
24 Ex parte proceedings
The Tribunal may proceed to hear a matter ex parte:
(a) if it is
satisfied that notice of the hearing was duly served on the party failing to
(i) being satisfied that service of notice of the
hearing has been duly attempted, or
(ii) having given directions under
clause 32 (6), the Tribunal considers that justice requires that the matter be
dealt with in the
absence of the party concerned.
Section 25 of the 1987 Act requires that
the landlord provide the premises in a reasonable state of repair at the
commencement of
the lease and maintain them in such condition throughout the
25 Landlord's responsibility for cleanliness and
(1) It is a term of every residential tenancy agreement that:
(a) the landlord shall provide the residential premises in a reasonable
state of cleanliness and fit for habitation by the tenant,
landlord shall provide and maintain the residential premises in a reasonable
state of repair, having regard to the age of,
rent payable for and prospective
life of the premises.
(2) In this section: residential premises includes
everything provided with the premises (whether under the residential tenancy
or not) for use by the tenant.
The Tribunal was not satisfied that
there was any defect in the watering system and hence there was no breach of
section 25. Rather
it seemed that the tenant had not taken the time to properly
understand how to work the system notwithstanding two lessons from the
The Tribunal was not satisfied that the
loss of turf, and failure to returf, the back yard was due to any breach on the
part. The problem was initially caused by the presence of the
tenant’s dogs in breach of the lease and the tenant’s failure
properly water the grass. The landlord’s endeavours to repair the lawn was
then frustrated by the failure of the tenant
to make the back yard available for
tradesman access.
The absence of the underfloor heating in
workable condition at the commencement of the lease was a breach by the landlord
25. The heating was a feature of the house and the rent was at the
very top end of the market around Queanbeyan and it was "reasonable"
meaning of section 25(1)(b) for the landlord to provide the house with the
underfloor heating in a functional condition
Residential Tenancies
Law and Practice in NSW 2001
ed Anforth, Thawley and Christensen). The
tenant had a right to expect the underfloor heating to work from the
commencement of the
lease in accordance with what she had bargained for. The
landlord was aware of the problem from the start of the lease and so there
issue of the landlord’s liability running only from the point the tenant
put the landlord on notice of the defect ([2.25.4]-[2.25.5]
Residential
Tenancies Law and Practice in NSW
2001 ed Anforth, Thawley and
Christensen).
The Tribunal further found as a fact
that had the tenant made reasonable endeavours to facilitate the
landlord’s efforts to
activate the underfloor heating then it would been
functional by 12 May 2001 (the lease having commenced on 6 March
The question arises whether this breach
by the landlord is a sufficient basis for the tenant to terminate the lease by
serving a notice
of termination and vacating the premises. There are two
competing schools of thought on this issue which are set out at [2.57.1]
Residential Tenancies Law and Practice in NSW
2001 ed Anforth, Thawley
and Christensen.
The modes by which a lease may be
terminated are exhaustively set out in section 53 of the 1987 Act. For present
purposes the relevant
part is section 53(a)(i) which requires only that the
tenant gives (or serves) a notice of termination on the landlord (alleging
breach on the landlord’s part per the requirements for a valid notice of
termination in section 57(1)) and the tenant thereafter
delivers vacate
possession in accordance with their notice.
Termination of residential tenancy agreements
A residential tenancy
agreement terminates only in one or more of the following circumstances:
if the landlord or the tenant gives notice of termination under this Part and:
(i) the tenant delivers up vacant possession of the residential premises on
or after the day specified in the notice, or
(ii) the Tribunal makes an
order under
(which relates to
applications to the Tribunal by the landlord for termination) terminating the
(b) if the Tribunal makes an order terminating the agreement,
Significantly, section 53(a)(i) makes no
requirement for an order of possession from the Tribunal, the service of the
notice and the
act of delivery vacant possession appears to operate in a self
executing manner. Further, section 53(a)(i) does not require that
landlord’s breach be of any minimum level of gravity in order to justify
the tenant serving a notice of termination and
vacating. Thus a tenant could
terminate a fixed term lease for the most minor of breaches. This is the essence
of first school of
thought set out at [2.57.1] Anforth, Thawley and
Christensen
This stands in stark contradistinction
to landlord initiated terminations for which section 53(a)(ii) does requires an
order of possession
from the Tribunal based on a breach of sufficient gravity to
justify the eviction of the tenant, and the notice of termination itself
mere statutory prerequisite to seeking the order from the
The second school of though proceeds
from an acknowledgment of the obvious unfairness of allowing a tenant to breach
a fixed term
lease for a minor breach and the general lack of reciprocity in the
legislation in the manner in which landlords and tenants are
treated on this
issue. This school of thought would read into section 53(a)(i) the additional
requirement that the tenant must secure
an order from the Tribunal pursuant to
section 70 and that the notice of termination is a mere statutory pre-requisite
to an order
under section 70:
70 Tribunal may terminate
residential tenancy agreement for breach
(1) The Tribunal may, on
application by a tenant under a residential tenancy agreement, make an order
terminating the agreement if
it is satisfied:
(a) that the landlord has
breached the agreement, and
(b) that the breach, in the special
circumstances of the case, is such as to justify termination of the agreement
under this section.
(2) If the Tribunal makes an order terminating a
residential tenancy agreement under this section, the Tribunal shall also make
order for possession of the residential premises specifying the day on which
the order takes effect. Division 4 Recovery of possession
of residential
The second school of thought has
superficial attraction in terms of reciprocity although it suffers the defects
it requires a substantial rewrite of
section 53(a)(i) by way of reading additional words into the section; and it
requires a similarly
that there be read into section 70 the additional
requirement that a notice of termination have been serve on the landlord by the
tenant as a pre-requisite to the operation of section 70:
it introduces its own unfairness in
that section 70 only permits an order of termination where "special
circumstances" exist and thus
a tenant would have to prove a greater breach
under section 70 than would a landlord have to prove under section 64, to secure
order of the Tribunal terminating the lease.
The authorities on the issue are set out
in [2.57.1]
Residential Tenancies Law and Practice in NSW
Anforth, Thawley and Christensen which include a call for legislative
clarification of this most unsatisfactory situation.
The present Tribunal
adheres to the view expressed in Newman
Blundell-Felisak
97/023358) and
Dupont and Rowe
(RTT 97/022753)
and by the Queensland Court of Appeal in
(unreported QCA 27/10/97) to the effect that any breach by the landlord is
sufficient to base a tenant’s notice of termination
which has a self
executing effect but wholly concurs in the need for legislative
The Tribunal therefore finds that the
tenant was entitled to service a notice of termination on the landlord by reason
of the landlord’s
breach in relation to the underfloor heating and, if the
notice is valid in form and lawfully served on the landlord, the lease would
have terminated on the tenant giving vacant possession in accordance with the
Section 130(4) of 1987 Act and reg 25(2)
Residential Tenancies (Residential Premises) Regulations 1995
the issue of service of notices of termination by tenants on
25 Service of notices of termination: sec 130
(2) For the purposes of
section 130 (4) of
the Act, a notice of
termination given under
the Act to a landlord may be
(a) by delivering it personally to the landlord, the landlord's
agent under the residential tenancy agreement or a person apparently
of or above
the age of 16 years to whom the rent payable to the landlord is ordinarily paid,
(b) by sending it by post to the landlord's usual place of residence or
business or employment, or
(c) by sending it by post or facsimile
transmission to the usual place of business of the landlord's agent under the
residential
tenancy agreement.
The evidence was that the tenant put the
notice under the landlord agent’s door and that the agent received it that
next day. Putting a notice under a door is not one of the prescribed
modes of service. However in
Master Harrison held that the modes of service set out in reg 25 were
not exhaustive and other modes of service were valid where
the notice was in
fact brought to the other parties attention. In the present case the landlord
admits to receiving the notice and
so the Tribunal is satisfied that valid
service has occurred.
The remaining issue is whether the
notice of termination dated 28 May 2001 and served on that date is valid as to
form. The validity
of such a notice is determined by reference to section 57(1)
and (2) 1987 Act which reads:
57 Notice of termination on
ground of breach of agreement
(1) A landlord or a tenant may give
notice of termination of a residential tenancy agreement to the other party on
the ground that
the other party has breached a term of the agreement.
notice of termination given under this section shall not specify a day earlier
than 14 days after the day on which the notice
is given as the day on which
vacant possession of the residential premises is to be or will be delivered up
to the landlord.
In the present case the notice was
"given" on 28 May 2001 and specified the 4 June 2001 as the date for vacant
possession. Plainly
this is not 14 days notice as required by section 57(2). The
notice itself said that it was intended to operate retrospectively from
2001 and thus the 4 June is 14 days notice. Section 57 makes no provision for
retrospective notices and the very concept of
retrospective notice is
inconsistent with the notion of "notice" per se. There is no authority of which
the Tribunal is aware which
supports the notice of a retrospective notice and
certainly none in the context of the 1987 Act. The notice of termination is
and hence is ineffective to bring the lease to an end within the fixed
The Tribunal does have discretion under
section 66 of the 1987 Act to waive defects in notices of termination, including
an insufficiency
of days notice, but it requires that the Tribunal be satisfied
that "special circumstances" exist to justify the exercise of the
discretion. In
this case the Tribunal is not satisfied that special circumstance exist which
would support the exercise of the discretion.
To the contrary, the Tribunal is
of the view that the substantial merits of the case are on the landlord’s
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the
tenant has abandoned the premises within the fixed term of the lease such that
of the 1987 Act applies:
78 Right of landlord
to compensation where tenant abandons premises
(1) If a tenant under a
residential tenancy agreement abandons the residential premises, the tenant is
liable to pay compensation
to the landlord for any loss (including loss of rent)
caused by the abandonment.
(2) The landlord shall take all reasonable steps
to mitigate the loss and is not entitled to compensation for any loss that could
have been avoided by taking those steps.
(3) The Tribunal may, on
application by the landlord, order a tenant to pay to the landlord such
compensation (including compensation
for loss of rent) as it thinks fit.
Pursuant to section 78, the tenant is
prima facie
, liable for the rent for the balance of the fixed term or
until a new tenant is found, which ever first occurs, subject to the
duty to mitigation their losses arising from the tenant
15 Parties to minimise loss from breach of
residential tenancy agreement
(1) The rules of law relating to
mitigation of loss or damage on breach of a contract apply to a breach of a
residential tenancy
(2) Nothing in this section affects the
operation of
(which also deals
with mitigation of loss).
The Tribunal is satisfied that the
landlord undertook reasonable efforts to advertise the premises in the Canberra
Times (see paragraph
3 above for details) and in their own office window. The
agent initially advertised the premises at the rent applicable to the
lease which was the appropriate course of action. When no new
tenants were forthcoming the agent was justified in advertising the
premises at
a reduced rent to attract a tenant. Indeed, had the agent continued to maintain
the rent at the original level and thereby
failed to attract any tenant, the
agent would have been open to a charge of failing to mitigate the
landlord’s losses. A new
tenant was eventually found and the new lease
commenced on 8 September, albeit at a reduced rent of $380.00 pw which in all
the circumstances
was a reasonable rent. The tenant’s liability then is
for the rent from 20 June to 7 September 2001 at the full rate and from
September to 6 March 2002 at the differential rate (being the difference between
$2259.52per month and $380 per week) which is
$8224.50. In addition to this the
sum of $77.23 was incurred for advertising fees which is a cost to the landlord
arising from the
tenant’s breach.
In addition to the debt for rent the
landlord made claims for the outstanding water accounts, various repairs and
cleaning required.
The water accounts were sighted and related to the period of
the tenancy. The water accounts are allowed in the sum of
The tenants liability for repairs and
cleaning is found in section 26 of the 1987 Act:
Cleanliness, notification of damage to residential premises etc
is a term of every residential tenancy agreement that:
(a) having regard to
the condition of the residential premises at the commencement of the tenancy,
the tenant shall keep the residential
premises in a reasonable state of
cleanliness,
(b) the tenant shall, as soon as practicable, notify the
landlord of any damage to the residential premises,
(c) the tenant shall
not intentionally or negligently cause or permit any damage to the residential
premises, and
(d) at the termination of the tenancy, the tenant shall leave
the residential premises as nearly as possible in the same condition,
and tear excepted, as set out in any condition report forming part of the
residential tenancy agreement.
(2) In this section: residential premises
includes everything provided with the premises (whether under the residential
tenancy agreement
or not) for use by the tenant.
The landlord has itemised each item of
the claim and supported them with quotes and invoices set out above. The
landlord produced
an Ingoing Condition Report and photographs. The landlord did
not press most of the items of damage and none of the cleaning. The
pressed by the landlord were those relating to the lawns and plants in the sum
of $1503.95. The Tribunal is satisfied
that this claim was justified and was
caused by the tenant’s dogs and the tenant’s failure to maintain the
The agent sought her costs for the
hearing pursuant to section 48 of the 1998 Act, which
(1) The parties to a matter
before the Tribunal are to bear their own costs, except as provided by this
(2) Except to the extent that the regulations otherwise provide,
the Tribunal may award costs in relation to proceedings before it
parties were granted the right to legal representation.
(3) The Tribunal
may also award costs in relation to proceedings before it:
(a) in respect
of expenses incurred by a party in being represented by an agent in accordance
(b) in respect
of expenses incurred in a manner or in circumstances prescribed by the
regulations, or
(c) in respect of any particular expenses, if it is
satisfied that there are special circumstances warranting an award of costs in
respect of them.
(4) The Tribunal may:
(a) determine by whom and to
what extent costs are to be paid, and
(b) order costs to be assessed on the
basis set out in Division 6 of
Legal Profession Act 1987
on any other basis.
(5) In this section, costs includes:
(a) costs of
or incidental to proceedings in the Tribunal, and
(b) the costs of or
incidental to the application.
Alternative
dispute resolution Division 1 Conciliation and preliminary measures
The managing agent’s fees for
appearing before the Tribunal falls within section 33(3) of the 1998 Act and reg
13(j) of the
1999 Regulations and is therefore within section 48(3)(a). But in
any event the Tribunal is satisfied that the conduct of the tenant
proceedings justifies the awarding of landlord’s costs, including the
agent’s fees pursuant to section
Residential Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (219 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter