URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2018/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CHATOOR, Roger [2018] NSWMPSC 5 (30 July 2018)
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
CONSTITUTED PURSUANT TO PART 8 of
THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW
To HOLD AN INQUIRY INTO A COMPLAINT IN RELATION TO
Dr Roger Chatoor
Date/s of Inquiry:
10, 11, 12, July 2018
Committee members:
Dr Arthur Glass (non medical) Chairperson Dr David Ross
Dr Lynne Pressley
Dr Catherine Berglund (non medical)
Officer assisting Committee:
Ms Svetlana Chernyakova
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Angela Petrie of counsel instructed by Ms Emma Bayley
Appearance for Dr Roger
Mr Simon Kalfas of counsel instructed by Mr David Brown
from Browns Legal and Consulting.
Date of decision:
30 July 2018
Publication of decision:
Refer to pages 25 of this decision for details of non-
publication directions
A hearing was held on 10, 11 and 12 July 2018. Some of the particulars of the
Complaint were found proven and the Committee considered
that this amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Respondent was reprimanded and several
conditions were placed on his
registration.
he background section of the Complaint reads (slightly altered):
On 9 May 2014 Patient A was admitted to Dubbo Base Hospital under the care of
another medical practitioner. On 13 May 2014 Patient
A was reviewed by the
Respondent and later that day transferred to Dubbo Private Hospital under the
Respondent’s care for ongoing
management and review. On 14 May 2014
Patient A was transferred to Gosford Private Hospital under the
Respondent’s care for
implantation of a dual pacemaker. He performed the
procedure on 15 May 2014 and on 16 May 2014 Patient A was transferred back to
Dubbo Private Hospital by air ambulance under his care. She was discharged from
Dubbo Private Hospital on 17 May 2014.
n 18 May Patient A was readmitted to Dubbo Public Hospital. She was confused
and agitated. She was diagnosed with an ST segment elevation
infarction and cardiogenic shock. In consultation with her family she was
treated palliatively. She died on 20 May 2014.
notification to the Medical Council from Scott McLachlan Chief Executive
Officer Western NSW Local Health District (of 25 September
2014) raised concerns
notification added that the
Respondent had been suspended on pay.
he Director of Clinical Governance Western LHD organised an investigation
into several of the Respondent’s cases, including
Patient A. Professor
Jelinek was the investigator. Prof Jelinek provided his report on 27 October
he notification from Scott McLachlan and other material provided to the
Medical Council triggered S 150 proceedings which took place
on 29 October 2014.
After considering this material and hearing from the Respondent the delegates
decided to take no action.
n mid-2015 a peer review report was requested by the HCCC from Professor
Jelinek. A complaint was drawn on the basis of this report.
The particulars of
the complaint alleged, in brief, that the Respondent should not have transferred
Patient A to Dubbo Private Hospital
because of her frailty and poor clinical
state. Further, the Respondent inappropriately approved the transfer of Patient
A from Gosford
Private Hospital to Dubbo Private Hospital.
Professional Standards Committee was convened on 20 September 2016 to
enquire into this Complaint. The Committee began to hear evidence
expert witnesses (Prof Jelinek and Dr Barnaby). The Committee then raised
concerns about matters not particularised, for
instance, the appropriateness of
the insertion of a pacemaker for Patient A. The Committee decided to adjourn the
proceedings and
the HCCC to investigate the issues of concern which were raised with the
expert witnesses.
his course of action was opposed by the Respondent. However, at a directions
hearing on 24 October 2016 the Chairperson confirmed
the adjournment of the
inquiry to a date to be fixed.
n November 2016 a further peer review report was requested by the HCCC from
Dr Singarayar. On the basis of Dr Singarayar’s reports
the HCCC sought to
amend the particulars to include a particular dealing with the insertion of a
pacemaker in Patient A and a particular
dealing with Patient A’s discharge
from Dubbo Private Hospital on 17 May 2014. At a directions hearing on 12
February 2018
the Chairperson granted leave to file the Amended Complaint.
n May 2018 the Chairperson became unavailable. Accordingly, the inquiry was
terminated and the Committee was reconstituted for the
purposes of conducting a
new inquiry in respect of these matters, with the earlier members joined by a
new Chairperson (see s 170E
of the National Law).
THE COMPLAINT
he Complaint is set out in full as an attachment to this decision. It alleges
that the Respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct under
section 139B(1)(a) of the
National Law
in that the he has engaged in
conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by him in the
practice of medicine is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
or experience.
he Particulars of the complaint are set out in detail below as we use these
to organise the material before the Committee. In short,
it is alleged that in
the particular circumstances of this case the Respondent should not have –
approved the transfer of the
patient to Dubbo Private Hospital, inserted a
pacemaker for the patient, approved the transfer of the patient from Gosford
Hospital to Dubbo Private Hospital and discharged the patient from Dubbo
Private Hospital.
THE RESPONDENT’S BACKGROUND
e was first registered in New South Wales on 14 January 2011. At all relevant
times with respect to this complaint, he practised as
a consultant cardiologist.
Under the National Scheme he is presently registered nationally in the category
of Specialist Registration
(Physician Cardiology) and is employed on this basis.
He has no conditions on his practice of medicine. He obtained Fellowship of
RACP in April 2012.
he Respondent’s CV is before the Committee. In outline, he was born in
1965. He graduated from the West Indies Medical Faculty
Kingston in 1990. He
became a Fellow of the Society of Cardiovascular Angiography and Intervention in
2008. Between 1992 and 2009
he held various registrar then consultancy positions
in the UK. Since 2009 he has held a number of consultancies and staff specialist
positions in Australia; first in Queensland (Cairns) and since 2010 in Dubbo
t the hearing the Respondent’s evidence was that he trained for 7 years
in the United Kingdom as a cardiologist. For 2 years
he was a Senior Researcher
cardiology at St. Thomas’s Hospital London. During his training he did
a lot of electrical device work, he said; in his view
more than most cardiology
registrars. It can be said that at the relevant time (i.e. 2014) the Respondent
had considerable experience
with implanting pacemakers.
THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
ection 139B of the National Law states:
Meaning of "unsatisfactory professional conduct"
of registered health
practitioner generally [NSW]
nsatisfactory professional conduct of a registered medical practitioner
includes each of the following:
onduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
practitioner’s profession is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of
an equivalent level of training or experience.”
he standard of proof which the Committee must apply is one of reasonable
satisfaction. And as the much-used statement of
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
"Reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or
established independently of the nature and consequence of the
fact or facts to
be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of
an occurrence of a given description,
or the gravity of the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
whether the Issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters 'reasonable satisfaction' should
not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences".
hese remarks, of course, focus the decision-makers’ attention upon the
nature of the evidence required to establish the case.
They do not change the
standard of proof, which remains that of reasonable satisfaction.
his is the legal framework in which we are to consider the material placed
before us. For the Complaint to be proven, the Committee
must be reasonably
satisfied on balance that the Respondent committed the conduct complained of and
that this conduct satisfies the
statutory definition of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. In this sense the onus is on the Commission to establish
that the Respondent
has departed to the requisite degree from the appropriate
standards. The standard of proof relevant to our fact-finding exercise
conventionally referred to as the
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(discussed above). Basically, the standard of proof is proportionate to the
gravity of the issue to be proved. These disciplinary
proceedings will have
professional and personal consequences for the Respondent and we have taken
account of this in our deliberations.
n evaluating the Respondent’s conduct he is to be judged by the
standards of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
and experience.
He is a practitioner of considerable experience and is to be judged accordingly.
One of the issues before us concerns
the decision to insert a pacemaker in
Patient A. The Respondent’s CV discloses that he was at the relevant time
a cardiologist
with much experience in this area.
he issues to be determined by this Committee are as follows.
First, whether the Committee is reasonably satisfied on balance that the
factual particulars of the Complaints are proven.
Second, whether the conduct overall amounts to unsatisfactory professional
And third, whether orders or directions made by way of Part 8, Division 3,
Subdivision 3 of the National Law are appropriate.
n issue for the Chairperson is whether non-publication directions should be
THE MATERIAL BEFORE US AND OUR REASONING RELEVANT TO EACH
he Particulars raise four allegations against the Respondent. In these
circumstances it makes sense to set out our findings immediately
after setting
out the relevant evidence for each particular, rather than in a separate section
after we have set out the evidence
before us on all of the particulars.
e set out the material before us on each particular separated for the most
part between material disclosed by the documents before
us and material
presented at the hearing; which was held on 10 11 and 12 July 2018. Evidence was
given by the Respondent and on the
first day of the hearing by five experts -
Prof Jelinek, Dr Singarayar, Dr Barnaby, Dr O’Donnell and Dr Hendel. This
was given concurrently with four doctors present in the hearing room at
Gladesville and Prof Jelinek taking part by way of a video
and when this failed
phone link.
e have had the benefit of submissions from both the HCCC and the
Respondent’s legal advisers. We have listened to these carefully
reference to them below where appropriate. There was some discussion at the
commencement of the hearing as to whether there
should be a two stage or a one
stage hearing. The Respondent requested a two stage hearing and this was not
opposed by the HCCC.
The Committee decided that it would hear the evidence
relevant to stage one and then indicate to the parties whether it considered
appropriate to proceed to stage two. After hearing this evidence the Committee
was of the view that it might make findings against
the Respondent and the
parties presented evidence and submissions relevant to stage two.
articular 1
On 13 May 2014 the Practitioner accepted the care of
Patient A in Dubbo Private Hospital, despite her frailty and poor clinical
even though Dubbo Private Hospital does not have the necessary facilities
to provide care for seriously ill patients, such as a coronary
care unit, an
intensive care unit and 24 hour registrar cover.
he documentary material
discloses the following. The Respondent
accepts this description of Dubbo Private Hospital but denies that accepting the
care of Patient
A at Dubbo Private was inappropriate. There was no significant
difference between the care she would receive at the private hospital
compared to Dubbo Public Hospital, he states. He points out that Dubbo Private
Hospital has a 4 bedded monitored unit where
patients are monitored on a routine
basis. The Respondent adds that he lives only 5 minutes from the private
hospital and that there
is a policy that seriously ill patients are transferred
rof Jelinek is of the view that there was a significant difference between
the hospitals as the public hospital had a coronary care
unit and 24-hour
registrar cover while the private hospital had no dedicated CCU, ICU or HDU and
where junior staff were not usually
available to assist with patient care. In
his view placing Patient A in Dubbo Private Hospital was substandard care which
the patient at risk.
n his S 40 response of 29 September 2015 the Respondent gives his reasoning
for transferring the patient to the private hospital.
Her bradycardias were largely the consequences of diltiazem which had been
stopped on 9 May. On the day of the transfer she had been
off the drug for 5
days and her bradycardias had effectively resolved. She was not on coronary
care, HDU or ICU but was on the general
medical ward on telemetry on the day of
the transfer. Upon transfer no further bradycardias were documented nor did they
the lead up to permanent pacing. Her pre-procedural course would have
been no different if she stayed at Dubbo Base (i.e. the public
hospital) and
even if she had remained on telemetry.
n his report of 9 August 2016 Dr Barnaby is unsure as to why the patient was
transferred to Dubbo Private Hospital rather than straight
from Dubbo Public
Hospital to Gosford Private Hospital. He is mildly critical of the decision to
admit Patient A to Dubbo Private
n his report to the Coroner Dr Hendel states that there was no medical reason
for the transfer of Patient A to Dubbo Private Hospital
from Dubbo Base Hospital
prior to being transferred to Gosford Private Hospital. He notes that Patient A
would have required transfer
from Dubbo to have the procedure, however the
procedure was not urgent. He notes that Dubbo Base Hospital is aligned with RPAH
that there are numerous lists each week at RPAH, Concord and Strathfield
Private hospitals. The only reason he can see for the transfer
Private Hospital is so that the Respondent could perform the procedure
t the hearing
the following points emerged from the experts’
discussion. If the Respondent thought that the patient had intermittent complete
heart block, then the possible recurrence of an episode was high; and the
private hospital would not have the capacity to respond
to this. But (as we will
discuss further below) the experts did not think that she had complete heart
block. Dr Hendel was concerned
that moving
the patient to the private hospital meant that there would be an unnecessary
double transfer. In other words, there was no reason
to move the patient to
another hospital where there would be a reduction in care and monitoring. Prof
Jelinek thought that it was
unreasonable to move an elderly and confused patient
from a secure environment into a private hospital which was more like a hotel.
But he was “not overwhelmingly critical” of this decision. Dr
Barnaby was mildly critical of the Respondent’s decision
to move the
patient to the private hospital. Dr O’Donnell was not critical of this
decision. He pointed out that the patient
had been in the public hospital in a
stable condition for 4 days. Dr Singarayar would be less critical of the
Respondent if the private
hospital had the capacity to deal with an episode in a
patient who was thought to have had complete heart block. An issue for
consideration
was if the patient needed a temporary wire how quickly could this
be done if she was in the private hospital. None of the experts
were familiar
with just what resources were available at Dubbo Private Hospital.
he Respondent’s evidence was that the public and private hospitals were
next to each other. In either place he was the specialist
who would have been
called if the patient had difficulties. He lived close by. If a temporary wire
was needed in a patient in either
the public or private hospital he would be the
one doing this and it would be done in the public hospital. He explained how
would take about 30 minutes to set up. If the patient was coming from the
private hospital there would be a speedy transfer to the
public hospital.
he Respondent said that before he transferred the patient to the private
hospital on 14 May he knew that it was his preference to
take her to Gosford
Private Hospital on 15 May for the procedure. However, he needed to speak to the
relatives first. He said he
spoke to Patient A about the transfer and she was
keen on this. He agreed that he could have taken her from the public hospital to
Gosford Private Hospital. He agreed that in retrospect the transfer to the
private hospital was unnecessary, but he noted that this
had no bearing on
subsequent events.
ur view of this material
is as follows. At the hearing the experts
were at the highest moderately critical of the Respondent’s decision to
transfer the
patient to Dubbo Private Hospital. As mentioned above, none of the
experts knew the detail of the resources available at the private
hospital. We
accept the Respondent’s evidence on this point. This evidence in our view
tempers the criticism of Dr Singarayar
and Prof Jelinek. We agree with Dr Hendel
and Dr Barnaby that the medical reasons for this transfer are unclear. However,
view the decision to transfer her to the private hospital is not a
significant departure from the expected standards and thus, although
of the particular are made out, it is not an example of unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
articular 1A
On 15 May 2014 the Practitioner inserted a permanent
pacemaker for Patient A at Gosford Private Hospital without sufficient clinical
indication in circumstances
he ECGs and tracings were not consistent with complete heart
he ECGs and tracings showed Second Degree Type I AV block;
econd Degree Type I AV block is not in itself an indication for permanent
here was no history given of syncope, presyncope or falls;
atient A was taking Vasocardol (Cardizem) 180mg daily, a
potential reversible cause for bradycardia;
he Practitioner failed to trial the withdrawal of Vasocardol (Cardizem)
180mg daily prior to undertaking the pacemaker insertion;
atient A was 92 years old;
atient A was more susceptible to procedural complications and adverse
outcomes due to her age.
he terms of this particular are based on reports provided by Dr
Singarayar.
n the documentary material
before us the Respondent has at different
times given three different explanations as to why he inserted the pacemaker.
material contemporaneous with the procedure (the Dubbo Private
Hospital medical record, the Gosford Private Hospital operation report
Respondent’s letter to Patient A’s GP) he speaks of Patient A having
intermittent episodes of complete heart
econd, in a statement dated 7 January 2015 prepared for the Coroner the
Respondent notes that on 13 May 2014 “after having been
off her Diltiazem
for 4 days Patient A developed slow VT (i.e. ventricular tachycardia) with rates
of between 100 and 120 bpm which
were documented on telemetry”. This idea
is continued in his statement of 26 July 2016 where he states:
Although (Patient A’s) bradycardias had improved... she remained at
risk of tachyarrhythmias and device implantation needed
to be undertaken within
hird, in his S 40 letter of 7 April 2017 the Respondent notes:
My decision to pace was not based on the presence of complete heart block. It
was based on Patient A’s presentation with a symptomatic
bradycardia where
recurrent bradycardias were likely and where rate limiting medication could only
be reintroduced safely after permanent
And to be fair to the Respondent, this was one of the explanations he gave in
the material he provided to the hospital investigation
in October 2014.
n this S 40 letter the Respondent makes a number of other points. He states
that while the records did document complete heart block
as a diagnosis he
subsequently realized that this was not correct. His decision to pace was based
on Patient A’s symptomatic
bradycardia (symptoms of hypoperfusion -
fatigue, declining functional state and mobility, at least one fall). He adds
incorrect to say that the patient was asymptomatic when she first
presented to Dubbo Base Hospital. He points to evidence of a tachycardia
rates of up to 120 bpm as evidence that it would have been impossible to control
recurrent tachycardias safely without pacemaker
insertion. He notes that the
patient initially presented with a troponin rise which became more significant
when she represented
18 May 2014. It was likely that she had significant
coronary disease which was an additional clinical indication for rate control
and medication, he states.
r Singarayar responds to these points in his report of 20 May 2017. He notes
that the claim made by the Respondent that the decision
to pace is not based on
the presence of complete heart block, is not consistent with his contemporary
material – e.g., the
operation report from Gosford Private Hospital, the
Respondent’s letter to the patient’s GP and his solicitor’s
letter to Ms Wykes of Western NSW LHD (i.e. material provided for the purposes
of the hospital investigation).
he Respondent claims that Patient A’s presentation was for symptomatic
bradycardia where recurrent bradycardias were likely
and where rate limiting
medication could only be reintroduced safely after permanent pacing. And the
Respondent adds, Patient A presented
with “symptomatic bradycardia
(symptoms of hypoperfusion/fatigue, declining functional state and mobility,
increasing confusion,
and at least one fall as evidenced by the presence of a
fractured and impacted shoulder)”. As to these claims, Dr Singarayar
that this is plausible but is not supported by the contemporaneous notes. For
example, the Respondent’s hospital notes
letter to the GP.
r Singarayar comments on the Respondent’s claim that rate limiting
medication could only be reintroduced safely after permanent
pacing. Again, he
states that this is plausible but not supported by the patient’s notes.
For example, rate limiting medication
(Cardizem) is not discussed or
reintroduced and the documented tachycardia of 13 May 2014 (sinus tachycardia)
would not justify the
reintroduction of rate limiting medications.
he Respondent asserts:
that although bradyarrhythmia’s which resolve after cessation of rate
limiting medication can be managed conservatively, the
decision to pace was
based on evidence in the literature that drug induced AV block is a serious
disease which requires pacing in
almost half of patients.
r Singarayar’s response to this is that in stating this the Respondent
misrepresents the available literature and uses selected
articles to support an
argument without considering the broader literature.
n his recent Reply to the Amended Complaint of 6 July 2018 the Respondent
discusses particular 1A as follows. As to (a) he claims
he did not proceed to
insert a pacemaker on the basis that Patient A had complete heart block. He
admits (b). As to
(c) and (d) he says that Patient A’s presentation was as a patient with
Symptomatic Mobitz type I second-degree AV block. As
to (e), he admits that
Patient A was taking Vasocardol (Cardizem) and otherwise does not admit (e). As
to (f) he says that Patient
A ceased Vasocardol on 9 May 2014 and otherwise does
not admit (f). He admits (g) but as to (h) says that the patient’s age
not a contraindication for the insertion of a pacemaker. In answer to the
particular as a whole, it is his view that in the circumstances
A’s presentation the decision as to whether or not to proceed to insertion
of a pacemaker was a matter of professional
judgement as to the desirability of
which professional opinions might reasonably differ.
n his report to the coroner Dr Hendel is of the view that a good case could
be made for implanting a pacemaker in Patient A.
She had been taken off her calcium channel blocker some days before and
remained in variable heart block even after sufficient time
had passed for the
effect to have worn off. In those circumstances there is a risk that she could
certainly go into complete heart
block and experience a syncopal episode
associated with bradycardia and a resultant injury. She had tolerated heart
rates about 40
beats per minute but was in bed at the time.
efore the hearing Dr Barnaby was not asked for his opinion about the
insertion of the pacemaker as his report predated the amendment
Complaint. Dr O’Donnell, however, is of the view that the insertion of the
pacemaker was appropriate. He notes that
the current guidelines differ on the
management of patients with second- degree Type 1 AV block. He states that much
of the commentary
from the expert witnesses has been for patients with
asymptomatic second-degree AV block. In his view the guidelines agree that
is indicated in symptomatic patients. It was the presence of symptoms in
Patient A that made the decision to implant appropriate.
He states that the
patient presented with “tiredness confusion and decreased mobility”
all of which could be attributed
to bradycardias. She was also noted to have a
chronically dislocated shoulder which may have been the consequence of a fall.
that in patients in whom the complete medical history is difficult due
to confusion it is the mandate of the treating doctor to assess
whether the
symptoms were related to the cardiac conduction abnormality.
s to 1A (e) and (f), Dr O’Donnell notes that many patients with cardiac
problems are on medications including beta-blockers
and calcium channel
blockers. Patient A was on a calcium channel blocker which may have contributed
to her AV block. Dr O’Donnell
states that there are no standardised
guidelines or consensus recommendations on how to manage such patients. In his
view the decision
rests with the treating doctor. And in his view the Respondent
acted within contemporary guidelines and in keeping with contemporary
scientific evidence.
s to 1A (g) and (h) Dr O’Donnell was a view that the patient’s
age and susceptibility to procedural complications and
adverse outcomes due to
her age would not have affected his decision to implant a pacemaker.
t the hearing
the following points emerged from
the experts’
. All the experts were of the view that the patient had second
degree type I AV block and there was no evidence that she had a complete
block. In other words, in their view particular 1A (a) is made out. If the
Respondent based his decision to pace on evidence
of a complete heart block it
was Dr Singarayar’s view that in the circumstances of this case the
decision to pace Patient A
was not warranted.
ll the experts were of the view that in the circumstances of this case they
themselves would not have inserted a pacemaker in Patient
A at that time. The
question became - was the Respondent’s decision to pace Patient A at that
time a judgement within the accepted
s we will discuss below, an answer to this question requires us to form a
view as to just what the Respondent’s reasons were.
Much of the discussion
of the experts assumed that the diagnosis was second degree type I AV block and
whether this could be described
(as the Respondent does) as symptomatic.
Particular 1A (c), however, raises the issue of
asymptomatic
degree type I AV block. Dr O’Donnell was of the view that the literature,
although controversial, allowed for pacing
even in these
circumstances. He pointed to the European Guidelines. In other words, even if
this was the basis of the Respondent’s thinking
he would not regard the
decision to pace as below the expected standards. None of the other experts
agreed with this.
articular 1A (d) raises the issue that even if it was symptomatic second
degree type I AV block, there was insufficient evidence of
symptoms (i.e. no
history of syncope, presyncope or falls). Dr Hendel noted that while the patient
had a dislocated shoulder it was
not clear when this had happened. Dr Barnaby,
Dr Singarayar and Prof Jelinek agreed with this and with the fact that there was
absence of evidence for the other symptoms. In other words, they agreed, more
or less, that 1A (d) was made out. It was Dr O’Donnell’s
it was more likely that the patient had symptomatic (rather than asymptomatic)
second degree type I AV block; and he evidenced
this with the examples of
mobility and cognitive issues and the evidence of a fall. He pointed to the
difference in the American
and European guidelines on this issue; with the
European guidelines being more encouraging of the procedure.
articular 1A (f) raises the issue of whether the Respondent failed to trial
the withdrawal of Cardizem prior to undertaking the pacemaker
insertion. All the
experts agreed that Cardizem was a potential reversible cause for the
patient’s bradycardia. Dr O’Donnell
noted that the drug had been
withdrawn for 4 days and this was enough time. The other doctors considered the
procedure non-urgent
and were of the view that the Respondent should have
continued to monitor whether the bradycardia improved, as a result of ceasing
the Cardizem.
s to 1A (g) and (h) (the patient’s advanced age and because of this the
increased susceptibility to complications), the experts
agreed that these
matters in themselves would not rule out a decision to pace. For Dr Hendel these
factors could point possibly to
a more conservative approach. For the others if
there was an absolute indication to pace then these factors were not
peaking generally about the decision to pace, it was Dr Singarayar’s
view that in the circumstances of this case the decision
to pace Patient A was
not warranted. Dr Hendel thought a case could be made for it, but this was not
an urgent procedure. Dr Barnaby
agreed that there was no emergency and a better
approach would have been to wait and see what happened. Dr O’Donnell
that the decision to pace was a reasonable decision in the circumstances.
Prof Jelinek considered the decision “dubious”
but “possibly
one could justify it”.
n his evidence
the Respondent
said that he became involved with
Patient A on 13 May 2014. He said that the decision to pace Patient A was not
formalised until he
spoke to the next of kin the next day, as Patient A had a
degree of cognitive impairment. On 13 May he received a phone call telling
that Patient A had had a tachycardia incident. On hearing this he said to
colleagues that Patient A would need a pacemaker. When
he discussed this matter
with the next of kin his views were influenced by the tachycardia incident. In
his view it was not possible
to manage Patient A’s tachycardia without a
pacemaker. He told the relatives that his preference was for inserting a
n his statement to the coroner of 7 January 2015, the Respondent states that
“on 13 May 2014 at 0400 there was a MET call for
heart rate at 34 bpm.
Later that day after having been off her Diltiazem 4 days Patient A developed
slow VT with rates of between
100 and 120 bpm which were documented on
telemetry.” It was noted that
the hospital records indicate that Dr Riley did not think that the telemetry
showed a VT, rather it was artefactual and a matter of
double counting. This led
to a discussion between the Respondent and the Committee as to just what the
telemetry disclosed. The Respondent
agreed that it did not show VT but rather in
his view a very slow atrial tachycardia; itself a clinically worrying condition.
Respondent said it was his view that Patient A had ischemic heart
he Respondent said that the reasons he gave to the relatives to pace was that
their mother had a bradycardia with symptoms attributable
to this. As to why he
wrote complete heart block in the Gosford Hospital report, he said he had seen
telemetry strips which indicated
this and this had influenced his thinking and
“formed the basis of what he wrote in the hospital report”. He
saying at the time that she had complete heart block. Subsequently he
came to realise that there were no ECGs in the records which
demonstrated
complete heart block. He must have made a mistake when he assessed the rhythm
strips. The Respondent was asked why
he had repeated the claim in his report to
the coroner (January 2015) that Patient A had intermittent complete heart block
thought at the time of the procedure (May 2014) that it was symptomatic
bradycardia. The Respondent said that when writing this report,
he was relying
on the information he had available to him at the time. He now accepts the
evidence that there was no complete heart
he Respondent said that Patient A’s bradycardia was symptomatic and
pointed to symptoms of confusion, dizziness and of her being
found on the floor.
The history that the patient had been found on the floor comes from the
daughter’s statement to the coroner
of November 2014. The Respondent said
that he had this history on 13 May 2014, even though it doesn’t appear in
the GP notes
or the admission records. The Respondent accepted that the medical
record stated the patient was conscious and alert during bradycardias
beats per minute when she was transferred to Dubbo Base Hospital from Bracken
House and that she walked into the ward
on admission to Dubbo Private
s to whether the symptoms could be reasonably associated with bradycardia,
the Respondent said that this was the simplest solution.
Here he referred to
Occam’s razor (i.e. that when there are various competing hypotheses one
should choose the solution with
the fewest assumptions; the simplest solution).
This led to a discussion as to whether the Cardizem could have been a cause of
bradycardia. The Respondent did not know why she had been prescribed this
but agreed that possibly it was for hypertension. He noted
that she had
bradycardia even after ceasing the drug.
he Respondent agreed that when he met Patient A on 13 May he knew that he was
going overseas for two weeks in the evening of 15 May.
He agrees that he could
have taken a conservative approach and waited to see what happened following the
withdrawal of the Cardizem.
But after 5 ½ lives she still had bradycardia,
he said. Alternatively, he could take a more active approach. He said that there
was no pressure to take the second approach, but he felt that there was no
benefit in waiting. As to why he did not take a conservative
approach he said
that the bradycardia was affecting her ability to function well. True there was
no syncope after the withdrawal
of the drug, but the patient had been in bed
most of the time. He said, she had heart block on a decreasing dose of the drug
was at risk of recurrent heart block.
ur view of this material.
We first discuss this with regard to
particulars (a) to (h); in other words what in our view were the clinical
indications for the
Then we discuss our view of the Respondent’s reasons for the procedure;
and whether we consider particular 1A is made out.
Our consideration of (a) to (h):
a) the ECGs and tracings were not consistent with complete heart
(b) the ECGs and tracings showed Second Degree Type I AV block;
The records of Dubbo Base Hospital disclose that on 12 May Dr Riley was of
the view that Patient A had second degree heart block.
This is recorded on the
discharge summary with the addition of “heart rate intermittently drops to
32-34 on monitor”.
It is the view of all of the experts that the ECGs and
tracings were not consistent with complete heart block but rather showed Second
Degree Type I AV block. We agree with this view, as now does the Respondent.
c) Second Degree Type I AV block is not in itself an indication for
permanent pacing;
We agree with the view of the experts, except Dr O’Donnell, that in the
circumstances of this case asymptomatic Second Degree
have been a justification for permanent pacing. Particular (c) in our view is
d) there was no history given of syncope, presyncope or falls;
Did Patient A have a history of symptoms which could reasonably be attributed
to her Second Degree Type I AV block? Among the experts
only Dr O’Donnell
was clearly of this view. And as Dr Singarayar pointed out, even if there was
some evidence of symptomatic
bradycardia with syncope you have to establish
whether or not this was a reversible cause (i.e. whether it was caused by the
the point raised by 1A
(e) and (f)).
he history recorded in Dubbo Base Hospital notes that Patient A was
transferred from a nursing home on 9 May after routine pathology
revealed an
elevated troponin. It is said that Patient A had a two-week history of feeling
generally unwell, confused with left shoulder
pain and decreased mobility. She
is said to be mostly blind but alert and oriented although she could not explain
why she had been
admitted to hospital. As to whether the confusion was a result
of dementia, it was said that this was not clear from the transfer
notes. There
is a history of high blood pressure. It is said that there were no recent falls.
In the hospital notes Patient A’s
daughter (CO, here called S, as this is
another way of spelling C...) is recorded as saying that her mother had gone
downhill rapidly
over the last couple of weeks with increased confusion and
decreased mobility.
here is a note on 10 May which states “symptomatic bradycardia with
syncope”. This however is not mentioned by the General
Practitioner or the
admitting doctor. There is a history of feeling unwell, confusion and decreased
mobility. But these symptoms
could all be attributed to causes other than
bradycardia. Working from the contemporaneous records it would appear that no
was made to systematically connect Patient A’s symptoms with her
bradycardia.
n his evidence at the hearing the Respondent refers to a history of Patient A
being found on the floor and that was why she was admitted
to Dubbo Base
Hospital. This is not part of the history from the general practitioner or
history that found itself into the
hospital notes. This incident is recorded in a statement to the coroner from
one of Patient A’s children (CO). Perhaps she told
this to the Respondent
at the meeting at Dubbo Private Hospital. Or perhaps CO here is thinking of an
event that happened later;
prior to her mother’s readmission to Dubbo Base
Hospital on 18 May 2014.
n our reading of the above material the Respondent did not have before him a
history of syncope, presyncope or falls. And if he was
aware of a suggestion
that Patient A had fallen (dislocated shoulder, possibly information from the
patient’s daughter) he
had before him no clear reason to attribute this to
her bradycardia.
e)Patient A was taking Vasocardol (Cardizem) 180mg daily, a potential
reversible cause for bradycardia;
(f) the Practitioner failed to trial the withdrawal of Vasocardol
(Cardizem) 180mg daily prior to undertaking the pacemaker insertion;
Here we note the Respondents response in his S 40 letter of September 2015,
Her bradycardias were largely the consequences of Diltiazem which had been
stopped on 9 May. On the day of the transfer she had been
off the drug for 5
days and her bradycardias had effectively resolved.
n his S 40 letter of April 2017 the Respondent states:
although bradycardias which resolve after cessation of rate limiting
medication can be managed conservatively, my decision to pace
was based on
evidence in the literature that drug induced AV block is a serious disease which
requires the pacing in almost half
of patients, but AV block is commonly related
to drugs but it is rarely caused by drugs and survival is significantly better
than for unpaced patients especially for those over the age of 45
r Singarayar comments on the above claim in his report of May 2017. Among
other matters he notes that on a proper reading of the literature
and published
guidelines from authoritative cardiology societies:
none of these would support pacemaker implementation for Mobitz type I AV
block with a reversible cause, unless the cause is likely
to recur and to result
in symptoms.
s we note above, all the experts agreed that Cardizem was a potential
reversible cause for the patient’s bradycardia. Dr O’Donnell
that the drug had been withdrawn for 4 days and this was enough time. The other
doctors considered the procedure non-urgent
and were of the view that the
Respondent should have continued to monitor whether the bradycardia improved as
a result of ceasing
the Cardizem.
n this issue we agree with the experts other than Dr O’Donnell. We find
that (e) and (f) are made out.
g) Patient A was 92 years old;
(h) Patient A was more susceptible to procedural complications and adverse
outcomes due to her age.
Here we agree with the experts that while these matters are made out they
were not in themselves reasons not to pace Patient A if
there was otherwise an
absolute indication to do this.
n sum, we find (a) to (h) proven as facts.
Our consideration of the particular as a whole:
t is the Respondent’s evidence that a finding of complete heart block
was not the basis of his decision to implant a pacemaker.
He states that
“he subsequently appreciated that this was not correct”. But if this
subsequent appreciation was prior
to the procedure we are at a loss to explain
why he gave the explanation of complete heart block in the Dubbo Private
Hospital medical
record, the Gosford Private Hospital operation report and again
in the contemporaneous letter to Patient A’s general practitioner.
balance, it is our view that his decision to pace Patient A was based on the
false assumption that she had complete heart block.
Clearly, on this basis the
decision to implant a pacemaker was as Dr Singarayar states
“unwarranted” and in our view
a significant departure from the
expected standards.
he Respondent’s explanation for the procedure is now of course
different. As he states in his S 40 letter and repeated at the
My decision to pace was not based on the presence of complete heart block. It
was based on Patient A’s presentation with a symptomatic
bradycardia where
the recurrent bradycardias were likely and where rate limiting medication could
only be reintroduced safely after
permanent pacing.
n the point that - rate limiting medication could only be reintroduced safely
after permanent pacing - we note that Dr Singarayar
commented upon this in his
letter of May 2017. He points out that no mention is given in the relevant
patient information as to why
she was on Cardizem and therefore no evaluation
that could be seen about the need for its ongoing use. He adds that the
Respondent’s
letter to the GP did not mention the reintroduction of
Cardizem and that it had not been reintroduced on discharge from Gosford
or Dubbo Private Hospital. It is his view that the documented
tachycardia of 13 May 2014 was most likely sinus tachycardia and this
justify the reintroduction of rate limiting medications. His view of the rhythm
strips of 13 May 2014 was that the bradycardia
had resolved following cessation
of Cardizem suggesting a reversible cause for bradycardia therefore not
warranting pacemaker implementation.
We agree with Dr Singarayar’s
peaking more generally, it is our view that at the time of the procedure the
Respondent did not have sufficient reasons to diagnose
symptomatic bradycardia.
Whatever symptoms he was aware of could be attributed to other causes –
her age, dementia, lack of
sight, the Cardizem, etc. He should have explored
this issue further. On this point we prefer the views of Dr Singarayar,
to some degree by Dr Hendel, Dr Barnaby and Prof Jelinek, rather than
the view of Dr O’Donnell. In other words, it is our view
that even if this
was the reasoning which motivated the Respondent there was insufficient reason
to think that Patient A had symptomatic
bradycardia. If the decision to implant
a pacemaker was on this basis it was also “unwarranted” at that time
view a significant departure from the expected standards. It is
unsatisfactory professional conduct via S 139B(1)(a) of the National
articular 2
On 16 May 2014 the Practitioner approved the transfer
of Patient A from Gosford Private Hospital to Dubbo Private Hospital under his
care, following the insertion of a dual chamber pacemaker (“the
procedure”), in circumstances where:
Patient A was frail and in a poor clinical state before the
he Practitioner was unable to be present at Dubbo Private Hospital to
review Patient A before her planned discharge on 17 May 2014;
here was no definite arrangement for another appropriately
qualified specialist to review her before her planned discharge
ormal procedural care requires review by an appropriately qualified
medical practitioner after the procedure.
ere we note that there is some overlap between particular 2 from the original
Complaint and particular 3 added by way of the amended
Complaint. Although
particular 2 focuses on the discharge from Gosford Private Hospital of 16 May
and particular 3 on the subsequent
discharge from Dubbo Private Hospital of 17
May, particular 2 (k) picks out the failure that there was no definite
arrangement for
another appropriately qualified specialist to review the patient
before her planned discharge from Dubbo Private Hospital on 17 May.
For reasons
that will become clearer below we consider these review arrangements under
particular 2 (k) rather than under particular
he Respondent admits that he approved the transfer of Patient A from Gosford
Private Hospital to Dubbo Private Hospital on 16 May
2014 the day after the
insertion of a dual chamber pacemaker and admits (j), (k) and (l). He does not
admit (i). He says that he
reviewed the patient after the procedure and she was
further reviewed by the CMO, Dr Campbell, on 16 May 2014 prior to her discharge.
The Respondent says that he approved the transfer on the basis of his then
understanding that Dr McClintock would be available to
review Patient A at Dubbo
Private Hospital.
the discharge from Gosford Private Hospital (apart from the arrangements
at Dubbo Private)
, in his S 40 letter the Respondent comments that Patient A
was seen by him post procedure and was reviewed by the CMO (Dr Campbell)
Gosford Private Hospital on the morning after device implantation following a
normal chest x-ray and satisfactory pacemaker check.
He states there were no
clinical concerns.
he Respondent left by plane on the night of the procedure for Europe.
Material before us shows us that on the morning of 17 May 2014
Dr Campbell noted
that the patient’s chest was clear on examination and a chest x-ray showed
no pneumothorax. An ECG performed
post procedure indicated normal pacemaker
function. The Respondent was contacted by email by a pacemaker technician who on
the pacemaker noticed the patient was in atrial fibrillation. The
Respondent received this email in transit in Abu Dhabi.
r O’Donnell in his report notes that pacemaker implantation is not
necessarily a complex procedure. He adds that the public
hospital where he works
most pacemakers are inserted as a day procedure. In those patients who stay
there is a nurse led discharge program. Dr O’Donnell does not think the
decision to transfer to Dubbo Private Hospital was incorrect.
r Barnaby in his report states that his understanding of current management
of pacemaker patients is that there are several approaches
to post procedure
management. If the procedure is uncomplicated the patient would usually be
discharged on the day of the procedure.
If there was a complication or
management requirement then discharge the following day may occur. Patient A was
seen by Dr Campbell
the following day. Dr Barnaby can see no particular problems
with patient management in this regard.
r Hendel notes it is usual practice for patients to be discharged without a
personal review by the operator. It is common practice
for a suitably
experienced resident medical officer to review the patient next morning after
the pacemaker check and chest x-ray
were available and then call the operator to
give an update on the patient’s condition. Dr Hendel is of the view that
the Respondent
should have arranged to be contacted prior to discharge from
Gosford Private Hospital to be informed of Patient A’s status
approve the discharge.
s to the review arrangements put in place at Dubbo Private Hospital
the Respondent addresses this issue in his recent response to particular 3. He
does not admit that he discharged Patient A by telephone
on 17 May 2014. He says
that he proceeded on the belief that Dr McClintock would be available to review
Patient A at Dubbo Private
Hospital and that upon being advised by Dr McClintock
that such would not be the case he made diligent efforts to obtain the agreement
of an alternate and appropriately qualified medical practitioner to review
Patient A at Dubbo Private Hospital which resulted in
his arranging for Dr
Beinart to review Patient A. The Respondent says that subsequent to arranging a
review by Dr Beinart he was
informed that Patient A had been discharged prior to
such review. The Respondent says that in retrospect he accepts that the
arrangement
that he believed he had put in place for review of the patient at
Dubbo Private Hospital was not ideal and he has subsequently changed
mail correspondence shows that the Respondent sent an email to Dr McClintock
in the early afternoon of Friday 16 May (1.59 pm). The
email asked if Dr
McClintock could have “a quick once over” of 3 patients (including
Patient A) returning to Dubbo Private
from Gosford Private prior to their
discharge on 17 May.
r McClintock replied that evening at 10:59. He said “as I explained to
you quite clearly over the phone” he was on annual
leave and not available
in Dubbo from Friday afternoon until Sunday afternoon. He said he had agreed
reluctantly to see two patients
on the Respondents behalf early on Friday
morning which he had done. He criticised the Respondent for not planning these
well in advance.
here is an email from the Respondent to Julie Whinfield at Dubbo Private
Hospital at 2.54 PM Saturday 17 May stating that he had spoken
to Dr Beinart who
was happy to review his remaining patients that afternoon. However, he called
Macquarie (i.e. the relevant ward
at Dubbo Private) and was told that Patient A
had been discharged.
he experts’ reports before us comment on the arrangements for the
discharge from Dubbo Private Hospital. Prof Jelinek is of
the view that this
transfer from Gosford hospital (of a frail patient) may have been acceptable if
another specialist had checked
on Patient A before she left hospital on Saturday, 17 May 2014. It appears
there was no definite arrangement for Patient A’s
review at Dubbo Private
Hospital. In his view this transfer without the arrangement for another
cardiologist to view the patient
before her discharge home was significantly
below what is was reasonably expected of a trained cardiologist.
r Singarayar in his report of 3 January 2018 states that the medical records
describe a clear pattern of persistent hypotension which
should have prompted
clinical review. In this context Patient A should not have been discharged from
hospital (i.e. Dubbo Private
r Barnaby is mildly to moderately critical that the Respondent did not ensure
appropriate transfer of care to another physician on
discharge from Gosford
Private Hospital. He adds he is unsure if fault lies with Dr McClintock or the
Respondent, but a written document
arrangement would have stopped any confusion.
Written instruction to Dubbo Private Hospital for the patient to be seen by a
prior to discharge would have stopped any procedural error.
r O’Donnell’s commented that “it is not unusual for
patients in both the public and private hospitals to be discharged
“nurse led’ discharge or a phone review. Without knowing the local
staff expertise of Dubbo Hospital he could not
comment further on the
appropriateness of this.”
r Hendel in his report to the Coroner comments that Patient A was not
reviewed by any doctor prior to her discharge back to Bracken
House. He adds
that this was of particular concern as there is a variance chart in the records
with an entry on 16 May 2014 22:00
hours for hypotension and that Nurse Toole
was notified. The recorded BP at this time was 91/47- lower that it should be
and is part
of a sequence of low pressures throughout the night. There is no
entry of any action by Nurse Toole in response to this episode.
He adds that as
noted in the history it seems that the Respondent rang in and was happy to have
the patient sent back to Bracken
House. Dr Hendel does not believe that this was
appropriate management. Dr Hendel comments that the Respondent it would seem had
no regular arrangement to cover his patients at Dubbo Private Hospital after
they were operated at Gosford Private Hospital. Here
we note in passing that the
records disclose that Nurse Toole rang the VMO to request a medical admission
and review, as per usual
practice, but the phone did not answer and she was told
next morning that Patient A’s VMO was overseas.
t the hearing
the following points emerged from
the experts’
. The frailty of Patient A while true is in this context not
directly relevant. The review arrangements in place at Gosford Private
were adequate in as much as a medical practitioner, Dr Campbell, reviewed the
patient on the morning of 17 May. The patient’s
hypotension and atrial
fibrillation could have had some significance and this information should have
been passed on to Dubbo Private
Hospital. The significant failure by the
Respondent, if there is one, is to fail put in place proper review arrangements
Private Hospital before the patient’s planned discharge on 17
s to the review arrangements with Dr McClintock which had fallen through, Dr
Singarayar thought that this possibly could be seen as
a misunderstanding rather
than a failure. Dr Hendel noted that the Respondent went overseas on a planned
yet only attempted to arrange cover for himself some few days prior to the
procedure (and his departure).
r Singarayar said (and Dr Hendel and Prof Jelinek agreed with this) that the
records at Dubbo Private Hospital show that after the
procedure the patient had
significant hypotension, was more agitated, less ambulant, less interactive and
more confused. This information
was not recognised and acted upon. Dr Barnaby
noted that while the patient should not have been discharged this was not
necessarily
a fault of the Respondent. Dr O’Donnell agreed that the
discharge process from Dubbo Private Hospital had failed, and that
Patient A did
not meet the criteria for a nurse led discharge. He pointed out that she had had
a day of hypotension which should
have been treated and her atrial fibrillation
required investigation, even if the cause was, say, undernourishment.
s to the arrangements for review at Dubbo Private Hospital
the Respondent
said, counter to Dr McClintock’s email, he recalls speaking to him
face to face on the ward at Dubbo Private Hospital earlier
in the relevant week.
Dr McClintock said that he could cover for him on the coming Friday and Sunday.
The Respondent conceded that
he had no plan for the Saturday but said that he
expected Dr McClintock to review the patient on Friday. In explanation of his
to Dr McClintock of 16 May the Respondent said that Dr McClintock had
already agreed to see two patients and he thought it was not
an imposition
asking him to review three more. As to why he didn’t mention the
patient’s low blood pressure or atrial
fibrillation to Dr McClintock or to
others, the Respondent said that in retrospect possibly he should have but he
thought there was
a framework in place to pick up any concerns. And he did not
think that atrial fibrillation was a sinister finding in this case.
Respondent said that once he realised that Dr McClintock would not review these
patients he made every effort to put reasonable
arrangements in place. He
concedes that he did not do well enough with these follow-up arrangements. As
discussed below, he arranged
for Dr Beinart to review Patient A but by then
there had been a nurse led discharge.
of the above is as follows. Parts (i), (j) and (l) of
particular 2 are proven but the approved discharge in these circumstances is
a departure from the expected standards. In saying this we agree with the
owever particular 2(k) raises other matters. In this context we note that
Patient A was discharged in the absence of any doctor’s
review although
she was hypotensive for a substantial period of time, agitated, less mobile than
her preoperative state and had documented
atrial fibrillation. It was the view
of all the experts which we agree with that in the circumstances of this case
Patient A should
not have been discharged without a doctor’s review. The
Respondent was not wholly responsible for her discharge for others
were involved
in this decision-making. But, in our view, he clearly failed to put in place a
“definite arrangement for another
appropriately qualified specialist to
review her before her planned discharge on 17 May 2014”. Particular 2(k)
is made out
and in the circumstances of this case we are of view that this is
unsatisfactory professional conduct via S 139B(1)(a) of the National
0. Particular 3
On 17 May 2014 the Practitioner discharged by
telephone Patient A from Dubbo Private Hospital without medical review in
circumstances
where her clinical state had deteriorated in that:
he had atrial fibrillation documented through her pacemaker check on the
morning of 16 May 2014;
he was hypotensive for a substantial period between 15 May 2014 and 17 May
he was described as being agitated but agitation was not part of her pre-
operative state;
he required assistance to stand but she was ambulant in her pre-operative
s discussed above under particular 2, we have dealt with the
Respondent’s alleged failings with regard to the discharge from
Private Hospital under that particular rather than under particular 3. The
reason for this is that on the material before us
we do not find as a fact that
- “the Practitioner discharged by telephone Patient A”. It follows
that we do not find
that particular 3 overall is proven, even if the matters (a)
to (d) can be established.
t is easy to see where the idea came from that the Respondent discharged
Patient A by telephone. The progress notes of Dubbo Private
Hospital record for
1150 AM 17 May that the Respondent “was happy to discharge”. In his
Coronial statement of 7 January
2015, the Respondent states that “I phoned
the ward around 1130 morning on 17 May 2014 and enquired about my patients. I
told that Patient A was fine and that there were no clinical issues of
concern... I agreed that she could be discharged with plans
for follow-up in 2
weeks time”.
t the hearing the Respondent said that since making this statement he had
access to various emails and texts and now he can be more
specific as to just
what happened. He said he recalls speaking to the Chief Executive Officer of
Dubbo Private Hospital at about
11 AM on 17 May about the lack of physician
cover for review of his patients awaiting discharge. The topic of nurse led
was discussed, he states. At 2:30 PM he phoned Dr Beinart who was
happy to review these patients. However, when he rang the ward
to tell them of
this he was told that Patient A had already been discharged.
he Respondent’s evidence was that while in his phone conversation with
the CEO of Dubbo Private Hospital she said that if the
patients are fine there
can be a nurse led discharge, he wanted them to be medically reviewed. That is
why he first tried to contact
Dr Yamba and failing this contacted Dr Beinart.
The Respondent asks why would he make these arrangements in the afternoon of 17
if he had discharged Patient A by telephone in the morning?
e accept the Respondent’s evidence on this point and find that he did
not discharge Patient A by telephone from Dubbo Private
Hospital. We add that
Prof Jelinek in his investigation report of October 2014 was of the view that
the patients, including Patient
A were discharged by the manager of Dubbo
Private Hospital without medical review on 17 May (page 7 of the report).
Particular 3
is not made out.
Summary of our findings
articular 1A is made out, as is particular 2 (k). Separately and together
this amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct by way
of S 139B(1)(a) of
the National Law.
lthough the facts of particular 1 are made out, this is not an example of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The facts of particular
3 are not made
THE APPROPRIATE ORDERS
ith regard to the appropriate orders in this matter, the Committee notes its
to protect the public,
and to assist in maintaining the appropriate ethical and clinical standards of
the profession. With the object
of protecting the public in mind we must take
account both of the likelihood of the Respondent repeating the professional
we have found to be unsatisfactory in these proceedings, and also the
need to deter others from falling short of the expected standards.
It is not our
role to punish the Respondent.
e must now consider the relevant protective orders to be made. The Committee
notes that the powers available to it in this regard
are set out in s146(B) of
the National Law. A Committee may do one or more of the following:
aution or reprimand the practitioner;
irect that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s practising of
the practitioner’s profession, it considers appropriate
be imposed on the
practitioner’s registration;
rder that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric treatment
or counselling;
rder that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by the
rder that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice at the
times, in the way and to the persons specified by the
rder that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the persons
specified by
the Committee
fter hearing the evidence on whether the Complaint was made out the Committee
was of the view that it might make findings against
the Respondent. Accordingly,
the parties presented evidence and submissions relevant to stage two.
he Respondent discussed his current work. He said that he was a private
cardiologist working at Dubbo Private Hospital and Lingard
Private Hospital,
Newcastle. He worked at Lingard once a fortnight on Fridays. He has an office at
Dubbo Private Hospital. He now
does little inpatient work as this work comes
primarily from the public sector. He takes no acute coronary patients. He does
work. He described this work as angiography, angioplasty and stenting
and device implants. He said that he left his job at Dubbo
Base Hospital about 4
years ago and has operated at Lingard for the past 3 years. His list there he
said may have between 8 to 12
for such procedures as angiograms, angioplasties or insertion of devices
(pacemakers or ICDs). With regard to inserting pacemakers
he said that this
varies, and he may do between 2 to 6 cases a month and 25 to 50 a year. As to
coronary angioplasty and stenting
his estimate was approximately 60 to 70 a
year. All his procedures (devices and angiograms) would add up to about 220 to
250 a year,
he said. At Lingard he said the patients are admitted on Thursday
and he does the procedures on Friday, at times using two laboratories.
all the patients post procedure and for those staying in hospital Friday night
he reviews them again on Saturday.
t Dubbo he consults from his private rooms and does some outreach clinics,
for example at Bourke. He is the only private cardiologist
at Dubbo Private
Hospital though there are occasionally visiting cardiologists. He said that he
has a number of colleagues at St
Vincent’s Private Hospital and Lingard
Private Hospital that he can talk to. He does this on a regular basis making
his decision-making is validated. Some decisions are good to discuss,
he said. If he is concerned about an inpatient at Dubbo Private
Hospital he can
transfer this patient to St Vincent’s Private or if need be to Dubbo
Public Hospital. He said that his relationship
with the cardiologists at the
public hospital is not a problem when they are dealing with patient care. The
Respondent does not think
he is professionally isolated. He listed the names of
doctors he could contact at St Vincent’s or Lingard if he was worried
once a fortnight. All his private surgery he said goes
to St Vincent’s.
The respondent discussed how he does his CME; basically, by attending
international and local conferences,
doing some examining for UNSW and Notre
Dame and reading medical information websites and papers that he can obtain from
s to what he has learnt from these proceedings he said that he has made
changes. He has learnt to be “airtight” in arranging
proper cover
whenever he is away. He now consults more than before and takes advice from
others and documents this. If a case like
Patient A arose again he would discuss
this with colleagues. He gave the name of a colleague he would contact if it was
case. There were two options as to what to do in Patient A’s
case. It is a question of what is appropriate he said and each
case is always
‘individual”.
he Respondent provided a reference from Dr Geoffrey Oldfield. Dr Oldfield
writes that in 2014 he was asked by the management of the
Lingard Private
Hospital if he would mentor the Respondent while he performed cardiac
catheterisation and coronary angioplasty and
stenting. Dr Oldfield states that
over the past 4 years he has observed the Respondent doing this work as well as
the implantation
of pacemaker devices. He considers the Respondent a
well-educated and knowledgeable cardiologist and that his angiography and
angioplasty
work is of the highest standard. “He is relatively
complication free and his work probably far exceeds that of many other people
I’ve observed working within the district. His implementation of patient
devices likewise is excellent.”
he Respondent explained that the mentorship with Dr Oldfield came about as
when he went to Lingard he had to be supervised for a time
before they would
fully credential him. After 6 months he was told he could operate independently
but he still continued to work
together with Dr Oldfield. As to what he had
learnt from this mentoring he gave the example of learning to do angioplasty
and gaining a different perspective on techniques.
s to his future plans, the Respondent said that he enjoyed medical practice
and wished for this to continue. He considers that the
work he does is valuable.
This motivates him rather than the desire to make a lot of money He enjoys
working in regional areas. He
is now 53 and would like to work for at least
another 10 years.
he Respondent had been made aware of the orders proposed by the HCCC –
basically a reprimand, an educational course, a condition
requiring a second
opinion for certain procedures and Category C supervision. The
Respondent’s response to this was that he
was happy to do an educational
course. After taking instructions, Mr Kalfas submitted on his behalf that it
would be possible to
comply with the second opinion condition but this was not
necessary as there was already in place a de facto second opinion arrangement.
In addition, such an arrangement might make it difficult when giving advice to
patients from around the regions, as this advice could
not be conclusive until
the Respondent had obtained a second opinion. As to the supervision order, again
it was not impossible, but
it was argued bearing in mind that the complaint only
dealt with one patient there was no reason to be concerned more generally.
Finally, it was argued that there was no need for a reprimand as this was more
appropriate in cases dealing with ethical matters.
ur view of this
is as follows. Significant aspects of the Complaint
have been found against the Respondent. The seriousness of these matters is
appropriately
recognized by way of a reprimand. We do not think that the
failings identified in this case would be remedied by the Respondent attending
an educational course. The failures with regard to Patient A were not due to a
lack of knowledge or a lack of familiarity with the
structure of medical
decision making. They were due to a lack of judgement. Such failures are better
addressed in our view by a condition
requiring a second opinion before
performing a coronary or device operation and a condition imposing Category C
supervision. We have
amended to some extent the draft conditions submitted by
s to the submission from the Respondent that there is already a second
opinion practice in place we don’t doubt that the Respondent
seeks the advice of colleagues. But in the circumstances of this case the
protective aspect of our jurisdiction requires
this to be formalized and not
left as an ad hoc arrangement. Of course, the second opinion condition and the
supervision condition
should only be in place for as long as it is considered
necessary to protect the public. The variation of their terms or their cessation
is of course a matter for the Council.
inally, as to who will be the supervisor, this is a matter for the Respondent
to choose and the Council to accept. But we suggest
that it be a cardiologist
who has appropriate expertise in interventional cardiology (for assessment of
coronary angiography and
percutaneous interventions) and basic electrophysiology
(for device insertion) and who is not commercially connected with the
Respondent.
In other words, a cardiologist who is independent of referral links
with the Respondent and who does not have a financial interest
in the laboratory
where the Respondent works. Similar points apply in our view to the second
opinion cardiologist. It may be that
the second opinions are given by two
different cardiologists as angioplasty is a specialised area of cardiology, as
is electrophysiology.
However, the supervisor’s role in our view could be
performed by an interventionalist cardiologist.
ractitioner is reprimanded.
The following practice conditions are imposed on the
practitioner:
Second Opinion
hen recommending and before performing a coronary or device operation the
practitioner must obtain a written opinion from another
cardiologist (who is a
Fellow of the College and approved by the Medical Council of NSW) which supports
the procedure(s). If the
written opinion does not support the procedure(s) the
practitioner cannot recommend or perform the coronary or device operation.
copy of the written opinion from the cardiologist (whether negative or positive)
is to be filed in the patient records.
he practitioner must maintain a log listing all patients for whom he has
obtained a written opinion. The log is to include:
he full names and dates of birth of the patient
he names of the cardiologist who provided the written opinion
brief description of the written opinion, including whether the cardiologist
supported or did not support the procedure(s)
he practitioner must forward to the Council a copy of the log within seven
days of the end of each calendar month
he practitioner must authorise the Council to contact the cardiologist to
verify the written opinion
Surgical log
he practitioner must maintain a log listing all surgical and interventional
procedures that he performs. The log is to include:
he full name and dates of birth of the patient
he date of the procedure
ame of the hospital where the procedure was performed
ull description of the procedure(s)
he outcome and any complications
he practitioner must forward to the Council a copy of the log within seven
days of the end of each quarter
Supervision
o practise under Category C supervision in accordance with the Medical
Council of NSW’s Compliance Policy - Supervision (as
varied from time to
time) and as subsequently determined by the appropriate review body.
t each supervision meeting the practitioner is to review and discuss his
practice with his approved supervisor with a particular focus
he clinical indications for interventions (coronary and devices)
eview of the angiography and PCI films
utcomes and complications
review of the monthly log of surgical and interventional procedures and log
of patients he has obtained a written opinion for.
upervision meetings are to occur on a monthly basis and the supervisor is to
report to the Council every 3 months
he practitioner must authorise the Council to provide the approved supervisor
a copy of the professional standards committee decision and a copy of the
practice conditions
he practitioner must authorise and consent to any exchange of information
between the Council and Medicare Australia for the purpose
of monitoring
compliance with these conditions.
he practitioner must bear the cost of compliance with these conditions.
he appropriate review body for the purpose of the review under s 163-163C of
the National Law is the Medical Council of New South
Wales when the Respondent
has a principal place of residence in New South Wales.
ections 125 to 27 of the National Law are to apply should the
respondent’s principal place of practice be anywhere in Australia
than New South Wales, so that the appropriate review body in those circumstances
is the relevant National Board.
PUBLICATION OF DECISION
ursuant to section 171E(1) of the National Law the Committee provides copy of
this written statement of decision to the Respondent,
his solicitor, the Health
Care Complaints Commission and the Medical Council of NSW.
NON-PUBLICATION DIRECTION
rders were sought by the HCCC with regard to the name and address of Patient
A and the name and address of her relatives.
he Chairperson has ordered this non-publication direction by way of Schedule
5D, clause 7 of the National Law (NSW) and any information
which might identify
these persons in these proceedings is not to be published by any person.
his direction does not operate to exclude any provision of the National Law
and does not preclude the Medical Council from undertaking
its statutory
Publication’ may include communicating either in writing or verbally to
any person.
n appeal to the Occupational Division of the NSW Civil and Administrative
Tribunal on a point of law is to be made within 28 days
of handing down of the
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
‘TTOPSTRTTCtSaortATTtfnttTTTattTWBpFAOTATTAATAoooodcWWAPWTAIAssss7HOADAADDDDTTDEADDDTOTHntt)PSOTII(OADI(OITT(((OTATTIISAPPAAAAABIIDTDTDITSITPPtPtSttPOTTAIIIPTPWWTATITTTCUSATHTTIITAITTAOT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (692 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter