URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2016/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Bennett, Maksimova and Matriano [2016] NSWNMPSC 4 (11 October 2016)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE OF
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 171
HELENA THERESE BENNETT
Registration Number: NMW0001378367 (NSW)
ALEKSANDROVA MAKSIMOVA
Registration Number: NMW0001731379 (NSW)
BERNADETTE MATRIANO
RE-REGISTRATION PENDING
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDER APPLIES
________________________________________________________________
NSW Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) represented by L Thomas, counsel
instructed by K Latimer, solicitor, HCCC.
RN Maksimova and Ms Matriano represented by K Doust solicitor, NSW Nurses and
Midwives’ Association.
RN Bennett represented by P Kava, solicitor, New Law
PROFESSIONALSTANDARDS COMMITTEE
G Ettinger (Chairperson)
Dr Schulz-Robinson RN (Professional Member)
R O’Donnell RN (Professional Member)
B Smith (Community Member)
Health Care Complaints Commission v Bennett, Maksimova and
[2016] NSWNMPSC 4
: 20 & 21 September 2016
11 October 2016
(in summary): RN Bennett is reprimanded.
Her registration is subject to conditions, including mentoring.
(in summary): The Complaint against RN Maksimova is not proven.
There is no finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
(in summary):
The Complaint against Ms Matriano is not
proven. There is no finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
CATCHWORDS:
Professional responsibilities, decision-making, policies
and practices.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
No86a (National Law) – s139B(1)(a)
SUPPRESSION ORDER:
The name, address and any other identifying
features of Patient A in are subject to a suppression order.
1. Patient A had been a resident at Castellorizian Aged Care
Service (CACS) at Kensington, New South Wales since 2006. At the time
Complaint, she was 89 years old, and suffering amongst other conditions, from
dementia. The Complaint concerns care and treatment
provided to her at the
facility between 10 July and 15 July 2014.
2. Due to difficulties in treating
Patient A’s skin condition, on 30 June 2014, her general practitioner
(GP), Dr Thomas Savoulis
referred her to dermatologist, Dr Lance Bear. Dr Bear
reviewed Patient A on 10 July 2014, and verbally ordered the application of
bleach solution as treatment for her skin condition, which he diagnosed as multi
resistant staph infection (MRSA).
3. Registered Nurses Helena Bennett, who
was Acting Care Manager at CACS, RNs Petya Maksimova and Maria Matriano cared
for Patient
A at various relevant times, and implemented treatment for Patient A
during the period of the Complaint as follows:
Manager Bennett worked at the facility on 10 and 11 July 2014. She did not work
RN Maksimova
worked at the facility on 10 and 11 July, but was not present over the weekend
of 12 and 13 July.
RN Matriano was
working at the facility in a permanent part-time position on morning shifts at
the weekend. RN Matriano worked the
morning shifts on 12 and 13 July
4. Complaints have been made against the Respondent RNs in
respect of their care and treatment of Patient A in the period 10 - 15
2014. In particular, the Complaints concern their failure to ensure that the
family of Patient A had been informed of the new
treatment; their implementation
of the bleach treatment without a written Treatment Order; the lack of
documentation of the treatment
in the Progress Notes; the method of treatment
with regard to the dilution of the bleach; the application of the solution to
A; and the use of a restraint or safety belt.
5. The task of this
Professional Standards Committee (the Committee) is to determine whether the
conduct of RN Bennett, RNs Maksimova
and Matriano demonstrated that the
knowledge, skill or judgment that they each possessed or the care they each
exercised in relation
to the care given to Patient A in July 2014 was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a registered nurse of
levels of training or experience.
6. In our view the conduct of each,
in different aspects, and to different degrees, was below the standard to be
7. Aspects of the conduct of RN Bennett amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct, and as the protection of the public is paramount
matters, we have decided to reprimand RN Bennett, and to impose conditions on
her practice as a registered nurse.
8. We did not find that the HCCC had
discharged its onus in regard to RNs Maksimova and Matriano, and did not find
them guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to section 139B of
the National Law.
9. Our reasons follow.
10. In matters such as the one before the Committee, the
HCCC bears the onus of establishing that the Practitioner has been guilty
unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to section 139B of the National Law
which provides relevantly:
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a registered health practitioner includes:
(a) Conduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
practitioner’s profession is significantly below the standard
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience.
(b) Contraventions of this Law or regulations
A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law or
under the NSW
regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the contravention....
significantly below
is not defined in the National Law
However in the Second Reading speech when the National Law’s
predecessor, the
Medical Practice Act 1992
(which contained a similar
definition of unsatisfactory professional conduct), was introduced to Parliament
it was stated that:
The first main purpose of the bill is to refocus the Health Care
Complaints Commission (HCCC) on investigating serious complaints
providers. To achieve this, Commissioner Walker recommended
unsatisfactory professional conduct be redefined so that only
significant
instances involving lack of skill, judgment, or care will
result in an
investigation or disciplinary action. .... the reference to
'significant' in that
context may refer to a single act or omission that
demonstrates a
practitioner's lack of skill, judgment or care, or it may
refer to a pattern of
conduct. In any individual case, that will depend
on the seriousness of the
circumstances of the case.
We note also that as a general principle, the use of the term
significant
may in law be taken to mean not trivial, of importance or substantial,
Re A Medical
Practitioner and the
Medical Practice Act
40010/07, 3
September 2007
(unreported)).
STANDARD OF PROOF
11. The onus or burden of proof falls on the HCCC. It is
well established, due to the protective nature of the jurisdiction, and the
seriousness of the Complaints, if established, both for the Practitioners and
the public, that the standard of proof is on the balance
of probabilities, but
to the level of satisfaction described by the High Court in Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
The Court there stated:
Reasonable satisfaction is
not a state of mind that is attained or established independently of the nature
and consequence of the
fact or facts to be proved. The seriousness of an
allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given
description,
or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular
finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question
the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In
such matters 'reasonable satisfaction' should
not be produced by inexact proofs,
indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences.
12. The standard by which RN Bennett must be judged is that
of a registered nurse, first registered in NSW in 1998, and who was employed
Castellorizian at the relevant time in July 2014, and acting as the Care Manager
at the relevant time in July 2014.
13. The standard by which RN Maksimova
must be judged is that of a registered nurse, trained in Bulgaria, and first
registered there
in 1999. She was subsequently registered in New Zealand, where
she completed nursing bridging qualifications in 2009.
14. The standard by
which Ms Matriano must be judged is that of a registered nurse, first registered
in NSW in September 2010. She
worked at Castellorizian from 2011 until she
resigned in 2014.
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
15. The Committee accepted into evidence two volumes of
documents from the HCCC, and a folder from RN Maksimova and Ms Matriano
their statements, their curriculum vitae, records of courses and
training undertaken, and references in support. RN Maksimova and
Ms Matriano
also gave oral evidence at the hearing.
16. RN Bennett chose not to provide a
statement, and did not appear at the hearing. Ms Kava, her solicitor, indicated
that RN Bennett
admitted each Particular of the Amended Complaint, and made
submissions on penalty on her behalf.
17. RN Miller, the expert briefed by
the HCCC in these proceedings provided reports and oral evidence. She is a very
senior nurse
with many years of managerial experience whose opinion we
18. The Committee considered the Complaints of the HCCC, noting that
in each case, the HCCC alleged that the Practitioner was guilty
unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B(1)(a) of the National Law
in that the Practitioner has engaged in conduct
that demonstrates the knowledge,
skill or judgment possesses or care exercised by the Practitioner in the
practice of nursing is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience.
19. The issues to be determined by this Committee
a. Whether the Committee is comfortably satisfied that any or
all of the particulars of the Complaints are proven;
b. If so, whether the
conduct of each Practitioner overall amounts to unsatisfactory professional
conduct; and
c. If such a finding is made, the Committee must decide whether
orders or directions made pursuant to
Division 3 Sub-division 3 of the
National Law are appropriate.
20. In order to deal with the Complaints, it is necessary to
expand on the facts to place the events in their context.
Castellorizian Aged Care Services (CACS or Castellorizian), the facility is
divided into three sections for the allocation
of staff. The Assistants in
Nursing (AINs), worked in pairs, two to each section. Two further AINs worked in
the special care unit.
AINs worked a rolling roster and swapped sections every
two weeks. Each pair of AINs was responsible for 14 to 16 residents. AINs
supervised by RNs.
22. Patient A was an 89 year old woman from Noumea who was
admitted to Castellorizian in 2006. On the evening of 15 July 2014, following
bleach treatment applied to her skin on previous days, Patient A was transferred
by ambulance to SVH Emergency Department, and then
transferred and admitted to
Concord Hospital.
23. Patient A had dementia, did not speak English, and had
limited capacity to communicate with her carers. RN Linda Walton described
Patient A as having a strong personality, capable of responding by making sounds
or saying one of two words such as mine and no,
and exhibiting child like
behaviour. Between the date of her admission to CACS in 2006, and July 2014 when
the events leading to
the Complaints of the HCCC occurred, Patient A’s
health and behaviour had declined to the point where she required assistance
with all personal care: eating, toileting, bathing, mobilising. Patient A had
family who generally visited at the weekend.
24. At the time of the event
which led to the Complaints to the HCCC, Patient A was under the care of Dr
Savoulis, who had sought
the opinion of Dr Bear, a specialist dermatologist,
regarding the treatment of her chronic skin condition, MRSA, which was not
to treatment. At that time, Patient A’s torso was covered with
open wounds and scabs. Her skin condition had been treated with
ointments and antibiotics.
25. Dr Bear visited CACS on 10 July 2014 to
examine Patient A. In his letter to Dr Savoulis following this consultation, Dr
Bear described
Patient A’s presentation as consistent with bullous
impetigo, and noted she was on Doxycycline. Following his examination of
A, Dr Bear prescribed bleach baths. He did not document his orders in Patient
A’s file, the Progress Notes, or anywhere
else at the facility. According
to Patient A’s notes Dr Bear was scheduled to see her at 16:00hrs on 10
July 2014, but arrived
at the facility unannounced at lunch time. This was a
busy time at the facility.
26. Staff present during Dr Bear’s
examination of Patient A on 10 July 2014 were RN Maksimova, RN Walton, and an
AIN who had
no responsibility for Patient A at that time. RN Walton was working
on the opposite side of the facility on that day, and she did
responsibility for Patient A either.
27. According to RN Maksimova,
following the brief examination of Patient A by Dr Bear, RN Walton gave Dr Bear
Patient A’s file
containing her medication chart, and photos of Patient
A’s shoulder and arms taken by RN Maksimova. Dr Bear was observed to
in a note book (which appeared to be his own notebook). Dr Bear verbally ordered
the application of a bleach solution as treatment
for Patient A’s skin
28. RN Walton (in her statement), and RN Maksimova in her oral
evidence, said that they were present with Dr Bear when he told them
Patient A a bath composed of 50/50 bleach and water. We noted that when Dr Bear
eventually attended the facility again on
16 July, 2014, the written
instructions he recorded in Patient A’s notes differed from verbal
instructions given earlier on
10 July 2014.
29. We note with concern RN
Maksimova’s evidence that on 16 July 2014, Dr Bear initially documented
his entry as 10 July 2014
before being challenged and amending it to the correct
date, 16 July 2014.
30. Dr Bear in his letter of 10 November 2014 to the
HCCC regarding the matter stated that:
discussed the treatment of bleach baths with two nurses (whose names I cannot
recall) who were in attendance at the nurses work
station. During my discussion
I emphasised that the correct dilution was half cup of unscented household
bleach to half a bath tub
of luke warm water with the solution to be used in the
bath or the shower. I advised the treatment should be continued on a daily
until ... (Patient A’s) skin lesions had cleared.
31. RN Maksimova’s evidence is that while Dr Bear was
at the facility on 10 July 2014, she called Dr Savoulis so that Dr Bear
discuss Patient A’s diagnosis and treatment with him, and that she heard
him say the dilution of the bleach to water
was ½ and ½.
Walton’s statement she recalls leaving the nurses station to check if the
facility had a bathtub. On her return she
recalls Dr Bear and RN Maksimova
discussing how to apply the bleach solution in the absence of a bath. RN
Maksimova discussed soaking
towels in the bleach solution and wrapping them
around Patient A. We are satisfied that the RNs inquired if alternative
with orally given medication were available, and Dr Bear responding,
if you want to get rid of the golden staph she needs to be
immersed in the bath.
33. RN Walton was not aware if anyone prepared a treatment or care plan
after Dr Bear left, and RN Maksimova continued with her medication
primary responsibility for documenting treatment is of course that of the
treating doctor. We are satisfied from RN Maksimova’s
evidence which is
discussed below that when she returned to the nurses station and saw that Dr
Bear had not provided a written treatment
order, she immediately attended at the
Care Manager’s office to report it.
34. On 11 July 2014, CM, RN Bennett
purchased household bleach from Coles. The first treatment of the bleach
solution was administered
on 11 July 2014 by RN Bennett (CM) with the assistance
of two AINs.
35. RN Bennett also instructed RN Maksimova to write an account
in the Progress Notes of how the bleach treatment was to be carried
out over the
weekend (12 and 13 July 2014, when RN Bennett would not be there).
Bennett emptied a container of bleach into a bucket and filled it with warm
water. Dry towels were placed in the bucket, wrung
out, and wrapped around
Patient A’s body. Bleach solutions was then poured over the towels
intermittently, at 5 - 10 minute
intervals for 30 minutes.
37. There were no
written instructions documented by Dr Bear when the first bleach treatment was
administered by RN Bennett.
38. On Saturday 12 July 2014 RN Matriano (who
only worked Saturdays and Sundays), administered the second treatment of bleach
having read the instructions documented by RN Maksimova in the
Progress Notes. She did so similarly on Sunday 13 July 2014, administering
third treatment. RN Matriano was asked why she had administered the third
treatment when the Progress Notes for 13 July 2014
at 04.40hrs written by RN
Gaylene Barker-Broad indicated right side looks more angry and raw than
previously observed. RN Matriano
admitted in evidence that she saw the
notation, but that on her assessment, the wounds were no different than on the
previous day.
However, after the treatment she telephoned RN Bennett to advise
that Patient A’s skin was blotchy over the chest area, and
that she had
become shivery. RN Matriano told us that RN Bennett advised her to cease the
bleach treatment, and indicated that Patient
A would be reviewed the following
day, Monday 14 July, 2014 by the GP.
39. RN Matriano told us that Patient
A’s daughter (who was not the primary person to be notified in connection
with treatments,
and to deal with consent), was visiting on 13 July 2014, and
that she advised her of Patient A’s condition and treatments.
Monday 14 July 2014, AIN Basyal took Patient A to the bathroom with another AIN
as requested by CM Bennett. The chair used
to take Patient A to the bathroom was
fitted with a seat belt. As soon as CM Bennett saw the redness on Patient
A’s skin, she
ordered that no further treatment be applied, and that she
would talk to the doctor. Dr Savoulis, who had been contacted by telephone
July, ordered that the treatment with the bleach solution be continued. However,
RN Bennett told the EM that she would not
continue the treatment until Patient A
had been seen and reviewed by Dr Savoulis.
41. When Dr Savoulis reviewed
Patient A on 15 July 2014, he ordered that the bleach treatment cease, and
ordered application of Solugel
to the affected areas twice daily.
July 2014, when RN Wilson went to administer the Solugel, she spoke with the
AINs caring for Patient A. RN Wilson found
Patient A’s skin to be red and
inflamed, she observed one arm oozing serous fluid, and emitting an odour. RN
Wilson rang an
ambulance and informed the EM she had done so.
43. We were
concerned to find that when the Ambulance officer requested a copy of the
treatment order for the bleach bath in order
to find out what had caused the
burns to Patient A, RN Wilson was unable to find a treatment sheet with an order
for the bleach bath
in Patient A’s notes.
44. When the EM contacted CM
Bennett to advise her of Patient A’s admission to SVH, and to ask about
the order for the bleach
bath, RN Bennett advised that the order had been given
orally to RNs Walton and Maksimova.
45. On 16 July 2014 the EM checked the
strength of the bleach, and checked the Progress Notes, and found no entry by Dr
Bear for 10
July 2016. There was no written medical order in Patient A’s
notes when RN Bennett attended to the first bleach treatment on
11 July 2014,
and all she could find in the Progress Notes in relation to the treatment was
that Dr Bear had attended the previous
day (10 July 2014).
46. On 16 July
2014 at 08:30hrs, the EM discussed her concerns with RN Bennett and advised her
she was stood down pending an investigation
into the incident. At 09:15hrs, the
EM contacted Dr Savoulis and advised him that Patient A had been transferred to
hospital the
previous evening.
47. The EM contacted the SVH/ED to inquire
The EM contacted Patient A’s relatives at 14:50hrs on 16 July
2014 to advise them that CACS was conducting an investigation
into the incident.
Patient A’s relatives had been unaware of the treatment she had received,
or that there were any concerns
until they attended the hospital. On her return
to the facility, Patient A looked unwell, and the EM requested that Patient A be
returned to Concord Burns Unit.
48. On 16 July 2014 at 17:05hrs Dr Bear
attended CACS to write in Patient A’s notes. He also brought with him a
copy of the
fax he had sent to Concord Hospital. Dr Bear wrote in the file, and
initially wrote 10 July 2014 until challenged regarding the date
of the entry.
49. On 20 July 2014 the EM advised RN Matriano that she was suspended from
50. On 22 July 2014 a memo was distributed to staff to advise them of
a compulsory meeting of all RNs and Care staff, and a Nurse
Consultant was
51. Ms Gaye Perrins, the Executive Manager at CACS made a
complaint to the AHPRA about three RNs, Bennett, Maksimova, and Matriano.
of these RNs left the employment of CACs in the months following the
52. Following the Complaint, CACS engaged Critical Success
Solutions (CSS), to investigate the critical incident pertaining to Patient
A’s care, and her subsequent admission to Concord hospital with burns.
53. The investigation by CSS, conducted by Fleur Hannen, in July 2014 noted
in the summary that:
critical incident does not appear to be an isolated case of poor practice and
raises concerns in relation to the actions and
non-performance of some of the
Registered Nurses (RNs) within the Castellorizian Aged Care Services.
54. CSS recommended as a matter of urgency that amongst
other things, the following be undertaken: review policies and procedures,
clinical assessments and care plans, treatment plans for GPs and Specialists to
sign off on; the purchase of professional guidelines
for RNs; and that RNs
undertake medication and wound competency as part of their induction; medication
management, clinical care,
specialised nursing, restraint management; review
education, communication systems and handover.
55. We add our own
observations obtained by hearing evidence from two of the RNs who came before us
as part of the disciplinary proceedings,
and by reading statements from other
nurses and nursing assistants in the documents before us. We were concerned that
many of the
procedures and policy (such as in regard to the seat belt/restraint
on the bath chair, and the notification process for family in
regard to new
medication or procedures), were not formally documented at
Castellorizian.
56. We were also concerned with Dr Bear’s statement to
the HCCC in which he indicated that he told the RNs at the facility the
concentration of bleach to water was 125 mls unscented household bleach to 80
litres of water. Further on in his statement Dr Bear
indicated that he told the
RNs the correct dilution was ½ cup of unscented household bleach to half a
bath tub of lukewarm water
with the solution to be used in the bath or shower.
57. First of all, Dr Bear erred in not recording in Patient A’s
records, what he had ordered on 10 July 2014. We noted further
that he did not
58. We prefer the
evidence of RN Maksimova, who in the presence of RN Walton, heard and understood
Dr Bear to be saying to them, and
to Dr Savoulis on the telephone, that the
dilution was 50:50 in relation to the quantities of bleach and water. The word
appears not to be have used by him at all. RN Maksimova told us that
the RNs made it clear to Dr Bear that there was no bath at
Castellorizian, and
that Patient A would be sitting in a bath chair wrapped in bleach soaked towels.
THE COMPLAINTS OF THE HCCC
59. The Complaints of the HCCC, following consultations with
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales in accordance with
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) (‘the National
Law’), in regard to RN Bennett,
RN Maksimova and Ms Matriano follow.
PARTICULARS OF THE HCCC COMPLAINT
treatment with a bleach solution (the treatment) was administered to Patient A,
the Practitioner, (RN Bennett):
to ensure that there was a written treatment order from a treating doctor with
clear directions as to the ratio of bleach
to water and the temperature of the
to obtain educational information such as articles from the treating doctor, so
as to educate staff about the treatment
and how to administer
11 July 2014,In the absence of a written treatment order from a treating doctor
with clear directions as to the ratio of bleach
to water and the temperature of
the water, the Practitioner:
(a) prepared
the bleach solution for the treatment with a ratio of bleach to water of
(b) delegated
administration of the treatment to two Assistants in
present for the
administered the treatment; and
(d) directed
RN Maksimova to record instructions for the administration of the treatment in
Patient A's progress notes and wound chart,
instead of recording it herself,
even though she was responsible for the preparation of the bleach solution and
given the directions for its
administered it.
11 July 2014, the Practitioner
permitted the Assistants in
to continue
administering
the application of the treatment to Patient A and failed to stop the treatment
and seek advice from the treating doctor, in circumstances
bleach solution smelled strongly;
of the Assistants in Nursing who had administered the treatment had stated that
the bleach solution had burned her skin; and
bleach solution bleached the Practitioner's
Practitioner failed to document the administration of the treatment to Patient A
on 11 July 2014 herself, and instead directed
RN Maksimova to document it, even
though the Practitioner had administered the treatment
Practitioner failed to:
consent was obtained from the person responsible for Patient A, such as a family
member or person appointed as a guardian,
before the treatment was
administered:
In circumstances where the treatment
was a new treatment for Patient A
60. The Committee notes with some displeasure that whilst it
is permissible to not attend a hearing dealing with a serious complaint
HCCC, it is preferable that a Respondent attend in person. This is particularly
so in the case of RN Bennett who was the Care
Manager at Castellorizian at the
time of the bleach treatments which she and others of her staff administered to
Patient A in July
2014. She was the person responsible for the care and welfare
of the residents, including Patient A, and had overall responsibility
61. The Committee notes that RN Bennett’s legal advisor, Ms Kava
indicated she admitted each Particular of the Complaint, (the
Complaint of the
HCCC is reproduced above), and that she has expressed remorse for her conduct in
relation to Patient A in July 2014.
We have noted the admissions in relation to
the Complaint, but have no comment to make upon any remorse as we have no actual
from RN Bennett in that regard before us.
62. We were told that RN
Bennett accepted that she administered a bleach treatment to Patient A on 11
July 2014 without having written
instructions from either Dr Savoulis or Dr
Bear, the dermatologist who had prescribed bleach treatment. Accordingly,
neither the
concentration of bleach to water, nor the temperature of the water
had been recorded. These were conveyed orally by RN Maksimova
following her
conversation with Dr Bear, and her understanding of his instructions which were
given in the presence of RN Linda Walton.
63. We are also satisfied from the
admission presented on RN Bennett’s behalf that she did not seek out
educational information
such as articles from the treating doctor, so as to
educate staff about the treatment and how to administer it.
64. We are also
satisfied that RN Bennett purchased the bleach used for the treatment from
Coles, and that on 11 July 2014, she prepared
the bleach solution with a ratio
of bleach to water of 1:1. We are satisfied that she administered and was
present for the treatment,
and that she directed RN Maksimova, who did not
administer the treatment, to record instructions for the further administration
the treatment in Patient A’s Progress Notes and wound chart. This was
so even though RN Bennett prepared the bleach solution,
and that she had
administered it.
65. We are also satisfied, and note with concern that on 11
July 2014, RN Bennett continued the application of the treatment to Patient
and failed to stop the treatment and seek advice from the treating doctor, in
circumstances where:
The bleach solution smelled strongly;
(b) One of the Assistants in Nursing had stated that the bleach solution had
burned her skin; and
(c) The bleach solution bleached the Practitioner's clothes.
66. We are satisfied that RN Bennett failed to ensure
consent was obtained from the person responsible for Patient A, such as a family
member or person appointed as a guardian, before the treatment was administered,
in circumstances where the treatment was a new treatment
for Patient
67. In coming to a conclusion regarding whether RN Bennett is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B(1)(a),
we have taken into
account the admissions made on her behalf, Ms Kava’s submissions, and the
evidence, both written and oral
of the expert, Ms Helen Miller. We are mindful
that on the day in question, there were extenuating and management concerns at
facility, which should not however, have distracted RN Bennett from
proceeding to seek a written treatment order from a treating
doctor before
treating Patient A with a novel treatment, or at all.
68. We did not accept
from the correspondence of Ms Kava on behalf of RN Bennett that due to her
concerns regarding the bleach, RN
Bennett removed the towels from Patient A, and
rinsed her after ten minutes on 11 July 2014. We prefer, and rely in that
on RN Maksimova’s record in the Progress Notes made at 13.34 hrs
on 11 July 2014, on instructions of RN Bennett about how Patient
A was to be
handled in regard to the bleach treatment over the weekend. That record states
relevantly:
Soak the towels (use only white towels) and wrap ... (Patient A’s) body
tightly, every 5 min pour from that water to make
the towels wet and after
around 30 min rinse and dry. ....
Clearly, that indicated to us that the treatment was to be continued for 30
minutes, and it is more likely than not, that that was
the case on 11 July
69. We noted Ms Miller’s opinions in regard to every
aspect of the HCCC’s Complaint, which were that RN Bennett’s
in relation to the bleach treatment fell significantly below the standard of a
practitioner of equivalent level of training
and experience, in particular as
she held the leadership role of Care Manager at Castellorizian. Ms Miller also
cited various clauses
of the Professional Code of Conduct and the Competency
Standard such as Professional Practice 1.2, 1.3, 2.5, and 2.6, and Provision
Coordination of Care 7.5., and 7.6 of the National Competency Standards (in
relation to the essential nature of ensuring written
70. Ms Miller also expressed concern that in a setting where there
was no written treatment order, even though the bleach solution
emitted a strong
smell, and even though the AIN present expressed concern that the bleach
solution burned her skin, (and whether
or not the bleach solution bleached RN
Bennett’s clothes), RN Bennett did not consider these indicators of a
trigger to cease
treatment. Ms Miller considered that conduct fell significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
of training and experience.
71. Ms Miller also expressed strong criticism of
RN Bennett and considered her conduct in instructing RN Maksimova to document
instructions
for the administration of the bleach over the weekend to be a
significant departure, and significantly below the standards expected
practitioner of RN Bennett’s level of training and experience.
72. Accordingly taking into account all of the above, we find RN Bennett
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct in relation
to each of the
Particulars of Complaint, taking into account, particularly the evidence of Ms
73. We have noted the favourable reference provided by Dr Min Wu of
Sutherland. We have also noted Ms Kava’s submission regarding
research RN
Bennett has undertaken regarding continuing education, in particular in relation
to leadership. In that connection, in
mid-September 2016, RN Bennett applied for
a Graduate Certificate in Leadership (Health and Human Services) for Semester
1/2017 (off
campus) with the University of Tasmania. At the date of hearing, her
attendance had not yet been confirmed.
74. Given our finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct, we next considered what penalty should
apply, bearing in mind that the
legislation provides that we can make protective
orders. We are mindful that the fact that disciplinary orders are commonly
characterised
as protective does not deny that they have punitive effects. (HCCC
[2007] NSWCA 326).
75. We have noted Ms Kava’s submissions
regarding the imposition of a caution rather than a reprimand, and her reference
case law which identifies a reprimand to be an official rebuke for past
wrongful conduct, as compared to a caution which is a reminder
to take care in
the future, and to avoid repetition.
76. We are satisfied that RN
Bennett’s conduct, and breach in standards in a situation in which she was
the Care Manager of
an aged care facility in July 2014 in relation to Patient A,
was very serious, and calls for a reprimand. We believe that is necessary
order to protect and maintain the confidence of the public in the standards
expected of registered nurses.
77. We have noted the submissions of both
parties in relation to other conditions.
have decided to order that RN Bennett undertake the course,
Dynamics and Clinical Leadership
, offered by the Australian College of
Nursing to be offered at the end of 2016. RN Bennett is to inform the Nursing
and Midwifery
Council of her enrolment in the above named course within one
month of 25 October 2016, and she is inform the Nursing and Midwifery
providing proof of attendance one month following completion of the course. We
note RN Bennett’s application to
undertake the Graduate Certificate in
Leadership (Health and Human Services) at the University of Tasmania, has not
been confirmed.
We make no orders in regard to that course.
78. Further, we order that RN Bennett be assisted by a
mentor. The mentor conditions are as follows:
4 weeks of 25 October 2016, RN Bennett is to nominate an experienced registered
to act as her professional mentor for approval by the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of NSW in accordance with the Council’s
Guidelines.
a. Within 2 weeks of approval of the mentor, she is to submit a
mentoring plan which details specific objectives and outcomes of the
relationship, including, but not limited to leadership and delegation of
b. At each monthly meeting with the mentor, the discussion is to
include, but not be limited to, leadership and delegation of work
c. RN Bennett is to authorise the mentor to submit a three (3)
monthly report in the prescribed format to the Council.
d. RN Bennett is to
provide the mentor with a copy of these Reasons for Decision, and evidence to
the Council indicating that the
mentor is aware of the decision.
Bennett is to be mentored for an initial minimum period of 12 months from the
date the mentor is approved by the Council, and
as subsequently determined by
the Council.
f. RN Bennett is responsible for the costs associated with
complying with the conditions.
79. RN Bennett is ordered to provide a copy of these Reasons
for Decision to her present and any future employers for a minimum period
months, or such period as the Nursing and Midwifery Council may determine.
80. Sections 125 to 127 of the National Law are to apply should RN
Bennett’s principal place of practice be anywhere in Australia
in New South Wales, so that the appropriate review body in those circumstances
is the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia.
81. The Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales is the appropriate review body for the
purposes of Division 8 of Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner Regulation National
RN MAKSIMOVA
PARTICULARS OF HCCC COMPLAINT
11 July 2014 the Practitioner (RN Maksimova) recorded directions for the
administration of a a treatment with a bleach solution
(the treatment) to
Patient A despite:
(a) knowing
there was no written treatment order from a treating doctor with clear
instructions as to the ratio of bleach to water
and the temperature of the
being responsible for administering the treatment to Patient A earlier on 11
Practitioner failed to:
consent was obtained from the person responsible for Patient A, such as a family
member or person appointed as a guardian,
before the treatment was
administered.
In circumstances where the treatment
was a new treatment for Patient A.
82. We noted that RN Maksimova admitted each Particular of
Complaint. We had oral and written evidence from her, and found her to
witness of truth.
83. RN Maksimova was the person who followed up Dr Bear to
come to the facility after he had received the referral from Dr Savoulis
30 June 2014. We are satisfied that the referral was given after RN Maksimova
drew to the attention of Dr Savoulis on 4 June
2014, that in addition to the
scabies and MRSA Patient A suffered, she had a new blister on her right upper
arm. The records show
that instead of late afternoon as arranged, Dr Bear
arrived at Castellorizian at noon on 10 July 2014. It was a busy time with meals
and medication rounds. He was met by RN Linda Walton, who provided a statement,
but did not give any oral evidence at the hearing.
RN Maksimova told us she saw
Dr Bear with Patient A’s file, which RN Walton had given him in order for
him to record his instructions,
and check Patient A’s history and
medications. RN Maksimova said that she was with Dr Bear, who seemed to be in a
he looked at Patient A’s lesions. She gave evidence that she
saw him writing in a notebook, and that she showed him photographs
A’s skin condition.
84. RN Maksimova said that she and RN Walton then
had a discussion with Dr Bear about the proposed treatment for Patient A which
understood to be a bleach bath. She told us that she asked about
alternatives such as creams to apply on the skin. RN Maksimova told
both RNs were unfamiliar with the treatment, and there was no bath available at
the facility, and Dr Bear insisted it
was the only treatment to kill golden
staph, it was agreed with Dr Bear that Patient A would be seated and wrapped in
towels soaked
in a bleach solution.
85. RN Maksimova then rang Dr Savoulis
who spoke with Dr Bear. RN Maksimova recalled Dr Bear saying bleach bath, half
water, half
86. RN Maksimova told us that after Dr Bear left
Castellorizian, and she had completed her medication round, she returned to the
station to discover that he had not written any instructions for
Patient A. It is not disputed, and we accept that she immediately
escalated the
matter and reported it to Care Manager Bennett, who neglected to follow up by
RN Maksimova told us that she did not
that she had
to leave work early on that day (10 July 2014).
87. RN Maksimova
reported that on the following day, 11 July 2014, Care Manager Bennett had
purchased the bleach for that day, and
for the weekend, and administered the
treatment to Patient A in the presence of two AINs. RN Maksimova told us that
she then inspected
Patient A’s upper body, and took the photographs of her
which are in the documents before us. She did not make a notation about
photographs in the Progress Notes.
88. RN Maksimova told us that after the
bleach treatment was complete, RN Bennett asked her to document instructions for
treatment that the weekend staff would administer as she herself
would not be at the facility.
89. RN Maksimova’s evidence was that
because she had not administered the treatment, she did not report on the
process which
RN Bennett had undertaken. We noted as follows what she entered in
the Progress Notes on 11 July 2014 at 13.34 hrs:
(Patient A) was seen by Dr Bear yesterday and as per his order (Patient A) needs
showers with ½ bleach and half water (concentration).
This morning this was
started. To continue during the weekend. Please use the backed (sic) stored in
the filing room, use 1 bottle
of bleach and same amount of warm water. Soak the
towels (use only white towels), and wrap (Patient A’s) body tightly, every
5 min pour from that water to make the towels wet and after around 30 min rinse
and dry. .....
90. We are satisfied from her evidence that RN Maksimova
understands that she should not have written the treatment process in the
Progress Notes in the absence of a treatment order from a treating doctor. She
told us she deeply regretted not having followed up
RN Bennett or contacted the
doctor herself. Ms Miller opined that the act of writing in the Progress Notes
in the absence of a treatment
order from a treating doctor would be a
significant departure from the standard expected of an RN such as the
practitioner, and would
invite her strong criticism.
91. Ms Miller’s
opinion was however, that whilst proceeding as RN Maksimova did, was a breach of
various Codes and Standards,
and her conduct fell below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of equivalent level of training and experience, the
breach was not significant because she did advise the Care Manager about the
lack of entry by Dr Bear into Patient A’s notes.
Ms Miller also opined
that by not contacting either the GP or Dr Bear, RN Maksimova’s conduct
was a departure from standards
but not a significant one. Ms Miller also opined
that RN Maksimova should have, in the absence of a treatment order, documented
fact in the Progress Notes, but that the fact she did not, was not a
significant departure from standards.
92. RN Maksimova told us that the
incident at Castellorizian had affected her every day, and that she was now more
confident to question,
and not undertake practices with which she did not agree,
or did not understand. She felt at the time that she had done all she could
by questioning the doctor with regard to alternative treatments, and immediately
when she discovered that Dr Bear had not documented
his instructions with regard
to the bleach treatment, she had informed the Care Manager. She did not doubt
she had heard Dr Bear
correctly as to the concentration of bleach to water in
the presence of RN Walton, and on the telephone to Dr Savoulis.
93. We have
noted references from RNs Sharon Wilson and Sharyn Bashfield, who were both
informed about the circumstances of the incident
for which RN Maksimova has come
before the Committee. RN Bashfield, in particular, stated that she has worked
with RN Maksimova for
over a year at Goodwin Ainslie, and described her as going
above and beyond to ensure that the residents have all their health needs
She also described RN Maksimova as always adhering to standards, policies and
procedures. We also had a “Performance
Development and Feedback”
report in regard to RN Maksimova dated June 2016 from Goodwin which was very
favourable, and have
noted CPD courses the practitioner has undertaken recently,
in particular in regard to improving her knowledge of medicines.
coming to a decision regarding whether RN Maksimova’s conduct as alleged
in the HCCC Complaint is made out, and whether
we find she has engaged in
conduct which is unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to the
legislation, we have taken into account
all the evidence and submissions before
us. We are mindful of Ms Miller’s opinions in regard to aspects of the
HCCC Complaint:
RN Maksimova’s recording of treatment plans on 11 July
2014 at the behest of the Care Manager, and in the absence of a written
treatment order by a treating doctor, and the fact she did not contact the
family and obtain consent for the bleach treatment. Ms
Miller opined that this
conduct attracted her strong criticism, and constituted a significant departure
from standards.
95. Whilst we are cognisant of the Committee expert’s
role, and respect her opinions, we are not bound by them. The Committee
satisfied with RN Maksimova’s: I did everything I could, noting she
immediately, on realising Dr Bear had not entered a
treatment order, informed
the Care Manager. Contacting the doctor was the primary responsibility of the
Care Manager, although we
are mindful RN Maksimova could have done so as well.
Ultimately we are satisfied with RN Maksimova’s evidence that she did
formally ordered.
96. We have noted the circumstances of how the failure to
inform both the doctor and family occurred. We are also satisfied that RN
Maksimova admitted each Particular of Complaint. We accept RN Maksimova’s
deep remorse for her actions which she expressed
97. We do not
find that any of the breaches of the Standards or Codes of Conduct in this case,
as they may have occurred, warrant
a finding of unsatisfactory professional
RN MATRIANO
PARTICULARS OF HCCC COMPLAINT
12 July 2014 the Practitioner (RN Matriano) delegated administration of a
treatment to Patient A with a bleach solution (the treatment)
to two Assistants
in Nursing:
(a) without
ensuring there was a written treatment order from a treating doctor with clear
directions as to the ratio of bleach to
water and the temperature of the
(b) without
raising her concerns about the treatment with the Care Manager;
a direction to the two Assistants in Nursing to restrain Patient A in the shower
chair while the treatment was administered;
(d) without
ensuring that she or another staff member was present with Patient A at all
times during the treatment.
13 July 2014, despite an entry in Patient A's progress notes, dated 13 July
2014, describing Patient A's skin as angry and raw,
the Practitioner delegated
administration of the treatment to two Assistants in
(a) without
ensuring there was a written treatment order from a treating doctor with clear
directions as to the ratio of bleach to
water and the temperature of the
(b) without
raising her concerns about the treatment with the Care Manager;
a direction to the two Assistants in Nursing to restrain Patient A in the shower
chair while the treatment was administered;
(d) without
ensuring that she or another staff member was present with Patient A at all
times during the treatment.
Practitioner failed to:
consent was obtained from the person responsible for Patient A, such as a family
member or person appointed as a guardian,
before the treatment was administered
in circumstances where the treatment was a new treatment for Patient
98. We noted that Ms Matriano, and we shall refer to her in
this manner because she does not currently hold registration as an RN,
the relevant time, at Castellorizian on the day shift on each Saturday and
Sunday. We had oral and written evidence from
her, and found her to be a witness
99. Ms Matriano admitted all the Particulars of Complaint with the
exception of those relating to the restraint of Patient A in the
100. For purposes of this matter, we note that Ms Matriano attended
work at Castellorizian on 12 and 13 July 2014, and cared for Patient
days. We accept her evidence that she checked Patient A’s Progress Notes,
and read and took into account RN Maksimova’s
annotations regarding the
bleach treatment to be performed over that weekend.
101. We accept Ms
Matriano’s evidence that she did not check for, or notice that there was
no written treatment order for the
bleach treatment after the handover from RN
Walton, who told her that Dr Bear strongly recommended the treatment, and that
Manager had commenced the treatment on the previous day. She accepts
that she directed the two AINs on duty to deal with Patient
A for the bleach
treatment on 12 July 2014.
102. Ms Miller opined that Ms Matriano’s
conduct in not ensuring there was a treatment order in place for the bleach
was a significant departure from the reasonable standard expected of a
practitioner of equivalent training and experience, and she
was strongly
critical. We are mindful however of the context of this omission, namely that it
was the doctor’s duty to provide
the written treatment order, that the
bleach treatment had already been administered on 11 July 2014, the day before
Ms Matriano
arrived for her weekend shift, and that the Care Manager had
delegated RM Maksimova to write instructions about its application on
weekend. Those instructions, as noted elsewhere in these Reasons for Decision
were very clear.
103. The issue of the restraint on the bath chair is that it
takes the form of a seat belt attached to the chair in which Patient
wheeled to the bathroom from her bed. Ms Matriano’s evidence was that the
belt was put on to prevent Patient A who was
a high falls risk person, and small
in stature, from slipping down off the chair, and because the treatment was to
last some 30 minutes.
We are mindful that the facility had, at July 2014, at
least, no written policy about the use of the belt, or consent for its use
a relative or guardian. We accept however that it was used, as Ms Matriano said,
not to restrain Patient A, but for her safety
and comfort. (Particulars 1.(c)
and 2.(c)). In doing so, we note the concession by Ms Thomas for the HCCC, that
the restraint referred
to is in fact the seat belt attached to the bath chair.
104. Ms Miller characterised the seat belt as a restraint, and noted that
the facility should have had a process for recording its
use, and for consent of
the family of the resident in its use. As that was not in place, she was
strongly critical, and considered
its use as a significant departure from the
standard expected of Ms Matriano. We are mindful that the criticism should be
towards the facility rather than Ms Matriano.
105. Ms Matriano
admitted to the Particular which read that she delegated the bleach treatment to
two AINs: without ensuring that
she or another staff member was present with
Patient A at all times during the treatment. Ms Matriano’s evidence
this allegation was however, that once the treatment had commenced,
and Patient A was settled, she told the AINs to call her if they
while she attended to other residents. She said that although she did not know
of any written policy, it was clearly understood
that there would always be a
staff member present with a resident when they were in the bathroom. Ms
Matriano’s evidence, which
we accept, is that she went in and out of the
bathroom, and that a staff member was always close by during Patient A’s
(Particulars 1.(d) and 2.(d)). As we are satisfied Patient A was not
left alone in the shower, we do not comment on Ms Miller’s
opinion except
to say she would be strongly critical of a resident left alone in the bathroom.
106. We note that Ms Matriano did not contact the Care Manager immediately
when she found out there was no written treatment order
from the doctor, and
that she did not consider doing so at that time. She said that she regretted not
having done so (Particulars
1.(b) and 2.(b)), until Sunday 13 July
107. Ms Miller was strongly critical of Ms Matriano for not having
significantly below that expected of a practitioner with similar training and
background.
108. Particular 2.(a) alleges that despite the entry in Patient
A’s Progress Notes early on 13 July 2014, indicating that her
angry and raw, Ms Matriano delegated administration of the bleach treatment to
be carried out. Ms Matriano’s evidence
in that regard was that she did not
see any difference in the skin as compared to the previous day, and accordingly
proceeded with
the treatment. We are mindful that it would have been prudent to
record that observation in the Progress Notes, but that Ms Matriano
so. Once she noticed Patient A’s condition (skin coloration and
shivering), after that day’s treatment had
been carried out, she called
the Care Manager on Sunday 13 July 2014 to inform her of Patient A’s
condition, and query why
there was no written treatment order.
Matriano admitted that she informed Patient A’s family of the treatments
and her condition on that day, because a daughter
(who incidentally was not the
primary person to contact), but who was visiting on 13 July 2014, arrived at the
facility. She said
in evidence that as the third treatment was being
administered on 13 July 2014, that she thought another RN or the GP would have
notified the family. She did not check any notes to verify that.
Miller was strongly critical regarding the family not having been contacted with
regard to the new treatment. We are satisfied
that the GP, the Care Manager, and
others who cared for Patient A on that day, should have seen to notifying the
family before Ms
Matriano came on duty over the weekend.
111. We noted that
Ms Matriano was also questioned about statements made by AINs which were in the
documents before us. We accept
Ms Doust’s submission that those statements
were made a year or more after the relevant events took place, and that we
prefer Ms Matriano’s evidence. We accept that submission, and have
already stated that we found Ms Matriano to be a witness
of truth who expressed
great remorse at what had occurred with Patient ‘s treatment, to the
extent that she did not seek re-registration
in 2015. She told us that she has
been working in non nursing jobs, and had only in March 2016, sought
re-registration (decision
112. In coming to a conclusion regarding
whether some or all of the Particulars of Complaint are proven, and whether they
unsatisfactory professional conduct, we have taken into account Ms
Matriano’s written and oral evidence, the submissions of
the parties and
the legislation. Whilst we are cognisant of the expert’s role, and respect
her opinions, we are not bound by
them. We are satisfied with Ms
Matriano’s explanations as noted above.
113. We are also satisfied
that Ms Matriano admitted each Particular of Complaint save for the allegation
regarding the restraint.
We are satisfied that the restraint, or seat belt was
used for the safety of Patient A, and if criticism can be made, it is that
facility did not appear in 2014 to have a written policy and consent system to
record its use.
114. We accept Ms Matriano’s deep remorse for what
occurred in July 2014 in relation to Patient A, as expressed before us. She
provided a reference from RN Loria, who commenced at Castellorizian in 2011 and
worked with Ms Matriano, and RN Blackledge (who
was the weekend supervisor at
Castellorizian, and worked with RN Matriano for a period of 3 – 4 months),
and who were informed
of the Complaint. Both referees were very positive about
Ms Matriano, her commitment and her nursing.
115. We do not find that any of
the breaches of the Standards or Codes of Conduct in this case, as they may have
occurred, warrant
a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
DISTRIBUTION OF THESE REASONS FOR DECISION
116. A copy of these Reasons
for Decision are to be provided to the HCCC, the legal advisors for RN Bennett,
the legal advisors to
RN Maksimova and Ms Matriano, Castellorizian, the family
of Patient A, Dr Savoulis and Dr Bear.
Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (827 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter