URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2007/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dabboussi [2007] NSWPB 1 (9 May 2007)
[2007] NSWPB 1
Health Care Complaints Commission v Ahmad Dabboussi*
The amended complaint alleged professional misconduct under
Pharmacy Act
and convictions under the
Traffic Act
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
. The convictions under the
Traffic Act related to driving whilst disqualified and making false statements
regarding his motor vehicle
license. The conviction under the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act
related to the unlawful possession of a prescribed
restricted substance, Xanax.
The pharmacist was a pharmacy owner and had a history of drug abuse and
dependence involving benzodiazepines, pethidine and panadeine
forte, resulting
in hospital admissions. In April 1998 the pharmacist had misappropriated and
self administered a drug of addiction,
morphine, when he had not lawfully been
prescribed that drug of addiction by a medical practitioner. In the period from
1997 to September 2001 the pharmacist had on various occasions, self
administered a number of restricted substances including Xanax,
Zoloft, Normison
and Ketalar.
On 1 May 1998 the Director-General of the Department of Health had prohibited
the pharmacist from the supply and possession of drugs
of addiction pursuant to
clause 151(4) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Subsequently, over a period of 4 years the pharmacist had self administered
and misappropriated pethidine for his own use, in circumstances
pethidine had not been lawfully prescribed for him. The pharmacist also failed
to make the relevant entries in the drug
register for the receipt of pethidine
ampoules during this period.
The pharmacist, whilst under the supervision of the Board’s Section 20A
Committee, had also failed to inform the Board of his
self administration of
pethidine ampoules. The pharmacist had also breached the conditions of
registration imposed by the Committee
regarding urinalysis on a number of
occasions. The urinalysis regime had been suboptimal until October 2005. The
pharmacist had
been suspended from practice in July/August 1998, August 2001 to
January 2003 and from July 2005 to the hearing of this Inquiry.
The pharmacist
admitted the particulars of the complaint save for failing to forward to the
Committee the results of his urinalysis
between 18 May and 9 August 2001.
Evidence was adduced of the positive, rehabilitative steps taken by the
pharmacist since 2005.
1. Each of the particulars of the amended complaint are proven (except for
particular 9(c) of complaint one) and professional misconduct
is proven. The
pharmacist’s conduct is indicative of a seriously flawed character. The
nature of the traffic offences was consistent
with the pharmacist’s use of
illegal drugs and a willingness to lie – he had made false statements to
obtain a motor
vehicle license, given police false information and had driven a
motor vehicle whilst under the influence of pethidine.
2. The time for determining fitness to practice is at the time the issue
presents for determination by the relevant adjudicating tribunal.
opinion indicated that the pharmacist has an insight into and acceptance of the
serious nature of his drug problem. Medical
option was also adduced indicating
that external supervision can be a key factor influencing the course of
addictive disorders. There
was no evidence of any drug misuse/abuse by the
pharmacist for almost 2 years. The pharmacist had made significant changes in
lifestyle and business interests and was involved in religious and community
work. The pharmacist was willing to submit to any conditions
placed on his
3. The evidence of the pharmacist’s sister as to the change in his
character and lifestyle was compelling. The pharmacist is
not currently unfit to
be registered as a pharmacist having regard to his recent rehabilitation and
reformation of character. Although
the alleged misconduct was indicative of a
seriously flawed character the pharmacist had taken positive steps to change his
routine and activities.
4. The pharmacist was severely reprimanded and numerous conditions were
placed on his practice – he is obliged to attend monthly
Anonymous meetings, to be reviewed by a independent psychiatrist and his
treating doctor or another medical practitioner
nominated by the pharmacist and
approved by the Board at regular intervals and to attend regular urine drug
screening. The treating
medical officers are to report to the Board.
Additionally, he is required to complete 1,000 hours of supervised practice and
submit to the appointment of a mentor pharmacist. The pharmacist is
not to handle, supply or dispense any Schedule 8 drug until assessed
Board as fit to do so and having first completed at least 750 hours of
supervised practice to the Board’s satisfaction.
The assessment is subject
to restoration of his Drug Authority by NSW Health. The supervising and
mentoring pharmacist(s) are to
report to the Board. The pharmacist is also
subject to extensive educative orders and required to maintain appropriate
of pharmaceutical professional bodies. The costs of compliance with
the orders, excepting for the review of an independent psychiatrist,
borne by the pharmacist.
*(Editorial note: There is an appeal pending to the District Court against
the Board’s decision, which appeal has been brought
by the Health Care
Complaints Commission).
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on 28, 29 and 30 November 2006 into a
complaint of professional misconduct made under the provisions
Pharmacy Act 1964
") by the Health Care Complaints Commission,
against Ahmad Dabboussi of 8 McPherson Place, Illawong, NSW 2234, a pharmacist
in New South Wales.
THE COMPLAINT
The Amended Complaint dated 19 March 2004 ("the Complaint"), alleges that the
Respondent:
Complaint 1
Has been guilty of professional misconduct pursuant to
section 19D(1)(c)
, in that the Respondent:
Has engaged in conduct that demonstrates
a lack of adequate knowledge, judgment and/or care in the practice of pharmacy,
Has engaged in improper and/or unethical
conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy; and/or
Is addicted to a deleterious
Complaint 2
Has been convicted in New South Wales of certain offences.
PARTICULARS OF THE COMPLAINT
The particulars of the Complaint are:
Complaint 1
From time to time, between approximately
May 1997 and approximately September 2001, the Respondent self administered
, which had not been lawfully prescribed to the Respondent,
contrary to section 12(1) of the
Drugs Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985.
From time to time, between approximately
May 1997, and approximately September 2001, the Respondent possessed
, contrary to section 10(1) of the
Drugs Misuse and
Trafficking Act, 1985.
Between approximately May 1997, and
approximately September 2001, the Respondent misappropriated
from the pharmacy at 63 Hill Road Lurnea for his own use.
Between approximately June 1998 and July
1998, the Respondent misappropriated
, from the Grace Plaza
Pharmacy at the corner of King and York Streets, Sydney for his own use.
From time to time, between approximately
9 March 1998 and approximately May 2001, the Respondent upon receiving
at Dabboussi’s Pharmacy at 63 Hill Road, Lurnea,
failed to enter details of the said
in the drug register for
that place contrary to clause 114(1) and 114(2) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 1994
From time to time between approximately
June 1998 and approximately July 1998, the Respondent upon receiving possession
at the Grace Plaza Pharmacy at the corner of King and York
Streets, Sydney failed to enter details of the said
in the drug
register for that place contrary to clause 114(1) and 114(2) of the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 1994
Between approximately May 1998 and
approximately the end of June 1998, the Respondent supplied and/or possessed
contrary to an Order made by the Director General of the
Department of Health on 1 May 1998 pursuant to clause 151(1) of the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 1994
prohibiting the Respondent from
supplying or having possession of drugs of addiction.
Between approximately September 2000 and
21 June 2001, the Respondent failed to inform the Pharmacy Board of New South
he self administered
without a prescription when the
Respondent was under the supervision of the Pharmacy Board’s section 20A
The Respondent breached the conditions
imposed on his registration by the section 20A Committee of the Pharmacy
BoardConditions are
actually imposed by the Board on the recommendation of the
Committee. In particular, the Respondent:
Failed to attend for urinalysis thrice
weekly as required between 13 October and 5 November 1998.
Failed to attend urinalysis as required
on 21 occasions between 29 June 1999 and 17 July 2001.
Failed to forward to the section 20A
Committee the results of his urinalysis from time to time between 18 May and 9
August 2001.
Between approximately 7 September 2000
and approximately 2 May 2001, the Respondent from time to time supplied and/or
contrary to an Order made by the Director General of
the Department of Health on 1 September 1999 pursuant to clause 151(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 1994
prohibiting the Respondent
from supplying or having possession of
Between approximately early March 2001
and approximately June 2001, the Respondent obtained a prohibited drug, namely
, by knowingly making false representations to Barry Waugh of
Lurnea Pharmacy and to Fauldings, namely, that he (the Respondent) was
authorised to take possession of
when his authority to do so
had been withdrawn, contrary to section 17 of the
Drugs Misuse and
Trafficking Act 1985.
In April 2001, the Respondent made a
false or misleading statement to the Pharmaceutical Services Branch of the New
South Wales Health
Department in his application for the removal of his
restrictions under clause 151(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 1994
in that the Respondent stated that he had not used
except on prescription since August 1998.
In or about April 1998 the Respondent
self administered
, which had not been lawfully prescribed to the
Respondent, contrary to section 12(1) of the
Drugs Misuse and Trafficking Act
In or about April 1998 the Respondent
, contrary to section 10(1) of the
Drugs Misuse and
Trafficking Act 1985.
In or about April 1998 the Respondent
misappropriated
, from Dabboussi’s Pharmacy at 63 Hill
Road, Lurnea for his own use.
From time to time, between approximately
September 1997 and approximately June 1998, the Respondent self administered a
restricted substance, namely
which had not been
prescribed for him by a medical practitioner.
From time to time, between approximately
November 1997 and early 1998, the Respondent self administered a restricted
substance, namely
, which had not been prescribed for him by a
medical practitioner.
From time to time, between approximately
early 1998 and approximately July 2001, the Respondent self administered a
prescribed restricted
substance, namely
which had not been
prescribed for him by a medical practitioner.
On about 28 September 2001, the
Respondent self administered
a restricted substance and
anaesthetic agent, which had not been prescribed for him by a medical
practitioner.
Complaint 2
On 16 January 1998 at Revesby, the
Respondent obtained a licence by a false statement, namely that he was one
Mohamad Sari who had
misplaced his drivers licence, contrary to section 7(1)(a)
Traffic Act 1909
On 10 June 1998 at Kingsgrove, the
Respondent fraudulently used a licence, namely fraudulently obtained licence
number 84671A in the
name of Mohamad Sari issued under the
Traffic Act
(NSW), contrary to section 7(1)(c) of
Traffic Act, 1909
On 10 June 1998 at Kingsgrove, being the
driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street, when required by a police
officer to produce
his licence and state his name and place of abode, the
Respondent did state a false name and place of abode, contrary to section
Traffic Act 1909
On 10 June 1998 at Kingsgrove, being a
person disqualified from holding or obtaining a drivers licence under the
Traffic Act 1909
(NSW), the Respondent did during the period of such
disqualification drive a motor vehicle upon a public street, contrary to section
7A(2)(a) of the
Traffic Act 1909
On 10 June 1998 at Kingsgrove, the
Respondent did have in his possession a prescribed restricted substance, namely
contrary to
section 16(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
On 10 June 1998 at Kingsgrove, the
Respondent did drive a motor vehicle upon a public street whilst under the
influence of a drug,
, contrary to section 5(2)(a) of
Traffic Act 1909,
Through his counsel at the hearing the Respondent admitted all Particulars of
Complaints 1 and 2, save for subparagraph 9(c) of complaint
1. In relation to
subparagraph 9(c) counsel for the Respondent submitted :
"...the results of urinalysis at all times were provided directly by the
pathology services provider, Douglas Hanly Moir, to the Committee
subparagraph 9(c) is not admitted."
THE RESPONDENT
The Respondent is a registered pharmacist in New South Wales, having first
become registered on 12 January 1994. However, the
Respondent’s
to practise has been suspended during the following periods: 8 July 1998 - 19
August 1998; 8 August 2001
- 8 January 2003;
13 July 2005 to date.
A list of documents tendered to the Board in evidence is annexed to these
The Respondent, Hayat Elnajjar (the Respondent’s sister), Sheik Shady
Alsuleiman of Lakemba Mosque and Dr Stephen Mervin Jurd
gave evidence in the
Respondent’s case and were cross-examined by counsel for the Complainant
at the hearing.
At the prior hearing in June 2005, the Respondent, Dr Jurd, Dr John Ellard
and Mr Peter Freeman (Deputy Registrar of the Board) gave
evidence and were
cross-examined. The transcripts of their evidence from that hearing were
tendered by the Complainant in the present
hearing and are contained in Exhibit
BURDEN OF PROOF AND THE BOARD’S JURISDICTION
The Board needs to be "
comfortably satisfied
" that the particulars of
the Complaint have been established because of the seriousness of the
allegations and the gravity of their
consequences (
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 362-363).
The jurisdiction exercised by the Board is protective and not punitive. There
are dual reasons for this: first, the protection of
the public and secondly, the
protection of the profession at large.
The Board adopts what was said by Kirby P as he then was in
(No 2)(1989)
16 NSWLR 197
"In giving meaning to the phrase ‘misconduct in a professional
respect’ in the context within which it appears it must
be kept in mind
that the consequences of an affirmative finding is drastic for the practitioner
and the purpose of providing such
drastic consequences is not a punishment of
the practitioner as such but protection of the public. The public needs to be
from delinquents and wrongdoers within professions. It also needs to
be protected from seriously incompetent professional people
who are ignorant of
basic rules or indifferent as to rudimentary professional requirements. Such
people should be removed from the
relevant roll of practitioners at least until
they can demonstrate that their disqualifying imperfections have been
The Board also adopts what was said by Sinclair DCJ in the District Court
appeal against orders of the Pharmacy Board in appeal number
12236 of 1991
decided 1 July 1992 (
[1992] NSWDC 1)
as follows:
"In deciding what orders are appropriate to the circumstances established
by the evidence adduced on the hearing of this appeal the
court takes into
the gravity of the
appellant’s
misconduct.
the protection of
the community.
the maintenance
of the standards of the
profession.
the circumstances
of the appellant at the relevant
the steps taken by the
appellant to ensure there is no repetition of such
misconduct."
Further, in
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, in order that abuse of privilege
may not lead to loss of
privilege."
Complaint One
Complaint One alleges that the Respondent has been guilty of professional
misconduct pursuant to section 19D(1)(c) of the Act.
Professional misconduct, in relation to a pharmacist, is defined in section
19A of the Act as including:
"(a) any conduct that demonstrates a lack of adequate:
experience,
by the pharmacist in the practice of pharmacy,
the pharmacist’s
contravening an order made or a direction given by the Board,
(f) the pharmacist’s being an habitual drunkard or being addicted to
any deleterious drug, and
(g) any other improper or unethical conduct of the pharmacist relating to
the practice of pharmacy."
Complaint One particularises misconduct from approximately May 1998 to 21
July 2005. It was submitted by the Complainant’s counsel
that the alleged
misconduct is particularly serious for the following reasons:
"(1) The Respondent engaged in illegal behaviour, contravening the Poisons
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation, 1994 and the
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act,
on numerous occasions;
The Respondent failed to
appreciate the need to keep an accurate drug register;
By his repeated
misappropriation of drugs of addiction while practising as a pharmacist, the
Respondent abused the trust placed in
him by the community;
The Respondent lied not only
to the Pharmacy Board
to the Pharmaceutical Services Branch, various medical practitioners (including
and Dr’s preparing reports that he knew were to be provided to the
Pharmacy Board) drug companies, his colleagues and his
The Respondent maintained his
lies about his illegal drug use for a period of more than seven (7)
The Respondent repetitively
breached undertakings given by him to the Pharmacy Board, undertakings that were
necessary for the dual
purpose of monitoring his behaviour and ensuring public
On a number of occasions when
the Respondent had been using pethidine, the Respondent either failed to undergo
urinalyses as required
or substituted his brother’s urine for his own, in
an attempt to thwart a positive result."
Kucka v Walton
[1996] NSWDC1 Nash DCJ adopted the following finding
made by the Board concerning the role of pharmacists in the community:
"Pharmacists occupy a special place in the community being given
responsibility for the legal supply of drugs to the public and for
ensuring that
those drugs are used appropriately. These responsibilities are governed by the
Pharmacy Act, 1964
. A failure to observe both the legal and professional
obligations relating to the use of medication effectively condones the abuse
some substances and threatens the public perception of the integrity of the
profession. Such conduct denies the public the protection
to which it is
entitled and erodes public confidence in pharmacists."
Spicer v Medical Board of NSW & Ors
19 February 1981
(unreported) at 5 it was held by the New South Wales Court of the Appeal
"...serious breaches of the high standard required of the medical
profession in its dealings with drugs demonstrates unfitness to
It was submitted by the Complainant’s counsel, and it is accepted by
the Board, that the same principle may be applied
mutatis mutandis
standards required of pharmacists because of the community’s interest in
the need for great care to be taken in the
supply and use of drugs of
Complaint Two
Complaint Two alleges that the Respondent has been convicted of certain
offences pursuant to the
Traffic Act 1909.
Section 20(3)
Pharmacy Act
"The Board is not to suspend a person’s registration or remove a
person’s name from the register for having committed
an offence if, having
regard to the nature of the offence or circumstances under which it was
committed the Board is of the opinion
that it does not render the person unfit
in the public interest to be registered as a pharmacist."
Traffic offences are generally not considered to be offences of the most
serious nature. However, it was submitted by the Complainant’s
and it is accepted by the Board, that in this case:
"...the nature of these particular offences is consistent with the
respondent’s use of illegal drugs and his willingness to
lie, as alleged
in Complaint One. The respondent obtained a driver’s licence by making a
false statement, he fraudulently used
that licence, he gave a police officer a
false name and address, he drove while disqualified, he drove under the
influence of pethidine
and he was in unlawful possession of Xanax. These
offences demonstrate a striking irresponsibility on the respondent’s part
and lack of societal concern."
FITNESS TO BE REGISTERED
The issue of fitness to practise medicine was discussed in
NSWCA, unreported, 15 July 1994 at 12 where the Court of Appeal
"To determine whether a finding of proven misconduct should be followed by
a consequential finding that the practitioner is not of
good character in the
context of fitness to practise medicine, one must consider: (a) whether the
misconduct can be satisfactorily
explained as an error of judgment rather than a
defect of character; (b) the intrinsic seriousness of the misconduct qua fitness
to practise medicine; (c) whether the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated
episode and hence atypical or uncharacteristic of
the practitioner’s
normal qualities of character; (d) the motivation which may have given rise to
the proven episode of misconduct;
(e) the underlying qualities of character
shown by previous and other misconduct; and (f) whether the practitioner’s
post the proven episode of misconduct demonstrates that public and
professional confidence may be reposed in him to uphold and observe
standards of moral rectitude required of a medical practitioner."
The Complainant’s counsel also referred the Board to the recent
decision of the New South Wales Medical Tribunal in
HCCC v Shashati,
Medical Tribunal, unreported, 22 September 2006. In
respondent doctor was addicted to morphine and self-medicated using a variety of
means, including taking stock from his doctor’s
bag and from his
surgery’s supplies, and by writing prescriptions for his own use in the
names of his patients. Consistent
with the facts in this matter, the respondent
doctor lied to the Medical Board, his Board-appointed supervisor, his colleagues
his family about his drug use.
In finding that the respondent doctor’s lies were sufficient to
establish a complaint that the respondent doctor was not fit
to practise
medicine, the Medical Tribunal said:
"Even accepting that this practitioner had a long standing drug addiction
and a mental illness [major depression] for many years,
the Tribunal is of the
view that his persistent lying was neither atypical nor uncharacteristic
behaviour but was reflective of his
character. The practitioner’s
persistent and systemic lying is inimical to fitness to practise medicine. It
could not be said
that it was an isolated episode.
The persistent lying in the face of those who were in a position to assist
the practitioner, the Medical Board, Review Panels and
Clinical Supervisor, and
lies maintained up to the date of the hearing do not instill confidence that he
is a person in whom the
public and the profession could impose
Should this be
confidence. Certainly at present, the Tribunal could have no
confidence, the practitioner was amenable
Should this be "amenable"?
supervision nor that he could be relied upon to disclose matters which were
adverse to him professionally."
The Respondent’s counsel submitted that the essential cause of the
Respondent’s admitted conduct was related to his drug
dependence/addiction. It was further submitted by counsel for the Respondent
that the Complainant has confused conduct intrinsic
to drug addiction with
inherent character.
The Board does not agree with counsel for the Respondent in this regard. The
Board is of the view that the Respondent’s conduct
went beyond conduct
resulting from his drug dependence/addiction and was indicative of a seriously
flawed character.
However, the relevant time for determining the fitness of a practitioner to
practise is the time of the determination by the disciplining
body seized with
the question:
A Solicitor v The Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 204 ALR 8.
The Respondent’s Current Employment and Professional Status
The Respondent is currently the registered owner of Edgeworth Day and Night
Pharmacy at Hornsby ("
the Pharmacy
"). The Pharmacy is staffed by four
employed pharmacists who all work part-time. There are no shop assistants or
dispensary assistants
employed to work in the Pharmacy. The Respondent states
that he rarely attends the Pharmacy premises.
At the commencement of 2006 the Respondent purchased an elevating work
platform ("
"), commonly known as a "cherry picker". The Respondent
hires the EWP to tradesmen who require such equipment to work at height.
Respondent states that he works as the operator of the EWP and that he holds an
EWP certificate issued by WorkCover. The Respondent
states that on average he
is working 30 to 40 hours per week on the EWP and that he does not employ
anybody else to operate the EWP.
Last year the Respondent joined the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia
"). He has been undertaking video lectures. He has attended a
lecture on anxiety and depression.
The Respondent gave evidence at the hearing that he had recently received an
offer from a pharmacist to purchase the Pharmacy. In
this regard, The
Respondent said he was approached privately by the potential purchaser. There
was an application submitted to the
Board for the transfer of ownership, but the
purchaser pulled out of the purchase on a Tuesday afternoon, just before the
on a Wednesday, and nothing proceeded beyond that.
The Respondent also gave evidence that whilst the Pharmacy is not on the
market he would consider a reasonable offer to sell. He
further explained :
When I say I would consider a reasonable offer, that’s probably in
the context of the offer I just had, which was a very substantial
offer, well
beyond its market value, so it made me think twice about selling, otherwise
I’m quite happy with the performance
of the pharmacy and I don’t
really have an immediate intention to sell it, but if someone is going to come
and provide you
with a ridiculous sum, then you have to make economic and
financial decisions, but otherwise no, it’s not on the market
When asked about the viability of the pharmacy, the Respondent said:
Its performance and its viability has certainly improved since we
obtained the number
[approval number under the National Health Act]
couple of years ago. It has plateaued out now. We do approximately 100 scripts
a day. Its turnover is in excess of the $1 million
mark. It is a small pharmacy
but considering it has small overheads, it is in a medical centre with low staff
and low salary commitments,
so it is able to generate a profit even though I am
not actually directly employed in the pharmacy."
In relation to video lectures, the Respondent gave the following
"...I joined the society
with the specific intention to be
able to attend evening lectures, to stay sort of ahead with the current
developments and so forth,
but I found that they actually didn’t offer
that many evening lectures throughout the year, not as many as I had hoped. They
have a backlog of all the evening lectures that have been provided over the last
few years and one is able to hire out the video,
which comes with a
questionnaire that you complete at the end and send back to the society and they
allocate you continuing education
points accordingly."
The Respondent also gave the following evidence in relation to his intentions
as to future professional practice :
"Q: If I can take you to the final page of your statement, Mr Dabboussi,
the future professional practice, you accept or seem to accept
importance of the protection of the community?
Q: You make it quite clear that you are prepared to accept whatever
conditions on your registration the Board may provide?
A: That’s right.
Q: And you are currently suspended from practice?
A: That’s right.
Q: And that has been the case for some time?
A: I think since July last year.
Q: And that is done on a what is termed a three monthly basis?
A: A two monthly basis.
Q: A two monthly basis?
Q: And do you meet with the Committee in relation to that further
suspension?
A: No, I haven’t actually met with the section 20A Committee for
some time now, probably a couple of years. I do make submissions
occasionally to
the Board from time to time and update them on what activities I have been up
to, but I haven’t had a face-to-face
meeting with the Committee for some
Q: Is it the practice of the Committee to ask you to come along for a
A: It was. We used to meet very regularly, initially monthly, and then I
think every couple of months and then it was scaled down.
I don’t know why
it ceased completely but it was certainly the norm for them to request me to
come in from time to time.
Q: Have you always made yourself available should there be a request for
such a meeting?
A: Absolutely."
Under cross-examination, the Respondent gave the following evidence as to his
intentions for future professional practice:
"Q: If you were permitted by the Board to again practise pharmacy, it
would be your intention, wouldn’t it, to return to that
pharmacy to
A: That would be my ultimate goal, yes.
Q: Your ultimate goal?
A: Well, depending on the sort of restrictions that are placed upon me.
The last time that I practised, that I was allowed to practise,
it was under a
condition that I had to be supervised while practising and that’s a pretty
reasonable condition that I imagine
would be imposed if I were allowed in the
future and so yes, that would be what I would intend doing, working in that
pharmacy under
supervision.
Q: You would intend to work in your own pharmacy under the supervision of
an employed pharmacist, is that what you are saying?
A: That depends. In the past I have worked under supervision in other
pharmacies. When I was first reregistered after a lengthy period
of suspension,
I had about three or four different positions around Sydney where I took on a
locum position for a period of time
under supervision of other pharmacists and,
as I said, it depends on the requirements of the Board. They may very well
suggest that
working under the supervision of an employed pharmacist might not
be appropriate, that might cause barriers to the pharmacist feeling
the freedom
to be able to communicate with the Board, so I would obviously have to comply
with whatever the Board suggests.
Q: Have you made any inquiries about employment in any other
A: Not at the moment because there hasn’t really been any need
Q: Do you understand that your lawyers are asking that you be permitted to
A: That’s right.
Q: Despite that you haven’t made any inquiries as to any pharmacy
that might be available for you to practise in?
A: As I just said, there hasn’t been any indication that I would be
allowed to practise any time in the near future. If that
was to be made then
certainly I would make the inquiries."
In re-examination, the Respondent gave the following further evidence:
"Q: My friend asked you about your proprietorship as the sole owner of the
pharmacy, Mr Dabboussi. Have you ever considered the
or any merit,
in trying to enlist a partner in the pharmacy practice or business?
A: Yes, in fact there was an avenue that I was looking at very recently,
of taking on a junior partner in the pharmacy. Basically
I could see that it
would have several advantages. Firstly, the capital injection would help relieve
the current debt that I have
in my financial situation. Secondly, a junior
partner is obviously going to be committed to the pharmacy and motivated to help
the performance of the pharmacy and it would probably be a situation
that that could work to my benefit as well. In this instance
necessarily - I’ll leave it at that. It has several advantages that would
suit my situation.
Q: Going back to the question my friend asked you about whether you
Is a word missing here? "practise"?
under supervision of an employed
pharmacist, if there was a partner in the business, that may alleviate any
difficulty in the arrangement
that might happen with an employed
pharmacist?
A: Certainly a partner is more independent than an employed pharmacist and
would feel that they have more freedom to act according
to their wishes.
Q: And in relation to any prescriptions there, you would be aware that
there may well be a condition on your registration limiting
or denying access to
Schedule 8 medications?
Q: And in respect of supervision, but not directly on that point, have you
ever considered the benefits of a mentor pharmacist?
A: That has been a suggestion that I have considered and it is something I
am prepared to take on.
Q: You would accept that mentorship if the Board were to nominate a person
to carry that on?
A: Absolutely..."
The Respondent’s Urinalysis Regime
The Section 20A Committee of the Board has been responsible for the
continuing assessment and monitoring of the Respondent’s
drug-use, which
has included medical examinations pursuant to section 20A(2) of the Act and
random or twice/thrice weekly urinalysis
since 1998.
Prior to 2005, the Respondent was being tested by way of a Urine Drug Screen
(UDS), but without specific instruction to the pathology
laboratory for testing
for Pethidine. There were also flaws in the protocol for supervision. In
particular, there was an incident
where the Respondent submitted a urine sample
that contained his brother’s urine, not his own. It is not surprising that
was allowed to occur, having regard to the adhoc supervisory arrangements
that were previously in place. In particular, the Board
notes the following
evidence given by the Respondent at the hearing in September 2005 :
The normal procedure was for the pathologist, collecting nurse, to walk
into the cubicle with me and look over my shoulder, to make
sure that there is
no swapping of testing etc. There were occasions, particularly in the first
practice in Liverpool, where the nurse
did not follow me to the bathroom. It was
the layout of the building. The bathroom was nowhere near the office and I would
offered the key, go perform the urinalysis and bring it back.
That was all pretty much prior to my relapse in 2001. After that, as best
as I recall, I started having urinalysis testing at Bankstown
office where the
bathroom facilities were within the actually pathology office. In most, if not
all, of those tests a nurse would
walk in and look over my shoulder to check
that the test, that the urine was in fact my urine.
Around the time that I recall being about 2002, Douglas
[Douglas Hanly
seemed to change their standards for urine drug screens. May I also
add in my trips away they were usually supervised. The nurse
would walk in. It
was around 2002 that Douglas themselves explained that they were bringing their
procedures in line with the Australian
Standard urine drug screens. It happened
to coincide - I am not sure if it did or not - it was after the Olympics at any
they brought a whole new mechanism out that involved two cups, the
measurement of a temperature of this sample, the sealing by wax
of cups and a
procedure that they called chain of custody. Now I under went that because they
insisted that that was the only way
that they were going to perform urine drug
That procedure, as you can imagine, was more cumbersome than the old one
of them looking over my shoulder and much more time consuming.
I used to close
the Pharmacy to go and get these urine tests done. This is prior to my
suspension.
I mentioned this to Dr Jurd several times and I said is it really
necessary for the full chain of custody, anybody who came in to
off and for the two samples to be sealed by wax etc. and he said no. His main
concern was supervision. When I brought
this to the attention of Douglas, they
were very abrupt that no, it is one way or the other. You will either do it
according to chain
of custody where someone not only is looking over your
shoulder but in fact is standing directly in front of you, or you won’t
It also coincided with the financial situation Medicare stopped actually
paying for these tests. Medicare changed their rules and
the patient had to pay
and there was a sum of something like $5,000 that Douglas believes that they
were owed, but they never chased
me up for it because it was all in the past. It
was something that Medicare sort of went back and said no, we will not
Under those conditions I went along and did the chain of custody where
they walked in. I tried to find somewhere, or I asked them
do you have a
practise where there is at least a male nurse. Even though I had been having
urinalysis for some years, it is one thing
for someone to look over your
shoulder but it is another thing for somebody to be standing directly in front
of you and they said
no, we don’t and we can’t guarantee, and it
almost seemed as if they did not want to do the whole thing at all.
Nevertheless I agreed to abide by their rules, brought it up again with Dr
Jurd and he said look, as long as they are supervising
he is happy not to have
the chain of custody, so what I did is what my normal procedure had been in the
past, it was done at the
same centre. The bathroom facilities were in the centre
and I would usually normally walk in and leave the door open. Passers by
walk in and some nurses would in fact walk in and look over my shoulder. Some
time had passed since the friction of the whole
matter. Some nurses would walk
in and look over my shoulder and some wouldn’t. Some clerks would note on
the paperwork that
it was supervised and some wouldn’t.
Now, at a later Section 20A Committee, the Committee brought up why are
some tests coming up as supervised and some not and I basically
gave them this
explanation and I put it to them what would you like me to do? I am happy to go
either way. Mr Freeman said he would
make some inquiries with Douglas if they
would be prepared to commit to writing that it is a supervised test. Somebody
walks in and,
you know, looking over my shoulder without following the full
chain of custody rigmarole but to this date I haven’t had a response
Mr Freeman, so I have continued in my normal practise, which is to walk into the
cubicle and leave the door wide open and as
I said, some clerks tend to come in,
some don’t. Some write that it is supervised, some don’t. I seemed
to have no control
over what ends up happening.
Q. Temperature is taken as well?
A. When it was done under the strict chain of custody, they would do an
exact temperature reading. Now it is more an empirical thing
where the nurse
will pick up and feel the sample to see if it’s warm or not."
The Complainant also obtained evidence that between April and July 2005 the
Respondent had been prescribed amounts of Pethidine. Throughout
this period, he
continued to attend urinalysis, and on days when it is alleged he was using
Pethidine, the results for opiates was
"negative". The question therefore arose
as to whether the immunoassay tests carried out were capable of detecting
Pethidine. According
to the report of Professor Graham Starmer, consultant
pharmacologist, dated 17 April 2006 the Pethidine would not have been
by the immunoassays used.
In response to the question put by the Complainant as to whether a trained
pharmacist would know that the immunoassay method of drug
screening was
inappropriate from reading the test report, Professor Starmer expressed the view
that a trained pharmacist would know
where to source such information.
Dr Grahame Caldwell, director of Biochemistry and Endocrinology, Douglas
Hanly Moir Pathology and director of Toxicology, The Sonic
Clinical Institute,
states in his report dated 19 June 2006 that he does not disagree substantively
with the views expressed by Professor
Starmer. However, his report canvassed
further what method of specimen collection is to be preferred. In this regard,
Dr Caldwell
was of the view that if a urine sample is to be assessed for the
presence of drugs for evidentiary purposes, then all of the relevant
specified in Australian New Zealand Standard ‘Procedures for the
collection, detection and quantitation of drugs
of abuse in urine" (AS/NZS
4308:2001) ("AS/NZS 4308") should apply. However, drugs that lie outside the
scope of AS/NZS 4308 and
that may be relevant include, but are not limited to
the following: methadone, buprenorphine, pethidine, oxycodone, ketamine,
gamma-hydroxbutyrate
("GHB") and benzodiazepines other than those listed in
Table 2 of AS/NZS 4308. Dr Caldwell states that from a logistic perspective
is not feasible to perform testing for all the drugs that have the potential to
be present in a donor’s urine. He states
that when a specimen is received
at Douglas Hanly Moir Pathology or Sonic Clinical Institute with a request for a
UDS, then the laboratory
routinely tests for the presence of the five principal
drug classes described in AS/NZS (opiates, sympathomimetic amines, cannabis
metabolites, cocaine metabolites and benzodiazepines). If the requesting
authority requires testing for any other drugs that lie
outside the scope of the
standard, then these drugs need to be specified in writing on the request form
or chain of custody form.
It seems the prior urinalysis regime was suboptimal. The Respondent admits
that in the past he made use of this to get around the
urinalysis regime.
The Respondent is currently undergoing urinalysis three times each week. The
current urinalysis regime commenced in or about October
2005. Under the current
urinalysis regime, the Board understands that specific instruction has been
given to the testing laboratory
to test for Pethidine.
The Respondent states that he has failed to comply with the current
urinalysis regime on two separate occasions. On one occasion he
states that he
was overseas for 7 to 8 days and was therefore unable to comply. On another
occasion he was unable to attend on account
of a work commitment.
There is no evidence of any drug use by the Respondent being detected by way
of urinalysis under the current urinalysis regime, which
as at the date of
hearing had been in place for approximately 14 months.
In the report of Dr Peter Morse, consultant psychiatrist, dated 21 March 2006
the Respondent is reported to have said that he is happy
with the current
urinalysis regime which he says is a cause of support and comfort to him and was
"particularly originally (sic) a very real reason for not taking
Dr Jurd also gave evidence at the hearing that there should be additional
testing for Tramadol as part of the urinalysis regime. When
asked why he would
select Tramadol Dr Jurd stated :
"Because... that’s the form that is taken by those impaired
practitioners under supervision of the Medical Board, that they
Australian Standard for drug urinalysis, plus specific testing for Pethidine and
Tramadol, so I take that to be the gold
Dr Jurd also expressed the view that the Medical Board has had more
experience with impaired practitioners over the years and that
as a result the
Medical Board has developed "
a more and more tight program
In re-examination Dr Jurd was asked about how a sufficiently rigid and
comprehensive urinalysis regime could minimize the possibility
of a relapse into
substance abuse. Dr Jurd gave evidence:
That’s the key containment factor and then, in addition to that, you
would need to bring to bear forces where the individual’s
life shifts and
their reinforcers change, the thing that is making them feel good about
themselves, the things that make them get
out of bed in the morning.
...........
The Respondent’s Recent Medical History
The Respondent was admitted to St John of God Hospital Drug and
Rehabilitation Unit on 29 June 2001 and his admission at that time
pertained to
benzodiazepine and Pethidine abuse and dependence. He was discharged from
hospital on 13 July 2001.
The Respondent was admitted again to St John of God Hospital on 15 September
2005 where he came under the care of Dr Selwyn Smith,
consultant psychiatrist.
The Respondent had been referred by Dr Jurd whom the Respondent had been
consulting on a regular basis.
Dr Jurd had requested that the Respondent be
admitted for detoxification in regard to his benzodiazepine dependence as well
as dependence
on Panadeine Forte and Pethidine. The Respondent was discharged on
20 September 2005.
In his report dated 6 February 2006, Dr Smith states that the Respondent
reported that the he had undergone a lengthy period of abstinence
following his
previous admission to St John of God Hospital in 2001. The Respondent reported
that the relapse that resulted in him
being admitted to St John of God Hospital
occurred approximately two months previous. He attributed his relapse to
persistent headaches.
He had utilized Pethidine to relieve his symptomatologies
and was using approximately 30 mg per day every few days. At times he had
incremented to 1.5 grams per week. The Respondent is said to have reported that
he last used Pethidine approximately 5-6 weeks prior
to his admission to
hospital. He then switched to Pandeine Forte over the six weeks prior to
admission and was utilizing up to eight
tablets per day. The Respondent is said
to have reported that he last used Pandeine Forte approximately three weeks
prior to his
admission. In addition, the Respondent reported that he had
utilized up to 20 mg of Valium per day over the two months prior to
Dr Smith states that the diagnosis on admission was Benzodiazepine, Pethidine
and Codeine Dependence. He further states that it was
thought that the relapse
had been precipitated by the recent onset of migraine and emotional
decompensation in regard to the Respondent’s
ability to cope with ongoing
financial stressors.
Dr Smith reports that the Respondent was treated with appropriate nursing and
medical care and supportive medication. The Respondent
is said to have
progressed well in treatment and at the time of discharge was most stable. He
was discharged on Avanza 30 mg bd.
Dr Smith reports that on follow up in his rooms (attendances on 3 November
2005, 13 January 2006 and 25 January 2006), the Respondent
had remained stable.
Dr Smith also describes the Respondent as being compliant and cooperative
throughout his inpatient stay and
that the Respondent maintained his compliance
through his further attendances at Dr Smith’s rooms.
Dr Smith reports that the Respondent is keen to re-engage as a pharmacist. Dr
Smith concludes that from a psychiatric point of view,
there would be nothing
precluding the Respondent from re-engaging. He further reports that the
Respondent is prepared to be monitored
on an as-required basis and is prepared
to conform to whatever restrictions are enunciated by the Board.
In his report dated 27 March 2006, Dr Smith expressed the view that:
"...if close monitoring through urine or other screening can be maintained
in a stringent fashion, then Mr Dabboussi would in my opinion
not pose as a risk
to the public on account of his practise as a pharmacist or operation of a
In this regard, I am also in agreement with the opinion of Professor James
Bell in his report of 21 March 2006 that external supervision
professional boards such as the Pharmacy Board is a key factor in influencing
the course of addictive disorders..."
"...He also requires to continue to attend Narcotics Anonymous meetings
and maintain contact with his treating therapists."
"...His prognosis is also linked to his ability to work
productively."
In his report to the Board dated 21 March 2006, Dr Peter Morse, consultant
psychiatrist, expresses the following opinion:
"In my report of 8
August 2005 I gave the opinion that I
found I was unable to accept Mr Dabboussi’s explanation of his behaviour
in regard to
the experience of migraine and the attendance at doctors and the
use of Pethidine. It would seem that Mr Dabboussi now agrees with
my view of his
state and attitude at that time.
He appears genuine in his acceptance that he had a serious drug dependence
problem in which he has considerable insight and is determined
to stay off the
drugs and appreciates the support he has been given from his family, religious
persons, treating personnel and others.
He recognizes the help, especially
initially, that urinalysis has been in being a deterrent to the use of narcotic
drugs. However,
he is also aware of the need to be constantly vigilant in regard
to future situations which may precipitate that drug dependence
In his report dated 27 November 2006, Dr Jurd reports that the Respondent
continues to be his patient and is currently attending approximately
monthly. Dr
Jurd states in his report that the Respondent has a diagnosis of polysubstance
dependence in early remission and treated
major depression.
Dr Jurd states that the Respondent’s prognosis:
"...will be determined by four non-treatment factors: compulsory
supervision, new love relationship, increased religious involvement
substitute dependencies."
Dr Jurd further reports:
"He has been under supervision for 8 years to little avail, but clearly
the supervision was suboptimal. Since the urinalysis protocol
tightened, this factor may now be operative. He has married in the last couple
of years and wishes to commence a family.
In the area of religion Mr Dabboussi seems to have made substantial
changes. He has much more actively embraced Islam, his traditional
describes his involvement in a variety of activities beyond regular attendance
at the mosque and prayer. He has changed
his appearance and he indicates a daily
involvement in his faith.
Substitute dependencies often distort substance dependence, not always for
the good. Opiate dependence may be followed by alcohol
dependence. Mr Dabboussi
has had the full gamut of substance use problems, but has also at times become
involved in speculative investment
in a fashion that was more like gambling than
portfolio management. Mr Dabboussi’s current business interests require
time and energy and seem less speculative. Equally, his intense involvement
in faith-based social movements could be seen as a positive
addiction."
Dr Jurd concludes that the circumstances under which he believes it would be
safe for the Respondent to practise as a pharmacist are
as follows:
Consolidating the therapeutic relationship between Mr Dabboussi and
myself. This would be achieved by continuing regular attendance
and a removal of
the expectation that I report to The Pharmacy Board.
Regular, three to six monthly
review by an independent psychiatrist, selected and paid for by The Pharmacy
Board. The independent
psychiatrist would report in writing to the Pharmacy
Development of an optimal
drug urinalysis mechanism that absolutely satisfies The Pharmacy Board that
urine substitution is virtually
impossible and that all relevant drugs are
screened. Testing for Tramadol should be added to the current
Graduated restrictions of his
work practises, slowly allowing him exposure to S8 drugs while maintaining
conditions (i), (ii) and
(iii). Detailed consultation with the New South Wales
Medical Board should be undertaken prior to the development of this new
Professor James Bell, a physician specialising in the treatment of drug
dependency, prepared a report dated 21 March 2006 at the request
Complainant. Professor Bell did not interview the Respondent and his report was
based on documents and instructions provided
to him by the Complainant.
The Board notes that the documents and instructions with which Professor Bell
was briefed did not contain information, in relation
to the recent positive
changes in the Respondent’s non-treatment and lifestyle factors, such as
the Respondent’s recent
involvement in religious and community activities.
Professor Bell expresses the opinion that the Respondent was indeed a
"pethidine addict". However, when asked about the severity of
Respondent’s addiction, Professor Bell considered it:
"...very unlikely that he
[the Respondent]
ever used pethidine in
quantities sufficient to become physically dependent (ie to the point of
experiencing withdrawal symptoms
on stopping). However, his drug use was
extensive and varied. In the transcript of evidence, Mr Dabboussi acknowledges a
of illicit drug use – ecstasy, cocaine and amphetamine –
prior to the injury which is said to have led to his becoming
addicted to
Pethidine. Mr Dabboussi used alcohol (leading to a PCA), benzodiazepines,
ketamine, and other opioids. Once addicted
to Pethidine, he went to enormous
lengths (at least great distances) to obtain supplies, and relapsed after
several episodes of in-patient
In addition to this drug use history, it appears that Mr Dabboussi was not
frank with his treating psychiatrist, Dr Jurd, who did
not obtain the full
history of his past drug use, nor an honest account of ongoing drug use. Mr
Dabboussi set out to subvert the
urine testing requirement that was placed upon
him. Immediately upon losing his drivers license he set about fraudulently
This behaviour may be interpreted as evidence of ‘severe
addiction’. However, I question the completeness of this assessment.
think it is more accurate to suggest that Mr Dabboussi has certain enduring
personality traits which mean he is intolerant of frustration,
disposed to
taking risk, including drug use, and to pursuing his perceived interests without
regard for honesty, social conventions
or legal restraints. These traits were
undoubtedly exacerbated by regular use of drugs, but cannot be explained only as
"severe addiction"..."
"...Given that Mr Dabboussi would not have experienced withdrawal
symptoms, and the fact he used a variety of drugs, at times together,
assume he was seeking to "get wasted..."
Professor Bell also comments as follows in relation to urine drug
"...I would comment that if Mr Dabboussi was using pethidine and avoiding
detection, whether through substitution of urines, or through
laboratory methods
being flawed, this represents a serious failing on the part of the pathology
system. External supervision (whether
through criminal justice, or professional
boards) is one of the few factors which unequivocally influences the course of
disorders. The likelihood (or preferably, certainty) that ongoing drug
use will be detected is an important deterrent, particularly
for individuals who
lack internal restraints..."
The Respondent’s Religious/Community Work and Other Lifestyle
The Respondent states that he has been doing community work with the United
Muslims of Australia Association and the Lebanese Muslim
Association. These
Associations are associated with the Lakemba Mosque.
The Respondent states that the work he does for these organizations is
related to youth affairs, including weekly lectures and camps,
communicating
with the isolated elderly and Islamic Friday service programs, which involves
attending high schools on Fridays to
give talks and lead prayers.
Sheik Shady Alsuleiman
("the Sheik")
gave evidence at the hearing
confirming details of the Respondent’s activities associated with the
Lakemba Mosque.
The Respondent also states that he has been helping with Human Appeal
International which is an organization that has a variety of
programs, including
digging wells in Africa, providing emergency and crisis relief in world trouble
spots and sponsoring orphans.
The Respondent’s sister, Ms Elnajjar, was cross-examined at the hearing
in relation to her statement dated 29 November 2006.
Ms Elnajjar has been teaching for 14 years and currently holds a Year 3
Coordinators position, being a position that she has held
for 10 years.
Ms Elnajjar was in attendance at the Respondent’s hearing before the
Board in 2005. She states that she was saddened to learn
that the Respondent had
another episode of Pethidine use in 2005, including at the time of the
Ms Elnajjar gave evidence at the hearing that she had previously been
deceived by the Respondent in relation to his drug use. However,
she now feels
that he has genuinely "
turned the corner
Ms Elnajjar gave the following evidence in response to questions from the
Chairman of the Inquiry:
"Q: Do you see Mr Dabboussi on a regular basis?
A: All the time.
Q: So you live nearby?
A: I live a couple of streets away.
Q: And you said that you think that he has made a lot of changes also in
his everyday life? Are they reflected in his daily routine?
Q: His involvement with family?
Q: Can you expand more on that for us?
A: Let me start of in March when I started to see these major changes. I
had actually come back from a holiday and my brother insisted
I start to go and
learn about the religion. I said that I don’t want to know about my
religion. He insisted I had to go. He
said to just go once and I did, and I have
been with him going to these regular classes on a Wednesday night and I have
so since April. That’s when I started. I have three children
and my husband does not attend the mosque. We generally do whatever
we do in the privacy of our own home. Ahmad has insisted that my husband take my
sons, my children, to the mosque so that
they too can learn about their faith
and know exactly what it is that we believe in. So he is the one that puts the
effort in and
makes sure that my husband does these things.
Also, on occasions when my husband can’t do these things, he himself
takes my sons to the mosque. He takes them to camps. Any
time where there is an
event, a social kind of gathering where it involves them being with children
around their age, and also having
to deal with learning more about what is good,
what is right, their religion and so forth, he is the one. He is the leader of
this and he does so with all of the other members of the family. He does so
with his friends. He will have dinners where he will
invite friends over for the
sole purpose of having a gathering and sitting talking, chatting, but nothing
more, nothing other than
that that, of what he truly believes in at the moment
and what he follows.
He spends a lot of his time, he donates a lot of his time to things like
the human appeal, any activities that are going on at the
mosque, which they do
all the time, whether it be a religious celebration or whether it be a Monday
night sermon, for example, where
he will be there to give a helping hand, so a
lot of that time is hours that he could be spending on himself, but he has
all of that for the sake of bettering him and for changing himself and
we can all see that, myself, my family, my parents, any one
of us, you can ask
and they will all say the same thing, because for a person to undergo that kind
of change it means they need to
let go of their lifestyle that they used to live
and unfortunately, or fortunately I don’t know, not many of us can do
I know for me leading a full-time job, raising a family, it would be
asking a lot for me to let go of many hours of my day to contribute
to something
else, just as you would with any kind of other activity that you believe is for
a good cause, volunteer work, whether
it be for the Red Cross or human appeal or
whatever. This one is for his own faith, for bettering himself and for helping
other people
Q: How would you describe his daily life prior to March 2005?
A: Very materialistic. It is the same as any person. I get up in the
morning. I go out. I enjoy the company of friends, any going
out to dinners,
just trying to lead a happy life, whereas he doesn’t do that now. Even
going out to the movies, he won’t
go out to the movies and going out to
dinner, he will only go to certain restaurants. He will only associate with
certain people
and, like I said, to do something like that you need to let go of
things that you are used to, and he seems to be doing it perfectly.
For me, to have to wake up every morning at 3 o’clock to go and make
prayers at the mosque that is half an hour away from my
house, and not come back
until 7 o’clock in the morning, I can’t do it and I don’t know
many people who can, and
yet he does. Sometimes he may have other jobs to do
during the day so he could be surviving on about four or five hours sleep for
the sake of wanting to learn, to do more, and at the end of the day we believe
the more you do these things the better it is for
yourself, so his life is based
on his faith at the moment."
Reformation of Character
The Complainant’s counsel submitted that the Respondent has not
demonstrated reformation of his character since he gave evidence
Board at the last hearing in September 2005, nor since he was last known to have
used Pethidine on 21 July 2005.
Re: The Matter of Mr Monier Gad Medical Tribunal NSW
, unreported,
21 June 2006 at 13, the Medical Tribunal considered evidence of religious
community activity and said that:
"The evidence...as to the charitable work undertaken by the Applicant is
impressive. The Applicant has since his name was removed
from the Register
devoted a great deal of time and effort to the Coptic Church and its
congregation. However, this Tribunal adopts
the words of the differently
constituted Medical Tribunal of September 1990 as follows ‘...the doctrine
of salvation by good
works has its limitations’."
Further, counsel for the Complainant referred the Board to the decision in
Exparte Tziniolis; Re The Medical Practitioners
(1967) 84 WN
(Pt 2) (NSW) 275, where Walsh JA said at 286:
"...if a man has exhibited serious deficiencies in his standards of
conduct and his attitudes, it must require clear proof to show
that some years
later he has established himself as a different man...’
In the present case, the Board has found Ms Elnajjar’s evidence of the
recent changes in the Respondent’s attitude and
lifestyle to be very
compelling. She was able to give evidence at the hearing that went beyond a mere
listing of the Respondent’s
recent religious and community activities, but
went to the heart of the changes in his day to day lifestyle.
In making a determination in this matter, the Board has also had regard to
the words of Justice Kirby in
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
34 NSWLR 408
at 409, paragraph 10:
"10. Improvement – The final consideration concerns an aspect of the
public interest to which, as I believe, insufficient attention
has been paid in
these cases. I expressed my views in this regard in Kotowicz v Law Society of
New South Wales (Court of Appeal,
7 August 1987, unreported). I was there in
dissent as to the result of the application. But, I hold to my opinion, as
to this case. It is an opinion which has enjoyed some favour in other
Australian jurisdictions:
‘Because the jurisdiction is for the protection of the public,
regard also may be had, to the public’s interests in the
restoration to
the Roll of such persons as have demonstrated, including by their work,
activities and life, a fitness to be restored.
For cultural and historical
reasons, redemption and forgiveness are important attributes of the shared
morality of our society. In
part, this is because of the teachings of religious
leaders who have profoundly influenced our community’s perception of
and fairness, reflected from the earliest time in the courts: see, eg.
St Matthews Gospel 18, 11ff; The Acts, 3, 19. In part, it
derives from the
self-interest which any community has to encourage the rehabilitation of those
who lapse and to hold out to them
the hope that, by diligent and honourable
efforts over a period, their past may be forgiven and they may be restored to
opinion of their family, friends, colleagues and society. The
public’s interest also includes the economic interest which is
involved in
utilising, to the full, the skills of talented people who have undergone years
of rigorous training but who, having misconducted
themselves, have had to be
removed for a time from positions of responsibility and trust.’"
FINDINGS IN RELATION TO MISCONDUCT
The Board finds that each of the particulars of the Further Amended Complaint
have been established, with the exception of those particularised
in paragraph
9(c) of Complaint One.
Having had regard to the standard applied in
, the Board
finds that the Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct within the
section 19A
Pharmacy Act
CONCLUSION IN RELATION TO FITNESS TO BE REGISTERED
The Board does not find that the Respondent is unfit to be registered as at
the date of determination of these proceedings.
In reaching this decision, the Board has had regard to the evidence given at
the hearing of the Respondent’s recent rehabilitation
and reformation of
character. Whilst there will always be a "genuine risk" that the Respondent may
"relapse", the uncontroverted
evidence is that there has been no drugs misuse or
abuse by the Respondent for almost two years. A stricter and more effective
drug screening protocol should also serve to underpin his continuing
remission. As to his character, whilst the Board finds that
at the time of the
alleged conduct such conduct went beyond conduct resulting from his drug
dependence/addiction and was indicative
of a seriously flawed character, the
Respondent has taken steps to make positive changes in his daily routine and
activities - with
a central focus on his religion and his family. The Respondent
has also indicated a willingness to submit to any restrictions on
his right to
practise or other orders of the Board. The Board has also taken into account the
economic interest in utilising the
skills of a professional such as the
Respondent, which it has balanced against the protection of the public from the
risk that the
Respondent may once again engage in conduct that falls short of
the high standards expected of his profession, as well as the object
deterring others who might be tempted to engage in similar conduct.
The Board makes the following orders:
Ahmad Dabboussi is severely reprimanded.
Ahmad Dabboussi is to attend monthly Narcotics Anonymous meetings for not
less than eighteen months from the effective date of these
orders. Every three
months, Ahmad Dabboussi is to provide a written declaration to the Board
confirming the dates and place/s of
the meetings he attended.
Ahmad Dabboussi is to be reviewed every six months for eighteen months from
the effective date of these orders by an independent psychiatrist
nominated by
the Board, the cost of such assessment to be borne by the Board. Ahmad Dabboussi
is to provide all necessary consents
to enable the said independent
psychiatrist, following each review, to provide to the Board a report, the
subject matter of which
is directed by the Board.
Ahmad Dabboussi is to attend for regular urine drug screening ("
three times per week on days and at a clinic or clinics approved by the Board.
Ahmad Dabboussi is also to attend for random UDS
on any day/s nominated by the
Board on not less than two hour’s notice. However, random UDS shall be
carried out not less than
once every two calendar months. Ahmad Dabboussi is to
provide all necessary consents to enable the clinics to forward all UDS results
to the Board.
The UDS regime is to be nominated by the Board and shall include:
A rigorous chain of custody protocol and
shall comply with all of the relevant conditions specified in Australian New
Zealand Standard
"Procedures for collection, detection and quantitation of drugs
of abuse in urine" (AS/NZS 4308:2001); and
Instructions to the nominated clinic/s
to carry out additional testing for Pethidine and Tramadol.
Ahmad Dabboussi is to attend upon Dr Stephen Jurd, or another medical
practitioner nominated by Ahmad Dabboussi and approved by the
Board, for monthly
review for not less than eighteen months from the effective date of these
orders. Ahmad Dabboussi is to provide
all necessary consents to enable the
treating medical practitioner to report to the Board every three months
confirming the dates
that Mr Dabboussi has attended for consultation over the
immediately preceding three months. Further, Ahmad Dabboussi is to provide
necessary consents to enable the treating medical practitioner, in the event
that he/she becomes aware of or forms the opinion
that Ahmad Dabboussi has
experienced a "relapse" concerning the use of any drug, including but not
limited to Pethidine, Panadeine
Forte and Benzodiazepams, to notify the Board
forthwith that there has been such a "relapse".
Ahmad Dabboussi is to complete 1000 hours of supervised practise under the
supervision of a pharmacist or pharmacists approved by
the Board (but not a
pharmacist employed by or in partnership with Ahmad Dabboussi). The period of
supervised practise must not be
less than twenty hours per week over a maximum
of five days per week.
For any period of time when the supervising pharmacist or pharmacists is/are
not present within that period, another registered pharmacist
The supervising pharmacist or pharmacists will be pharmacist in charge at all
times they are present in the pharmacy and their responsibilities
will include
dispensing Schedule 8 medications. The supervising pharmacist will also be
responsible for the weekly reconciliation
of the drugs register.
Ahmad Dabboussi is to provide all necessary consents to enable the said
pharmacist to provide to the Board a report, the subject matter
of which is
directed by the Board, as and when required to do so by the Board. However, no
single supervising pharmacist will be
required to report to the Board in this
regard more than once every two months.
Ahmad Dabboussi’s right to practise following completion to the
Board’s satisfaction of the 1000 hours of supervised practise
referred to
in order 6 above, will thereafter be conditional upon:
Ahmad Dabboussi submitting to the appointment of a mentor pharmacist or
pharmacists approved by the Board (but not a pharmacist employed
partnership with Ahmad Dabboussi) for a period of not less than six months.
Ahmad Dabboussi is to provide all necessary
consents to enable the said
pharmacist to provide to the Board a report, the subject matter of which is
directed by the Board, every
two months for a period of six months from a date
to be nominated by the Board; and
While Ahmad Dabboussi is the registered
owner of a pharmacy, Ahmad Dabboussi is to employ a pharmacist whose hours will
least in part (not less than two hours per day) with those of Ahmad
Dabboussi for a period of twelve months. Ahmad Dabboussi is to
provide all
necessary consents to enable the said pharmacist to provide to the Board a
report, the subject matter of which is directed
by the Board, every two months
for a period of twelve months from a date to be nominated by the
Ahmad Dabboussi is to deliver a seminar to pharmacists approved by the Board
on the subjects of management of Schedule 8 substances
and the ethical
responsibilities in relation thereto. Such seminar is to occur at a time and
place directed by the Board.
Ahmad Dabboussi is to complete at least 20 hours per year, for three years
from the effective date of these orders, of Board approved
Professional Education ("CPE"), at least 10 hours of which per year must be face
to face contact activity.
Ahmad Dabboussi is to provide the Board with documents evidencing completion
of the required CPE activities no later than 31 December
2007, 31 December
2008, 31 December 2009 and 31 December 2010.
For a period of three years from the
effective date of these orders, Ahmad Dabboussi is to do all things necessary to
maintain his
membership of the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia while ever he
practises as a pharmacist. Proof of membership is to be provided
to the Board by
30 June 2007 and on renewal of membership each subsequent
While ever he holds a pecuniary interest
in the business of a pharmacist, Ahmad Dabboussi is to do all things necessary
and maintain membership of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia. Proof of
membership is to be provided to the Board by 30 June 2007
on renewal of
membership each subsequent year.
Ahmad Dabboussi is not to handle, supply
or dispense any Schedule 8 drugs until such time as he has been assessed by the
the Assessment
") as fit to do so and not before Ahmad Dabboussi
has completed a minimum of 750 hours of supervised practise to the Board’s
satisfaction of the total 1000 hours of supervised practise referred to in order
6 above. The Assessment shall be carried out by
the Board’s Health Panel
and will be subject to ratification by the Board and restoration of his Drug
Authority by NSW Department
With the exception of Order 3 above, the costs of complying with these Orders
are to be met by Ahmad Dabboussi.
The effective date of these Orders will be one month from the date on which
Ahmad Dabboussi is notified by registered post at his
address as it appears on
the Register.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.01 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter