URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/145.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Knowles v Health Care Complaints Commission [2025] NSWCATOD 145; (30 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Knowles v Health Care Complaints Commission
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 145
Hearing Date(s):
19 August 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Occupational Division
J Redfern PSM, Senior Member
B Scott, Senior Member
R Benda, Senior
M Christensen, General Member
(1) Mr Knowles’ application for reinstatement is dismissed.
Knowles is not entitled to seek a review for 12 months from the date of this
(3) Mr Knowles is to pay the costs of the HCCC on an ordinary basis
as agreed or assessed.
Catchwords:
OCCUPATIONS — Heath practitioners — Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) — unregistered pharmacist
disqualified for three years — application for reinstatement of
registration at the end of the disqualification period
— practitioner not
yet fit to practise — 12 month non-review period ordered.
COSTS — principles in reinstatement proceedings
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal 2013 (NSW)
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
Pharmacy Act 1964
Cases Cited:
Ake v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2019] NSWCATOD 165
Medical Council of NSW
[2015] NSWCATOD 49
Health Care Complaints Commission v
Balafas (No 2)
[2021] NSWCATOD 175
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2021] NSWCATOD 49
Health Care Complaints Commission v Knowles
NSWCATOD 37
Health Care Complaints Commission v Wilcox (No 2)
[2020] NSWCATOD
Puri v Medical Council of New South Wales (No 2)
[2024 NSWCATOD
Qasim v Medical Council of New South Wales
[2021] NSWCA 171
v Medical Council of NSW [2026] NSWCATOD 18
Shah v Health Care Complaints
[2014] NSWCATOD 94
Texts Cited:
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal Occupational Division, Guideline on
Costs (August 2017)
Principal judgment
Daryll Knowles (Applicant)
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Respondent)
Representation:
E Lambert (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Applicant (self
represented)
Health Care Complaints Commission (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00174699
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Daryll Knowles has been a registered pharmacist for over 35 years. He was
disqualified from registration to practice for three
years following findings of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct made by the
Tribunal on 31 March 2022
Health Care Complaints Commission v Knowles
[2022] NSWCATOD 37).
Knowles’ period of disqualification expired on 1 April 2025 and on 7 May
2025, he applied to the Tribunal for reinstatement
under s 163B of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) (National Law). The respondent, the
Health Care Complaints
Commission (HCCC), opposes the application.
must decide whether Mr Knowles’ registration to practise should be
reinstated. Mr Knowles contends that he is fit to practise,
he acknowledges the
previous complaints and findings against him and has expressed remorse for his
previous failings. The HCCC contents
he is not yet fit, Mr Knowles bears the
onus to establish that he has become fit and, while he expresses remorse, he has
not sufficiently
acknowledged his failings or demonstrated insight, which raises
concerns about future compliance and the protection of the health
and safety of
the public.
a hearing on 19 August 2025, we have decided to dismiss the applicant and to
make an order that Mr Knowles’ disqualification
not to be reviewed under
Division 8 of the National Law until after 12 months. Our reasons
Knowles was first registered as a pharmacist in 1982. He was the sole proprietor
of a large compounding pharmacy, Australian Custom
Pharmaceuticals (ACP). ACP
compounded substances and prescriptions from doctors over Australia and
dispensed those substances to
patients. Amongst other drugs, ACP compounded
peptides and selective androgen receptor modulators. A number of the drugs
by ACP were associated with illicit or off-label use for performance
and image enhancement.
December 2019, the HCCC referred complaints about Mr Knowles to the Tribunal. In
August 2020, Mr Knowles notified the Australian
Health Practitioner Regulation
Authority (AHPRA) that he wanted to surrender his registration. He ceased to be
a registered pharmacist
on 30 November 2020. In January 2021, Mr Knowles applied
to the Tribunal requesting that it exercise its discretion under cl 12 of
of the National Law not to conduct an inquiry into the complaint.
Tribunal, constituted by Principal Member (PM) Britton, as she then was, refused
to exercise the discretion for the reasons set
out in her decision (
Care Complaints Commission v Knowles
[2021] NSWCATOD 49).
In short, PM
Britton was not satisfied that it was not in the public interest for the inquiry
to continue. The disciplinary action
The disciplinary
proceedings
substantive disciplinary proceedings came before the Tribunal on 6, 7 and 8
December 2021. The HCCC brought 17 complaints against
Mr Knowles. On the first
day of the hearing, the HCCC withdrew two of those complaints (Complaints One
and Three) and withdrew a
number of particulars to Complaint Eleven. Mr Knowles
made admissions in relation to the balance of the complaints. The Tribunal
that all of the remaining complaints were established. The current proceedings
are not a review of the disciplinary proceedings
or the findings made but rather
a review of the order pursuant to s 163B of the National Law. However, the
complaints and findings
are relevant in the context of our current assessment of
Mr Knowles’ fitness to practice and it is therefore apt to summarise
complaints and findings made.
complaints related to:
(1) The inappropriate compounding and dispensing of ketamine between 2014 and
2015 on 312 occasions (Complaints Two and Four).
(2) Permitting hormones and peptides to be dispensed to a patient without
knowing the patient’s medical condition or having
a reasonable basis for
believing the peptides were prescribed for an appropriate therapeutic purpose
(Complaint Five).
(3) Shortly before October 2014, supplying or permitting the supply of melatonin
and thymosin beta 4 (which was not an approved drug)
to a patient where the
patient did not have a prescription for those drugs (Complaint Six).
(4) Between October 2010 and July 2014 permitting 12 prescriptions of the drug
HCG to be compounded and dispensed on prescriptions
from certain doctors for
weight loss in circumstances where, amongst other things, the HCG was not
supplied for a recognised therapeutic
purpose (Complaint Seven).
(5) Between January and September 2014 permitting peptides to be dispensed on
approximately 168 occasions, sometimes in combination
with other peptides,
without knowing the patients’ medical conditions or having a reasonable
basis for believing the peptides
were prescribed for an appropriate therapeutic
purpose (Complaint Eight).
(6) Between June 2014 and May 2016 permitting 7,951 prescriptions for peptides
to patients to be compounded and dispensed without
knowing the patients’
medical conditions or having a reasonable basis for believing the peptides were
prescribed for an appropriate
therapeutic purpose (Complaint Nine).
(7) Between June and December 2014 permitting different peptides to be dispensed
in combinations to four patients in circumstances
where the directions on the
prescriptions were vague and insufficiently clear and without knowing the
patients’ medical conditions
or having a reasonable basis for believing
the peptides were prescribed for an appropriate therapeutic purpose (Complaint
(8) Between December 2015 and February 2016 permitting phentermine to be
compounded and supplied to 184 patients in circumstances
where Mr Knowles did
not provide appropriate information about the compounded drugs and, amongst
other things, without taking reasonable
steps to establish that the medication
was suitable for the patients supplied (Complaint Eleven).
(9) Between September 2015 and October 2016 permitting testosterone with chrysin
to be compounded and dispensed to patients on approximately
418 occasions in
circumstances where Mr Knowles had not done any clinical trials to satisfy
himself as to the safety and efficacy
of the formulation, contrary to Guideline
2 of the Pharmacy Board of Australia (PBA) guidelines on compounding of medicine
there was insufficient information about the topical exposure of chrysin
to be satisfied about its safety (Complaint Twelve).
(10) Between September 2015 in October 2016 permitting testosterone and zinc to
be compounded and dispensed to patients on approximately
418 occasions in
circumstances where there was a commercially available approved product with the
Australian Register of Therapeutic
Goods (ARTG) and where compounding and
dispensing testosterone cream was contrary to Guideline 2 of the PBA guidelines
on compounding
medicines. (Complaint Thirteen).
(11) Between July 2015 and April 2016 permitting a topical preparation
containing testosterone with SARMS 22 (a drug not approved
by the ARTG) without
a reasonable basis to believe the addition of SARMS 22 had any material effect
on the therapeutic purpose of
the product (Complaint Fourteen).
(12) Between July 2014 and November 2016 permitting a topical preparation
including testosterone and DHEA (a drug which was not approved
and had never
been registered on the ARTG) to be compounded and dispensed to patients in
circumstances where there was a commercially
available approved ARTG product,
combining and dispensing the topical preparation was contrary Guideline 2 of the
PBA guidelines
on compounding medicines and where Mr Knowles had no reasonable
basis to believe that the addition of DHEA had any material effect
on the on the
therapeutic purpose of the product (Complaint Fifteen).
(13) Particulars in Complaints Four and Eight to Fifteen were relied on
individually to establish professional misconduct (Complaint
(14) From February 2002 to around October 2006 entering into an arrangement to
conduct a pharmacy business with a non-pharmacist
in contravention of
Pharmacy Act 1964
(NSW) (since repealed) by entering into an
arrangement with a party in around February 2002 whereby companies controlled by
party referred prescriptions for compounded pharmaceuticals to Mr Knowles
and the profits generated from dispensing those prescriptions
were paid to the
companies controlled by that person until around October 2006 and by dispensing
products pursuant to that arrangement
for periods for February 2002 and April
2003 to October 2006 (Complaint Seventeen).
Tribunal examined the evidence and, independently of the admissions made by Mr
Knowles, was satisfied that each of the Complaints
referred to in [9] above was
established (at [19]-[57] and [83]).
Tribunal concluded:
(1) The conduct of Mr Knowles which was the subject of Complaints Two to Fifteen
was “significantly below the standard reasonably
expected” of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience, as defined by s
139B(1)(a) of the National Law:
(2) Mr Knowles was guilty of “unsatisfactory professional conduct”
in respect of the established particulars of Complaints
Two and Four to Fifteen,
as defined by s 139B(1) of the National Law, and his conduct was unethical: at
(3) In respect of Complaint Sixteen, there were 13 instances of unsatisfactory
professional conduct, which, when considered together
amounted to conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of
registration: at [79].
(4) Mr Knowles contravened
Pharmacy Act 1964
during a period when to
do so was professional misconduct under
Pharmacy Act 1964
(5) If Mr Knowles was still registered as a pharmacist, the Tribunal would have
cancelled his registration, and such an order was
warranted by the extent,
length and nature of the admitted conduct: at [93].
Tribunal ordered, pursuant to s 149C(4)(b) of the National Law, that Mr Knowles
be disqualified from being registered in the pharmacy
profession for a period of
three years from the date of the orders and that the Pharmacy Board of Australia
was required to record
the fact that the Tribunal would have cancelled Mr
Knowles’ registration in the National Register kept by the Board. The
also ordered that Mr Knowles pay the HCCC’s costs of the
proceedings.
Mr Knowles’ application for
reinstatement
Knowles applied for a reinstatement order of his registration by application
made to the Tribunal received on 7 May 2025. He stated
in the application that
he had complied “in full” with the orders made by the Tribunal
handed down on 6 April 2022 (a
reference to the orders which were the subject of
the decision dated 31 March 2022).
support of his application, Mr Knowles relied on an affidavit sworn 16 June 2025
to the following effect:
(1) Throughout his 35 years of practice, he had never received a complaint or
report of harm from a patient or treating doctor.
(2) He had consistently dispensed millions of prescriptions without incident
and, in agreeing to withdraw the application against
his co-accused pharmacist
manager, the HCCC acknowledged that there was no evidence of direct patient harm
as a result of the conduct
and the matter did not raise any novel principles
that would justify depriving the Tribunal and the Council of resources to hear
other cases.
(3) At the time of the allegations, ACP was the most accredited compounding
pharmacy in Australia, being the only pharmacy to receive
APB Guideline USP797
and USP795 accreditation from an external auditor (together the “USP
standards”). The staff were
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) trained by
TGA (Therapeutic Goods Administration) approved educators, with courses
co-written by
himself and his co-accused pharmacist manager.
(4) In 2015, after receiving the complaint, Mr Knowles made the decision to
elevate his operations by constructing a GMP facility
licenced by the TGA for
sterile and non-sterile compounding. He achieved this in October 2020 while
addressing ongoing inquiries
from the HCCC and the Pharmacy Council of
(5) Upon receiving the TGA licence for ACPharm, he closed the ACP compounding
facility in 2020. He also licenced the ACP analytical
lab, which had conducted
quality control testing for ACP compounding medicines for 10 years. This unique
facility was staffed with
exceptional pharmacists.
(6) During this period, Mr Knowles experienced one of his greatest achievements,
being awarded the title of the Fellow of the Australian
College of Pharmacy in
April 2019 for his contributions to modern compounding, research and education.
He also received a certificate
of appreciation from the University of Sydney
Pharmacy Department for his contributions to the education and mentorship of
pharmacy students in GMP and manufacturing practices at ACP. He also
obtained TGA clinical trial approval for his facility to develop
an Australian
made novel antibiotic combination for head trauma patients in ICU as prevention
for pneumonia morbidity. This was a
global 14,000 patient HREC Phase 3 trial
sponsored by George Global Research Institute which ran from 2015 to 2021 with
of helping people in second world countries.
(7) Mr Knowles and his wife relocated to the NSW Central Coast in September
2021, and he continued working in his licenced facility
as an unregistered
pharmacist and general manager of operations until his retirement in October
(8) After becoming aware of the critical shortage of pharmacists in his local
community on the Central Coast, leading to some local
pharmacies temporarily
closing due to the lack of registered locums, he decided to return to the
pharmacy profession when possible.
(9) He commenced employment at Priceline Kincumber as a shop assistant under the
supervision of Trent Playford and Victor Frangos
in January 2024. He made
significant efforts to become a valued and respected part of the team while
complying with all relevant
requirements for general registration as a
pharmacist. To demonstrate his commitment to his employers and build on the
progress made
in his first year, Mr Knowles focused on enhancing his knowledge
and expertise in community pharmacy arrangements.
(10) He assumed additional responsibility as a pharmacist under supervision,
which included training junior staff and delivering
small lectures on the
quality use of medicines to local community groups. He now regularly worked on
Thursdays and Fridays at Priceline
Kincumber and Wednesdays at Amcal West
Gosford. He had completed over 1400 hours under supervision and has received
written references
from the owners and managers of both stores.
(11) During this period, he rejoined the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia to
complete his continuing education and has accrued
over 60 continuing
professional development points in the current year. He has reviewed the most
recent pharmacy practice guidelines
and regulatory changes.
HCCC filed a Reply to the application on 7 July 2025, opposing the application,
seeking a non-review period of 12 months for any
subsequent applications for
review under
of the National Law and an order that Mr Knowles pay the
HCCC’s costs as agreed or assessed under cl 13 of Schedule 5D of the
National Law.
Knowles filed a response to the HCCC dated 20 July 2025. He addresses each of
the complaints previously made to the Tribunal with
the reasons for his
“change of mind in the light of the nature of Complaints 2 and 4 to 17 to
give comfort to the Tribunal”
that he will pose no threat to the public
safety or public interest if reregistered. These detailed submissions, which
comprise evidence
given by Mr Knowles to support his application and on which he
was cross examined, are referred to later in these reasons.
22 July 2025, the HCCC filed material relating to the application for
re-instatement, which included material related to the disciplinary
proceedings.
Reinstatement – relevant law and legal
of the National Law relevantly provides that the object of the National Law
is to establish a national registration and accreditation
scheme for the
regulation of health practitioners. One of the objectives of the National Law is
to “provide for the protection
of the public by ensuring that only health
practitioners who are suitably trained and qualified to practise in a competent
and ethical
manner are registered”:
Tribunal is empowered to suspend, for a specified period, or cancel a registered
health practitioner's registration if satisfied
the practitioner is
not competent to practise the practitioner's profession, the
practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct,
the practitioner has been
convicted of or made the subject of a criminal finding for an offence
where the circumstances of the offence
render the practitioner unfit in the
public interest to practise the practitioner's profession or the practitioner is
not a suitable
person for registration in the practitioner's profession: s
149C(1). If the practitioner is no longer registered, as was the case
Knowles, the Tribunal is empowered under s 149C(4) to make the following
(a) decide that if the person were still registered the Tribunal would
have suspended or cancelled the person's registration; and
(b) if the Tribunal would have cancelled the person's registration,
decide that the person is disqualified from being registered
in the health
profession for a specified period or until specified conditions have been
complied with; and
(c) require the National Board with which the person was registered to record
the fact that the Tribunal would have suspended or
cancelled the
person's registration in the National Register kept by the Board.
Mr Knowles was disqualified, he cannot make an application for registration as a
pharmacist unless the Tribunal makes a reinstatement
order under s 163B of the
National Law: s 149E(1)(b) of the National Law.
Tribunal is the “appropriate review body” for the purposes of
, under s 163 of the National Law and exercises jurisdiction under s 163A of
the National Law under its general jurisdiction in
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act).
163B provides:
(1) The appropriate review body must conduct an inquiry into
an application for review and may then do any of the following--
(a) dismiss the application;
(b) make an order ending or shortening the period of the suspension
(c) make a reinstatement order;
(d) make an order altering or removing the conditions to which the person's
registration is subject, including by imposing new conditions;
(e) make an order--
(i) ending or shortening the period of a prohibition order; or
(ii) altering or removing the conditions to which the person is subject under
a prohibition order, including by imposing new conditions.
"reinstatement order"
is an order that the person may be
registered in accordance with
(a) the person makes an application for registration to the National Board;
(b) the relevant National Board decides to register the person.
(3A) Any condition imposed on a person's registration by the National Board
applies but only to the extent that it is not inconsistent with
conditions imposed or altered by the appropriate review body under
subsection (4).
(4) The appropriate review body may also impose conditions on the
person's registration or alter the conditions to which the person's
registration
is to be subject under the reinstatement order.
(5) The order on a review under this section may also provide that the order is
not to be reviewed under this Division until after
a specified time.
163C sets out the purpose, nature and scope of the review as follows:
(1) A review under this Division is a review to determine the appropriateness,
at the time of the review, of the order concerned.
(2) The review is not to review the decision to make the order, or any findings
made in connection with the making of that decision.
(3) In addition to any other matter the review may take into account, the review
must take into account any complaint made or notified
to a Council or
a National Board, or a former Board under a repealed Act, about
the person, whether the complaint was made or notified
before or after the
making of the order that is the subject of the review and whether or not the
complaint was referred under Subdivision
2 of Division 3 or any other action was
taken on the complaint.
(4) A Council and the Commission are entitled to appear at
any inquiry conducted by the Tribunal under this Division.
legal principles applying to a review under s 163C have been summarised by
Brereton JA (Bell p and Emmett AJA agreeing) in
Qasim v Medical Council of
New South Wales
[2021] NSWCA 171
as follows:
16. The proceedings below were an application, by way of review
under s 163A of the
National Law
, for reinstatement.
Such an application is an inquiry into present fitness, and not a review of the
original decision in which the
practitioner was deregistered. Although, under
earlier legislation, the Medical Tribunal could revisit the earlier decision,
present legislation precludes that course, as s 163C of
National Law
provides as follows:
[text of s 163C(1) and (2) omitted]
17. In conformity with s 163C(1), the task of the
review Tribunal on a reinstatement application is therefore to determine the
appropriateness of an order reinstating the applicant, as at the date of hearing
the application. In performing that task, the Tribunal
must have regard to the
objectives and guiding principles of the
National Law
relevantly include the protection of the public by ensuring that only those
practitioners who are suitably trained and qualified
to practise in a competent
and ethical manner are registered, the paramount consideration being the
protection of the health and
safety of the public.
18. The position of an applicant for reinstatement is
disadvantaged by reason that presumptions of fitness, which might otherwise
arise from an absence of contrary suggestion, do not operate for the benefit of
an applicant who has been deregistered on the basis
of unfitness. An applicant
for reinstatement bears the onus of demonstrating that he or she can be trusted
to practise in a way that
conforms to the professional standards expected of a
health practitioner and presents no risk to the safety of the public and their
confidence in the profession.
19. Thus the essential task of an applicant for reinstatement
is to show that he or she is no longer unfit. In this case, given
that the sole
basis of the appellant’s deregistration was lack of competence by reason
of an impairment, what the appellant
had to demonstrate was that she was no
longer unfit by reason of an impairment of such a nature and degree as impaired
capacity to practise. On that issue, she bore the onus of proof.
[citations omitted]
such, the findings and orders made by the Tribunal in the disciplinary
proceedings are not the subject of the review, however,
they are nonetheless
relevant because the decision records findings about Mr Knowles’ fitness
to practise at the time of the
orders based on the evidence before the Tribunal.
The findings relate to historical matters but evidence a pattern, over an
period, of conduct found by the Tribunal to be significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
training or experience, unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct.
task of the Tribunal is to assess
at the time of this review
are satisfied Mr Knowles should be reinstated to practise. Mr Knowles bears the
onus of satisfying us about this and consideration
of whether Mr Knowles has
insight into his previous conduct and what changes he has made and will make in
the future are relevant
to the question of whether he is “no longer
observed by the Court of Appeal in
, the critical issue for the
Tribunal is to determine whether, having regard to the material before us, Mr
Knowles “can be trusted
to practise in a way that conforms to the
professional standards expected of a health practitioner and presents no risk to
of the public and their confidence in the
profession”.
Outline of material before the Tribunal
additional to his affidavit (Ex A1) and response to the HCCC referred to above
(Ex A2), Mr Knowles provided:
(1) His reflections in 2025 on professional practice standards (Ex A3).
(2) Certificate of Fellowship to the Australian College of Pharmacy (awarded 29
January 2020) and Certificate of Appreciation from
the University of Sydney
School of Pharmacy (22 October 2019) (Ex A4).
(3) Professional reference from Fiona Wolski dated 4 June 2025 (Ex A5).
(4) Professional reference from Trent Playford dated 5 June 2025 (Ex A6).
(5) Document relating to licences and accreditation for Australian Life Science
Pharma and Verita Pharma Pty Limited (Ex A7).
(6) Curriculum Vitae for Mr Knowles (Ex A8).
(7) Reference letter from Michael Anderson dated 10 August 2025 (Ex A9).
(8) Response to HCCC written submissions filed 13 August 2025 (Ex A10).
HCCC lodged a tender bundle including copies of the previous decisions of the
Tribunal relating to Mr Knowles, transcript of the
previous disciplinary
proceedings before the Tribunal, selected material from the disciplinary
proceedings, including an affidavit
of Mr Knowles sworn 1 December 2020,
complaints from the Pharmaceutical Regulatory Unit (PRU), expert evidence from
the disciplinary
proceedings and documents relating to proceedings in 2020 under
s 150 of the National Law. The material also included emails between
and Mr Knowles regarding a request for further information and summons material
produced by two of Mr Knowles’ referees,
Ms Fiona Wolski from the Amcal
Pharmacy and Mr Trent Playford from the Priceline Pharmacy (Ex R1).
HCCC provided further summons material from the West Gosford Amcal Pharmacy (Ex
R2), an Evidentiary Certificate from AHPRA dated
18 August 2025 with details of
Mr Knowles’ registration, including registration restrictions, (Ex R3) and
reasons for decision
in relation to the 2020 proceedings under s 150 of the
National Law (Ex R4).
Knowles gave oral evidence and his referees, Fiona Wolski and Trent Playford,
were cross-examined in relation to their references.
Knowles’ written material
his response to the HCCC’s reply and written submissions, Mr Knowles
lodged written responses (Exhibits A2 and A10) which
comprise written argument
and assertions about factual
matters, by way of evidence. He has also provided
his reflections on professional standards (Ex A3).
is convenient to summarise those responses insofar as they contain Mr
Knowles’ explanation for his previous conduct, what
has changed and why Mr
Knowles says his registration should be reinstated.
Response to
HCCC dated 20 July 2025
Knowles states that this response is an addendum to his affidavit and at the
outset observed that the complaint brought by the
HCCC was pursuant to s 149C of
National Law which did not apply to pharmacists such as himself because he was
unregistered at the
time of the Tribunal hearing. Mr Knowles appears to have
overlooked or may not have been aware of the provisions of s 149C(4), which
empowered the Tribunal to make this order.
balance of the response document sets out Mr Knowles’ written evidence in
support of his case. In summary, Mr Knowles states:
(1) He understood and accepted the Tribunal’s decision; he fully
acknowledged the seriousness of his professional misconduct
and the potential
implications for patient safety and public trust in the pharmacy profession at
the time and deeply regretted any
actions that may have contributed to patient
risk or diminish these standards of the pharmacy profession.
(2) Mr Knowles now realises fully the deficiency in his decision-making and
training that led to these outcomes. To this end, he
has over the past 10 years,
since receiving the initial complaint, been committed to addressing the issues
with “humility,
accountability and resolve to uphold the highest standards
of practise moving forward”.
(3) Mr Knowles was an officer of an TGA registered facility and is now fully
aware of his obligations under the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
the regulations. While he made genuine efforts to comply with the relevant
regulations and legislation, there were instances
where he misinterpreted and,
on reflection, ignored or flouted certain requirements. He now recognises that
this led to actions that
were not aligned with ethical or professional
(4) Since this time, Mr Knowles has taken steps to educate himself more
thoroughly and he has developed a clearer understanding of
his legal and ethical
obligations. He is committed to approaching all future decisions with greater
diligence and integrity, ensuring
that he will seek clarification if he needs it
and he will act in accordance with both the letter and spirit of the law.
(5) In relation to the complaints about understanding safety requirements of
off-label dispensing and essential risk assessment required
before dispensing
(Complaints 4, 7, 8, 10 and 12 to 15), he has undertaken training in risk
management and clinical trial medication
supply. The experience of a five year
project with the TGA registered facility of Australian Life Sciences Pharma has
given him new
insights into the inadequate precautions and risk management that
he conducted at ACP. For instance, he would have not proceeded
with dispensing
the off-label medications and acknowledges that some of his past decisions,
while not intentionally harmful, were
made based on a flawed understanding of
his ethical and legal obligations.
(6) In relation to the complaints about a pharmacist's responsibilities to
understand the intended purpose, patient needs and appropriate
quantities of
medication regardless of having a legal prescription (Complaints 2, 5, 6 and 9
to 11), he now understands the intended
meaning of quantity and purpose and
understands that the phrase “recognised therapeutic standard”
underscores the expectation
that pharmacists will exercise professional
judgement to ensure that any supply aligns with evidence based therapeutic
He admits that his judgement in the circumstances outlined in the
complaint was below the standard expected of a pharmacist of his
training and
experience.
(7) Mr Knowles accepts that compounded medicines, including peptides, are
subject to additional scrutiny. He also accepts that his
decision to compound
various peptides and creams did not include sufficient evidence for their safe
compounding. Mr Knowles states
that he has changed his risk assessment process
and would not compound these medicines given his learned insight. He further
that he now understands that his supply of compounded peptides, even on
legal prescriptions, may not have met the recognised therapeutic
required under the law, for which he now takes full responsibility.
(8) In relation to Complaint 17, Mr Knowles states that he successfully defended
this complaint about pecuniary interest in the Supreme
Court but now understands
that he must consider further the implications to the profession as well as the
pure legality of the situation.
He states that if he was presented with this
“opportunity” again, he would make a totally different decision.
(9) Mr Knowles deeply regrets any potential risk that his actions may have posed
to patients and that, by compounding peptides, he
inadvertently contributed to a
practice that could undermine public confidence in the safety of compounded
medicines. He states that
pharmacist must act as gatekeepers, critically
evaluating prescriptions to prevent inappropriate supply and that his failure to
scrutinise the therapeutic appropriateness of the peptides he
supplied was a deviation from his professional duty. He acknowledged
of injectable ketamine for an off-label indication of treatment resistant
depression may not satisfy the rigorous guidelines
surrounding clinical trials.
He further acknowledges that he did not have specific robust evidence to support
the addition of certain
medications.
(10) The complaints have prompted him to undertake a significant reflection on
his practise and decision making process and he acknowledges
that he should have
been more vigilant in ensuring compliance with the relevant legislation and
guidelines. To address these shortcomings,
he has taken proactive steps by
enrolling in the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia's Pharmacy Practice
Guidelines in December 2024
and the TGA's 2020 public discussion for development
of sterile compounding guidance. He has initiated a comprehensive audit of his
dispensing practices from the time of receiving the complaints until he closed
his compounding pharmacy in June 2020. He has also
sought guidance and
supervision from senior colleagues over the past 18 months and has implemented a
more rigorous documentation
process to record his rationale for supplying
compounded medicines. He built and licenced a TGA sterile compounding facility
digital GMP documentation system between 2015 and 2020 which vastly
increased his knowledge of compounded medicine.
(11) Mr Knowles has not practised for over four years and at the age of 67 years
old, he has no intention of practising as a proprietor
of a compounding or
non-compounding pharmacy. He wants to be reregistered to respond to the critical
shortage of a registered pharmacist
in the Central Coast region.
(12) He is prepared to give further undertakings that he will not participate in
modern or complex compounding other than that contained
in the Australian
Pharmaceutical Formulary (APF). He also undertakes to only work as an employed
pharmacist and not to take any proprietor
or ownership role in a pharmacy
Mr Knowles’ reflections on continuing professional
development
Knowles states as he is not practised as a community pharmacist for four years
reflecting on implementation of the newly released
professional practise
standards in pharmacy practise is important for his future practise. He states
that he has completed 17 continuing
professional development (CPD) modules and
has gained greater understanding of such concepts of patient-centred care,
interprofessional
collaboration and ethical practice. Attached to this
submission are details of the CPDs that Mr Knowles has completed. His
implementation
plan which sets out his CPD activities, includes the professional
practice standards implementation program, the NSW opioid treatment
diabetic eye disease, 1st and 2nd generation antihistamines, Blepharitis causes
and management, age-related macular degeneration,
conjunctivitis, atopic
dermatitis, on managing uncomplicated cystitis, prostate cancer and the
Priceline Pharmacist master class.
According to the record produced by Mr
Knowles, these courses were undertaken between October 2024 and February 2025
and the combined
total of CPD points are over 40. He also states he had
accumulated over 60 CPD points up to the time of the hearing.
Knowles provides further reflections on the learnings from attending each of
these courses. We have no doubt Mr Knowles has completed
Mr Knowles’ response to the HCCC’s written
submissions
document contains both submissions and statements made by Mr Knowles asserting
certain facts or opinions. It is therefore apposite
to summarise the effect of
those assertions and opinions in the outline of the evidence.
summary, Mr Knowles:
(1) Disagrees with the HCCC’s “sparse description” of his
grounds for reinstatement and further states that he
has a long term commitment
to remediation, he has gained new insight into his previously inadequate
appreciation of the potential
risks associated with extended medical supplies to
patients, he let his passion for pharmacy and emotional desire to be perceived
as helpful cloud his decision making, and he has undertaken a 10 year process of
learning and contributing back to the industry as
evidenced by the
“humbling recognition” by two groups of his peers about his
contributions to the profession.
(2) By way of expanding upon his long term commitment to remediation, Mr Knowles
states that he has over the nearly 10 years since
the original complaint in 2015
reflected upon his decision making and conduct leading to the 2015 complaint and
has, over the past
10 years, taken steps to gain the necessary insight. He notes
that the complaint of December 2019 was a second amendment of the original
complaint and so he believes his insights and knowledge gained should be
evaluated since 2015. Mr Knowles points to the fact that
his practice was
independently audited and accredited to USP standards and that he was the only
pharmacist in Australia to achieve
(3) He notes that in his affidavit of 1 December 2020 in the disciplinary
proceedings (referred to the HCCC submissions), he stated
that he was not
registered and that he undertook never to apply to be registered as a pharmacist
in any jurisdiction. However, he
gave this undertaking in the context of the
HCCC agreeing to the complaint against his “co-accused” pharmacy
being withdrawn. Mr Knowles also applied for the Tribunal not to make an
inquiry into the complaint, and he attempted to negotiate
the same arrangement.
When this was not agreed to, he decided to rescind his offer at that time. The
representation that he made
in 2020 that he did not wish to reapply for
registration was based on his circumstances at the time but since that time he
being a pharmacist serving in his local community. This should not be
held against him.
(4) Mr Knowles also notes that the HCCC raises concerns about his employment in
the past three years and about whether he was acting
as an unregistered
pharmacist. Mr Knowles states that the reference in his affidavit to working as
an unregistered pharmacist was
to indicate that he did not hold himself out to
be a registered pharmacist. His role did not require him to make clinical
or deal with customers or patients. When he commenced working, his
employers had full knowledge of his unregistered status and employed
pharmacy assistant grade 4 He has not worked in a role as a pharmacist and
recognises that there is a distinction between
a pharmacy assistant and an
unregistered pharmacist.
(5) In his view, an unregistered pharmacist is someone who has completed
pharmacy education but is not registered with AHPRA. They
may work under the
supervision of a registered pharmacist, but the scope of practice is limited to
that of pharmacy assistant. A
pharmacy assistant can work under the supervision
of a registered pharmacist, but the assistant is limited to non-clinical tasks
such as managing inventory, assisting customers and performing basic sales
functions. His role has been focusing on supporting the
registered pharmacist
and store managers and to ensure compliance with pharmacy laws and regulations.
If a patient has questions
complex queries or there is need to discuss medication management, he refers
those questions to the pharmacist.
(6) Mr Knowles states that he has acted in good faith and he has not represented
himself to the general public as a qualified pharmacist
or a pharmacist under
supervision.
(7) Mr Knowles acknowledges the importance of adhering to legal requirements and
states he has taken steps to comply with the National
Law. He admits that the
conduct warranting the disqualification was serious and occurred over a
significant period of time. He further
states that one of the reasons for the
significant period for the conduct was that he had on several occasions visits
from the professional
standards unit (PSU) of the NSW Health Department during
2010 and 2015 but at no time did officers tell him he was contravening the
legislation until nearly five years later. He states that if he had been told
this in 2010, he would have immediately stopped his
(8) Mr Knowles attributes much of his failure to uphold the requisite standards
to a misinterpretation or a lack of understanding
of the expectations of the
governing standards that the period of conduct to the lack of immediate
enforcement by PSU before December
2015. He further states that the fact that he
had undergone extensive risk assessment and pharmacy practice guidance training
his ethical and risk management commitment as a pharmacy
professional.
(9) Mr Knowles states that he takes full responsibility for his actions and now
has a full understanding and insight of the risks
he posed to the safety of his
patients. His focus on the fact that there was no complaint from a customer or
treating doctor relates
to one of the reasons reportedly given by the HCCC in
relation to his “co-accused’, Mr Plummer. He submits that these
statements do not demonstrate his failure to take account of risks associated
with his conduct. He has undertaken many professional
development courses both
before and after the disciplinary proceedings and the HCCC “cherry
picks” the fact that only
two of the courses directly addressed the
conduct which led to the original disciplinary proceeding. The HCCC has also
excluded significant
courses that he undertook prior to his 2025 CPD year, his
10 year process to change his practice regarding risk assessment and ethical
decision making and his voluntary community service at local care homes, Central
Coast Catholic health services and as a life force
coach for the prostate Cancer
Foundation of Australia. He has already achieved 61 CPD points in this year
(10) Mr Knowles states that he has completely admitted the conduct of the
complaint and it is “mischievous” of the HCCC
to describe his
evidence as merely “considerable progress”. The HCCC has neglected
to acknowledge the total revamp of
his compounding practice between 2015 and
(11) Mr Knowles states that the restrictions he has proposed, which limit
compounding to that contained in the APF, are reasonable
and demonstrate his
respect for regulatory standards.
Evidence of referees
Michael Anderson, consultant pharmacist and reportedly past Pharmacy Council
Member, provided a written referenced for Mr Knowles
dated 10 August 2025. The
reference states that Mr Anderson had the privilege of knowing Mr Knowles for
his entire professional career
as a pharmacist for a period spanning more than
45 years. He was aware that Mr Knowles was deregistered following some poor
made during his time as a pharmacy proprietor. Mr Anderson states that
he believes Mr Knowles has used his period away from practice
reflection and personal growth. He further states that Mr Knowles is committed
to making amends and if permitted is eager
to dedicate the remaining years of
his working life to serving the community once again. Mr. Anderson strongly
supports any decision
that enables Mr Knowles to return to his profession. Mr.
Anderson did not give evidence at the hearing to expand upon this
Trent Playford, the joint owner of the Priceline Pharmacy at Kincumber and the
Amcal Pharmacy at West Gosford, provided a written
reference dated 5 June 2025.
He also gave evidence at the hearing. The reference was also signed by Mr Victor
Frangos, a friend of
Mr Knowles and one of the other proprietors of the
pharmacies. Mr Frangos did not give evidence at the hearing.
Playford and Mr Frangos state Mr Knowles has worked under their supervision for
the past 18 months. They have observed firsthand
Mr Knowles’ strong
clinical knowledge, professionalism and his commitment to patient care.
According to the reference, Mr Knowles
has shown a comprehensive understanding
of the ethical and professional standards required in pharmacy practice and his
conduct under
their supervision has reflected the level of accountability and
care expected of a pharmacist seeking to return to the profession.
They support
Mr Knowles’ application to re-register as a pharmacist and believe he
would be a valuable and trusted member of
the profession.
his oral evidence, Mr Playford said that he was one of the proprietors of three
pharmacies. They also operated a store at Newcastle.
Mr Playford said that his
business partner, Mr Frangos, approached him about Mr Knowles working at the
pharmacy as a pharmacy assistant.
Mr Playford was asked whether he knew about Mr
Knowles’ registration status at the time he employed him as a pharmacy
He said that he knew that Mr Knowles was not registered but he did
not know that he had been disqualified until the pharmacy was
summoned by the
HCCC. At the time Mr Knowles was employed he understood Mr Knowles did not want
to become registered. When he provided
the reference for Mr Knowles, Mr Knowles
told it him that it was for his re-registration, but he did not know it would be
proceedings before the Tribunal. The reference was prepared by Mr
Knowles, which he read and agreed with and then signed. Mr Playford
agreed that
Mr Knowles had not been open about his registration status.
Playford was questioned about Mr Knowles’ role at the pharmacy. He said a
pharmacy assistant can dispense but can only do
so after this had been checked
by the pharmacist. Mr Knowles had been dispensing medication but had been using
the dispensing system
under direct supervision. Mr Playford was asked why the
dispensing records had not been produced and why, in response to a request
dispensing records, Mr Playford responded that there were no records. Mr
Playford clarified this and said that he had understood
this to mean dispensing
records by Mr Knowles as a pharmacist and not as a pharmacist assistant.
Playford was asked whether he had a conversation with Mr Knowles about his
registration status after he became aware of his disqualification.
Mr Playford
said that he had not really had any conversation although he had read the
decision of the disciplinary proceedings and
he was now aware of the complaints
made. He said the reference was provided before he was aware of this
information. Mr Playford
was asked whether this knowledge impacted his
reference, and he said that it did not. He would still support Mr Knowles’
re-registration.
When pressed about this Mr Playford was asked whether he would
support Mr Knowles but with “some reservations” now that
he had more
information. Mr Playford responded “perhaps” but also said that in
the time that Mr Knowles had worked with
him, he would not question Mr Knowles
judgement. He agreed Mr Knowles had not been open with him and this was an
issue, but he could
understand why he did not disclose these matters at the
time. While Mr Playford agreed while the recent information that had come
light may change his interacts with Mr Knowles, he had no concerns with his
honesty and the work that he had undertaken for him
as pharmacy assistant.
Playford was asked if the Tribunal decided to reinstate Mr Knowles’
registration, what supervision would he consider to be
appropriate? Mr Playford
said that there are strict controls on what goes on anyway so he did not believe
there would need to be
further restrictions. He also said that Mr Knowles had
shown that he was open to learning new things and that he understands what
required and what needs to be referred to a pharmacist. The scope of practice
for pharmacies had broadened over the years and
it had been important for the
pharmacy assistant to know when they need to refer matters to the pharmacist. He
had no concerns about
this with Mr Knowles.
Playford said that Mr Knowles had undertaken the training provided by Priceline
Pharmacy extracted in the tender bundle (Ex R1).
One of the training courses Mr
Knowles had attended was a My Health Records course. This assisted decision
making for pharmacists
in relation to products, but pharmacy assistants did not
have access. Mr Knowles did not have access.
Fiona Wolski, pharmacist manager and trainer at Amcal, West Gosford, provided a
written reference dated 4 June 2025. The first
part of the reference was almost
in identical terms to the written reference provided by Mr Playford. Ms Wolski
further stated that
Mr Knowles had contributed meaningfully to the training and
mentoring of junior staff, he had shown genuine dedication to remaining
with pharmacy practise developments and he currently already completed over 60
CPD points in that year. She stated that given
the current pharmacist shortage
in the Central Coast community and Mr Knowles commitment to re-engaging in the
profession, she believed
he had much to offer and that he had conducted himself
with professionalism and integrity throughout her time working with him.
Wolski gave evidence at the hearing. She said she was Mr Knowles’
supervising pharmacist at Amcal. She first met Mr Knowles
in July 2024. At the
time he commenced working in July 2024 she was not aware that he had been
disqualified and only became aware
of this at the time of receiving the summons.
Ms Wolski said that she was asked to complete a reference for Mr Knowles. She
the first draft and Mr Knowles then assisted with final draft. At the
time she prepared the reference she knew that Mr Knowles had
worked as a
pharmacist in compounding and understood he had retired and now wanted to come
the decision disqualifying Mr Knowles,
although she had an article about his case which Mr Playford had sent to her. Ms
asked whether the fact that Mr Knowles did not tell her about the
disqualification and she was not aware of this at the time she
prepared her
reference changed her views. She said this did not change her views because the
disqualification was about Mr Knowles’
role as a compounding pharmacist
and he would be working as a community pharmacist, which was different. She also
said that she did
not question Mr Knowles about the disqualification when she
found out because she considered that there was no need to do so.
Wolski said that all pharmacy assistants had a supervising pharmacist and if a
pharmacy assistant dispensed medication this would
be checked by the pharmacist.
A pharmacy assistant cannot sell pharmacy medication without the supervision of
a pharmacist. She also
said, like Mr Playford, that when the pharmacy was
requested to produce records relating to dispensing, this was taken to mean
by Mr Knowles as a pharmacist. As such no records were produced. She
said that a pharmacy assistant can give the medication to a
customer, but it
depends on whether there is a need for instruction. If instruction was required,
this would be done by a pharmacist.
In short, Ms Wolski said that Mister Knowles
was working as a pharmacy assistant not a pharmacist. She also said that, from
her observation,
he did not hold himself out to be a pharmacist when he was
working with the public.
did not know the history of Mr Knowles’ case but said she had never seen
him do anything unsafe as a pharmacy assistant.
She was also asked whether Mr
Knowles had ever been allowed to answer questions about medications given that
he had knowledge over
and above that of a pharmacy assistant. She said that Mr
Knowles would only ever do this if he checked with her
Oral evidence of Mr Knowles at the hearing
Knowles was questioned by counsel for the HCCC about four key areas.
first was about his failure to tell Mr Frangos, Mr Playford and Ms Wolski about
the circumstances leading to his current registration
status. The second related
to representations made in the previous proceedings about whether he would apply
for re-registration.
Knowles said that he had known Mr Frangos since university days. He and his wife
had decided to move to Avoca in 2022 to retire
but when he went to the pharmacy
where Mr Frangos was working, Mr Frangos came out to see him and suggested that
he may want to work
in the pharmacy as a pharmacy assistant. Mr Frangos knew
that Mr Knowles was not registered but Mr Knowles did not discuss his
disqualification
with him. Mr Knowles was asked why he did not raise this with
Mr Frangos or the other pharmacists, and he said that he was not proud
was also asked whether this would have been a relevant matter to discuss, and Mr
Knowles said it was not relevant to his
role as a pharmacy assistant. However,
he agreed that it did not give the other pharmacist the full history.
Knowles said that he decided to re-register about nine months after working with
customers in the pharmacy. He acknowledged that
he had previously signed a
statutory declaration to the effect that he would not seek to be re-registered
and that this was for the
purposes of his application to have the proceedings
discontinued (referred to in paragraph 21 of the disciplinary proceedings
However, he said that he made this representation in the context of
the decision made by the HCCC to withdraw the complaint against
Alan Plummer,
noting that one of the grounds for the withdrawal was that Mr Plummer would not
seek to re-register as a pharmacist.
set out in his written statement, Mr Knowles stated that he changed his mind
when the HCCC did not withdraw the complaint against
him. He said that this
undertaking was conditional as far as he was concerned and he would only give
the undertaking if the complaints
were withdrawn. Mr Knowles said that he
considered that there was inequity in the approach taken as between he and Mr
Plumber, although
it was pointed out to him that a key difference was that he
was the proprietor of ACP and Mr Plumber was the pharmacy manager.
Knowles was asked about whether he had taken full accountability for the
complaints given he had failed to discuss those matters
with Mr Frangos and the
other supervising pharmacists, Mr Playford and Ms Wolski. Mr Knowles said that
he was embarrassed and in
retrospect he should have been honest about the
disqualification and told the pharmacists the full story. He was then asked
he had sought references under “false pretences”. Mr Knowles
had not told each of the referees that the references would
proceedings before the Tribunal. Mr Knowles said that he asked for those
references before he realised that he needed
to make an application to the
Tribunal under s 163B of the National Law. However, counsel for the HCCC pressed
Mr Knowles on this
issue, noting that he must have known this at the time he
asked for and obtained the references because his application for reinstatement
was dated 2 May 2025 and was filed on 7 May 2025. He had participated in a
directions hearing on 4 June 2025 where orders were made
Knowles was also questioned about whether he really had changed his mind and
whether his evidence could be relied on more generally
given that the only
explanation that he gave for not being truthful with his referees was that he
was not aware that there would
be proceedings. For the reasons outlined above,
the HCCC contended that this could not be correct. Later in the hearing, after
been presented with this inconsistency, Mr Knowles said that he did not
see this as a material matter to discuss with these referees
at the time and he
apologised to the Tribunal for his lack of understanding about the system.
However, there is an inconsistency
between this evidence and the earlier
evidence, which was a matter raised directly with Mr Knowles by the Tribunal. Mr
Knowles did
not explain the apparent inconsistency. Overall, Mr Knowles’
explanation for the failure to disclose these matters to the referees
unconvincing.
Knowles was also asked about who wrote the references because they were similar.
He said that he and Mr Playford discussed the
contents, but Mr Knowles prepared
the draft, and Mr Playford signed it. However, Mr Knowles was of the view that
the information
contained in the reference was Mr Playford’s belief. Ms
Wolski prepared much of her draft. Ultimately, little turned on this.
third aspect that Mr Knowles was questioned about were the apparent
inconsistencies between assertions made by him in the disciplinary
proceedings
and the current assertions made in his affidavit and submissions dated 20 July
2025 to the effect that he had acknowledged
his previous deficiencies and had
example was the challenge made by Mr Knowles to the disciplinary proceedings
where he requested that the Tribunal exercise its
discretion not to make an
inquiry into the complaint by the HCCC. Mr Knowles was asked about paragraph 18
of the 2021 decision, which
recorded Mr Knowles’ contention that the
complaint was “vexatious” and that the Pharmacy Council of NSW had
him to a “targeted vendetta” in circumstances where
“his only crime was to be the first and largest compounder
complex compounded medicines in Australia”. It is also recorded in the
decision that Mr Knowles contended that as
part of this vendetta the Council and
the HCCC subjected former ACP staff to “uncalled for treatment, public
humiliation bullying
and career-destroying actions”.
Knowles was asked to reflect on this submission and whether he still has those
views about the complaints made by the HCCC given
he now says he accepts the
findings made by the Tribunal, based on those complaints. Mr Knowles said he has
reflected on this but
still believed that the staff at ACP lost their jobs
because the Pharmacy Council of NSW closed down ACP with “little or no
reason”. When it was pointed out to Mr Knowles by counsel for the HCCC
that the reason why ACP had closed was because of the
complaints made against
him and the subsequent investigations and the suspension of his licence, Mr
Knowles did not accept that this
was the case. In response to this evidence, the
HCCC tendered the written reasons of the Pharmacy Council of NSW in respect of
proceedings under s 150 of the National Law in 2020 (Ex R4).
150(1) of the National Law provides that a Council must, if anytime it is
satisfied it is appropriate to do so for the protection
of the health or safety
of any personal or persons or if satisfied the action is otherwise in the public
interest, suspend a registered
health practitioner’s registration or
impose any conditions relating to their practice that the Council considers
appropriate.
Before taking such action come up the Council must give written
notice before taking such action and give reasons for the action.
this case, the Pharmacy Council of NSW gave notice to Mr Knowles about concerns
it had, based on complaints received. The Pharmacy
Council imposed conditions on
Mr Knowles’ registration following a hearing on 23 April 2020, with
reasons dated 11 May 2020,
varied the decision following a hearing on 19 May
2020, with written reasons dated 16 June 2020, and suspended Mr Knowles’
registration, following a hearing on 6 July 2020 with written reasons dated 3
August 2020 (Ex R4).
being taken through the various hearings culminating in Mr Knowles’
registration being suspended, Mr Knowles was asked
whether he now accepted that
it was not the “fault” of the Pharmacy Council or the PRU that 26
ACP staff lost their jobs
but rather this was a consequence of Mr Knowles’
registration being suspended. This suspension was based on complaints made
Mr Knowles’ practice following hearings by the Pharmacy Council and the
reasons recorded in Ex R4. Mr Knowles conceded
that this was the case but said
that he had changed and the Tribunal should take into account the work he had
done between 2015 and
2020 to improve standards. He also submitted that the last
complaint was 2016 but, in any event, (as submitted in his affidavit of
2025 at para 2), he had “never received a complaint or report of harm from
a patient or treating doctor” throughout
his 35 years of pharmacy
Knowles was then taken to the decision of the Pharmacy Council dated 11 May 2020
(Ex R4) which related to a complaint initiated
by the Pharmacy Council on 1
April 2020 for compounding at ACP in contravention of the Therapeutics Goods
Regulation 2008 and the
PBA guidelines on Compounding Medicines. The decision
records at [2] the allegation ACP was compounding certain products for dental
practitioners in circumstances where the products were compounded in batches or
manufactured without a TGA manufacturing licence,
were not compounded in receipt
of a prescription, were not compounded for an individual patient and were will
not labelled for an
individual patient and were being used for off-label use
where appropriate risk assessments were not conducted. The decision recorded,
amongst other things, that that there was no evidence risk assessments were
conducted for individual patients and that the expiry
date for most of his
products was three months yet the USP only an allowed an expiry date of 24 hours
without extensive tense testing.
Mr Knowles accepted that the complaint that was
the subject of the decision made by the Pharmacy Council dated 11 May 2020 was
of a more recent complaint. He also said that he now understood the
fact that there was “no evidence” of reported harm
does not mean
that there was in fact no harm or, at least, the potential for risk and
Knowles was also referred to the finding made by the Pharmacy Council in its
decision dated 3 August 2020 at paragraph 70 where
it was noted that Mr Knowles
had presented to the council an “independent” audit report from
Verify Compounding as evidence
to demonstrate ACP's compliance with the
Council’s premises and equipment guidance for non-sterile complex
compounding. The
author of the report was Brianna Porter who was also known as
Brianna Knowles, Mr Knowles’ daughter. The decision notes that
Knowles did not deny this during the s 150 proceeding once it was raised, he did
not disclose this when he provided the
report to the Council “in an
attempt to portray it as an independent report in support of his requests for a
review an alteration
of conditions”. It was put to Mr Knowles that his
conduct with his current employers in failing to disclose important relevant
information was similar to the conduct in 2020 where he had not been fully
frank. Mr Knowles asked if this was an example aware he
was not being open and
honest. Mr Knowles said that he was telling the truth today and he now realises
his mistakes. At that time
of the s 150 proceedings, he was trying to save his
business, and he realises that he made some very poor decisions.
fourth area that Mr Knowles was questioned about was the assertion made in his
submissions filed with the Tribunal on 13 August
2025 to the effect that it was
the delay of the PRU in taking action that caused problems for him and if this
had been brought to
his attention earlier, he would have stopped his conduct.
Counsel for the HCCC raised that this appeared to be inconsistent with
4.3 of his 20 July 2025 submission to the effect that he had ignored or flouted
certain requirements. Mr Knowles said that
he did not do this
intentionally.
giving his evidence and being cross examined by the HCCC, Mr Knowles was
questioned by the Tribunal.
that one of the findings made by the Tribunal in its disciplinary proceedings
was that his conduct was unethical, Mr Knowles
was asked about what changes he
had made and what had he learned in relation to this issue. Mr Knowles said he
learned that even
though something was legal, he had still made some poor
ethical decisions. He accepted that even though he was the proprietor of
bent the rules based on client’s desires and not based on their best
Knowles was asked whether providing references to the Tribunal where he had not
disclosed either to the referees or the Tribunal
all circumstances was
consistent with ethical practice. Mr Knowles said this was an oversight and he
apologised to the Tribunal for
this. He was also questioned about the
explanation for his previous contraventions contained in his affidavit and
submissions to
the effect that he had wanted to please customers, even where to
do so could be detrimental to providing the optimal and clinical
solution and
could amount to a breach of professional boundary standards in the Code of
Conduct. Mr Knowles was asked about how he
would be able to resist this, even
while working in a community pharmacy. Mr Knowles said he now understood that
his legal obligations
would override what a customer or treating practitioner
wanted. He also said there was the added precaution that he would be watched
the other pharmacists. Mr Knowles was asked whether he had identified this issue
with the other pharmacists and had discussed
it with them. He said that he had
not discussed it with the other pharmacists, but he had discussed it with
another very experienced
pharmacist, David Preswick. He said that he had
discussed these issues with David Preswick in recent years on an informal and ad
hoc basis. Mr Knowles was asked why Mr Preswick did not provide a written
reference and he said that there had not been enough time
left for him to obtain
a reference.
Knowles was asked whether he had received any professional health counselling or
mentoring over the years to gain further insight
into and learn strategies to
deal with the risks of crossing professional boundaries. He said that he had
not. Mr Knowles was also
asked whether he had considered attending any
additional ethics courses such as through the St James Ethics Centre. He said he
not done so but would consider this.
Consideration
question for the Tribunal is whether, having regard to the evidence before the
Tribunal about Mr Knowles current circumstances,
his registration should be
reinstated.
Submissions of the parties
to the hearing, the HCCC submitted that the Tribunal should not order
reinstatement and should further order a non-review period
of 12 months for
subsequent applications. The HCCC further submitted that Mr Knowles’
conduct warranting the disqualification
was serious and occurred over a
significant period. In his written submissions, Mr Knowles attributes much of
his failures to uphold
the requisite standards on misinterpretation or a lack of
understanding of the governing standards and requirements. His evidence
adequately address how he will ensure such misinterpretations do not occur in
the future and how such lapses in judgement
should not occur.
Knowles’ submission during the course of the disciplinary proceedings and
in support of this application was to the effect
that there was “no
evidence” of any actual or probable theoretical harm to a patient and this
demonstrates a failure
by Mr Knowles to take accountability for the risk
associated with his conduct. While Mr Knowles has recently demonstrated some
acknowledgement
of key ethical failings, there is limited evidence to
demonstrate that he understands his ethical obligations or that he has
to develop this. The evidence of the numerous professional
development courses he has undertaken do not demonstrate his commitment
ethics and there are only two program that he has undertaken that would address
the conduct which was the subject of the proceedings.
HCCC expressed concern about Mr Knowles’ written evidence that he was
working as a “pharmacist under supervision”,
which suggests that he
may have been practising while unregistered. This evidence needed to be tested
but if there was evidence that
Mr Knowles has been practising as a pharmacist
under supervision while disqualified, this would weigh heavily against
reinstatement
of his registration. The HCCC submits that there is a lack of
information concerning Mr Knowles work at his TGA licenced facility
the disciplinary proceedings.
the HCCC accepts there is evidence to indicate Mr Knowles is remorseful for his
actions, there is little evidence that he has
insight into the seriousness of
the conduct or that there are processes in place to ensure such failings do not
occur in the future.
Notably, Mr Knowles has only completed limited courses
related to ethics.
Knowles submits he is willing to accept restrictions on practise that he will
not participate in modern or complex compounding
other than what is contained in
the APF and that he will only work as an employed pharmacist and will not take
any proprietorship
or ownership role in a pharmacy business. However, the HCCC
submits that this is not adequate. If Mr Knowles wants to resume compounding,
the proposed restrictions only confine the medicines that can be compounded yet
the severity of the complaints which were the subject
of the disciplinary
proceedings goes beyond this.
closing oral submissions at the end of the hearing, the HCCC maintained its
position and further contended that, while Mr Knowles’
compounding
practice and his proprietorship was the subject of a number of serious
complaints, the inappropriate dispensing of medications
had also a significant
problem. It was not clear that the restrictions proposed by Mr Knowles would
resolve these issues.
HCCC accepted that Mr Knowles had acknowledged a number of important issues
relating to his previous conduct but submitted that
the Tribunal should not be
satisfied that Mr Knowles has sufficient insight into those issues. This was
demonstrated by the fact
that he was not frank, open and honest about the nature
of the references that were provided to the Tribunal or in his disclosures
the referees. There was also relevant that Mr Knowles sought to minimise in his
evidence the seriousness of the concerns raised
in relation to the references
and in relation to the seriousness of some of the previous conduct. The HCCC
also noted that Mr Playford
supported Mr Knowles but with some reservation. Mr
Knowles has come a long way, but the HCCC submitted more work is required, which
is why the HCCC submitted that the Tribunal order a non-review period of a
further 12 months.
HCCC submitted that if the Tribunal was minded to order reinstatement, it should
do so subject to eight conditions including:
a prohibition on Mr Knowles having
a financial interest in a pharmacy business and from practising as the sole
proprietor or as pharmacists
in charge, registration to practise under Category
B supervision in accordance with the Pharmacy Council compliance policy with a
supervisor approved by the Pharmacy Council, providing reports to the Council at
two monthly intervals or as specified by the Council,
notifying any pharmacist
in charge of his conditions on registration before commencing to practise, a
prohibition in undertaking
the compounding of medicines for human or veterinary
use, providing a CPD plan for 2025/26 and completing within 12 months a course
in Ethics and Dispensing in the Pharmacy Practice course organised by the
Pharmaceutical Society of Australia.
reference in the proposed conditions to Category B supervision relates to one of
the categories of supervision set out in the
policy and guidelines published by
Pharmacy Council (Pharmacy Council of NSW website). There are three categories
of supervision:
Category A, which provides for direct supervision at all times
with the supervisor practising at the same location as the pharmacist
undertaking weekly review meetings and reports to the Council once a month,
Category B supervision where the supervisor is to
monitor and provide indirect
supervision and be readily available to provide assistance or direct supervision
as required, with the
supervisor to practise at the same location as the
pharmacist but may, in exceptional circumstances be off site with fortnightly
review meetings and reports to the council every three months, and Category C
supervision, which is indirect supervision (not at
the same location) with the
supervisor being able to be contacted by telephone with monthly review meetings
and reports to the Council
every six months.
support of his application and in response to the submissions of the HCCC, Mr
Knowles contends that he is not only remorseful,
but he has changed and has
insight in relation to the conduct which was the subject of the disciplinary
proceedings. He has abided
by the Tribunal orders and has not worked as a
pharmacist in his own right or under supervision. The reference to working as an
unregistered
pharmacist under supervision was not intended to convey that he was
working as a pharmacist but merely an acknowledgement that he
was unregistered.
Knowles submits that he changed his mind about seeking reinstatement because he
wants to contribute to the profession and the community.
He wants to continue to
learn and has undertaken significant professional development over the last 10
years. His referees have given
evidence they would still offer him a position,
even knowing about his deregistration. He would like to help his colleagues and
community. He has learned that actions may be legal but not ethical and that
risk assessment goes “hand in hand” with
ethical considerations. He
concedes he was out of his depth in his compounding practice, and he now
understands that there is a need
to practise safely and that the absence of
actual harm is not enough.
Knowles submits that the Tribunal should not look at the position as it was 10
years ago but now. The Tribunal should not focus
on the past and the
disciplinary proceedings. He is a changed man, he is “more
Knowles further submits that he is prepared to offer an undertaking that he
would refrain from engaging in compounding in breach
of the APF guidelines, he
would not take an ownership role in a pharmacy, and he would be prepared to
complete 400 hours of supervision
by a pharmacist in charge. He did not want to
submit to Category B supervision but would agree to Category C supervision. He
not to engage in compounding in breach of the APF guidelines and
otherwise would agree to the additional conditions proposed by the
Should Mr Knowles’ registration be
reinstated?
conduct that was the subject of the 2021 proceedings was serious and covered an
extensive period, although we accept that the
most recent conduct which was the
subject of the findings was November 2016. We also accept that these matters
were considered by
the Tribunal at that time and that Mr Knowles was
disqualified for three years based on the available evidence. These proceedings
are not a review of that decision, and the purpose of the jurisdiction is to
protect the public, not for punishment of the former
practitioner. As observed
by the Court of Appeal in
application for
reinstatement requires that the Tribunal make an inquiry into
. An applicant for reinstatement bears the onus of demonstrating
that he or she is no longer unfit because they “do not have
presumptions
of fitness, which might otherwise arise from an absence of contrary
suggestion”: at [18]-[19].
a case such as this, an applicant must satisfy the Tribunal that the conduct
which was the subject of the previous disciplinary
proceedings will not happen
in the future if the applicant is reinstated to practise. Mr Knowles contends
that this is the case,
and the Tribunal should be satisfied that he is now fit
to practise.
observed by the Tribunal in
Shah v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2014] NSWCATOD 94
in summarising the relevant considerations in reinstatement
cases at [34] as follows:
• the applicant bears the onus of proving that he is a
fit and proper person to be engaged in the profession of nursing as
an endorsed
enrolled nurse (see [41] and the authorities there referred to);
• the standard of proof to be applied by the Tribunal is
the civil standard of proof, the balance of probabilities, tempered
requirements of
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336)
; (see [41] and the authorities there referred to;
In Re Jason Martin
[2010] NSWMT 13
• the purpose of the jurisdiction is "not punishment or
further punishment" of the former practitioner, rather the jurisdiction
exercised is for the protection of the public (see [47] and the authority there
referred to);
• the power to reinstate should "be exercised with great
caution and only upon solid and substantial grounds" (see [48] and
the authority
there referred to);
• there is no public interest in denying forever the
chance of redemption and rehabilitation to former practitioners. The
better served if, in appropriate cases, those who have offended, once they have
affirmatively proved reform, are afforded
a second chance (see [49] and the
authority there referred to);
• in making an assessment of the applicant's worthiness
and reliability for the future the Tribunal may draw inferences from
happened in the past and, in particular, what led to their being removed from
the Register. At [50] the Tribunal referred
In Re Jason
[2010] NSWMT 13
where the Medical Tribunal pointed out it is not
"a question of what an applicant has suffered in the past. It is a question of
[her] worthiness and his [her] reliability for the future". That Tribunal
noted the difficulty associated with predicting how a practitioner
would behave
in the future and remarked that "the decision in the particular case is to a
greater or lesser extent dependent upon
the Tribunal's assessment of the
applicant".
that may be relevant to the question of whether Mr Knowles is fit to practise
include Mr Knowles’ insight into the previous
established misconduct,
evidence of any change in attitude, whether he has demonstrated genuine and
sincere remorse for his previous
conduct, evidence of further training,
education and professional development directed to the issues which were the
subject of the
disciplinary proceedings and evidence of any suitable conditions
or supervision and mentoring, if necessary, to provide guidance
and checks and
balances in the initial stages of reinstatement to practise.
Knowles provided detailed written statements and submissions directed to these
matters. He also provided details of the professional
development undertaken by
him over the past few years, evidence of certificates of recognition or
appreciation in 2019 and 2020,
evidence about Mr Knowles operation of TGA
licenced facilities and professional references. Mr Knowles gave oral evidence
of his application and put forward two referees who also gave oral
Mr Knowles’ detailed written submissions and oral evidence, we are not
satisfied that his registration should be reinstated
at this time, with or
without conditions. We further order, consistent with the HCCC’s
contention, that Mr Knowles is not entitled
to seek a review for 12 months from
the date of this order under s 163B(5) of the National Law.
have we decided to refuse Mr Knowles’ application and to make a
non-reviewable order?
summary, we agree with the HCCC that Mr Knowles has come a long way since March
2022, but we are not satisfied his registration
should be reinstated at this
stage. We also find that a further period of reflection before he can make
another application would
give Mr Knowles the opportunity to undertake mentoring
or counselling to address the current concerns identified.
Knowles has the onus to establish that he is now fit to practise. The findings
made by the Tribunal in the disciplinary proceedings
were serious and remain
relevant to our consideration. While Mr Knowles has addressed some aspects,
especially in his written material,
we are concerned about whether Mr Knowles
has sufficient insight into his conduct such that we could be confident of real
considering the exercise of this discretion under s 163C(1)(c) we must have
regard to ss 3A and 3B of the National Law which state:
3A The main guiding principle of the national registration and
accreditation scheme is that the protection of the health and safety
public must be the paramount consideration.
3b In the exercise of functions under a NSW provision, the
protection of the health and safety of the public must be the paramount
consideration.
is material before us in Mr Knowles’ favour but, on balance, we are not
satisfied that he understands the importance of
ethical practise, accepts the
seriousness of the potential for harm caused by his unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional
misconduct or that he has yet taken all necessary steps
to educate himself about these matters. For instance, if Mr Knowles were
engage in compounding and dispensing to please customers or treating doctors
without knowing the patient’s medical condition
or having a reasonable
basis for believing the medication prescribed was for an appropriate therapeutic
purpose, there would be a
risk to public health and safety. This is contrary to
the objective under the National Law that the protection of the health and
safety of the public must be paramount consideration.
Knowles has worked as a pharmacy assistant for the past 18 months. The HCCC
raised concerns about whether he has been actually
undertaking functions of an
unregistered pharmacist. The HCCC relies on the wording in Mr Knowles’
affidavit, which referred
to him working as a “pharmacist under
supervision”. Mr Knowles criticises the HCCC for raising this issue
without proof.
Mr Knowles had been undertaking pharmacist duties, this would be a breach of the
orders and would be in contravention of the National
Law. This would be a
serious matter that would weigh heavily against his reinstatement and may have
been, without a cogent and persuasive
explanation for the breach, a decisive
factor against Mr Knowles. The HCCC was correct to raise this and to test the
Knowles explanation, together with the evidence of Mr Playford and Ms Wolski is
persuasive. The wording used by Mr Knowles in his
affidavit is somewhat loose
and on face value conveys the meaning that Mr Knowles is performing an
unauthorised role. However, both
Mr Playford and Ms Wolski, who were extensively
questioned about this issue, supported Mr Knowles’ evidence that he had a
role. We accept their evidence.
Knowles referred to himself in his written material and in his oral evidence as
a pharmacist who was unregistered. He still sees
himself as a pharmacist after
many years of practise and his evidence demonstrates his pride in his profession
and in his previous
achievements. There would have been a strong temptation for
Mr Knowles to go beyond his more limited role while working in the pharmacies.
However, there is no evidence that Mr Knowles has done so and this counts in his
also accept Mr Knowles’ evidence that when he initially commenced working
at the Amcal and Priceline Pharmacies on the Central
Coast, he did not have an
intention to return to practise. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, we
accept that his decision
to apply for re-registration was made more recently,
probably at the time when he was coming up to the expiry of his
disqualification.
The fact that Mr Knowles gave an undertaking in the context of
the 2021 application does not compel a conclusion or even lead to
an inference
that he gave the original undertaking without having an honest belief that he
would comply with such an undertaking
in the future. We accept Mr Knowles’
evidence that this was an undertaking proffered in the context of the 2021
application
for dismissal. Because the proceedings were not dismissed and
resulted in the findings made by the Tribunal in the disciplinary proceedings,
there was no obligation for him to comply with such an undertaking. Relevantly,
this was not an undertaking that was referred to
or factored into the
Tribunal’s consideration of the matter in the disciplinary proceedings. As
such, we accept that Mr Knowles
simply changed his mind about seeking
re-registration.
his first affidavit in support of his application, Mr Knowles focused on his
achievements, the fact that he had 35 years of practice
and that he had
consistently dispensed millions of prescriptions without incident and without
evidence of harm. He did not refer
to the disciplinary proceedings or the
complaints which were the subject of those proceedings and did not express any
or remorse for his previous conduct. It was not until these issues
were raised by the HCCC that Mr Knowles acknowledged certain failings
detailed written response dated 20 July 2025.
though Mr Knowles acknowledged the complaints and failings in his second written
response, the force of this response is diminished
by inconsistency with some of
his submissions in the 2021 interlocutory application for dismissal and in his
oral evidence before
this Tribunal. For instance, Mr Knowles gave evidence in
these proceedings justifying his submission in the 2021 application that
action by the Pharmacy Council complaint was vexatious and unnecessarily caused
ACP to close down and the loss of jobs. As outlined
above, Mr Knowles adhered to
his evidence during his cross examination and it was not until he was taken to
the detail of the s 150
proceedings, that he eventually resiled from this
position. This demonstrates that Mr Knowles not only rejected the legitimacy of
the Pharmacy Council complaints in 2021 but maintained this position in these
proceedings. This belies his statement that he now
fully acknowledges the
seriousness of his professional misconduct and the potential implications for
patient safety in public trust.
his written acknowledgement of the seriousness of his previous conduct which was
the subject of the disciplinary proceedings,
Mr Knowles had a tendency to
minimise this by characterising his misconduct narrowly as “only”
relating to his compounding
practice and his role as a proprietor. He overlooked
that many of the complaints also related to inappropriate dispensing and
Knowles further submitted that the conduct in question was ten years old and
that the HCCC had not taken into account his ten years
of improvements and
achievements or his recent CPD and the work he had undertaken as part of
licencing a TGA approved facility. However,
this assertion did not acknowledge
the complaints made in 2020 that were the subject of the s 150 proceedings,
which he later conceded
after he was taken to the relevant material. Nor did his
evidence about the TGA licenced facility explain or support his contention
the licencing process had improved or would improve his practise and insight
the core of a number of the complaints was Mr Knowles’ failure to
recognise the ethical considerations in providing unproven
and untested
compounded prescriptions to patients. Mr Knowles described this practise as
being driven by his desire to please patients.
While this may be so –
still raising a serious concern – such a description fails to recognise
that some of the complaints
related to, and were possibly driven by, the
profitable volume compounding and dispensing model operated through ACP. Mr
does not expressly acknowledge or identify the potential for financial
conflicts as an ethical consideration in his evidence to the
demonstrates a lack of insight into an issue of critical importance for
practitioners. We agree with the HCCC submission that
Mr Knowles’ CPD
which we accept is extensive, is deficient in this regard. Mr Knowles did not
identify the need for counselling
and mentoring focusing on ethical concerns.
While he said he would consider this further, this was only when it was brought
attention by the HCCC and the Tribunal.
of the most concerning matters is Mr Knowles’ failure to advise his
referees, first, about his disqualification and, secondly,
their reference for use in these proceedings. We accept that Mr Knowles was
ashamed about his disqualification,
but he was working as a pharmacy assistant
in a pharmacy practice, and, in our view, this is a matter that was relevant to
the discharge
of his role. It would have been important for Mr Knowles’
employers to understand the circumstances leading to his being unregistered
give them the option of whether they wished to employee him or whether they
decided to put additional measures in place during
the period of his
disqualification. Employing a pharmacist who is unregistered because they are
retired is very different from making
a decision to employ an unregistered
pharmacist with full knowledge that he was disqualified.
this regard, we accept the failure to give full and frank disclosure to his
employers demonstrates an ethical flaw in Mr Knowles’
character. We agree
that this conduct is similar to the conduct relating to the representations made
by him to the Pharmacy Council
representation that Mr Knowles had retired without also explaining the
circumstances
leading to his retirement is misrepresentation by omission.
Notably, this is recent conduct, not conduct which is over five years
conduct was exacerbated by the fact that Mr Knowles asked the pharmacists to
provide references which he knew or ought to have
known would be provided to the
Tribunal in these proceedings. He did not disclose the purpose of the
references, that the references
would be given to the Tribunal or that the
referees may potentially be required to give evidence to the Tribunal. Mr
Playford said
that he was surprised when the pharmacy practice was summoned. Mr
Knowles attempted to justify the failure to disclose this information
pharmacists by saying that he did not understand how the references were to be
used. He also said he did not understand that
the application for reinstatement
required an application to this Tribunal. This evidence is not credible because
Mr Knowles application
was filed in May 2025, well before the references were
drafted and finalised.
references of Mr Frangos, Mr Playford and Ms Wolski are favourable. The oral
evidence of Mr Playford was also supportive, although
he said his support was
“reserved” given the failure of Mr Knowles to disclose the
disqualification to him in the context
of the reference and the Tribunal
proceedings. Mr Playford was a credible and measured witness. We accept his
evidence that he has
observed Mr Knowles over the past 18 months and formed a
favourable impression of his conduct and professionalism. This evidence
however, limited by the limited role Mr Knowles was undertaking and the fact
that Mr Playford was unaware of Mr Knowles’
history during the period of
his supervision and was therefore less likely to be scrutinising his conduct
Wolski was also very supportive of Mr Knowles, but we give her evidence less
weight to the extent that she, somewhat surprisingly,
did not appear to be
concerned Mr Knowles had failed to disclose important information to her.
Overall, we had the impression that
Ms Wolski was genuine but nonetheless a
strong advocate for Mr Knowles rather than an objective independent
HCCC proposed potential conditions requiring a high level of supervision if Mr
Knowles’ registration were to be reinstated.
Mr Knowles does not accept
that this supervision is required but states, if conditions were to be imposed,
that he would be prepared
to accept the less intensive Category C supervision.
Mr Knowles’ acceptance of a supervision condition is not determinative
whether such a condition would be imposed but his attitude to such a condition
is relevant. First, it demonstrates a lack of insight
by Mr Knowles about the
need for a period of intense supervision before he can return to full practise,
particularly having regard
to the seriousness of the previous breaches.
Secondly, it is possible that the effectiveness of supervision is at risk where
practitioner being supervised does not fully recognise or embrace the need
for close supervision and where it is imposed.
this, we are not satisfied that such a condition would be sufficient in any
event. This is because we are not satisfied that
Mr Knowles yet has sufficient
insight into the shortcomings that led to his disqualification.
accept that there is no public interest in “denying forever” the
chance of redemption and rehabilitation to former
practitioners. Against this,
the practitioner must affirmatively prove reform and that the power to reinstate
should be exercised
with “great caution and only on solid and substantial
this case, we are not so satisfied. This is because, in exercising our functions
under the National Law, the protection of the
health and safety of the public
must be the paramount consideration.
also agree with the HCCC’s submission that we should make an order under s
163B(5) that the order not be reviewed for 12
months because we are not
satisfied that Mr Knowles is yet fit to be re-registered. Making another
application without first undertaking
further education on ethics and formal or
informal mentoring would be counterproductive.
Submissions
Knowles submits that the Tribunal should make an order that each party pay their
own costs, consistent with usual costs order that
applies to Tribunal
proceedings under s 60(1) of the NCAT Act. Section 60(2) provides that the
Tribunal may award costs but only
if it is satisfied there are “special
circumstances” warranting an award of costs. Those special circumstances
out in s 60(3) of the NCAT Act and include matters relating to the
conduct of the proceedings by the parties, the relative strengths
of the claims
made by the parties, the nature and complexity of the proceedings and whether
the proceedings were frivolous, vexatious
or otherwise misconceived or lacking
in substance.
Knowles acknowledges that different rules apply to proceedings in the
Occupational Division but contends that the Tribunal should
be guided by the
provisions of s 60 in this case and should order costs if there are special
circumstances.
Knowles accepts that the HCCC, acting in the role of contradictor in his
application for reinstatement, is a necessary party to
assist the Tribunal.
However, Mr Knowles contends that the Tribunal should take into account that the
costs incurred by the HCCC
in engaging senior counsel was unnecessary and
disproportionate in the circumstances, particularly given Mr Knowles was
unrepresented,
and the role of contradictor could have been adequately
discharged by presenting the relevant material and undertaking a review his
material without the need to engage counsel.
HCCC submits that Tribunal’s power to order costs is conferred by cl 13,
Sch 5D to the National Law. Cl 13(1) provides that
the Tribunal may order the
complainant (if any), the registered health
practitioner or student concerned, or any other person entitled
to appear to pay costs to another person as decided by the Tribunal. Cl 13(4)
states that cl 13 applies instead of s 60 of the NCAT
HCCC submits the general rule is that costs follow the event:
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Philipiah
[2013] NSWCA
Qasim v Health Care Complaints
[2015] NSWCA 282
Care Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
HCCC also relies on
Ake v Health Care Complaints Commission
NSWCATOD 165.
Ristevski v Medical Council of NSW
[2026] NSWCATOD 18 with approval, the Tribunal found:
51 We agree with the view expressed by the Tribunal
at [70]-[71] that in conducting a review of a
relevant order under s 163B of the National Law, there is a public interest in
the Tribunal
being assisted by the relevant practitioner Council or the
Commission. Without a respondent in this class of matters, there is a
the Tribunal might only have available the self-serving evidence adduced by the
applicant practitioner. The involvement
of, to use the term coined
, a “public interest respondent” in review
proceedings, assists the Tribunal in discharging its obligation to ensure that
all relevant material is disclosed so as to enable it to determine all relevant
facts in issue:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
52 While we have considerable sympathy for
s position and the inevitable financial burden imposed
by a costs order, the authorities have consistently stated that mere
impecuniosity
of the losing party is not a justifiable reason to departing from
the usual rules in respect of costs:
Health Care Complaints Commission v
Relevantly,
the Tribunal found in
Provided the respondent conducts its case appropriately, it should be
compensated regardless of whether the order is granted or refused.
such, the HCCC submits that regardless of the outcome, it should be awarded
Consideration
Tribunal has published the Occupational Division Guideline, Costs (August 2017).
Clause 14 provides:
The Tribunal
make a costs order in disciplinary proceedings or an
appeal brought under the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
Costs are generally awarded to the successful party unless there are
disqualifying circumstances.
general principles in relation to costs in matters under the National Law have
been summarised in the decision of Deputy President,
Seiden SC, DCJ, in
v Medical Council of New South Wales (No 2)
[2024 NSWCATOD 122.
observed by Deputy President Seiden at [13] and [14], principles relevant to the
general rule are that costs generally follow the
event, although this is not an
absolute rule. Costs compensate the winning party and are not a form of
punishment, but this rule
may be displaced if the winning party engages in
conduct that disentitles them to costs. The onus is on the losing party to
a basis for any departure from the usual rule:
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Balafas (No 2)
[2021] NSWCATOD 175
be apportioned or reduced, or various orders may be made that reflect the
circumstances and are consistent with the underlying
decision. Costs are in the
Tribunal’s discretion which should be exercised judicially: Cole DCJ in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Wilcox (No 2)
[2020] NSWCATOD 51
these are reinstatement proceedings and the question of whether the
“compensatory principle” applied is such
proceedings was discussed
by the Tribunal in
Medical Council of NSW
NSWCATOD 49.
The Tribunal observed at [90] that the reinstatement proceedings
arise because of the prior misconduct of an applicant. The proceedings
seen as ancillary. Characterising an applicant as successful where the
applicant’s registration is reinstated “misunderstands
the nature of
the respondent’s involvement at the inquiry”. In that case, the
Tribunal made an order for costs in favour
of the Medical Council, even though
it made a reinstatement order but excluded costs thrown away because of an
adjournment.
was cited with approval in
at [48], where
the Tribunal also ordered costs despite ordering that the practitioner’s
registration be reinstated.
the present case, the HCCC sought an order for costs of the review.
have accepted many of the HCCC’s contentions and declined to reinstate Mr
Knowles’ registration, consistent with the
submissions made by the HCCC
soon after the commencement of the proceedings. The HCCC maintained this
submission at the end of the
hearing, but it is possible the HCCC could have
changed its view if the evidence had been more favourable to Mr Knowles.
for the reasons outlined above, this is not the critical factor on
costs. A relevant consideration is whether the HCCC conducted
appropriately or whether there was “disentitling” conduct by the
HCCC in opposing the reinstatement. This does
not involve consideration of
whether there are “special circumstances” because s 60 has been
expressly ousted from application.
our view, the HCCC is entitled to its costs on an ordinary basis. The HCCC did
not delay or prolong the proceedings and took issue,
appropriately in our view,
with certain evidence and propositions put forward by Mr Knowles. It was
important that the evidence be
tested, and this provided considerable assistance
to the Tribunal in the course of its inquiry. We did not accept some of the
submissions
raised but the thorough exploration of certain contentious issues at
the hearing satisfied us about those matters.
order that Mr Knowles pay the costs of the
proceedings.
make the following orders:
(1) Mr Knowles’ application for reinstatement is dismissed.
(2) Mr Knowles is not entitled to seek a review for 12 months from the date of
(3) Mr Knowles is to pay the costs of the HCCC on an ordinary basis as agreed or
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the New South Wales Civil and Administrative
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (405 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter