URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/290.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Solaris v Health Care Complaints Commission [2025] NSWCATAP 290; (14 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Solaris v Health Care Complaints Commission
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 290
Hearing Date(s):
30 May 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Appeal Panel
S Westgarth, Deputy President
J Gatland, Senior Member
(1) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), a further hearing of the appeal to consider the effect of the subsequent
making of a permanent prohibition order on the utility
of this appeal is
dispensed with.
(2) The appeal is dismissed pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Catchwords:
APPEALS – whether utility where no practical consequences for the
parties – principles – appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act, s 63
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Cases Cited:
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force v Parish
NSWCATAP 180
Commissioner of Taxation v Industrial Equity Ltd
(2000) 98 FCR
[2000] FCA 420
FZK v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(No 2)[2025] NSWCATAP 197
NSW Department of Premier and Cabinet v Cianfrano
[2009] NSWADTAP 15
People with Disability Australia Incorporated v Minister
for Disability Services & Anor
[2011] NSWCA 253
Secretary, Department of
Communities and Justice v Feeney
[2021] NSWCATAP 139
Solaris v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2024] NSWCATOD 204
Solaris v Health Care Complaints
[2024] NSWCATOD 97
Song v Dickenson No 2
[2025] NSWCATAP
Ugur v Bridge Housing Limited
[2024] NSWCATAP 203
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Soulore Solaris (Appellant)
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Respondent)
Representation:
Appellant (Self-Represented)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Appellant (Self-Represented)
Health Care
Complaints Commission (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00036223
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Occupational Division
[2024] NSWCATOD 204
Date of Decision:
18 December 2024
Balla ADCJ, Principal Member
File Number(s):
2023/00459831
REASONS FOR DECISION
21 November 2023, the Appellant was issued with an interim prohibition order by
the Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) in
the following terms:
Mr Soulore Solaris must not under any circumstances provide, or cause to be
provided, any health services, either in paid employment
or voluntary, to any
member of the public.
prohibition orders are imposed under
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
(NSW) and may remain in force for up to eight weeks.
While the Appellant sought administrative review of HCCC’s decision to
impose the interim prohibition order, as the proceedings progressed, his
application was amended to include the repeated imposition
prohibition orders, issued as each eight-week interim prohibition order expired.
Each of which was in the same terms.
the proceedings reached final hearing, the interim prohibition order in force at
the time had been issued to the Appellant on
3 December 2024.
Tribunal concluded that it was satisfied that the interim prohibition order made
on 3 December 2024 had been made in accordance
with the relevant legislative
requirements, and it affirmed the HCCC’s decision.
Appellant then commenced an internal appeal of the Tribunal’s
The issue to be determined: whether this appeal has
this appeal was heard, on 30 May 2025, the interim prohibition order that had
been the subject of consideration by the Tribunal
at first instance had lapsed.
No application was made to address the further interim prohibition orders that
were then in force.
those circumstances, at the hearing of the appeal, we inquired about the utility
of the appeal. The HCCC contended that there
was no utility at that stage
because the interim prohibition orders the subject of the Tribunal’s
decision had lapsed. However,
the HCCC nonetheless addressed the substance of
the issues raised by the appeal on the basis that our decision may impact upon
making of further interim prohibition orders against the Appellant.
Similarly, the Appellant submitted that, since there remained
in place interim
prohibition orders in identical terms to those in place at the time of the
Tribunal’s consideration of the
matter, there remained utility in the
appeal of the Tribunal’s decision at the date the appeal was heard.
those submissions, we have concluded that the appeal had no utility at the date
it was heard. As we explain below, to the
extent that doubt attended that
conclusion, such doubt has been eliminated by intervening
The HCCC subsequently imposed a permanent prohibition
a date after the appeal hearing, the HCCC issued a prohibition order to the
Appellant under
Health Care Complaints Act
are informed by its recent written submissions that the prohibition order made
is a permanent prohibition order and that it “is not making
interim orders” with respect to the Appellant. The circumstances
concerning why submissions have been received recently is explained below.
party informed the Appeal Panel of the making of the permanent prohibition
order; instead, its existence came to the attention
of the appeal panel when the
Appellant, as he is entitled to do, commenced further proceedings in the
Tribunal seeking a review of
that decision. The proceedings concerning the
permanent prohibition order are ongoing.
parties were responsible for bringing to the attention of the Tribunal a
material change to the underlying facts of the appeal:
People with Disability
Australia Incorporated v Minister for Disability Services & Anor
NSWCA 253 (PWD)
per Allsop P at [3]. The failure by the parties to alert
the Tribunal to such a material change was wasteful of costs and time and
contrary to the guiding principle and the obligations of the parties to assist
the Tribunal, as provided under
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NCAT Act), see further: PWD at [6].
have not been informed of the terms of the permanent prohibition order, although
the HCCC, in its recent submissions, offered to
provide a copy of it. The
Appellant informs us, in his written submissions, that the permanent prohibition
order relied on the findings
of the interim prohibition order. It would not be
appropriate for us to consider the terms of the permanent prohibition order,
that the Appellant is seeking to challenge its imposition in other
proceedings in the Tribunal. The fact that a permanent prohibition
been made is the only relevant detail to our consideration of the matter.
a consequence of our becoming aware that a permanent prohibition order had been
made, we sought further submissions from the parties
on the question of whether
there remained any utility in determining this appeal. Both the Appellant and
the HCCC provided written
submissions on that question.
hearing dispensed with
parties were also asked to make submissions on whether the question of the
utility of the appeal might be determined without a
further hearing pursuant to
s 50 of the NCAT Act
Neither party, in their submissions, sought a
further hearing on the question of utility. We are satisfied, having read the
submissions
of both parties, that we should dispense with a further hearing.
his recent submissions, the Appellant argued that there remained utility in
determining the substance of the appeal. The HCCC,
however, submitted that there
was not. We have concluded, for the reasons that follow, that there is no
utility in our determination
of the appeal, and it is to be dismissed on that
Should we decide on an appeal that has no utility?
neither the Tribunal at first instance, nor the appeal panel should entertain
appeals that have no practical consequences
for the parties:
FZK v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATAP 197
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice v Feeney
[2021] NSWCATAP
NSW Department of Premier and Cabinet v Cianfrano
NSWADTAP 15
. There are some limited exceptions to that principle,
which, for the reasons we discuss below, do not apply here.
is relatively common, in coming before the Tribunal at first instance or on
appeal, that the facts or changes to the law intervene
to cause an appeal to
become arid or lack utility. In
Ugur v Bridge Housing Limited
NSWCATAP 203
, to which the HCCC refers in its submissions, the appeal panel of
the Tribunal found that it should not determine matters where the
decision will
have no consequence for the parties or could, at most, be considered advisory.
That decision arose in the context of
an appeal from a decision where the
Tribunal’s orders at first instance had been carried out or otherwise
superseded.
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force v Parish
NSWCATAP 180
, at [49]−[60], the appeal panel provided the following recent
summary of the relevant principles concerning the approach to
be taken where the
utility of an appeal has come into question. We respectfully adopt that summary
as follows:
“46 A proceeding, or an aspect of it, will lack utility if its
determination serves no practical purpose. One way a proceeding
or issue can
become moot is if, due to supervening events or circumstances, there is no
longer a controversy between the parties:
Hunter Development Corporation v
Save Our Rail NSW Incorporated (No 2)
[2016] NSWCA 375
Development
47 As a matter of general principle, courts will ordinarily refuse to determine
issues which no longer have utility or have become
Bass v Permanent
Trustee Co Ltd
(1999) 198 CLR 334
[1999] HCA 9
, the High Court
‘Because the object of the judicial process is the final determination of
the rights of the parties to an action, courts have
traditionally refused to
provide answers to hypothetical questions or to give advisory opinions.’
49 Courts have the power to dismiss or stay proceedings which involve issues
that are not live between the parties, so as to protect
the court’s
processes from being abused. This includes the power to dismiss an appeal which
was brought as of right, if later
events show that the questions involved in it
have become moot between the parties’:
Jardin v Metcash
[2011] NSWCA 409
) at [30]-[31].
50 The Tribunal likewise has the power to summarily dispose of issues which have
no utility. Section 36(1) the NCAT Act provides
that the guiding principle
for proceedings under the Act is to ‘facilitate ... the real issues in the
proceedings’. This
imperative applies to ‘the resolution of the
issues between the parties’: NCAT Act, s 36(4). The Tribunal has
powers under ss 36 and 38 to ensure that proceedings meet the
guiding principle:
Sunaust Properties Pty Ltd t/as Central Sydney Realty v
The Owners – Strata Plan No 64807
[2023] NSWCA 188
51 While the general rule is that proceedings which have become moot should not
be entertained, there is a line of authority which
suggest that courts
nevertheless have a discretion to determine matters which have been regularly
commenced; notwithstanding that
there is no longer a live substantive issue
between the parties:
People with Disability Australia Incorporated v
Minister for Disability Services
[2011] NSWCA 253
Hunter Development; Commissioner of Taxation
v Industrial Equity Ltd
(2000) 98 FCR 573
[2000] FCA 420
Industrial Equity
52 Those cases identify the following factors can be relevant to the exercise of
that discretion, on an appeal:
(1) Where there is a live issue of costs between the parties and resolution
of the issue depends on determining the appeal on its
Development
at [27]-[38], [46], [56];
(2) Where the appeal raises an important question of principle which will
have ramifications for other cases:
at [13]-[15];
Attorney-General for the State of New South Wales
[2014] NSWCA 466
(3) Where appeals have been brought in the public interest and there is
‘an issue of construction having significance beyond
the immediate rights
of the present parties and there are serious arguments capable of being advanced
as to the correctness of the
Industrial Equity
, Campbell JA noted that the discretion should be exercised
sparingly, stating (at [35]):
‘It could only be in rare circumstances, if ever, that a court was
justified in reaching a decision on [a] legal question that
had no practical
consequences for either of the parties:
Gardner v Dairy Industry Authority of
New South Wales
[1977] 18 ALR 55
at 60, 69.’
54 The foregoing provides some basis to suggest that the Tribunal, too, has a
narrow discretion to determine a matter, which was
regularly commenced, but
where there is no longer a live substantive issue between the parties. The
question of costs might provide
such justification, although, it is not always
necessary or appropriate to finally determine the merits of a matter in order to
Re Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs ex parte
[1997] HCA 6
(1997) 186 CLR 622
at 624 (McHugh J).
55 The discretion of the Appeal Panel to consider a moot appeal was
discussed by the Appeal Panel in
Secretary, Department of Communities
and Justice v
[2021] NSWCATAP
. It was there noted that the question of costs and
whether an error of principle is raised might provide the basis to exercise the
discretion. Nevertheless, the Appeal Panel declined to entertain the moot appeal
in that case. It dismissed the appeal under s 55(1)(b)
of the NCAT Act, as
misconceived or lacking in substance.
60 We accept, as a general proposition, that where a matter has been regularly
commenced, but subsequent events mean that there is
no longer a live issue as
between the parties, the Tribunal may have authority to determine the matter.
The real question is what
orders the Tribunal would have power to make; and
appeal panel in
Song v Dickenson No 2
[2025] NSWCATAP 208
considering the general principles concerning the phrase “substantial
miscarriage of justice” when considering
whether to grant leave to appeal,
further considered the question of utility at [41]:
... If an appeal raises a question of law, the appeal should, if upheld, be
capable of affecting the orders at first instance in
a meaningful way:
Narraport Woollahra Holdings Pty Ltd v Ice Box Liquor Pty Ltd
NSWCATAP 240
. However, an appeal will lack utility if its
determination serves no practical purpose:
The Commissioner of Police, New
South Wales Police Force v Parish
[2025] NSWCATAP 180
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice v Feeney [
NSWCATAP 139
. Similarly, if leave to appeal is required, there must be
utility in granting leave:
Imbree v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2024] NSWCATAP 158
if the orders of the appeal panel were to be upheld, they would not be capable
of affecting the orders at first instance in
any way because the order the
subject of the appeal had expired and no further orders of the same kind can be
made. Accordingly,
the appeal serves no practical purpose.
taking into account the criteria summarised in
at [52], we
consider that:
(1) There is no live issue of costs between the parties, and the resolution of
the issue does not depend on determining the appeal
on its merits. The
Appellant, by his notice of appeal, does not seek costs. While we note that in
his original written submissions
on appeal, the Appellant submitted ‘I
reserve the right to claim costs after receipt of the full HCCC reply’,
that submission
does not give rise to a live issue of costs between the parties
in circumstances where the Tribunal’s discretion to award costs
to be predicated by, in the first instance, the Appellant being successful at
any stage of the proceedings (which he is
not) and, in the second instance, by
there being special circumstances arising from the conduct of the parties to
justify an award
of costs: s 60 NCAT Act.
(2) This appeal does not raise an important question of principle or have
ramifications for other matters in the way in which, for
example, the Court of
Appeal considered the matters raised in PWD. In PWD at [14]-[15], Beazley JA, as
Her Excellency then was, concluded
that the appeal was not lacking utility
because it involved the proper consideration of a statutory provision where at
other proceeding was on foot, where the answer to that question would
be “pivotal” to the determination of the other
proceedings. By
contrast, the subject matter of this appeal primarily concerns whether the
Appellant was afforded procedural fairness
in the initial proceedings, whether
the Tribunal exhibited bias in its reasoning, and whether its decision was based
on erroneous
factual findings. The matters to be determined are, therefore,
confined to the particular facts and conduct of the proceedings.
We cannot see
that these proceedings will have any bearing on the proceedings subsequently
pursued by the Appellant against the imposition
of a permanent prohibition
order. Much of the Appellant’s submissions on utility were directed to the
imposition of having
to re-litigate in the new proceedings issues he has already
argued regarding the interim prohibition order. We reject that submission
that a permanent prohibition order is made under different provisions and only
after an investigation has been concluded –
it is an entirely different
order from the orders which have been the subject of these proceedings.
(3) Nor do we consider that the issues between the parties in these proceedings
have ‘significance beyond the immediate rights
of the present
parties’ in the sense discussed in
Commissioner of Taxation v
Industrial Equity Ltd
(2000) 98 FCR 573
[2000] FCA 420
) at [16]. In
Industrial Equity
, there was both a live issue of
costs of the first instance proceedings and a question of interpretation
concerning the nature and
extent of the Commissioner of Taxation’s powers
to issue notices to taxpayers to attend compulsory examinations. The issues
this appeal do not have application beyond the rights of the present parties and
therefore, we cannot conclude that the appeal
has been brought in the public
interest in the relevant sense.
we do not consider that there is an error of principle that requires resolution
of the kind contemplated by the appeal panel
role of the Tribunal is not to give advisory opinions or make declarations:
Australian Press Council Inc v Southey
[2022] NSWCATAP 127
–[48], Song v Dickenson No 2 at [83].
the appeal is moot, the Tribunal has power to dismiss it under s 55(1)(b) of the
The nature of the order the
subject of the Tribunal’s decision at first instance, and on the
appeal concerned the Tribunal’s decision to affirm an interim prohibition
order made by the HCCC on 3 December 2024. The
terms of the interim prohibition
order were the same as those of the original interim prohibition order set out
in paragraph one
18 December 2024, the matter was heard and determined by the Tribunal, affirming
the HCCC’s decision to impose the interim
prohibition order. The reasons
for that decision are set out in
Solaris v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2024] NSWCATOD 204 (Reasons).
Before us, the Appellant challenged the
orders made on that date.
we have noted above, the interim prohibition order made on 3 December 2024 was
in fact one of several consecutive interim prohibition
orders made by the HCCC
against the Appellant under
Health Care Complaints Act
summary of the interim prohibition order regime imposed on the Appellant by the
HCCC was set out in
Solaris v Health Care Complaints Commission
NSWCATOD 97
, where the Tribunal constituted by PM Ransome considered
an application for a stay of an interim prohibition order. In that regard,
Tribunal observed:
‘An issue arises in the proceedings in that the interim prohibition order
the subject of the application by Mr Solaris has
in fact expired.
Interim prohibition orders have been issued by the respondent to the applicant
under s 41AA of the Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(the Act). The
first such order was issued on 4 August 2023. By virtue of s 41AA(4) of the Act
an interim prohibition order remains
in force for a maximum of 8 weeks. The
respondent has made further interim prohibition orders since the expiry of the
first order
which, in effect, causes the order to continue. The most recent
order was made on 2 May 2024. Each order that has been made is in
Mr Solaris asks that his proceedings in the Tribunal be taken to be an
application in relation to the most recent interim prohibition
order in force at
the relevant time. The HCCC has no objection to this approach and has
evinced an intention to continue to make
such orders for the foreseeable future.
In the interests of justice I made an order on 7 May 2024 pursuant to s 53
of the NCAT Act
that the application made by the applicant on 19 December
2023 which seeks review of the interim prohibition order made on 21
2023 is amended to seek review of the interim prohibition
order in force at the time of the Tribunal’s decision (presently
order made on 2 May 2024).’
the Reasons, the Tribunal also noted that the intention of the parties was to
allow the Appellant to seek review of the interim
prohibition order in force at
the time when the decision was made, the specific order the subject of the
decision at first instance
was identified as the order made on 3 December 2024:
Reasons at [27]-[29].
HCCC may make an interim prohibition order under s 41AA of the
Health Care
Complaints Act
during any investigation of a complaint against a
non-registered health practitioner. There is an obvious tension between the
requirement that an interim prohibition order remain in force for a
period of no more than eight weeks and the need for the HCCC
to initiate,
conduct, and finalise investigations that can extend beyond such a time period
due to their complexity. We are not aware
of the reasons behind the statutory
time limit set by s 41AA, but it is, in our view, significant that
Parliament set such a time
limit for the purposes of s 41AA. In particular,
each time an interim prohibition order is made, the HCCC is required to have the
requisite belief and form the requisite opinions under s 41AA(2).
HCCC summarised its approach to the making of consecutive interim prohibition
orders in its statement of decision dated 14 October
2024, in the following
An interim prohibition order remains in force for a period of eight weeks, or
for a shorter period as specified in that order. After
the order lapses, the
Commission considers whether there is a basis to make a new interim prohibition
order. There is no limitation
on the number of interim prohibition orders that
can be made against a provider.
that regard, the Appellant tendered several of the notification and statement of
decision documents relating to the various interim
protection orders made
against him since August 2023. Upon reviewing that material, it is clear that
each time an interim prohibition
order was made, the HCCC’s delegate
considered the current state of the investigation being carried out before
addressing the
matters required under s 41AA(2).
an investigation is completed in accordance with Div 6 of Part 2 of the
Health Care Complaints Act
, and the HCCC has made relevant findings and
has formed the relevant opinion, it has the power to make a prohibition order
specified period or permanently: ss 41A(1), 41A(2) of the
Care Complaints Act
. The effect of the requirements in ss 41AA and 41A
means that interim prohibition orders may be imposed during an investigation,
whereas permanent prohibition orders are made after an investigation has been
completed. As a consequence, it appears that once an
investigation is concluded,
the HCCC has no power to make an interim prohibition order that covers the same
subject matter as a permanent
prohibition order.
relevance to the current proceedings is that we are satisfied that now that a
permanent prohibition order has been made, there
will be no further interim
prohibition orders made against the Appellant of the kind that is the subject of
these proceedings.
Utility of the Appeal
HCCC has submitted that, in light of the making of a permanent prohibition
order, the appeal has no utility. It submits that the
matters sought to be
ventilated by the Appellant concern whether the primary decision was affected by
appealable errors, including
procedural unfairness, bias, misconduct and the
Commission’s reliance on “malicious and negligent” actions of
police detectives. In that regard, the HCCC submits, even if he were to
succeed in establishing the alleged errors in the primary
decision in relation
to the interim prohibition order, that would have no bearing on the proceedings
in which the Appellant seeks
a review of the HCCC’s decision to make a
permanent prohibition order. For the reasons that follow, we agree with that
submission.
The relief sought by the appeal
appeal is from the orders of the Tribunal. Therefore, the utility of an appeal
may be gauged from whether the appeal panel can
make orders that will have any
material effect on the original orders made: see the authorities cited at
orders the subject of the appeal are the first three orders made by the Tribunal
at first instance, these are as follows:
(1) The Respondent’s decision of 3 December 2024 is
affirmed under
Administrative Decisions Review Act
(2) The Application is dismissed.
(3) Subject to order (6), below, pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) 2013, until further order of
the Tribunal, the publication of, or publication of or matters contained in:
(a) the Confidential and Privileged Documents filed on 4
September 2024 and Amended Confidential and Privileged Documents filed
December 2024, and
(b) Tab 41 of the
Bundle filed on 4 September 2024
(the Confidential Documents)
is prohibited.
section of the notice of appeal where the orders sought on appeal are required
to be set out; the Appellant wrote the following:
Proper examination of all the concealed documents, are they really
privileged?
Allow fair conduct – miscarriage of justice.
Dismiss HCCC orders! Due to procedural unfairness, lack of transparency, biased
and incorrect claims, breaches of legislation, reliance
on biased evidence,
unreasonable length of time.
with his completed notice of appeal, the Appellant submitted in the covering
remarks to his written submissions on the
appeal that:
This application seeks to set aside the decision, order a re-hearing, and
dismiss the IPSs due to procedural unfairness, bias, factual
errors, and
significant misconduct by the HCCC and NSW Police ...”
Appellant also submitted, throughout his written submissions, that the interim
prohibition order should be set aside; however,
he did not make any submissions
of relevance concerning the non-publication orders of the Tribunal at first
instance. We do not consider
that the Appellant prosecuted his appeal in
relation to the non-publication order. In any event, we note the Tribunal at
first instance
made the non-publication order in aid of earlier non-publication
and non-disclosure orders of the Tribunal made on 11 July 2024 by
PM Ransome that are not the subject of this appeal. In that regard, the
Tribunal at Reasons [57] – [61] observed:
‘In these Reasons I have referred to the Tribunal having made
non-publication and non-disclosure orders on 11 July 2024. These
(2) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
until further order of the Tribunal, the publication of the Confidential
Material or matters contained in the Confidential Material
is prohibited.
(3) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
until further order of the Tribunal, the disclosure of the Confidential Material
or matters contained in the Confidential Material
is restricted to the
respondent, the respondent’s legal representatives and the Tribunal.
Since those Orders were made, further documents have been filed by the
Commission. I was informed that the only difference between
the confidential
documents filed before and after 11 July 2024 was the removal of the claim of
privilege over the report of Dr Cala.
I accepted that it would be necessary to
make additional orders to extend the 11 July 2024 confidentiality Orders to the
filed after 11 July 2024. I have made those Orders below.
Other matters
Mr Solaris did make a number of other submissions which I do not accept for the
reasons set out below.
Failure to provide documents
Mr Solaris strongly believes that the Commission, amongst other entities, is
deliberately keeping documents from him.
Orders were made by the Tribunal member on 11 July 2024 prohibiting the
disclosure of certain documents to anyone other than the
Commission. Those
orders were made after legal submissions from the Commission as to the
non-disclosure regimes in legislation such
as the Coroner’s Act 2009
Accordingly,
the primary relief sought by the Appellant was to have the interim prohibition
order set aside. In that regard, there
are two difficulties:
(1) First, as was apparent at the commencement of the appeal, the interim
prohibition order, the subject of the Tribunal’s
decision at first
instance, had lapsed.
(2) Second, since the HCCC has imposed a permanent prohibition order, it can no
longer make interim prohibition orders in the way
it had done between about
August 2023 and May 2025.
discuss those issues below in the following
consideration.
Consideration of the utility of the appeal
Was the Appeal moot from the outset?
lack of utility of the appeal was raised by the HCCC in its filed reply to the
notice of appeal. The HCCC’s submissions
on the lack of utility of the
appeal were, however, only lightly pressed. At the hearing of the appeal, the
HCCC confirmed that it
had made consecutive interim prohibition orders against
the Appellant while continuing its investigations, and that an interim
prohibition
order was in place at the date of the appeal hearing, albeit not the
same order that was in place before the Tribunal at first instance.
Accordingly,
at the hearing of the appeal, the Appellant remained subject to an interim
prohibition order, and further interim prohibition
orders were likely to be
addressing the question of the utility of the appeal where the interim
prohibition order had lapsed, the Appellant, in his written
submissions, stated
The HCCC claims no practical utility exists due to the IPO’s expiry on 28
January 2025 (Reply, Para 8; s 41AA(4), HCC Act).
This overlooks ongoing harm:
(1) reputational damage from upheld false findings (Paras 52, 64) persists,
fuelled by police defamation
(False Claims, emails, Affidavits to be filed, TABs
10, 35 - source of false IPO claims); (2) my 31-year profession remains halted,
costing $100,000+ (Local Court Claim); and (3) successive IPOs (e.g., post-3
December 2024) perpetuate the injustice (Submissions,
Factual Background 1).
Review retains utility to correct errors, restore procedural fairness, expose
misconduct, award costs, and
prevent future orders (
Choudhury v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2021] NSWCATOD 27)
, rendering the HCCC’s
mootness argument untenable.
matters raised by the Appellant in that submission assume that the appeal panel
has powers that extend beyond the scope of what
is permissible on an appeal
where, in substance, the only relief sought is to set aside the HCCC’s
interim prohibition order.
Accordingly, that submission cannot be accepted.
HCCC had initially submitted that it was conceivable there may have been some
limited utility in considering the substance of
the appeal where the
HCCC’s investigation into the Appellant’s conduct was ongoing and it
was likely further interim
prohibition orders would be made. However, having
regard to the manner in which each interim prohibition order was required to be
made (as we set out above), we do not agree that any findings by the appeal
panel could have affected the HCCC’s statutory
obligations under the
Health Care Complaints Act
in making interim prohibition orders against
the Appellant, on, for example, a different basis. The nature of the
role in administrative review at first instance was not to
detect errors of decision-making by the HCCC, such as a failure to afford
procedural fairness, but to make the correct and preferable decision on the
evidence then before it:
Administrative Decisions Review Act
it is the case that each interim prohibition order requires the HCCC to form the
requisite beliefs and opinions set out in s 41AA
Health Complaints
, then any application of the Tribunal’s views to an order would be
limited because an ongoing investigation might change the
underlying facts and
opinions on which an interim prohibition order was made. That the underlying
facts did change is evident from
the statements of reasons for the previous
interim prohibition orders, which the Appellant tendered on appeal.
do not accept that the appeal had utility at the date of the hearing because
there were no orders that we could have made that
would have affected the rights
and interests of the parties.
The effect of the HCCC making a
permanent prohibition order
our reading of the relevant provisions of the
Health Care Complaints Act
(set out above), when the HCCC makes a permanent prohibition order against an
unregistered health practitioner, it can no longer
make interim prohibition
orders. Therefore, it is no longer the case that any future interim prohibition
orders could be made and
thus affected by any decision in this appeal.
conclusion of the investigation process, which must have occurred since the HCCC
subsequently issued a permanent prohibition order
under s 41A of the
Care Complaints Act,
meant that the HCCC had no power to make any further
interim prohibition orders against the Appellant. Therefore, to the extent that
there was any utility in determining the appeal while the investigation process
was on foot, that utility was obliterated on the
conclusion of the investigation
process. Had we concluded that there was some utility to the appeal while the
regime of interim prohibition
orders was in place, then the conclusion of the
investigation would have led to an inevitable conclusion that the appeal had no
Conclusion and orders
consider that the utility of this appeal was in doubt from the outset because
the interim order dated 3 December 2024, the subject
of the Tribunal’s
decision, had expired. Any order made, therefore, could not have been capable of
affecting the orders at
first instance in a meaningful way. The consequence of
the interim prohibition order expiring by the time of the appeal was that
would have been no interim prohibition order to set aside had we decided to
uphold the appeal.
conclusion of the investigation, evidenced by the making of a permanent
prohibition order, has the consequence that no further
interim prohibition
orders could have been made against the Appellant. The Appellant has pursued his
rights of review in respect
of the permanent prohibition order and those
proceedings are now before the Tribunal at first instance. If there were any
to the lack of utility of the appeal before the conclusion of the
investigation, such doubt is no longer present.
Accordingly,
we make the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), a further hearing of the appeal to consider the effect of the subsequent
making of a permanent prohibition order on the utility
of this appeal is
dispensed with.
(2) The appeal is dismissed pursuant to
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (317 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter