URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1087.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wright v Industrial Relations Secretary o/b Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (No.2) [2025] NSWIRComm 1087 (14 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Wright v Industrial Relations Secretary o/b Department of Primary
Industries and Regional Development (No.2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1087
Hearing Date(s):
10, 11, 12 June 2025
4 August 2025 (last note received 14 August
Date of Orders:
14 October 2025
Decision Date:
14 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner Howell
The Commission finds the Respondent unlawfully victimised the Applicant.
Orders are made to enforce the Freedom from Victimisation
provisions of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW —Victimisation – Applicant a
member, executive member of a vocational branch, and vocational
branch delegate
of his union (the PSA) – PSA engaged in long running campaign to change
laws with respect to fisheries management
to improve safety of fisheries
enforcement officers when at work - In his capacity as executive member of
vocational branch and vocational
branch delegate the Applicant participated in a
campaign (including industrial action in the form of work bans, and a concurrent
media comments) and participating in proceedings before the Commission by
attending to provide instructions in conciliation and later
being a witness
– Applicant provided statements to media as part of campaign in his own
time at the request of and in conjunction
with senior officials of the PSA
– Applicant did not obtain approval from Respondent before making media
statements - Denial
of higher duties opportunity, and informal warning issued to
Applicant – Consideration of whether actions amount to a detriment
sufficient to ground a finding of victimisation – Actions found to be
sufficiently detrimental to ground a finding of victimisation
– Respondent
claimed detriments imposed because decision maker thought Applicant had breached
the Respondent’s Code of
Conduct and Ethics by making unapproved media
statements – Consideration of operation of s 210(1)(a), (g), (h) and (j)
IR Act – whether s 210(1)(a) protects status as or activities as a
delegate – meaning of “participates” in
s 210(1)(g) of the IR
Act – attending conciliation to provide instructions in manner typical of
union delegate is participation
in proceedings - meaning of public or political
activity in s 210(1)(h) of the IR Act – meaning of “performance of
employee’s duties” in s 210(1)(h) of the IR Act -
Applicant’s media statements made in own time at the request
of and as a
part of a campaign being run by his union to secure change in law to enhance
safety or workers when at work a public
or political activity for purpose of s
210(1)(h) – media statements did not interfere with the performance of the
duties – Consideration of the ‘reverse onus’
in s 210(2) of the IR Act in circumstances where decision maker did
evidence – Presumption that detrimental action taken for proscribed reason
not displaced – Finding Respondent
victimised the Applicant – Relief
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
s 210(1)(a)
, (g), (h), and (j),
Industrial Relations and Other Legislation Amendment (Workplace
Protections) Act 2025
Fair Work Act 2009
Equal Opportunity Act 2010
Discrimination Act 1991
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
Anti-Discrimination Act 1988
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
Cases Cited:
Alam v National Australia Bank
[2021] FCAFC 178
(2021) 288 FCR 301
ALAEA v International
Aviation Services Assistance
[2011] FCAFC 333
(2011) 193 FCR 526
Australian Workers Union v
BlueScope Steel Limited
[2006] NSWIRComm 1029
Barclay v Lake George Mines Pty
(1949) 48 AR(NSW) 557
Basan v Commissioner of Police (No 3)
NSWIRComm 1028
Bradshaw v McEwans
[1950] HCA 56
(1951) ALR 1
Buchanan v Fire and Rescue
[2020] NSWIRComm 1019
Cairns Regional Council v Carey
[2012] QCATA
Certain Lloyd's Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
(2012) 248 CLR
Comcare v Banerji
[2019] HCA 23
(2019) 267 CLR 373
Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union v De Martin & Gasparini Pty Limited (No
[2017] FCA 1046
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v
[2023] FCAFC 163
300 FCR 171
CPS Management v Equal Opportunity Board
[1991] VicRp 50
[1991] 2 VR 107
Cummins South Pacific Pty Ltd v Keenan
[2020] FCAFC 204
(2020) 281 FCR
Davis v Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd
[1998] NSWIRComm 289
(1998) 81 IR
Dowling v Fairfax Media Publications
[2008] FCA 1470
(2008) 176 IR 346
Finance Sector
Union v ANZ Banking Group (2002) 120 FCR 170
Fire Brigade Employees Union
(NSW) v Fire and Rescue (NSW)
(2016) 259 IR 252
Fire Brigade Employees’
Union of NSW (o/b Challinor) v Fire and Rescue NSW
[2016] NSWIRComm
General Motors Holdings v Bowling
(1976) 51 ALJR 235
Henry v Leighton
Admin Services Pty Ltd
[2015] FCCA 1923
Industrial Relations Secretary on
behalf of the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development v Public
Service Association
and Professional Officers' Association Amalgamated Union of
New South Wales (Work Bans by Fisheries Officers)
[2024] NSWIRComm 1065
City of Perth
[1997] HCA 30
(1997) 191 CLR 1
Jaggi v Health Secretary
(in respect of Western Sydney Local Health District)
[2022] NSWIRComm
Janssen v SWSLHD
[2018] NSWIRComm 1022
KI v The Retail Store
Kidman v Casino Canberra Ltd
[2020] ACAT 1250
Kinninmont v
Ku-ring-gai Council
[2020] NSWIRComm 1064
LaRoche v President and Members of
the Equal Opportunity Board & Anor
(1991) EOC 92-361
Lattouf v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation (No.2)
(2025) 341 IR 105
Nestle Australia Ltd v The
Equal Opportunity Board
[1990] VicRp 71
[1990] VR 805
Nevil Abolish Child Support v Telstra
Corporation Limited
[1997] VADT 44
New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v
Minister Administering the Crown Lands Act ("Berrima Gaol")
Paula Lee v Ausgrid (No 6)
[2013] NSWIRComm 62
v Commissioner of Police
[2025] NSWSC 624
PSA v Teterycz
[1997] NSWIRComm
Public Service Association and Professional Officers’ Association
Amalgamated Union of New South Wales (obo Saraceno) v Commissioner
[2024] NSWIRComm 1001
Public Service Association and Professional
Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales v
Commissioner of Police
[2024] NSWIRComm 1062
Qantas Airways
Limited v The Transport Workers Union of Australia
[2022] FCAFC 71
(2022) 292 FCR 34
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2021] FCA 1587
[2021] 398 ALR 39
at Broken Hill Pty Ltd Steel Works, Newcastle
[1968] AR 48
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2015] FCA 27
Shand v Secretary, Department of Transport
[2018] NSWIRComm 1055
(2018) 282 IR
Simanjovska v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales
Ters v Health Secretary in respect of the South Western Sydney Local
Health District
[2023] NSWIRComm 1009
(2023) 323 IR 120
Twentieth Superpace Nominees Pty Ltd v TWU
[2006] NSWIRComm 218
(2006) 156 IR 323
V v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[1999] FCA 428
(1999) 92 FCR 355
Wright v Industrial Relations Secretary on behalf of the
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
[2025] NSWIRComm
Principal judgment
Applicant: Joseph Wright
Respondent: Industrial Relations Secretary, o/b
the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
Representation:
Mr L Saunders (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Mr B Trainor, PSA (Applicant)
Ms S Moten,
Landers & Rogers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00411191
Publication Restriction:
In September 2024 the PSA imposed work bans, restricting the capacity of
fisheries officers employed by the Respondent from undertaking
inspections of vessels involved in the commercial fishing industry. The work
bans resulted in the notification of an industrial
dispute to the Industrial
Relations Commission. In accordance with the requirements of the
Relations Act 1996
, that dispute was listed for a compulsory conference. The
Applicant, a delegate and executive member of a vocational branch of the
(known as the Fisheries Officer Vocational Branch, or FOVB), attended the
compulsory conference proceedings for the purpose of
providing instructions to
the PSA’s solicitor and counsel. The matter did not resolve in conference.
The Applicant subsequently
gave evidence in arbitration proceedings before the
Commission, in which the Department sought dispute orders.
The work bans were imposed on 11 September 2024. The dispute was notified
on 23 September 2024. The compulsory conference occurred
on 25 September 2024.
The PSA issued a media release in connection with the work bans and the
proceedings before the Commission,
containing a number of quotes from the
Assistant General Secretary. The Assistant General Secretary also participated
in a number
of interviews with journalists. At the request of the PSA and in his
own time, the Applicant, in his role as PSA delegate and elected
spokesperson
for the FOVB, also participated in some interviews with journalists. Media
articles containing commentary attributed
to the Applicant and/or the Assistant
General Secretary were published over 29 and 30 September 2024, and again on 8
October 2024.
On 8 October 2024, the Director of Fisheries Compliance (the head of the
area in which the Applicant worked), sent an email to the
Applicant couched in
terms reflecting a counselling and reprimand (albeit expressly noting
“This email does not serve as an
official warning”). The following
day, the Director issued an instruction denying the Applicant an opportunity to
a previously (albeit informally) arranged higher duties position for a
period of 3 weeks.
The Applicant alleged the Director had unlawfully victimised him because
of his status as an elected workplace delegate (contrary
to s 210(1)(a) of the
IR Act), because he had participated in proceedings in relation to an industrial
matter (contrary to s 210(1)(g)
of the IR Act), because he had engaged in a
public or political activity that did not interfere with the performance of his
(contrary to s 210(1)(h) of the IR Act), and/or because he had made
complaints about a workplace matter that he considered was a
risk to health or
unsafe (contrary to s 210(1)(j) of the IR Act).
The Respondent argued the actions towards the Applicant were not
sufficiently detrimental to the Applicant to ground a finding of
victimisation,
that the Applicant had not established the factual elements necessary for the
protected characteristic in s 210(1)(a),
(g), (h) or (j), and otherwise that the
detriments were imposed because the Director believed the Applicant had breached
the applicable
Code of Conduct and Ethics (and other policies) by making
comments in the media about the Department’s activities without approval.
The Commission found the detriments imposed on the Applicant by the
Director were sufficient to ground a finding of victimisation,
and that the
Applicant had established the factual elements for three of the four protected
characteristics relied upon: ss 210(1)(a),
(g), and (h) of the IR Act. In those
circumstances, the rebuttable presumption created by s 210(2) of the IR Act was
The Director did not give evidence in the proceedings (see
Wright v Industrial Relations Secretary on behalf of the department of Primary
Industries and Regional Development
[2025] NSWIRComm 1035).
Having regard to the whole of the evidence, the Respondent failed to
satisfy the Commission that the alleged protected characteristics
substantial and operative cause of the detriments imposed by the Respondent (via
the decisions and actions of the Director).
The Commission found the Respondent, via the decisions and actions of the
Director, had unlawfully victimised the Applicant in contravention
of s 210 and
ordered relief under s 213 of the IR Act.
PSA FCU CAMPAIGN
The First Alleged Detriment
The Second Alleged Detriment
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
SUBMISSIONS AND EVIDENCE
CONSIDERATION
Detriment – General Observations
Alleged Detriment – Denial of Acting Up
Opportunity
Consideration of the First Detriment
Alleged Detriment – 8 October 2024 email
Consideration of the Second Detriment
Protected Characteristics – General
Observations
Section 210(1)(a) – Member, Official, or other
elected representative of employees
Scope of s 210(1)(a).
Section 210(1)(h) – Public or Political
What are public or political activities?
Interference with the performance of the
employee’s duties
Section 210(1)(g) – Participate or Propose to
Participate in Proceedings
Section 210(1)(j) - Complaint about a risk to health
REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION
5 November 2024, Mr Joseph Wright
(the Applicant)
, a Supervising
Fisheries Officer
within the Fisheries Compliance Unit of the
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
(respectively, the
the Department)
, filed an application under
Industrial Relations Act
(the IR Act)
, seeking relief against
alleged victimisation in contravention of prohibitions contained in s 210 of the
resolution of these proceedings was somewhat protracted. The initial hearing, at
which the Commission received the evidence, took
place in early June 2025. At
the conclusion of those hearings the parties requested further Conciliation, and
were assisted in that
regard by Commissioner Muir. The matter did not resolve.
Submissions were heard on 4 August 2025, and post hearing the final materials
were received on 14 August 2025, following which decision was reserved.
the length of these reasons, there is very little factual dispute as to what
occurred. Broadly described, the central allegation
in these proceedings is that
the Respondent, through the decisions of its Director of Fisheries Compliance,
Dr Andrew Moriarty, unlawfully
victimised the Applicant for his role in a
campaign (involving industrial action in the form of work bans and media
commentary) being
advanced by the Public Service Association and Professional
Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales
, for legislative and policy reform to improve the safety of the
officers of the FCU when at work
(the PSA FCU Campaign)
detrimental treatment alleged to constitute unlawful victimisation
(1) The denial of an opportunity to act in a more senior leadership position
(attracting a higher rate of pay), for a period of approximately
commencing late November 2024; and
(2) A written warning from Dr Moriarty in an email dated 8 October 2024.
am satisfied that the Respondent did unlawfully victimise the Applicant as
alleged. For the reasons that follow, I am satisfied
the Applicant had a
characteristic protected by s 210 of the IR Act (indeed three such
characteristics), that each of the actions
relied upon are detrimental treatment
sufficient to ground a finding of victimisation, and I am not satisfied the
Respondent has
demonstrated that Dr Moriarty did not impose that detrimental
treatment for reasons (meaning substantial and operative reasons) that
the Applicant had one or more characteristics protected by s 210 of the IR Act.
Relief, albeit of a limited kind, is granted.
order to explain that conclusion it is necessary to briefly trace some of the
history of the PSA FCU Campaign and the Applicant’s
role within it.
PSA FCU CAMPAIGN
Department has, amongst other things, responsibility for administering laws
governing the fisheries resources of the State, specifically,
compliance with the
Fisheries Management Act
Estate Management Act
. The FCU is one of the means by which the
Department seeks to discharge that responsibility. In practical terms, the work
FCU includes hours spent on patrols, day and night, often in remote
areas, directed to the detection and prevention of illegal fishing
activity and
damage to fish habitats in the diverse rivers, lakes and marine environments of
all relevant times the Applicant has been a member and elected delegate of the
PSA, an organisation of employees registered under
the IR Act with coverage
entitling it to represent the industrial interests of Fisheries Officers of the
Department (including the
Applicant as an SFO). Since mid-2023 the Applicant has
also been an elected member of the PSA’s Central Council (a part of
PSA’s Executive).
March 2019 the Applicant has been a member of the PSA’s Fisheries
Officers’ Vocational Branch Executive
. The FOVB was
described by the Respondent’s Manager, Industrial Relations, Ms Ange
Royal, in this way: “
The FOVB is coordinated by the PSA and is a
representative body of Departmental employees and union delegates that advocates
interests, rights, and working conditions of Fisheries Officer’s
has been a long-running dispute between the PSA and the Department over the
safety of members of the FCU when undertaking certain
duties. The dispute was
the subject of correspondence and joint consultative committee meetings between
at least 2021 and 2024.
September 2024 that dispute resulted in the PSA imposing work bans, restricting
certain inspection activities of fisheries officers
outside of daylight hours.
That dispute, the work bans, and the proceedings before this Commission that
followed, are an important
part of the backdrop to this current application.
that time, the Applicant was not only a member and elected delegate of the PSA
(via the FOVB), but also the FOVB Acting Secretary
Chairperson.
mentioned, the work bans imposed in September 2024 were an escalation of a long
running dispute. The Applicant described the bans
arising from a view having
been formed by the PSA and the FOVB that the “consultative process [about
measures to address the
safety concerns] had run its course and failed”
and that it was “necessary to explore other avenues to address the
of the officers”.
The concerns that led to the bans were described by the Applicant in this
“The bans were imposed by the PSA and FOVBE as part of an industrial
campaign to pursue legislative reform to address safety
concerns of officers.
These concerns include:
a. Insufficient self-defence equipment, including a lack of OC
spray and stab proof vests.
b. Insufficient powers of monitoring and inspection and access
to information which result in officers having to remain at locations
increased risk of harm to establish lawful grounds to conduct even the most
basic of monitoring and inspection functions.
c. Inadequate capacity to safely and efficiently effect vehicle
stops associated with the exercise of powers under the FM Act to
stop, search
and inspect motor vehicles believed to be associated with fisheries offences.
d. Insufficient regulation of the commercial fishing industry,
resulting in the officers being unable to swiftly and properly identify
conduct risk assessments of fishers and their associated vessels and vehicles
(including a lack of a real time Vessel Monitoring
Systems, lack of fit and
proper person assessments for all commercial fishers and their crew, lack of any
identity verification for
commercial fishing licence holders and their crews,
lack of individual identifiers on vessels used for commercial fishing to enable
timely identification of those on board or the vessel’s associated fishing
bans commenced on 11 September 2024, following a direction published on the
PSA’s website the previous day, 10 September
I note the published
direction records the action followed an “overwhelming” vote by
members of the FOVB in support of
taking the action “to protect themselves
and their colleagues in the course of their work”. As the Applicant
it in his oral evidence, that publication reflected the position of
the PSA through the vote taken by its members within the
The publication concludes
with the observation “
This action has been brought on by members’
extreme frustration at the Government and Senior Management of their Department
that have continued to refuse to provide appropriate protective and self-defence
capabilities”.
23 September 2024, the Respondent (who is taken to be the employer of public
service employees in proceedings before this Commission:
Government Sector Employment Act
(the GSE Act)
), on behalf of
the Department, notified a dispute under s 130 of the IR Act to the Industrial
(the Dispute)
Dispute came before Commissioner McDonald for Conciliation on 25 September 2024.
I note the Manager Industrial Relations (Ange
Royal), the Director of Fisheries
Compliance (Dr Andrew Moriarty), and the Applicant were amongst the attendees
(the Applicant attending
The dispute was not resolved. The matter was programmed for an expedited
arbitration on 18 October 2024, with directions requiring
evidence and
submissions to be filed and served in the usual way in the interim.
it transpired there was a marginal delay arising from Dr Moriarty having
temporarily fallen ill,
the Department’s primary materials were filed by 3 October 2024, the
PSA’s on 11 October 2024, the Department’s
material in reply on 23
October 2024, and the hearing ultimately proceeded before Commissioner McDonald
on 28 October 2024.
fact the Applicant’s witness statement (part of the PSA’s case in
chief) was not served until 11 October 2024 is significant
in these proceedings.
the hearing of the Dispute the Department sought dispute orders essentially
directed to bringing the bans to an end. It relied
upon evidence of Dr Moriarty
and Ms Royal. The PSA resisted those orders, and relied upon a statement by a
David Potter, an FO, and
the Applicant (who was cross-examined).
4 November 2024, Commissioner McDonald published her decision refusing the
Department’s application for dispute orders, and
otherwise making a
Recommendation with a view to resolving the
I understand the work
bans remain in effect to this
dispute was described by the Commissioner (at [5]) in this way:
“...the PSA clarified (to the extent it had not been made plain earlier)
that the work bans had been implemented due to work
health and safety concerns
and were directed toward obtaining four outcomes to ameliorate those concerns,
(a) that every vessel in the NSW commercial fishing fleet be fitted with a
Vessel Monitoring System (VMS);
(b) all crew members of commercial fishing vessels should be subject to a
‘fit and proper person’ test;
(c) that the identity of all crew members of commercial fishing vessels be
notified to the Department and the identity of commercial
fishing licence
holders be verified as part of the licensing process; and
(d) that FOs be authorised to carry oleoresin capsicum spray (OC Spray) as a
defensive tool.”
four matters that were raised by the PSA in the dispute were, as the PSA itself
acknowledged in those proceedings “largely
outside of the control of the
Department, as they require legislative
The bans were
said to be “in a sense, symbolic: their intent is to draw public attention
to the underlying safety issues and
the legislative reform the PSA contends are
appropriate.”
Department had no control over some of the matters sought by the PSA as they
would require legislative reform was not in
dispute. In fact, one of the matters
relied upon by the Respondent as a matter of public interest in favour of making
the dispute
orders sought in those proceedings was the fact the Respondent had
no ability to give the PSA what it was
note Commissioner McDonald set out at some length evidence going to the
operation of the Fisheries Joint Consultative Committee
and Work Health and
Safety Concerns (at [77] – [117]), including the conduct of what was
referred to as a CERT Review and the
publication of a report of that review in
April 2022 containing 12 recommendations “relating to safety and
operational improvements”.
The Department had supported (or supported in
principle) all 12 of those recommendations (at [78] – [80]).
of Commissioner McDonald’s account of the circumstances surrounding the
bans indicated that either the Department, or the
government more generally, had
expressly opposed the reforms sought by the PSA save that the Commissioner of
had refused the request
to give FCU officers access to OC Spray - something about which the PSA was
apparently first advised on 12
September 2024 at a meeting following the
announcement of the PSA bans: [105]. In fact, the Commissioner’s account
of the history
included an observation (at [95]), referring to the seventh
recommendation of the CERT Review, to the effect that that recommendation
“one of four recommendations requiring legislative amendment”, each
of which had the support of the Department, and
additionally that the Department
had supported legislative change to require commercial fishing licence holders
to pass a ‘fit
and proper person’ test which had progressed to the
point of regulatory drafting: at [102] – [103].
the proceedings before me the Applicant gave evidence and otherwise relied upon
some documentary material. The Respondent relied
upon two witness statements and
tendered a number of documents. There is nothing in the written or oral evidence
to support the view
that the Department (or the Government more generally for
that matter) had ever expressly rejected any of the reforms being sought
PSA on behalf of its FOVB membership. The decision of the Commissioner of Police
to refuse a request for permission to carry
prohibited weapons (OC spray) is not
a decision of the government or the Department.
cross-examination, the Applicant repeatedly resisted the idea that the position
being advocated by the PSA for reform (legislative
and otherwise) directed to
improving the workplace safety of members of the FCU was in
“conflict” with the position of
either the government or the
. The highest the
evidence got is what I consider to be something of a throwaway line at the
conclusion of the notice of the bans
published by the PSA on 10 September 2024
in which it was said (my emphasis) “This action has been brought on by
extreme frustration at the Government and Senior Management of
their Department that have continued to refuse to provide appropriate
and self-defence
capabilities”.
Applicant was taken to this passage in cross-examination. It was his evidence
that neither the Respondent nor the government more
generally, had actually
communicated a “refusal” to adopt the proposals to improve workplace
safety being advocated by
As for the notice published
10 September 2024, he said the FOVB had contributed to the drafting of the PSA
communication issued on
10 September 2024, but they hadn’t drafted
The Applicant would not have
used the word “refuse” to describe the position that had been
communicated to the FOVB.
notice could hardly be considered a proper foundation for a finding that either
the Department or the government or both held
a policy position that the reforms
being advocated by the PSA should not be implemented and/or would not be
implemented, so as to
create a potential conflict of interest (a matter raised
by the Respondent and addressed below).
answer to questions by me to ensure the evidence on this point was clear, the
Applicant gave unchallenged evidence that neither
the government or the
Department had communicated a refusal to embrace the legislative and other
reforms being advocated by the PSA
to improve the safety of the working
environment for its members in the
note in cross-examination the Applicant gave this
“Q. And would you agree with me that until the status quo
changes the government policy of the day is whatever the legislative
at that particular point in time?
A. Yes, of course.
Q. And sir, what you were seeking to do was to change
government policy by changing the legislation?
A. Ultimately I suppose, yes, because these safety mechanisms
we were chasing required legislative amendments.”
Applicant may accept the underlined proposition, but I do not. In this context,
change in policy positions precede legislative
reform. If legislation is amended
during a governmental term, one can reasonably infer (if necessary, because
there would inevitably
be direct evidence that could be led) that the
legislative reforms reflect current government policy. But there are any number
reasons why a policy position of government (the Executive) may not be
reflected in legislation (created by the Legislature) at any
given point in
time. Legislation reflects the current state of the law. I am not prepared to
infer that the government holds a particular
policy position from the mere fact
that legislation stands in a particular form at a particular time, particularly
where it was entirely
within the hands of the Respondent to lead evidence of
what the policy position of the government on the legislative reform proposed
the PSA in fact is.
Respondent called evidence in these proceedings from:
(1) Ange Royal, Manager Industrial Relations; and
(2) Ms Lee Burdett-Symons, the Program Leader North East.
witness (in their written or oral evidence) state that either the Department or
the Government has communicated, in any form
or forum or at any time, that
either the Department or the Government rejected any of the proposals being
sought by the PSA through
its campaign. There is complete silence in the
evidence as to what the government’s policy position is with respect to
reforms being sought by the PSA. There is no evidence of a
Government policy in not providing fisheries officers with protective
equipment ... and conferring greater powers to conduct surveillance,
investigation and perform vehicle registration and criminal record checks”
(cf RSUB [96]). I am not prepared to infer from the mere absence of
legislative amendment to date that the government had
decided not
to pursue the proposals for reform advocated by the PSA in the PSA FCU Campaign
(which does not require me to accept
the government had made a positive decision
that something should not be given or done – it may be the government was
view its legislative agenda was such that those concerns were of a lesser
priority for the present), or the further step, had made
a positive decision
that the members of the FCU
have those powers.
the Applicant’s evidence included a letter from Mr Sean Sloan, Deputy
Secretary, Fisheries and Forestry, dated 18
September 2024 addressed to Mr Shane
Howes, Industrial Officer of the PSA, in relation to the PSA FCU Campaign in
which it was said,
amongst other things, when describing the actions taken by
the Department to improve the workplace (including safety) of the FCU,
(1) Undertaken “a comprehensive and independent Fisheries Officer Safety
Review – conducted in May 2022 with all recommendations
accepted and
(2) “Approval by the Minister for Agriculture to draft a broader Fit and
Proper Person regime for inclusion in the Fisheries
Management (General)
Regulations”
(3) Established a “data access arrangement with the Australian Maritime
Safety Authority...to access vessel information. A
trial of this arrangement has
recently been conducted and was very effective. Wider ranging arrangements will
be implemented over
the coming months”; and
(4) “Contrary to the statement in your recent correspondence, I do support
a strategic approach to review and modernise aspects
of fisheries officer powers
Fisheries Management Act
, to address modern fisheries
management and compliance needs...”
is sufficient for these proceedings, but I would add, to the extent I am able to
inform myself about the circumstances of the
PSA FCU Campaign and the Dispute
from the detailed reasons of Commissioner McDonald and the passages of the
evidence for the Respondent
extracted in the Commissioner’s decision in
those proceedings, there is nothing that suggested there was active opposition
at the time of the PSA’s campaign. One cannot make findings of fact based
on the published reasons of another member of this
Commission, but as I have
already indicated, there is no evidence of active opposition from the Government
or a decision to reject
any of those proposals in this case, and that is enough
for present purposes.
is clear on the whole of the evidence that the work bans imposed by the PSA and
the media campaign that went with them, were but
a part of the PSA FCU Campaign
- a broad campaign adopted by the PSA in support of its members in the FOVB, to
persuade the government
to enact or otherwise implement the legislative and
other reforms it saw necessary to provide a safe system of work for its FOVB
membership. Indeed, one of the submissions advanced by Counsel for the PSA in
the Dispute, extracted by Commissioner McDonald in
her decision (at [96]),
expressly acknowledged as much:
“Legislative and regulatory change can happen within government with
effort, including effort by the senior leadership of this
department. The
work bans are directed at encouraging that effort through, among other things,
attracting [media attention], which
they have done.”
is against that backdrop that I come to the immediate background to the conduct
of the Applicant and Respondent relevant to these
proceedings.
the context of that campaign, the FOVB membership had apparently agreed that
“as part of the industrial campaign” one
of their delegates should
be the contact person for any media
The Applicant, as a
delegate and the Acting Secretary of the FOVB at the time, was selected and
agreed to undertake that role.
Applicant said that between about 22 September 2024 and 2 October 2024, a number
of media outlets (including the ABC, the Daily
Telegraph, news.com.au and a few
regional newspapers) were referred by the PSA’s media unit to the
Applicant so, as he described
it “I could talk to them as a union delegate
membership”.
The Applicant
did not seek out any media outlets independently of the PSA media unit
Applicant ensured the media interviews would not impact with his capacity to do
his job. As he said:
“On each occasion, I ensured that the interview occurred at a time outside
of my hours of work or during a lunch break. I did
so, as I was mindful that in
speaking to the media I was not acting in my capacity as an employee of the
State but as a union official.
I also did not want my duties as a union official to interfere with my duties as
a fisheries officer. I am very proud of the work
I perform as a fisheries
officer and I believe that fisheries officers provide an important service the
people of NSW.”
Applicant said that he was conscious to limit his comments to the safety
concerns of the FOVB membership, and not to unnecessarily
criticise the
Minister, the Department or senior departmental
As he described it,
he did not think being unnecessarily critical was
“productive”.
view, that evidence is consistent with the comments attributed to him published
in subsequent media articles (referred to below).
Additionally,
the Applicant said he was at pains to always emphasise he was speaking as a
representative of the
“...[I]n respect of each interview, I made it as clear as I possibly could
to the journalist that I was talking to them as
organised via the PSA and as a
PSA delegate and a member of the executive of the FOVB and not as a Department
spokesperson. This
was generally the first thing that I discussed with the
journalist. I also attempted, during the interviews, to reference
wherever I could to make it clear that I was speaking on
behalf of the PSA.”
accept that evidence. It is reflected in a number of the extracts from the
published media reports referred to below.
29 September 2024, it would appear at about 4:57am, the national work reporter
for the ABC published an online article entitled
“NSW fisheries officers
demand stab-proof vests and capsicum spray in order to do their job
safely”. The version of the
story in evidence, having been printed from a
story that appeared online, is reasonably lengthy. It extends for several
printed pages
and includes a number of photographs, at least one of which shows
the Applicant in what I understand to be his uniform with the caption
“Fisheries Officer Joe Wright says more needs to be done to protect
officers”. The story “In Short” is described
“Fisheries officers are calling for the right to use capsicum spray and
wear stab-proof vests after run-ins with illegal poachers
and criminal gangs.
They are also refusing to carry out night inspections of trawlers without police
assistance.”
as the story refers to the Applicant (underlined in the extract below), it
states as follows:
“Supervising fisheries officer Joe Wright knows too well the dangers of
confronting a fisherman suspected of an illegal catch.
He says situations can quickly turn hostile.
"People have driven cars at me, they become highly aggressive," he said.
Mr Wright is one of dozens of fisheries officers in New South Wales who have
been threatened with assault while on the job, protecting
oceans, rivers and
These officers are now demanding stab-proof vests and capsicum spray, amid fears
workers are at risk of being hurt or even killed.
The union representing the officers says they are unsafe and "operationally
ineffective" when coming face-to-face with poachers and
organised criminals.
[an image of a fishing trawler then appears, with the caption “Fisheries
officers can inspect trawlers to ensure the fish catch
is lawful”]
In March, a fisheries officer at Iluka on the NSW north coast was threatened
with a timber club and pursued through town in his car
after carrying out covert
surveillance at night.
The officer had been watching a trawler suspected of illegal fishing.
The accused is before court facing 13 criminal charges including resisting and
obstructing a fisheries officer.
Mr Wright says many officers don't feel safe doing their job.
"The fact that we have not had a fisheries officer in New South Wales killed in
recent memory as a result of being out there doing
their job, is testament to
the calibre of the people that are actually doing the job," he said.
[an image of a large number of fish caught in a hauling net is then depicted]
The high value of premium seafood has added to the lure of illegal activity.
"All you need is a dive suit and a device to remove the abalone," Mr Wright
"In a couple of hours, you can literally take hundreds and hundreds of
"There is a very valuable market for these species."
[an image of a large volume of abalone is then found, with a caption identifying
it as having been supplied by “NSW Fisheries”]
Assaults, gun shots and threats to kill
Over the past decade, more than a dozen officers have been threatened with being
shot, stabbed or faced significant threats of violence,
according to the Public
Service Association.
"Our counterparts in Victoria are equipped with stab-proof vests and capsicum
spray, we're just asking for the same equipment," Mr
Wright said.
[an image of the Applicant in uniform with his arms crossed, with the caption
“Fisheries Officer Joe Wright says more needs
to be done to protect
NSW fisheries officers have authority to use body-worn cameras, but Mr Wright
said they cannot activate them on private property
without permission from the
person they suspect of wrongdoing.
New laws giving them basic search rights, like those held by inspectors in
Queensland and Victoria, are also being demanded along
with GPS monitoring for
commercial fishing vessels.
Fisheries officers who are members of the Public Service Association of NSW
(PSA) have refused to carry out night inspections of
trawlers without police
assistance as of September.
Inspections of all inland commercial fishing operations outside daylight hours
without police have also been halted.
The NSW Department of Primary Industries says it does "not agree with the PSA
assertion that the department requires fisheries officers
to conduct work in an
unsafe environment."
part, this article (including much of the extract above that is not underlined)
reflects commentary in a media release that the
PSA would release online to the
world at 6:14am that morning (referred to below). I gather it was provided to
the ABC, given the
PSA organised the contact with the Applicant.
appreciate the depiction of a public servant in a uniform adjacent to comments
may, in the right circumstance, lead a reasonable
reader to be confused as to
whether the comments of the individual are comments of the agency. That is not
one of the photographs in the story, the Applicant is identified as
“Acting chair of the PSA Fisheries Officers Vocational
Branch Joe Wright
(pictured),” and is attributed with the comment he “believes
front-line work protecting oceans, rivers
and estuaries cannot be safely carried
out unless changes are made.” In addition to the comment attributed to the
in the final paragraph of the extract above, the story otherwise
clearly records commentary attributed to the Deputy Secretary of
the Fishers and
Forestry Department, and there are clearly recorded comments of the Abalone
Association NSW co-chair. Seen in context,
no reasonable reader could mistake
the commentary attributed to the Applicant, limited as it was, as reflecting the
views of the
Department.
ABC Online article is chronologically the first media article/story in the
evidence. Next in time appears to have been the PSA
media release mentioned
above, published online by the PSA at 6.14am that morning, 29 September 2024
(the PSA Media Release)
. That press release, entitled “Fisheries
Officers take industrial action over safety
as one might
expect, described the Dispute and what had transpired at the Commission
proceedings the previous week:
“Fisheries Officers across NSW have begun industrial action over safety
concerns after a number of violent incidents where
they were shot at, threatened
with knives and baseball bats and had cars driven at them.
The Officers are demanding they're issued with protective equipment like
stab-proof vests and capsicum spray.
Fisheries Officers are now avoiding certain areas and individuals at the very
time fears have emerged that crooks, poachers and organised
criminals like
outlaw bikie gangs have taken over the state's rivers, oceans and estuaries and
are now plundering valuable species
like abalone and rock lobster.
Without direct Police assistance on operations the Officers are now refusing to
complete inspections of commercial trawlers at nighttime.
The Department of Primary Industries, which employs Fisheries Officers,
attempted to force them back into dangerous night work earlier
this week by
applying to the NSW Industrial Relations Commission but the Commission refused
to make such an order.
The Officers also want the same powers as Fisheries Officers in other states to
check boat and car registrations, conduct surveillance,
investigations, and real time GPS tracking of the entire commercial fishing
They also want to see the introduction of a 'fit and proper person' test for
commercial fishing licence holders and their crew within
six months.”
is common with press releases of this kind, what follows is a series of quotes
that the author of the release presumably thinks
may serve their ends if picked
up and reproduced by the general media. In this case, quotes such as:
"Fisheries Officers are being shot at, run down, having fishing knives pulled on
them, someone's going to get killed," said Mr Wright.
“Mr Wright” here quoted is, however, not the Applicant. All the
quotes in the PSA Media Release are attributed to
Mr Troy Wright, the Assistant
General Secretary of the PSA. No reference is made to any comment from any
delegate at all, and certainly
not the Applicant in the PSA Media Release. In
addition to the above, the quotes attributed to the Assistant General Secretary
"Fisheries Officers have no way of knowing if a boat or car we inspect is going
to be filled with bikies from outlaw motorcycle gangs,
they're blind compared to
Fisheries Officers in other states.”
"In other states' Fisheries Officers have access to car and boat licence records
like Police, they can find out if people are violent
offenders and avoid
dangerous situations, they can see if someone has a history of crimes against
the environment - in NSW we can't
"It's harder to get a RSA certificate to pull schooners at the local pub than it
is to get a commercial fishing licence, you can
get one and start taking
thousands of kilos of fish by filling out an online form with no 100 points of
ID, with no background checks.”
"In Victorian or Queensland to be a commercial fisher you need to pass a fit and
proper person test, so if you have a prior history
of crimes against the
environment, or violent crimes you won't get a licence.”
"It's an absolute joke, to flick a line in at the local wharf mums and dads have
to pay for a licence and have it with them, but
to run a commercial fishing
operation you can have 15 people all pulling out hundreds of fish who have zilch
paperwork.”
"Fisheries Officers have no powers of investigation, they can't even use
binoculars or a camera, in other states they can apply to
a magistrate to put a
tracking device on a boat, here can't do that, why?”
"We know drug traffickers have infiltrated the commercial industry, miles off
the coast in the dead of night we need to board boats,
yet unlike other states
we don't have a GPS vessel monitoring system for our commercial fishing fleet,
one day Fisheries Officers
will board a boat and they'll get killed.”
"This is why the NSW fishing fleet is so appealing to drug traffickers to pick
up cocaine shipments off the continental shelf.”
"In 2020 a fishing trawler called
was caught carrying 1.8
tonnes or $850 million worth of cocaine it had picked up from a larger ship in
international waters, if Fisheries
Officers had boarded this boat they might
have been killed.”
"Fisheries Officers can't even run a rego check on a boat they physically pull
up alongside.”
"In Queensland they track every boat via GPS, so they know where each boat is,
who's the skipper and what they're doing.”
"It's not just miles off the coast, Fisheries Officers are intercepting poachers
with thousands of dollars worth of abalone and rock
lobster at all hours of the
night, and these crooks won't hesitate to hurt them if it means avoiding jail
"Fisheries Officers need more defensive protective equipment, stab proof vests,
capsicum spray so if someone comes at them with a
fishing knife they can put
some distance between them and if they close that distance they can spray them
so they can escape.”
"Fisheries Officers often can't call Police for backup as they are tracking
poachers in the dead of night on remote beaches or miles
offshore on trawlers,
I'm telling you someone is going to get killed.”
"There's big money in poaching, every abalone is a $50 note, and all you need is
a wetsuit and a knife and you can lever a couple
of 100 off the rocks in a few
hours, it's big money.”
"If you care about our state's fish stocks, especially of endangered species
like abalone and rock lobster, you need to hear this
distress call from
Fisheries Officer's because if they're ignored you might wake up to the news one
day soon that these species are
extinct," said Mr Wright.
Assistant General Secretary was, as the Applicant described it, aware of the
FOVB’s industrial concerns through discussions
with the FOVB Executive (of
which the Applicant was a part), and to the Applicant’s knowledge, was
authorised by the general
secretary of the PSA to speak on behalf of the
is clear that the PSA Media Release was picked up by a number of media outlets
and used in stories published on 29 and 30 September
2024. In some of those
articles, reference is made to comments made by the Applicant, but they are of a
somewhat different and often
less pointed character than those of the Assistant
General Secretary, frequently in the form of an anecdote.
reasons that will become apparent, whilst all of the media articles and radio
broadcasts in evidence are important (and I infer
were considered by Dr Moriarty
at some point), I consider it to be of importance to identify those media
articles (including radio
broadcasts) that were published or broadcast before
6:30am on Monday, 30 September 2025 (or at the least prior to a meeting of the
Senior Leadership Team of the FCU held at approximately 9am that day). On the
evidence, that is only:
(1) The ABC Online article extracted above, entitled NSW Fisheries officers
demand stab-proof vests and capsicum spray in order to
do their job
(2) The PSA Media Release published at 6.14am, 29 September
extracted above.
(3) A Mirage News article published at 6:17am 29 September
That article makes no
reference to the Applicant. The only quotes are from the PSA Media Release and
are correctly attributed to
Troy Wright, Assistant General Secretary of the PSA.
(4) A Sunday Telegraph article published on 29 September
described below.
(5) An Adelaide News article published 29 September
described below.
(6) A Daily Liberal article, published (and updated) online on 29 September
. The Daily Liberal article
makes no reference to the Applicant. The only person quoted in the article is
the Assistant General Secretary,
obviously drawn from the PSA Media Release.
(7) The brief radio comments on the morning of 29 September
the Sunday Telegraph article published on 29 September 2024, the Applicant
appears in uniform in an image next to the heading “Fish
guardians under
attack”. He was attributed with these comments:
“Fisheries officer, and PSA delegate, Joe Wright and his colleague once
had a gun aimed at them when they were sitting in wait
beside illegal fishing
gear beside NSW a river after a tip-off from a member of the public.”
"We can't even use binoculars or cameras without the adjoining landowners
permission," Mr Wright said.
"So we have to sit close to the illegal gear and wait for whoever owns it or is
using it to return.”
"So here we were well outside mobile phone service waiting when the landowner
comes running down to us, and points a longarm rifle
at our heads. In that
moment, we were sitting ducks."
Mr Wright said the union has raised concerns with the department and NSW
Agriculture Minister Tara Moriarty around what they see
as a deterioration in
regulations, and the effect it has on staff.
"In other states, fisheries officers have access to car and boat licence records
like police; they can find out if people are violent
offenders and avoid
dangerous situations, they can see if someone has a history of crimes against
the environment - in NSW we can't
do that," he said.
a number of other quotes in that article attributed to Troy Wright, the
Assistant General Secretary (and are clearly from the
PSA Media Release).
Adelaide News article published online on 29 September 2024, bares the title
“’Someone’s going to get killed’:
NSW Fisheries officers
strike over unsafe
conditions”.
The article
“It's this very scenario that victim fisheries officer, and PSA delegate
Joe Wright fears.
He and his colleague once had a gun aimed at them when they were sitting in wait
beside illegal fishing gear on the shoreline of
a river after a tip-off from a
member of the public.
"We can't even use binoculars or cameras without the adjoining landowners
permission - and often they're the ones carrying out the
illegal activity." Mr
Wright said.
“So we have to sit close to the illegal gear and wait for whoever owns it
or is using it to return.
So here we were • well outside mobile phone service - waiting when the
landowner comes running down to us, and points a longarm
rifle at our heads.
We hightailed it out or there - and the man was eventually dealt with by
authorities – but in that moment, we were sitting
Mr Wright said the union has raised concerns with the department and NSW
Agriculture Minister Tara Moriarty around what they see
as a deterioration in
regulations, and the effect it has had on staff”
article continues with (amongst other comments) a number of the quotable quotes
from the PSA Media Release, correctly attributed
to Troy Wright, Assistant
General Secretary.
only quote attributed to the Applicant in a radio broadcast prior to the morning
of 30 September 2024, appears to be ABC radio
comments on 29 September 2024 at
. Having described,
amongst other things, the “union claim before the Industrial Relations
Commission”, the presenter
said: “Supervising fisheries officer Joe
Wright says many feel ill
equipped”, and appears to contain a brief
comment from the Applicant:
“We're talking about officers just trying to preserve their lives. Our
counterparts in Victoria are equipped with stab proof
vests and capsicum spray.
That is all
we're asking for.”
appear to be the
comments attributed to the Applicant in any of that
media prior to the morning of Monday, 30 September 2024.
of the Applicant’s comments up to this time (or indeed thereafter) could
be reasonably characterised as an “attack
on Dept and Minister”,
although that view could be reasonably expressed of some of the comments made by
the Assistant General
Secretary. That is of significance in light of evidence of
what transpired during an ad-hoc meeting of the Senior Leadership Team
called at short notice on the morning of 30 September 2024, referred to
the evidence there are other media articles or broadcasts attributing comments
to the Applicant that happen a little later in time.
There is an additional
article making brief reference to the Applicant published in the Newcastle
Herald on 30 September 2024 entitled
“Fisheries officers in night
in which the
following were attributed to the Applicant:
“A UNION delegate for NSW Fisheries officers has warned it's "only a
matter of time before someone gets seriously injured or
even worse" unless the
state government implements a list of safety reforms.”
is made to the industrial action being taken by fisheries officers and their
demands, and the story continued:
“The North Coast delegate for the NSW Fisheries Public Service
Association, Joe Wright, spent many years working in Port Stephens
where illegal
rock lobster fishing is a major issue. He said fisheries officers in Port
Stephens and Newcastle have also seen the
rise of organised crime in the
commercial fishing industry.
It's a testament to the officers who have been out there doing the role for
decades that nobody has been killed," Mr Wright said.
"It shows you the calibre
of the people that they've been streetwise enough to make it through to date.
But we're running on luck."
much of the rest of the article records comments from the Assistant General
Secretary (largely reflecting the PSA Media Release),
correctly attributed to
are additional comments attributed to the Applicant in transcripts of radio
broadcasts in evidence, including:
(1) A live radio interview with the Applicant on ABC Illawarra Breakfast radio
on Monday, 30 September 2024 at
. In it the Applicant
referred to the fact the areas in which fisheries compliance officers are
required to work can be remote, that
it is not practical to rely on support from
other law enforcement such as police in such remote areas, and that the valuable
present (such as in the NSW South Coast marine areas) mean fisheries law
enforcement are often dealing with “the more serious
end of illegal
fishing crime [and consequently] an increased prevalence of aggressive, hostile
and very challenging circumstances”.
The “client base” the fisheries officers come to deal with, for
example in dealing with abalone or rock lobster situations,
were described as
“hugely hostile” and officers were “dealing with all manner of
verbal abuse but also threats
of physical violence and basically threats, the
nature of which mean that our members, our officers simply just have to focus on
getting themselves out of those situations above enforcing the provisions of the
relevant legislation”. Fisheries officers
were “unable to hold that
thin green line”. He observed “Their job is becoming far too
dangerous and they need
improvements to their self-defence capability, and
drastic improvements to legislation to even make it contemporary and in line
what is available to Fisheries Officers in other jurisdictions such as
places like Victoria and Western Australia that lead the way
space”. Refence was made to the close proximity of the waters of the
Illawarra and Shoalhaven area to the biggest black
markets for fish, in Sydney,
making those areas particularly vulnerable to illegal fishing crime.
Reference was made to a trial of OC spray and its purported success, with the
spray acting as an effective deterrent, the Applicant
saying (amongst other
“And that's why the Union, that's why we are pushing so hard for those
in New South Wales.
The fact is that the capsicum spray and stab proof vest are available to our
colleagues in Victoria right down
to the point that our colleagues in Victoria
even have permits to carry that gear into New South Wales in the course of their
duties yet in New South Wales, officers don't have access to it. They
can't get approval to carry that for ourselves in New South
Wales and it's kind
of ridiculous”.
That interview appears to have been picked up by other ABC radio outlets.
(2) On 30 September 2024, 7:30am ABC Riverina
and ABC South East NSW
“Good morning Isla Evans with ABC South East and Riverina News. A New
South Wales fisheries
officer says those patrolling the far south coast
are operating in the state's most difficult area. Union members are demanding
proof vests and capsicum spray amid fears workers are at risk of being hurt
or killed while policing illegal fishing
Supervising Fisheries
officer Joe Wright says 20 officers patrol from the lllawarra down to the
Victorian border. He says valuable species are found in
the region's waters,
which has led to an increase in illegal fishing
operations.
They're dealing with the most high value species, like rock lobster and
That's kind of a tinderbox for, you know, problems if you bring
all of that together. Our South Coast members strive amongst all the
odds to try
to hold a thin green line on serious organised crime.”
(3) On 30 September 2024, 7:30am ABC Illawarra
“ABC lllawarra News. Good morning. I'm Nick McLaren. Union members from
New South Wales Fisheries say their refusal to conduct
night inspections of
trawlers without police assistance should not impact seafood production. It's
part of calls for the night for
the right to use capsicum spray and wear stab
proof vests after run ins with illegal poachers and criminal gangs. Supervising
officer Joe Wright says the abalone fishery south of Jervis Bay is a
known hotspot for threatening behaviour.
So people running from officers throwing their catch, hiding their catch, being
generally difficult to deal with in terms of providing
personal particulars and
all of those sorts of things, and it makes the role really challenging.”
than the above, I can see no reference to the Applicant in any of the evidence
of published media prior to 8 October 2024.
comments by Mr Troy Wright in the PSA Media Release (or otherwise from
interviews done with him) were much more widely broadcast.
addition to the above, comments from the PSA Media Release (or otherwise made by
the Assistant General Secretary) can be found
published in an article published
on 30 September 2024 in the Illawarra Mercury entitled “Fisheries officers
strike over safety
an online article on Sunraysia
, and Newscorp Digital
published 30 September
2024. The Applicant is not referred to in any of it.
addition to the above, the Assistant General Secretary’s quotes appear to
have been picked up in Radio broadcasts on 29 and
30 September 2024 including by
10:19am on 30 September 2024, the Assistant General Secretary did an interview
on the well known Ray Hadley Morning Show on 2GB
in which the Applicant did
not appear to participate.
4:08pm on 30 September 2024,
Assistant General Secretary did an interview with ABC Drive in which the
Applicant did not appear to participate.
is very clear that the vast majority of the media reporting up to 30 September
2024 (referred to in a Media Report Dr Moriarty
received at 9:52am on 30
September 2024, and in an email from Lyndall Hilder at 9:55pm on 30 September
2024, referred to below) emanated
from the quotable quotes attributed to Troy
Wight, Assistant General Secretary in the PSA Media Release (or interviews with
attributed to the Applicant.
is also clear, in my view, that nothing attributed to the Applicant in any of
the media reporting could reasonably be characterised
as an “attack”
on the Department or the Minister or even the government more generally. All of
the Applicant’s
statements to the media are directed to raising a concern
to say, the environment in which they work (often remote), the valuable fish
assets that are being targeted by criminal fishing
activity, and the criminal
organisations that are often behind it, the hostile ‘clientele’ that
they come to deal with
(occasionally using personal anecdotes of situations he
has found himself in), the PSA bans and the reason for the bans being imposed,
and the health and safety improvements they were seeking (often compared to what
is available by interstate counterparts).
of it appears confidential (and there is no evidence any of it was considered
confidential). Much of it was, in substance, canvassed
in evidence before
Commissioner McDonald and extracted in her reasons. I understand no
non-disclosure orders were sought (let alone
made) under s 164A of the IR Act in
those proceedings.
is with that background that I come to the conduct of the Respondent relied upon
as a detriment to ground the findings of victimisation
and relief sought by the
The First Alleged Detriment
Applicant’s immediate supervisor, Ms Lee Burdett-Symons, occupied a
position of Program Leader, North East. The duties associated
with that position
included, amongst other things, leading and managing the Fisheries Compliance
Unit Far North Coast and North Coast
Burdett-Symons was due to take a period of leave for some six weeks in late
October to early December 2024. Preparations for that
period of leave, including
securing someone to act in her stead whilst away, were being made at around the
time of the PSA bans.
The relevant workplace policy for acting up opportunities
contemplated an expression of interest (EOI) process for acting opportunities
excess of 4 weeks. I note that policy requiring an EOI for acting opportunities
in excess of 4 weeks was only introduced in July
Prior to that, Ms
Burdett-Symons would simply ask individuals to act in her
required by that new policy, an EOI process was conducted in late August,
closing on 13 September 2024. No-one expressed an interest.
That absence of
response was apparently not unusual, in part because of the “minimal
financial incentive” to take on
the additional responsibilities of the
role compared to what is earned (and required of) an
As the Applicant described
it, he did not apply to the EOI because he is already very busy with his work
(“I often find that
I cannot physically get to everything. So, that often
dictates what I can put my hand up
“made a conscious decision not apply because I was not able to keep up
with everything else that I was doing within my actual
and secondly the
role is challenging and the remuneration for taking on that more challenging
role is not large.
with her past practice and to ensure the role wasn’t left vacant during
her absence, having received no response
to the EOI Ms Burdett-Symons
“proactively (and without first speaking to the Director of Fisheries
Compliance) decided to encourage”
the Applicant and another SFO, Mr Ben
Audet, to share the acting opportunity as they had done in the
request was made via an email dated 25 September 2024 from Ms Burdett-Symons to
Mr Audet, the Applicant and copied to a Ms Christine
Rae. That email proposed
dates for the shared acting up arrangement, drafted to accommodate leave
arrangements that the Applicant
and Mr Audet had already arranged, essentially
splitting the six week period in two with the Applicant taking the second block
18 November to 5 December 2024). Ms Rae joined the email chain about 7
minutes later by advising she would enter the relevant allowance
payable to the
Applicant and Mr Audet into the relevant payroll system “to ensure you are
paid at the correct payscale”
once they confirmed Ms Burdett-Symons’
request. A few hours later, again on 25 September 2024, the Applicant confirmed
“try to act in the Boss’ position for the second group of
dates”, a communication Ms Burdett-Symons understood
as the Applicant
confirming his acceptance of her
cross-examination, having said he hadn’t wanted to volunteer to act up for
the full 6-week block of Ms Burdett-Symons’
leave because it was
“six weeks of hard time”, the Applicant gave the following evidence
“Q. And so doing the quote/unquote “hard time”, wasn’t
what you wanted to do but you were prepared to accept
it as an arrangement?
A. Well, we do it because it’s an absolutely critical position to our
zone’s functioning and we do it because we care
able to do things.
Q. And it’s not because of the money?
A. I mean, you wouldn’t do it if you were getting paid less money but the
main reason for doing it is because of that experience
you get out of dealing
with - going from 16 staff to almost 50 staff.
Q. But that wasn’t something you were putting up your hand to do, it was
something you would accept that it would be useful
A. Well, it’s good for our development and it is something - I have a very
good rapport with my line manager and I want to
- and my team and I want to - I
see it as a manner in which I can help the team and keep people, support people
out there doing what
they’re employed to do.”
arrangement made by Ms Burdett-Symons was, as she described it in her
supplementary statement, “consistent with arrangements
in the past, where
[the Applicant] and Mr Audet have received approval to act in my role while I
have been on leave”
was usually left to manage the process of having someone act up in her
In fact, her evidence
went further:
“Q. Have you ever had a situation, apart from the circumstance that
we’re talking about in these proceedings, where the
Director of Fisheries
Compliance overrode your decision?
A. No, not that I’m aware of, no.”
process then being applied may well have only been newly implemented (although I
note the Delegations Manual, Ex 9, dates to 2022),
but Ms Burdett-Symons
confirmed that but for Dr Moriarty’s intervention (described below), in
accordance with that arrangement
made on 25 September 2025, the Applicant would
have performed the acting opportunity he had been offered and agreed to, in the
to December 2024 period
evidence around the communication of Dr Moriarty’s decision to deny the
Applicant the opportunity to act up in the PLNE
role can be more conveniently be
dealt with chronologically at the end of the discussion regarding the Second
Detriment. For present
purposes it is sufficient to note the
(1) As would be apparent from the above, over the weekend of 28 and 29 September
2024, and on Monday 30 September 2024, there were
several media articles
reporting on the Dispute before the Commission (which had been the subject of
unsuccessful Conciliation on
25 September 2024), some of which involved the
(2) At 6:30am Monday, 30 September 2024, Dr Moriarty sent a meeting invitation
via Teams to Ms Burdett-Symons and four other people.
The title of the meeting
invitation was “SLT Check In re articles” and was to occur at 9am
that morning. I understand
SLT means Senior Leadership Team. For reasons that
will be discussed below, the timing of that email is significant in the
disposition
of this application, as is the timing of and content of the media
publications referred to above. That is conveniently dealt with
when discussing
s 210(2) and the rebuttable presumption it creates.
(3) A meeting of the SLT took place at or around 9am on Monday, 30 September
2024. The timing of and what happened in the course
of that meeting, and
specifically what Dr Moriarty said and how Dr Moriarty appeared, is also
contextually important in the disposition
of this application. Again, that is
conveniently dealt with when discussing s 210(2) and the rebuttable presumption
it creates.
(4) At 4:40pm that day, Monday 30 September 2024, an email was broadcast by
Deputy Secretary, Sean Sloan, to all fisheries and forestry
staff, including the
FCU. It was headed “Update on Fisheries Officer work bans”, referred
to “media coverage over
the weekend on Fisheries Officer safety
concerns” and identified it was to provide an “update to all
Fisheries &
Forestry staff”. It described the “Public Service
Association’s (PSA) Fisheries Officer Vocational Branch”
imposed bans, described those bans, and noted the matter had now been referred
to the Commission. It then said:
“The Department has been working extensively with the PSA Fisheries
Officer Vocational Branch over the past 18 months to address
a range of issues
related to their work.
Your safety and well-being are important, and we want everyone to make safe
choices as outlined in all our safe work method statements
and general work
instructions.
All staff are reminded to follow the Department's Code of Conduct and Ethics, as
well as relevant policies and guidelines. If you
are unsure of these, please ask
your Director or Executive Director.”
The email concluded by noting all media enquiries should be directed to the
Department’s media unit and attached recent correspondence
between the
Deputy Secretary and the PSA on these matters for additional context (I note the
correspondence referred to was not included
in the evidence in these
proceedings).
(5) The evidence is largely silent as to what transpired between 30 September
2024 and 8 October 2024, other than to note that Ms
Royal was on leave from 4 to
13 October. Importantly, there is no reference in the evidence to anyone from
the Respondent having
advised the Applicant they saw anything he had done over
the weekend of 28 and 29 September, or on the morning of 30 September 2024,
supporting the FOVB’s campaign as inappropriate.
The Second Alleged Detriment
would appear that at 7:41am on 8 October 2024, the Applicant gave a live
interview to an ABC Central Coast journalist. A transcript
of the interview is
included in the evidence. The transcript records the journalist referring to the
approximately $18 million contributed
by recreational anglers to policing and
fisheries management through their recreational fishing licence fees and a
desire to see
those funds put into the Recreational Fishing Trust for the
support of coastal, mobile and inland fisheries offices, and to enforce
fisheries rules and regulations. The journalist continued to observe
“Unfortunately, those fisheries officers are having trouble
doing their
job because they believe they’re not equipped to tackle the challenge in
front of them.” Reference was made
to the bans being implemented by the
PSA “until they’re given the resources they need. They say like stab
proof vests
and capsicum spray.”
Applicant is introduced in this way (my
“Joe Wright is an active fisheries officer and is also the Public Service
Association union spokesperson. I asked Joe what
needs to be done to get our
law enforcement back on track and in line with best
follows is a transcript of the Applicant’s comments (I have broken the
text into paragraphs for convenience, but the text,
including typographical
errors, is otherwise as contained in the original):
“We're in a situation where we don't have adequate powers of inspection
and adequate powers of surveillance and monitoring.
Um, certainly when you
compare what we have available to us in New South Wales with other jurisdictions
like Victoria and Western
Australia. Um, our unfortunately, our capabilities are
really quite archaic. Um, but on top of that, we've also got major concerns
officers in New
South Wales.
So most people who have interacted with the fisheries
officer in this
state, with our members, they would have noticed that officers, um, they have a
power of arrest. So they carry a pair
of a set of handcuffs, and they also carry
an extendable baton, which is basically tools that is supposed to enable
officers to get
out of tricky situations. Certainly in the case of the baton,
what we're arguing is that, um, there is now other contemporary tools
available to law enforcement people and law enforcement agencies across the
world, things like capsicum spray, which enable
people like fisheries
officers who are dealing with potentially hostile, escalating or hostile
situations to be able to have more chance to get out of that
situation and seek
Um, what we're asking for is, in all reality is to be equipped the same as our
colleagues in Victoria. Um, the fisheries
service in Victoria are, you
know, they have modern legislation, they have modern powers of inspection and
surveillance. And they
had and they have modern and contemporary self-defence
mechanisms for their staff. And that's all we're really asking for here.
But I constantly have fishery
officer members contacting me, um, and
other delegates on (sic) the union and begging us to do more to fix the
situation and, the,
um, you know, the stalemate that we're at with respect to
having the capability to deal with the real bad eggs or the people who
committing the higher end, more significant fisheries
and marine park
crimes, and you find that they're, um, really responsible for a very
disproportionate amount of illegal catch.
The reality is, that the fisheries
resource across New South Wales is
highly accessible. Um, fisheries
work, you know, the places where, people
can where people do access the fishery
um, a wide and varied, you know,
it can be out in the far west, out on the, on out on the darling River. Um, it
can be, you know,
in the sneaky parts up the backs of estuaries or offshore.
And, you know, the reality is that fishery
resource, which is
increasingly, um, which is increasing in value is, highly sought after. Um,
there's a, there's more or less a never
ending market for various types, various
species of fish and even not just for human consumption, but also for, you know
markets, things like the aquarium industry and the illegal wildlife
trade as well, which we all often forget about.
And the reality is, that, you know, with, relative ease, say, in the case of
abalone or rock lobster, you can put your dive, put
your wetsuit on, grab your
snorkel and a tool to lever the abalone off the rocks you get in the water. And
if you have any reasonable
ability at snorkelling and diving, it's not hard to
go and take a significant quantity of those species. And then if you have links
to people or markets that are willing to pay for them, it's an easy dollar. And
if you don't, the reality is, Scott, if you don't
have if we don't have
officers out there creating a deterrent, which I think our
members have done very well for a very long time, then it would, I would
and our members would argue that it wouldn't be. It wouldn't take long at all
before we find fishery
sectors collapsing and it would start with those
high value species.
Um, this is exactly the type of thing that's happened in other countries. You
know, you look at the fishery
resource in South Africa, the fishery
challenges in California and all of these other parts of the world with
bigger populations and things like that. And it doesn't take
much for it. only
takes the law enforcement arm of fisheries
agencies to take their foot
off the pedal. And all of a sudden you're dealing with, you know, significant
impacts on the resource.
And that's what our members ultimately fear, because
we're all keen fishers, too. And we all care about the. We all care about the
aquatic environment.”
journalist made some concluding remarks and again refers to the Applicant as an
“active fisheries officer and Public Service
Association
spokesperson.”
Applicant’s comments are, quite frankly, banal. They disclose nothing that
could reasonably be considered confidential information.
There is no evidence
anything said was considered confidential. Insofar as reference is made to the
work of the FCU they amount to
little more than general descriptions about the
environment in which the FOVB’s “members” (as the Applicant
said) were working as justification for the demands they were making,
and by comparison with resources made available to the counterparts
There was no “attack” (to use Dr Moriarty’s language from the
minutes of the 30 September 2024 meeting
referred to above) on the Department,
the Minister or the government more generally.
introduction (and concluding remarks) did refer to the Applicant as an active
fisheries officer, but that was coupled with a reference
to him being the Public
Service Association spokesperson. No reasonable listener could have mistaken the
Applicant’s comments,
such as they were, as reflecting the views of the
Department.
7:44am on 8 October 2024, the host of “The Big Fish” and “ABC
Central Coast Breakfast”, Scott Levi, wrote
to the Minister’s office
inviting a response from the Minister to an interview done that morning. The
Minister’s office
forwarded it to (amongst others) the Manager Media,
Primary Industries who in turn forwarded it to (amongst others), Dr Moriarty.
9:06am that morning, Dr Moriarty had been forwarded an email with a link to
“the clip featuring an interview with Joe Wright”.
9:52am 8 October 2024, Dr Moriarty forwarded that chain of emails to, amongst
others, Mr Wilson, Senior HR Business Partner. That
email said “FYI
– he’s still doing it!!!”.
noted above, despite Dr Moriarty’s apparent frustration and/or irritation
(an inference I think can reasonably be drawn by
the three exclamation marks),
there is no evidence that anyone had reached out to the Applicant directly to
say that they considered
his communication with the media inappropriate.
would appear there was a discussion between Dr Moriarty and Mr Wilson at some
time between 9.52am and 1.45pm, because at 1.45pm
Mr Wilson sent Dr Moriarty an
email saying “
As discussed, please see below email template that you
can issue to Joe Wright, reminding of his obligations as an employee under
What followed in the email from Mr Wilson was a draft email
addressed to the Applicant.
2.24pm that afternoon, 8 October 2024, Dr Moriarty sent an email to the
Applicant under the Subject “Unapproved public comments
made to media
sources referencing NSW Fisheries and activities of the Department”. It
would appear Dr Moriarty crafted that
subject line – the draft from Mr
Wilson did not propose one. The body of the email was word for word the draft
provided by
Mr Wilson, save for an additional paragraph that I have emphasised
in the below extract, noting that paragraph is inconsistent on
its face with the
paragraph that immediately preceded it:
I am writing to you in relation to several unapproved public comments you made
to media sources referencing NSW Fisheries and activities
of the Department,
including ABC News and the Sunday Telegraph interviews published on 29 September
2024 that included photographs
of you wearing the Department's Fisheries Officer
uniform, ABC radio interviews broadcasted on 30 September 2024 and 8 October
On this occasion, I have decided that no further action or investigation is
required other than to remind you that as an employee
of the Department of
Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD), you have a clear obligation
to adhere to the Department's
Code of Ethics & Conduct in relation to
Professional Standards, specifically:
- We must behave in a way that does not damage the reputation
of the Department or the NSW Public Service.
- Only authorised employees are to comment publicly on the
activities of the Department, including having conversations with journalists
posting on social media
- Public speaking engagements must be approved before
commitments are given.
If it is found that you have breached these standards and obligations expected
of you in future including by making any further public
comments about NSW
Fisheries and/or the activities of the Department without approval, the
Department may recommend commencement
of formal misconduct procedures against
you in accordance with
Government Sector Employment Act
You are required to complete the Department's Code of Ethics & Conduct
mandatory training available through the Bridge portal
on the Intranet. If you
have not already done so, please complete this training module and provide
evidence of completion to your
manager within 14 days of the date of this
I would also like to remind you of the Government Sector Core Values set out in
Section 7 of the
GSE Act 2013
(https:/Jintranet.regional.nsw.gov.au/ethics-conduct).
This email does not serve as an official warning. A copy will be retained by the
HR Business Partner (HRBP) team for future reference
if required.
You are reminded of your obligation to maintain confidentiality of the matters
discussed and outlined in this email and must not
discuss this with other
You have access to the Department's Employee Assistance Program and may access
counselling services by calling 1300 360 364.
If you wish to discuss this matter further, please let me know and I can arrange
a meeting. You can also contact your HRBP Connor
Wilson on 0497 553 743 or
connor.wilson@regional.nsw.gov.au.
I see in the roster that you are on leave this week, however I will be setting
up a meeting with you upon your return, including
Lee and Connor to discuss the
content of this email.
email to the Applicant sent on 8 October 2024 is the second detriment relied
upon by the Applicant as unlawful victimisation,
characterised as a
“written warning” from Dr Anderw Moriarty, the Director Fisheries
Compliance.
meeting between Dr Moriarty and the Applicant foreshadowed in the underlined
passages in the above extract never occurred. The
evidence about why that is so
is more conveniently discussed as part of the chronology of events in dealing
with the operation of
s 210(2) and the rebuttable presumption it creates.
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
application is made under s 213 of the IR Act, seeking Orders to
“enforce” the provisions of Part 1 of Chapter 5 of
specifically in the form of the legislation that existed at the time the
proceedings were commenced, subsections 210(1)(a),
(g), (h) and (j). Section 210
has been substantively amended on and from 3 July
being the date of assent
Industrial Relations and Other Legislation Amendment (Workplace
Protections) Act
(the Workplace Protections Act)
, so that those
subsections are now respectively s 210(1)(a), (e), (h) and (m).
parties accepted that on its proper construction, the Workplace Protections Act
was not intended to have a retrospective operation.
That is to say, the
amendments to ss 209A, 209 and 210, would not appear to be drafted to displace
the presumption an amending Act
would not ordinarily be read so as to attach new
legal consequences to facts or events which occurred before its
commencement
. I agree. In any
event, the Applicant did not seek to amend the application to allege the
Applicant’s conduct was “industrial
organising activity” as
that phrase is now to be understood under ss 209A and 209(3) post the enactment
of the Workplace Protections
the form applicable to these proceedings, s 210(1) relevantly
(1) An employer or industrial organisation must not victimise
an employee or prospective employee because the person—
(a) is or was a member or an official of an industrial
organisation of employees or otherwise an elected representative of employees,
(g) participates, or proposes to participate, in proceedings
relating to an industrial matter, or
(h) engages in, or proposes to engage in, any public or
political activity (unless it interferes with the performance of the
duties), or
(j) makes a complaint about a workplace matter that the person
considers is not safe or a risk to health, or exercises functions
under Part 5
(Consultation, representation and participation) of the
Work Health and
Safety Act 2011
Workplace Protections Act also made significant amendments to s 210(2) and s
213, deleting s 210(2) entirely (and enacting two
new subsections 210(2) and
(3)), and including a refashioned ‘reverse onus’ provision in a new
s 213(5). Both parties
accepted the new s 213(5) had no application to these
proceedings, and the relevant form of s 210(2) applicable to these proceedings
was that as at November 2024 when the proceedings were commenced. In light of
the savings and transitional provisions applicable,
that is plainly
210(2) in that form has been a feature of the IR Act for many years:
“(2) In any proceedings under section 213 to enforce the
provisions of this section, it is presumed that an employee or prospective
employee who suffers any detriment as a result of action by the employer or
industrial organisation was victimised because of a matter
referred to in
subsection (1) that is alleged by the applicant to be the cause of the
detrimental action. That presumption is rebutted
if the employer or industrial
organisation satisfies the Commission that the alleged matter was not a
substantial and operative cause
of the detrimental action.”
has been interpreted on a number of occasions, including recently in litigation
that culminated in the judgment of McHugh JA in
PSA v Commissioner of
[2025] NSWSC 624.
operation is relatively well settled, and at the level of principle was not the
subject of any real dispute. That jurisprudence
will need reconsideration in the
context of the new s 213(5), but not in this matter. Its operation in this case
is discussed below.
SUBMISSIONS AND EVIDENCE
Applicant relied upon an outline of written submissions dated 28 April 2025
, a reply submission dated 4 August 2025
(the ASUBR)
which were supplemented orally, a chronology, a bundle of documents produced
under summons (Ex 1), an extract of Dr Moriarty’s
diary dated 8 October
2024 (Ex 6), an affidavit of the Applicant (Ex 2), who also gave oral evidence
and was required for cross-examination.
Respondent relied upon an outline of written submissions dated 5 June 2025 and a
supplementary note dated 1 August 2025 (
respectively) which were supplemented orally, a Statement of Ms Ange Royal (Ex
5), two statements of Ms Lee Burdett-Symons dated
26 May 2025 (Ex 7), and 6 June
2025 (Ex 8), both Ms Royal and Ms Burdett-Symons were required for
cross-examination and gave very
brief oral evidence, and a number of
Respondent sought to rely upon an affidavit of Dr Moriarty, but he was
unavailable for cross-examination (despite an appropriately
timed request for
him to be made available). For the reasons explained in
Joseph Wright v
Industrial Relations Secretary on behalf of the Department of Primary Industries
and Regional Development
[2025] NSWIRComm 1035
, the affidavit of Dr Moriarty
was not received in evidence.
the conclusion of the hearing, at the request of the Commission the Respondent
(with the Applicant’s agreement) advised
the amount the Applicant
“would have received had he acted in the Program Leader North East
position between 18 November and
5 December 2024 is $892
light of the position of the parties reflected in the above, it is not in
dispute that:
(1) The Applicant is an employee of the Respondent;
(2) The two matters relied upon to establish a detriment described at paragraph
[3] above, occurred. That is, as a matter of fact
it is not in issue that:
(a) The Applicant was denied the opportunity to act up in the position of Ms
Burdett-Symons for the three-week period commencing
late November 2024 (see
paragraphs [75] – [81] above);
(b) The Respondent (Dr Moriarty) did issue an email to the Applicant dated 8
October 2024, which the Applicant asserts (and the Respondent
denies) amounts to
a written warning (at [83] – [95] above); or that
(c) Dr Moriarty was the sole decision maker behind each of these two actions.
(3) The Applicant has alleged the two detrimental actions were taken because of
(or for reasons that included) the protected characteristics
in s 210(1)(a),
(g), (h) and (j). The Respondent denies any of the protected attributes in s
210(1) apply to the Applicant’s
circumstances.
this case, the two “threshold matters” (as the Applicant’s
counsel described them
Applicant must establish are:
(1) Whether the alleged detriments the Applicant suffered at the hands of the
Respondent are sufficient to ground a finding of victimisation.
(2) Whether the Applicant has or has done something that enlivens a protected
attribute in s 210(1) of the IR Act.
the Applicant establishes these two propositions, the issue becomes whether the
Respondent has rebutted the presumption arising
from the operation of s 210(2)
by establishing that the alleged protected characteristics were not a
substantial and operative cause
of the detrimental action or actions.
raised with counsel whether the second of the ‘threshold’
propositions was a threshold fact that must be established
by an Applicant, in
light of the words of s 210(2) and what was said by McHugh JA in
Commissioner of Police
[2025] NSWSC 624
(emphasis in
“...it may not strictly be necessary for the applicant to
“establish” the existence of a protected matter before
presumption is engaged; it is at least arguably sufficient that “a matter
referred to in subsection (1) ... is
alleged by the applicant
cause of the detrimental action.”
Applicant submitted it was an overstatement to say an applicant had to
demonstrate the protected characteristic existed in fact.
The contention was
illustrated by a hypothetical example: an employee who alleges they suffer
detriment because they claimed an award
benefit such as annual leave, need not
demonstrate they in fact had sufficient accrued annual leave to support their
request before
the protected characteristic would be
established.
For this case, by
way of illustration, the Applicant’s evidence demonstrated he had acted on
the basis that a range of people
in the PSA had authorised the comments he made
in the media – the fact the PSA rules may have technically not been
to (which was not conceded) would not deny a contention action was taken
because the Applicant “is or was a member or an official
of an industrial
organisation of employees or otherwise an elected representative of
employees” (s 210(1)(a)).
Respondent submitted the observations of McHugh J in
PSA v Commissioner of
extracted above were “throwaway obiter comments” or a
observation”,
proper approach is reflected in the existing jurisprudence of this Commission,
and in particular
Kinninmont v Ku-ring-gai Council
[2020] NSWIRComm 1064
(and the authorities referred to therein)
doesn’t’ even get to looking at what the reasons are until the
objective elements are
light of my findings below, it is not strictly necessary to determine this
question, but for my part, I do not think it correct
that an Applicant must
establish the characteristics in s 210(1) as a matter of fact in every case
before the rebuttable presumption
may arise. With respect to the members of this
Commission who have expressed a different view, as McHugh J suggested in the
above, that is not what s 210(2) in fact says. In terms, the presumption
in s 210(2) of the IR Act arises when an employee alleges
that the cause of
detriment is a protected characteristic (emphasis added): “it is presumed
that an employee or prospective
employee who suffers any detriment as a result
of action by the employer or industrial organisation was victimised because of a
referred to in subsection (1) that is alleged by the applicant to be the
cause of the detrimental action”. In terms, all that
is required is
that detriment be established and the Applicant
substantial and operative reasons for that detriment (the cause of the
detrimental action) was a matter referred to in
subsection (1).
reverse onus exists because
“the reasons for detrimental action
against an employee are, of necessity, peculiarly within the knowledge of the
does not appear to be anything in the terms or policy informing the section that
requires the Applicant to establish the characteristics
in s 210(1) exist as a
matter of fact.
if an employer had acted to an employee’s detriment
because the relevant decision maker believed an employee to be a member
official of a union when they were in fact not, or because they believed an
employee had proposed to participate in proceedings
in relation to an industrial
matter when they had not (and so on), a contravention may nonetheless still be
established. In that
hypothetical, the subjective reason of the decision maker,
even though mistaken, would nonetheless have been infected by the protected
characteristic: the relevant action was nonetheless taken for the substantive
and operative reason of the protected characteristic.
Albeit directed to the
meaning of the word “prevent” in the relevant provisions in the
Fair Work Act
(2009)(Cth), as was observed by the Full Court of the
Federal Court in
Qantas Airways Limited v The Transport Workers Union of
[2022] FCAFC 71
(2022) 292 FCR 34
“... it is at least arguable that an anti-victimisation provision focused
upon the perceptions of the perpetrator which seeks
to protect an attribute or
the exercise of some capacity or right, may extend to action taken because that
capacity or right is mistakenly
imputed to the targeted person. As Bromberg J
Fair Work Ombudsman v Australian Workers’ Union
[2017] FCA 528
“Victims of various forms of discriminatory conduct are protected not only
against action taken because the victim has a particular
attribute (for example
sex, race, religion or disability) but also where such an attribute has been
wrongly imputed to the victim.
In relation to persecution “for reasons
of” a protected attribute as a criterion for a protection visa under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth), Burchett J (with whom
O’Loughlin and Nicholson JJ agreed) said (at 568) in
Ram v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1995] FCA 1333
(1995) 57 FCR 565:
The words “persecuted for reasons of” look to [the
persecutor’s] motives and attitudes, and a victim may be persecuted
reasons of race or social group, to which they think he belongs, even if in
truth they are mistaken. Hitler’s ghastly views
led to persons being classified as Jewish who had appropriately regarded
themselves as German; the perception
of the authorities was then the important
reality which determined their fate”.
Nonetheless,
that is not a matter that needs be determined as on the evidence before me I am
satisfied the Applicant has established
detriment and facts consistent with
three of the
protected attributes relied upon exist in fact (as
described below). Even absent the fourth asserted protected characteristic, the
rebuttable presumption is engaged.
CONSIDERATION
Detriment – General Observations
Applicant bares the onus of demonstrating he has suffered a detriment at the
hands of the Respondent.
afford a Respondent procedural fairness, an applicant must identify, precisely
and clearly, the detriment alleged to have been
The Applicant has
plainly done that here.
amounts to a ‘detriment’ for the purpose of
of Chapter 5 of
the IR Act was not in any real doubt:
(1) The Applicant submitted
concept of detriment has been given its ordinary broad and general meaning:
“to cause an employee to suffer some injury,
hardship or loss or otherwise
treat the employee harshly, unfairly or to his disadvantage in or in relation to
his/her employment”,
extending to matters which may have indirect adverse
impacts on employees (as opposed to the direct loss of remuneration), such as
the loss of opportunity to work.
It is a question of fact, that looks broadly to whether the employee is worse
off than if the impugned act or omission had not occurred.
(2) The Respondent accepted the word “victimise” does have a broad
and in that connection
means to cause an employee to suffer some injury, hardship or loss or otherwise
treat the employee harshly,
unfairly or to his disadvantage in or in relation to
his/her employment.
nonetheless has to be a real and appreciable detriment, and not merely a
theoretical detriment. That does involve a question
of degree. Something
would not be enough, but more than that, it also it has to be
something “which does amount to a diminution of right or some
prejudicial
alteration”.
Detrimental
treatment grounding a finding of victimisation can, on its face, involve the
exercise of or a right or entitlement (such
as a dismissal on proper notice, or
the invocation of a disciplinary process etc). It is the purpose for which the
action is taken
(the substantial and operative cause) that may render it a
contravention of the freedom of association protections in s 210 of the
Detriment – Denial of Acting Up Opportunity
is not in dispute that Dr Moriarty denied the Applicant the opportunity to act
up in Ms Lee Burdett-Symons position of Program
Leader, North East for a period
of 3 weeks.
Applicant argued the fact he had initially expressed some reluctance to take on
the acting up opportunity, or may not have been
particularly keen to do it, is
irrelevant to the question of
The benefit to him of
that opportunity was not trivial. Dr Moriarty’s decision directly denied
the Applicant the opportunity
to obtain a financial benefit of the acting up
and denied him the
indirect career development benefit of acting in a higher
the Applicant had in fact been properly offered the opportunity by Ms
Burdett-Symons, given her limited authority under the
Delegation Manual and the
fact Dr Moriarty hadn’t authorised the offer in advance, was also said to
be irrelevant. Dr Moriarty
denied him the opportunity in circumstances where, on
the evidence of Ms Burdett-Symons, he would have worked it but for Dr
intervention – it was submitted intervention in this
context is still nonetheless an
and one that operated to
the Applicant’s detriment. It ought be uncontroversial that the Applicant
suffered a detriment from
Dr Moriarty denying the Applicant the opportunity to
act up for that period.
Respondent said the Applicant had not in fact been properly offered the acting
up opportunity, as Ms Burdett-Symons did not have
authority to make that offer
independently of approval from Dr
as such, it was not a
direct loss, but at best a lost opportunity. The Respondent maintained this was
not a detriment because the
Applicant had only begrudgingly agreed to undertake
the 3-week acting up opportunity. On the Respondent’s case, it is not
to just say there is a lost opportunity for earning an allowance,
because that came with the higher level of responsibility and work
very reason the Applicant said he did not express an interest in the first
place. If what was lost was not real and valuable,
it is not a
The Respondent argued
the evidence in this case is the Applicant saw this acting up opportunity as a
burden, not a benefit, and in
those circumstances, to deny the opportunity is
not a detriment.
Consideration of the First Detriment
evidence in this connection is summarised above. Whether Dr Moriarty had finally
‘signed off’ on the Applicant acting
in the relevant period or not,
I accept the unchallenged evidence of Ms Burdett-Symons that but for Dr
Moriarty’s intervention
(notably, the only time she can recall this ever
having happened), the Applicant would have performed the acting up role. Dr
denied him that opportunity by refusing to accept Ms Burdett-Symons
arrangement with Mr Audet and the Applicant. In doing so, he
Applicant not only the remuneration for the acting up position (which of course
came with the added responsibilities of
the role), but also denied him the
developmental opportunity it presented, the experience the opportunity
presented, and denied him
the opportunity “to help the team and keep
people, support people out there doing what they’re employed to do.”
do not accept the fact the Applicant was reluctant to express an interest when
initially invited, but did when later approached
directly, means he has lost
nothing of real and appreciable value in denying him the opportunity
he had agreed to do it. The Applicant explained his reluctance to
complete the EOI process – it was not only because of the
time that EOI
preparation required (as described above), but also because he was frustrated
because the implementation of the EOI
process disturbed a practice that, in his
view, had worked well.
otherwise knew, based on experience, that Ms Burdett-Symons would come to him
and Mr Audet if no-one expressed an interest. That
is what happened.
readily accept by refusing the Applicant the opportunity to act up in the
position of Program Leader, North East, in accordance
with the arrangement
proposed by Ms Burdett-Symons and agreed to by the Applicant, the Respondent,
through the decision and actions
of Dr Moriarty, imposed a real and appreciable
detriment on the Applicant.
Alleged Detriment – 8 October
summary, the Applicant argued:
(1) The email was sent by Dr Moriarty – the Director of the FCU, not the
Applicant’s immediate manager. It was not some
minor informal correction
one may expect from time to time by their immediate manager. From the terms of
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
email, it arose from (at least) an allegation of a
breach of the code of conduct and requires the Applicant to undertake training
– “a clear criticism of conduct and the imposition of an
obligation”.
(2) The email reflects the start of a process. The fact the email was not the
product of a formal misconduct process contemplated
by the GSE Act and GSE Rules
does not mean it isn’t a warning in the ordinary sense of the word, or a
detriment. In an industrial
context it is the kind of action that weakens an
employee’s position in that they are on “thinner ice” in
potential disciplinary
The degree of jeopardy
is irrelevant - on any view, having received this letter (which is to remain on
his file and would not have
been if it were
insignificant),
the Applicant is
placed in a less secure position than before. It is not a mere informal
‘talking to’ of the kind rejected
as a detriment by Wilcox CJ in
Finance Sector Union v ANZ Banking
the least, a threat of repercussions for
, or amounts to the
employer having put their point of view on his conduct that would affect what
would happen on any further
It was prejudicial
to his interest in a not immaterial way, and as such is a detriment.
summary, the Respondent argued:
(1) The email was a remedial and educative step, not a punitive one: its purpose
was to remind the Applicant of existing obligations
with which he must
It was expressly said
it was not a formal warning. The label applied by the Respondent is not
determinative, but it is not immaterial
that a caution and reprimand is a formal
step taken under s 69 of the GSE Act, after the process of
allegation/investigation/finding
contemplated by the GSE Rules. Whether a
communication such as this is something that has a real and appreciable
prejudicial effect
on the Applicant needs to be seen in that statutory context.
The email was at its highest an “informal counselling” and
not victimisation.
(2) The fact it was to be retained for future reference “doesn’t
necessarily mean it’s going to be looked at in
a way which might be taken
into account as a formal strike on your permanent record for the purposes of
taking any future
necessarily prejudicial to his employment. Things that fall on the
‘educative and remedial’ side of the
line, are not victimisation.
Simply reminding the Applicant of his responsibilities and requiring him to
again undertake a training
program is not victimisation. On one view, they are a
benefit to an employee.
Consideration of the Second Detriment
email of 8 October 2024 from Dr Moriarty is plainly a document issued to alert
the Applicant that in his view the Applicant had
breached “the Code of
Ethics & Conduct in relation to Professional Standards”, and to
caution him against doing it
again by threatening “the commencement of
formal misconduct procedures against [him] in accordance with
Government Sector Employment Act 2013
” if he were to make “further
public comments about NSW Fisheries and/or the activities of the Department
without approval”
in the future. It was plainly designed to (at the least)
stop the Applicant’s participation in the PSA FCU Campaign, to the
his participation involved him answering media enquiries from the PSA media
unit. In its terms, the email is a reprimand and
a caution - or as the Applicant
described it, a written warning. The Respondent’s labelling of the email
as something other
than the formal step of caution or reprimand contemplated by
Government Sector Employment Act
following the
application of the processes described in Part 8 of the Government Sector
Employment (General) Rules (“
This email does not serve as an official
), does not change its substantive character. There is simply
no other way to reasonably read the email when viewed in context. Nor,
of the meeting on 30 September 2024, and the emails exchanged between Dr
Moriarty and members of the SLT about the 8 October
2024 email and the meeting
that was to follow it (discussed below), do I have any doubt that is precisely
how Dr Moriarty intended
email was not a mere face to face “informal rebuke or request that
supervisors often find it necessary to administer to
subordinates”.
Moriarty was not the Applicant’s immediate supervisor. The email was
drafted by a Senior HR business partner for Dr Moriarty.
It was issued to the
Applicant by the Director of the FCU and was to be followed by a formal online
Teams meeting at which the Applicant
would clearly be given a dressing down
his conduct. The email is clearly in the nature of a caution or reprimand. It
may not have the same effect as a formal caution
or reprimand under the GSE
Rules, but in my view, it plainly places the Applicant in a less secure position
than he was prior to
it having been issued. No doubt that was the purpose in it
being “retained by the HR Business Partner (HRBP) for future reference
required.” It was a real and appreciable detriment to the Applicant.
Protected Characteristics – General Observations
question in this connection is whether the Applicant had any of the protected
characteristics listed in s 210(1) of the IR Act.
The Respondent quite rightly
submitted that in order for it to be afforded procedural fairness, the Applicant
must specifically identify
the protected characteristic or characteristics
alleged to be the reason for the detrimental action relied upon. The Applicant
plainly done that in this case. In that connection, as noted above, the
Applicant relied upon subsections 210(1)(a), (g), (h) and
(j) as the substantial
and operative reason (or at least part of such reasons) for taking the two
alleged detriments. It is convenient
to deal with each of them separately. In
that connection, the proper approach requires me to consider each of the grounds
210(1)(a) – Member, Official, or other elected representative of
210(1)(a) is extracted above. It prohibits victimisation because the person
“is or was a member or an official of an
industrial organisation of
employees or otherwise an elected representative of employees.”
is not in dispute that at all relevant times, the Applicant was not only a
member of the PSA (and a member of the “workplace
of the union
known as the FOVB), but was also an elected delegate of the PSA, the FOVB Acting
Secretary and Acting Chairperson, and
a member of the PSA’s Central
Council. It was also not in dispute that he was chosen by the FOVB membership to
be the appointed
connected to the
PSA FCU Campaign.
summary, the Applicant argued:
(1) Section 210(1)(a), protecting union delegates, extends to protecting persons
from victimization because of both their bare status
as a delegate and due to an
exercise of legitimate activities in the role of delegate:
(1990) 39 IR 8
Newcastle Steel Works Case
(1961) AR 48
AWU v Bluescope Steel Limited
[2006] NSWIRComm
(2) The Applicant, in making the media comments and otherwise participating in
the PSA FCU Campaign (including by attending the conciliation
proceedings, and
subsequently being a witness in those proceedings), was acting as a delegate of
the PSA and office holder in the
FOVB. It was a collective decision of the
members of the FOVB to have an FOVB delegate act as a contact point for any
media comments
relating to the PSA FCU Campaign. The PSA itself, through its
media unit, made the arrangements between the Applicant and the relevant
organisations. The media campaign involved the Applicant making commentary in
conjunction with the Assistant General Secretary,
Mr Troy Wright. The Applicant
at all times understood he was authorised by the PSA to do what he did, as part
of the PSA FCU Campaign.
(3) The Applicant accepted that not everything a delegate or elected
representative does in that capacity is protected by s 210(1)(a)
(election as a
delegate does not confer a magic cloak of
, but there is no
basis to find that it was illegitimate for the Applicant, an elected delegate
and branch official of the FOVB, at
the behest of the PSA and in conjunction
with the Assistant General Secretary, to participate in a campaign (by making
media comments)
directed to the safety of the working environment of the FOVB
members. This is not a case where the union’s rules prohibited
Applicant did. At best (and this was not conceded), it would amount to nothing
more than a technical non-compliance with
the PSA Rules. That would not take the
Applicant’s conduct beyond the protection afforded by s 210(1)(a) of the
legitimate activities of an elected delegate and branch official.
Respondent, in summary, argued:
(1) Section 210(1)(a) protects an employee from victimisation because of their
status as a member, delegate or elected representative,
the activities they may carry out in that
connection.
(2) The Applicant’s complaint is that the Applicant was acting in his role
as a PSA delegate in making the media comments.
This is not an alleged
contravention of s 210(1)(a) as it focuses on activities as a delegate rather
than status as a delegate.
(3) In the alternative, even if s 210(1)(a) does protect a delegate from
activities as a delegate, it can only be understood to protect
activities as a delegate acting in that capacity. Illegitimate activities as a
delegate are not protected. What is legitimate
activity for a delegate falls to
be assessed by reference to authorities discussing the role of a union delegate,
relevant legislation
and industrial
instruments
, and the relevant
union rules (in this case, Ex 10).
In that connection, the
Applicant’s media commentary was not within the legitimate bounds of what
a delegate may do under the
Award, the PSA Rules, or the PSA delegate handbook:
(a) Section 5 of the Crown Employees (Public Service Conditions of Employment)
Reviewed Award 2009, deals with Union Consultation,
Access and Activities:
(i) The Award prescribes the responsibilities of a PSA delegate. They include
participating in the workplace consultative processes,
following the dispute
settling procedures, distributing PSA literature/membership forms; and using any
facilities provided by the
workplace properly and reasonably as negotiated at
organisational level. In addition, the Award provides that a PSA delegate may
engage in certain union business when on duty, and is entitled to paid leave in
(ii) The PSA has responsibilities under the Award in relation to delegate
activities. For example, cl 60.1.1 of the Award requires
that the PSA provide
written advice to the Department Head about PSA activity to be undertaken by an
accredited delegate and, if
requested, to provide written confirmation to
workplace management of the delegate's attendance/participation in the activity.
Applicant maintained that he was speaking to the media on behalf of the PSA,
but the PSA did not provide written advice of this activity
as required under cl
(b) The PSA Rules and By Laws (and Chapter F, General By-Law for Workplace
Groups, paragraph (o)) provide that a workplace delegate’s
duties include
receiving and investigating grievances of work group members, accompanying
members to disciplinary interviews as a
support person, participate in workplace
negotiations with local management, promoting the objects, policies and
decisions of the
PSA, distributing union material, recruiting new members and
maintaining regular contact with members. Specifically as to press statements,
rule 143 of the PSA Rules, dealing with Administration,
“The General Secretary and/or the President shall be the only authorised
officers of the Association in whose names official
letters or press statements
shall be issued.
Providing that the Executive and/or Central Council may grant authority where
special circumstances exist and such special circumstances
are elated to the
advancement of Association policy for this procedure to be varied”.
(c) The PSA Delegates Handbook, said to “constitute a written direction
made to delegates regarding the proper performance
describes the
role of a delegate as the “date to day face of the union in the
workplace” and their functions in similar
terms to the Award. Relevantly,
consistent with the PSA’s Rules, the Handbook states that a
delegate’s functions include
representing members in the delegate’s
area in negotiations with management, acting as a conduit between members and
promoting union membership and activity and attending local
consultative meetings.
(d) The Handbook records limitations placed on a delegate’s role,
including that delegates are obliged to “meet the code
of conduct of the
relevant agency.” Relevantly, the Handbook states that:
(i) delegates are also expected to follow management directives, as they have a
duty of service to their employer, regardless of
their disagreement with the
(ii) delegates are prohibited from making any negative comments about their
employer on social media;
(iii) if delegates are approached by the media, the journalist should be
referred to the union for comment. Relevantly, the Handbook
“[t]here have been cases where members have been disciplined or sacked for
speaking to the media and allegedly bringing
their employer into
disrepute” and therefore all media requests should be referred to PSA.
Respondent submitted even if s 210(1)(a) does extend to legitimate activities of
a delegate, the protections do not extend to
activities outside these boundaries
including the making of media comments in breach of the Respondent’s Code
of Conduct and
the Department’s guidelines and procedures. The
Applicant’s activities did not fall within the protection conferred by
210(1)(a) of the IR Act.
Scope of s 210(1)(a)
terms of s 210(1)(a) are clear: the protection afforded by s 210(1)(a) is
against victimisation because the employee “is
or was a member or an
official of an industrial organisation of employees or otherwise an elected
representative of employees”.
It does not
protection against any particular activity in that capacity. The authorities
referred to by the Applicant do not say “
the protection extends to
protecting persons from victimisation because they are a delegate and due to
their exercise of legitimate
activities in the role of a delegate”:
ASUBR at [8]. To the extent protection is conferred by s 210 directly for
activities undertaken, it is to be found under other
subsections such as
(relevant to these proceedings) s 210(1)(d),
“exercises functions
conferred under this Act
”, or in the IR Act in its present day form
(that do not apply here), subsections such as ss 210(1)(c), (d), (f), or (g)
engages or proposes to engage in industrial organising
refuses to engage in industrial action or
another industrial organising activity
exercises or
proposes to exercise functions conferred under this Act
has a role or responsibility under industrial relations legislation or
an industrial instrument
does not mean, however, that activities performed as a delegate are irrelevant
to the operation of s 210(1)(a). The authorities
relied upon by the Applicant
demonstrate that when action is taken against a delegate because of their
activities in the role of
a delegate, an inference may be drawn that action is
taken against the relevant employee not merely because of what they have done,
but in fact because they are a delegate or other representative.
debate between the parties as to the reach of s 210(1)(a) harks back to one of
the differences between the judgments of Barwick
CJ and the majority of the
Court (Mason J, with whom Gibbs, Stephen, and Jacobs JJ had agreed) in
General Motors Holdings v Bowling
(1976) 51 ALJR 235.
proceedings before the High Court in
came on appeal from a
decision of the Australian Industrial Court, in which the Industrial Court had
convicted the appellant for
a contravention of 5 of the
Conciliation and
Arbitration Act
(the C&A Act)
, a historical analogue
of s 210 of the IR Act. The worker at the heart of the proceedings, Bowling, was
a shop steward at the appellant’s
works at Elizabeth in South Australia.
He was dismissed in the context of a fractious industrial dispute that had
involved work to
rule bans and apparent industrial sabotage (acts with which
Bowling had apparently expressed some sympathy in newspaper articles
appeared on the morning of his dismissal).
relevant union rules did not expressly confer any particular role or
responsibility on Bowling as a delegate in dealing with that
dispute (or the
media comments), but he nonetheless had involved himself in various workplace
issues and disputes, including the
bans. The dismissal was communicated to
Bowling by the plant superintendent, and was said to have been because of his
“unsatisfactory
attitude to the job and to supervision.” The
evidence of the plant superintendent was not accepted as reflecting the real
for dismissal. The decision to dismiss had in fact been made by two
directors based in Melbourne, neither of whom gave evidence in
the proceedings
(albeit based on a recommendation of the South Australian plant superintendent).
central question for the majority of the Industrial Court was whether the
decision makers “were actuated by the circumstances
that the informant was
a shop steward.” Their Honours noted that the factors that influenced the
minds of the decision makers
was exclusively within their knowledge, and after
having considered a number of matters that might have actuated the directors to
dismiss concluded: "it would be quite reasonable and well within probability
that the employer . . . might be actuated by the circumstance
that this zealous
and restless employee held the office of shop steward and was likely to use it
in a way regarded by the employer
as detrimental to its interests." Absent
explanation from the decision makers, the majority of the Industrial Court found
the company
had not discharged its onus (s 5(4) of the C&A Act having a
similar reverse onus in dealing with the reasons for dismissal to
that found in
s 210(2) of the IR Act) and convicted it.
relevant provisions of the C&A Act were s 5(a) and (f), and relevantly
“An employer shall not dismiss an employee, or injure him in his
employment, or alter his position to his prejudice, by reason
circumstance that the employee-
(a) is or has been or proposes, or has at any time proposed. to
become, an officer, delegate or member of an organization, or of
an association
that has applied to be registered as an organization; or
(f) being an officer. delegate or member of an organization.
has done, or proposes to do, an act or thing which is lawful for the
furthering or protecting the industrial ... interests of the organization or its
members, being an act or thing done within
the limits of authority expressly
conferred on him by the organization in accordance with the rules of the
organization.
Penalty: Four hundred dollars.''
CJ would have allowed the appeal. On his Honour’s reasoning there was a
“radical error” displayed in the
reasoning of the majority in the
Industrial Court “in that no separation was effected between the fact of
the holding of the
office [dealt with in s 5(a)] and the industrial activities
of the employee unconnected as they were with his office of shop steward
its duties [dealt with in s 5(f)].”
J, with whom the other members of the Court agreed, dismissed the appeal. His
Honour observed (emphasis added):
“Section 5(4) imposed the onus on the appellant of establishing
affirmatively that it was not actuated by the reason alleged
in the charge. The
consequence was that the respondent, in order to succeed, was not bound to
adduce evidence that the appellant
was actuated by that reason, a matter
peculiarly within the knowledge of the appellant. The respondent was entitled to
the evidence was consistent with the hypothesis that the appellant
was so actuated and that hypothesis was not displaced by the appellant.
that, despite the sub-section, there is some requirement that the prosecutor
brings evidence of this fact is to make an implication
which in my view is
unwarranted and which is at variance with the plain purpose of the provision in
throwing on to the defendant
the onus of proving that which lies peculiarly
within his own knowledge.
I would for my part, accept the finding that the principal reason for the
dismissal was that the appellant considered the respondent
to be a troublemaker,
to have deliberately disrupted production and thereby to be setting a bad
example to others. Even so, this
finding does not carry the appellant the whole
It is to my mind a very considerable leap forward to say that this finding in
itself is a comprehensive expression of the reasons
for dismissal and that they
were dissociated from the circumstance that the respondent was a
No doubt this is an advance which could be made if officers of
the appellant had said in evidence "We dismissed him because he was
troublemaker, because he was deliberately disrupting production and setting a
bad example and we did so without regard at all to
his position as a shop
steward" and that evidence had been accepted. Yet this evidence was not given
and, even if it had been given
there may have been a question as to its
reliability. Once it is said that the appellant dismissed him because he was
deliberately
disrupting production and was setting a bad example it is not easy
to say without more that this had nothing to do with his being
a shop steward.
Although the activities in question did not fall within his responsibilities as
shop steward
his office gave him a status in the work force and
a capacity to lead or influence other employees, a circumstance of which the
could not have been unaware
It would be mere surmise or
speculation, unsupported
by evidence, to suppose that the appellant's
management, if concerned as to the bad example he was setting, divorced that
consideration
from the circumstance that he was a shop steward.
We are left, then, with a reason for the dismissal which does not exclude the
possibility that it was associated with the circumstance
that the respondent was
a shop steward. If this was no more than a slender possibility the circumstance
might be discarded as one
which was not a substantial and operative factor in
the dismissal. However, I have already said enough to indicate why the
possibility
cannot be so regarded – the respondent’s office as a
shop steward endowed him with a special capacity to influence others
therefore not easily dissociated from his ability to set an example to
dealing with the distinction between status and activities, Mason J observed (at
242D, emphasis added):
“The appellant sought to give emphasis to the distinction to be drawn
between s. 5 (1) (a) and s. 5(1)(f) and argued that the
activities of a shop
steward fell under par. (f) and not par. (a).
So much may be conceded,
but this does not avail the appellant in the present case because we are
concerned not with activities undertaken by the respondent in his capacity
shop steward but with activities otherwise undertaken and the
example that he set to others in which his
position as a shop steward was
of particular significance.”
does not stand as authority for the proposition that the equivalent to s
210(1)(a) of the IR Act prohibiting victimisation because
an employee “is
or was a member or an official...or otherwise an elected representative of
employees” protects activities
undertaken in that capacity per se: cf
ASUBR at [9]. Rather, it stands as an illustration of how industrial activity by
delegate or other elected representative may support an inferential
finding that such status was a substantial and operative reason
victimisation absent an appropriate explanation to the contrary (or perhaps more
accurately, how absent an innocent explanation
by the decision maker, a
respondent may fail to rebut the presumption created by the equivalent of s
210(2) when evidence is otherwise
consistent with actions being taken because
the employee was a delegate or other elected representative).
decision of Maidment J in
Transport Workers’ Union v CWU Transport
(1990) 39 IR 8
is another illustration of inferences drawn in the absence of
evidence from the decision maker.
Dispute at Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd Steel Works, Newcastle (No.2) (the Newcastle
Steel Works Case)
[1961] ARNSW 48
, dealt with the dismissal of a delegate
following his involvement in organising a strike and remaining on site to
organise a stop
work meeting in defiance of a direction by the employer to
leave. In the course of dealing with a contention that the dismissal was
or unjust because, even if some of the conduct was open to criticism,
“everything that [the delegate] did ... was done
by him in his capacity as
delegate and that it was unjust for the company to dismiss him, and him alone,
when he was acting in a
representative capacity”, the Commission said (at
“Any case that comes before an industrial tribunal involving the dismissal
of a union delegate requires anxious consideration
by the tribunal with a view
to ensuring that no man be unjustly penalised for his participation in
legitimate activity as a representative
of his union. It is basic to our system
that employees should be organized in industrial unions and it is through such
unions that
approach must be made to the tribunals set up. Men who are willing
to play a part in the affairs of an industrial union are entitled
to expect that
they will not be prejudiced in their employment because of any legitimate
actions they take in any union office they
assume. Indeed, it is an offence
under s. 95 of the Industrial Arbitration Act for an employer lo dismiss an
employee or injure him
in his employment or alter his position to his prejudice
by reason of the fact that the employee is an officer, delegate or member
trade or industrial union. But, while this Commission will be vigilant to
protect the position any delegate unjustly dealt with
by an employer for
legitimate activity on behalf of his union, it certainly will not regard
delegateship as a magic cloak conferring
on the wearer immunity from liability
for wrongful actions.”
observations were made in the context of dispute proceedings in which it was
alleged the dismissal of the relevant delegate
was harsh and unjust. It was not
a passage construing the reach of the predecessor to s 210(1)(a) of the IR Act
(cf ASUBR at [9]),
and does not stand as authority for the proposition that s
210(1)(a) protects the
of a delegate per se. The reasoning
does, however, reflect the potential for an inference to be drawn that action
taken against a
delegate for lawful and legitimate activity in the role of
delegate was taken
they were a delegate, including so as to
remove a delegate to avoid future legitimate organising activity.
is again reflected in the final case relied upon by the Applicant. In
Australian Workers Union v BlueScope Steel Limited
[2006] NSWIRComm 1029
Commissioner Conner dealt with a dispute in which a delegate was disciplined for
calling a stop work meeting. The Commissioner said
...The position of a trade union delegate is protected by S.210(1)(a) which
makes it an offence for an employer to victimise an employee
because he:
...is or was a member or official of an industrial organisation of employees or
otherwise an elected representative of employees..."
An employer is navigating dangerous waters if he victimises an employee as a
consequence of his conduct as a trade union delegate,
no matter how unhelpful
the employer may have viewed the employee acting in that capacity [Transport
Workers’ Union of Australia
v. CWS Transport Services Pty Limited
That having been said, the role of trade union delegate is no licence to act in
an inappropriate manner. A trade union delegate will
not be excused conduct
which for any other employee would be grounds for censure. In the Newcastle
Steel Works Case
(1961) AR 48
the Full Bench of the former State Industrial
Commission (Richards, Beattie and Kelleher JJ) commented in that respect (at
as follows:
"...While the Commission will be vigilant to protect the position of any
delegate unjustly dealt with by an employer for legitimate
activity on behalf of
his union, it certainly will not regard delegateship as a magic cloak conferring
on the wearer immunity from
liability for wrongful actions..."
But it is Mr Pleli's assertion that he was doing no more than what he was
directed to do by other employees (which naturally enough
he declined to
As I outlined in my unreported decision of Thursday, 13 July, 2000 in Gorman v.
BHP Integrated Steel Division [Matter No. IRC 4242
of 1999 at pp.31 and 32), I
accept that the position of trade union delegate is often a thankless job - an
intermediary between workers
and management with the individual taking the heat
from both sides. A trade union delegate doing no more than his job as delegate,
whether or not the action he took in that respect was proper in the opinion of
the employer, would be entitled to expect that his
employer would respect his
legitimate activities in that role as a delegate. For instance, in my unreported
decision of Friday, 25
July, 2001 in O'Brien v. Linfox Limited [Matter No.IRC
6240 of 1999 at pp.34 and 35] I found the reason for the dismissal of a trade
union delegate was so linked with his legitimate role in that capacity as to
make it unfair. And in my unreported decision of Tuesday,
21 September, 2006 in
Transport Workers' Union of New South Wales v. Premier Illawarra Pty Limited
[Matter No.IRC 3653 of 2004] I
removed a warning notice from the personal file
of a trade union delegate because I was satisfied that his actions had been only
a reflection of the collective decision of the employees whom he represented.
What then is the legitimate role of a trade union delegate? ...”
Commissioner ultimately concluded that the activity of the relevant delegate was
not legitimate activity as a delegate because
the stop work meeting was not
relevantly authorised under the union’s rules.
illustration, albeit here resulting in the rejection of the evidence of a
decision maker, can be seen in the judgment of Wilcox
FSU v ANZ Banking
(2002) 120 FCR 170
where his Honour dealt with an alleged
contravention of an historical analogue of s 210(1)(a) in the federal system
arising from disciplinary
action imposed on a union official (a Ms Buckland)
because of her involvement in facilitating and participation in industrial
at a bank branch she managed, and media comments she had made on the
precarious state of women in the banking industry during an
interview with a
newspaper journalist. There, like here, there was no issue that Ms
Buckland’s conversation with the journalist
and other actions in
connection with the action) arose because of her position in the union and at
the request of the union.
decision maker, a Mr Inglis, had given evidence that in making his decision to
discipline Ms Buckland for her actions on the day
of the industrial action and
in her communications with the media, he was not influenced by Ms
Buckland’s position in the union.
Wilcox CJ did not accept that evidence.
Having observed that the relevant conduct by Ms Buckland that led to the
disciplinary action
was “intimately associated with Ms Buckland’s
position in the FSU”,
his Honour referred to evidence Ms Buckland’s position in the union had
been “a point of antagonism between them”
from their first meeting,
and continued:
“It is important to note that, at no stage, has Mr Inglis impugned Ms
Buckland's integrity or general competence as a branch
manager. All the issues
raised by him have arisen out of her FSU position and activities. Given that
these have shaped Mr Inglis'
attitude to Ms Buckland, it would be naïve to
accept his assurance that they had nothing to do with his decision, on
day of industrial action'', to require her to attend for counselling
and his subsequent decision to issue a formal warning. I cannot
paraphrase Mason J, that those decisions were divorced from the circumstance
that Ms Buckland was a senior FSU officer.”
the evidence as a whole, his Honour found the Bank had not rebutted the
presumption that the disciplinary action was imposed for
reasons that included
Ms Buckland was an officer of
despite Mr Inglis’
evidence to the contrary.
Application alleges a contravention of s 210(1)(a), referring to
Applicant’s status as a PSA delegate (and member) (at [2], CB pg 3) and
activities carried out in that capacity (at [3],
CB pg 3). I do not accept the
Applicant has narrowed that claim (cf RSUB [23] and [24]). The ASUB [23(c)] and
[24], and ASUBR [8],
similarly refer to both the fact the Applicant was a
delegate and in that capacity (in that “role”) was interviewed by
media outlets as part of the PSA FCU Campaign. As said at ASUB [24],
He alleges that Dr Moriarty’s decision was actuated by one or
more of each of these”
factors (noting that observation is in
reference to the whole of [23], which refers to each of the grounds of s 210
relied upon).
my view, s 210(1)(a) protects an employee against victimisation because they are
a member, delegate or other elected representative.
It is not necessary to
determine whether the Applicant participating in media interviews at the request
of and organised by the PSA,
was strictly within the terms of the PSA Rules, the
PSA Delegates Handbook, or the relevant provisions of the Conditions Award. That
may be necessary if the Applicant had relied upon the protected attribute
arising from the exercise of a function conferred by the
IR Act (s 210(1)(d)),
or in the more recently enacted s 210(1)(g) “
has a role or
responsibility”
under the IR Act or an industrial instrument, but not
here. As in
the employer may well fail to discharge the
rebuttable presumption that action was taken because an employee was a delegate,
if actions taken by the delegate in that capacity were not strictly within
their express authority under the relevant union rules.
all relevant times the Applicant has been a member and elected delegate of the
PSA, and additionally held other elected positions
within the FOVB, including as
the person nominated by the FOVB executive to be the spokesperson for the PSA
FCU Campaign. That was
consistent with his role as the acting Chair of the FOVB
(a workplace group under the PSA Rules). In that capacity, he was to be
leading union spokesperson in the workplace...They lead and encourage other
delegates and members, will usually be the union
assign work to other WPC
suffered detriment at the hands of the Respondent. He has alleged the detriments
I have found were imposed because, amongst
other allegations, of the fact he was
a delegate. That is enough to engage the rebuttable presumption in s 210(2).
Whether that was
in fact one of the substantial and operative reasons for Dr
Moriarty’s decisions is to be assessed on the whole of the evidence
later point in these reasons when considering s 210(2).
should, however, record that I do not accept that as a general proposition, a
delegate (such as the Applicant) would be acting beyond
what may be considered
the legitimate activity of a union delegate by promoting or participating in a
campaign being run by their
union, when they do so at the request of the senior
officers of that union (in this case, the Assistant General Secretary, Troy
including by speaking to journalists organised by the media unit of
that union about proceedings before the Commission.
statements about the proper role of a workplace delegate in decisions dating
from the early to mid-1960’s (such as the
observations of Commissioner
McCreadie of the former Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission in
Garden Island Dockyard Case
[1964] CthArbRp 694
(1964) 107 CAR 806
at 810 – 811, or
that of the Full Bench of the Industrial Relations Commission in the
Newcastle Steel Works Case
[1961] AR(NSW) 48
at 88: cf RSUB [52]) cannot
be accepted as an exhaustive statement of the legitimate activity of such a
delegate in 2025 (even if
they could be taken as an exhaustive statement at the
time they were published, itself a doubtful proposition).
case will turn on its own facts, but as a general proposition the ordinary
campaigning activities of a union today will almost
inevitably use both
broadcast and social media to prosecute their advocacy on important social and
political issues, and to protect
and advance the industrial interests of their
members (and those of the workers in the industries they represent more
generally).
That will often be done as part of a broader public strategy
connected with dispute proceedings before an industrial tribunal (or
litigation). I recognise it is but one illustration, but in
Kidman v Casino
Canberra Ltd,
“promoting union campaigns” was but one of the roles of the
delegate in that case. As was observed by the ACT Civil and
Administrative
Tribunal in
“Exerting public pressure on an employer is a commonplace and legitimate
industrial activity. Obtaining publicity by participating
in interviews with a
local newspaper is lawful activity often used by industrial unions to advance
the views and interests of their
comments in previous decisions of various courts and tribunals, and the PSA
rules and Handbook to which the Respondent referred,
were all directed to the
role of a delegate when making decisions or taking action independently of and
not at the request of the
union: in other words, what the rules etc specifically
permitted or required of a delegate when making independent decisions in
of that role. Whatever may be said about the authority of an elected
delegate to independently act under a relevant union’s
rules without
deference to the union or more senior union officials, absent some express
prohibition in the relevant rules, I can
see no reason why it would not be an
entirely legitimate activity for a union delegate to participate in a campaign
relating to the
industry in which they work at the request of and in conjunction
with the senior officials of their union. Whether that activity
fails to attract
one of the protections in s 210 of the IR Act for some other reason is a
different question.
should add that I do not accept there was a prohibition in the PSA Rules on the
Applicant’s participation in the campaign
in this case: the
Applicant’s interviews with journalists were not an official letter or
press statement
on behalf of
the PSA. The PSA issued an official press statement independently of the
The Delegates
Handbook expressly recognises, having stated if approached by media to refer
journalists to the union for official
comment, that: “
The General
Secretary can authorise PSA staff or delegates to speak on his or her behalf on
certain matters”.
There was no direct evidence of authorisation by the General Secretary. However,
I infer from the fact the media unit, an area under
the control of the General
Secretary (who is the CEO of the PSA under its Rules), and the direct
involvement in the PSA FCU Campaign
of the Assistant General Secretary, that the
General Secretary authorised the PSA FCU Campaign and the Applicant’s
involvement
(as the elected spokesperson by the FOVB) within it.
Section 210(1)(h) – Public or Political Activities
Application alleges the Applicant “Engaged in public and/or political
activities, as a delegate of the PSA, including to
make public statements
through media outlets in respect of the industrial interests of fisheries
obviously not in dispute that Applicant did make public statements through media
outlets in respect of the industrial interests
of fisheries officers in his
capacity as a PSA delegate, in respect of the industrial interests of fisheries
officers. I recognise
the Respondent argued the Applicant’s conduct was
not legitimate conduct of a delegate in communicating in the media, but that
not a relevant consideration under s 210(1)(h).
Respondent submitted:
(1) The Applicant’s media statements did not amount to a public or
political activity within the meaning of s 210(1)(h) of
and in any event
(2) The protection in s 210(1)(h) did not apply because the media statements
made by the Applicant “interfered with the performance
substantive issues are:
(1) Whether, by making those media statements at the request of the PSA, in
connection with the PSA FCU Campaign the Applicant engaged
“public” activity and/or a “political” activity; and if
(2) Interfere with the performance of the Applicant’s duties as an SFO in
Applicant accepted the section is not intended to cover everything done in
Properly understood,
[this subsection]
is directed at employees
participating in activities of any description involving, among other things,
advocacy in support of their
rights, beliefs and/or interests, or in support of
as it was put in oral submissions
“activity that has a public flavour,
a public or political flavour...Its not public and political, its community
minded or community
focused or acts of that
was submitted the Applicant “participated in a public
activity, being the media campaign in support of the PSA’s industrial
agenda relating to the safety
its FOVB members: “Here we’re talking about advocacy and support of
rights and advocacy, specifically and expressly,
it’s one of the things
that Mr Wright is criticised of, to influence the government because some of the
changes just simply
cannot happen without legislative effect. It’s more
nuanced than that. It’s influencing the government by putting pressure
the department to ask the Minister to do things but it’s the same
character”.
for whether the Applicant’s conduct was a public or political activity,
the Respondent’s submissions may be summarised
as follows:
(1) The concept of a “public or political activity” in s 210(1)(h)
has a much narrower focus that simply being anything
which might be relevant to
public debate or public
political, meaning a
change in government and public meaning something of an official or governmental
(2) A “political activity” is an activity “in the exercise or
non-exercise of a public power, namely, legislative,
executive or judicial power
and bears on government or concerns the relationship between the government and
the governed”.
expressions using the adjective “political” such as ‘political
opinion’, ‘political belief’,
‘political offence’
and ‘political refugee’ have been connected with political control
or government of the
country or the machinery, processes, form, role, structure,
feature, purpose, obligations, duties or some other aspect of government
(3) Generally, a distinction is made between action taken for an industrial
purpose and action taken for a political purpose. For
example, a distinction may
be drawn between industrial action that is politically driven as against that
which is directed to
bargaining.
(4) The word ‘political’ is not coextensive with general matters of
public policy. Contrary to AS [19(a)], the use of
the adjective
‘political’ has not been found to convey the broader meaning of
“advocacy in support of [an employee’s
or other’s] rights,
beliefs or interests”.
(5) As for “public”
the Commission has
held that a reference to public activity is restricted because of its context,
so that not all public activity
is protected simply because it is done in
Read contextually,
the words ‘public’ and ‘political’ are to be construed
to have analogous meanings; that
is, the activity has been engaged pursuant to a
public function concerning the affairs of government or pertaining to the
, reflecting one of
the ordinary meanings of the word “public” when deployed as an
(and consistent
with its usage in similar expressions such as ‘public officer’,
‘public authority’, ‘public
office’ or ‘public
service’ to connote a person appointed to discharge a duty of public
office in the interests
of the public, or the engagement in activities of
governmental or official
(6) A union does not perform the role of a governmental or public body, and its
powers and functions are not administrative in nature
but rather its role is to
act as an industrial representative of employees (so it is not a
administrative
A union and
their officers and delegates perform a private function in representing the
industrial interests of
(7) The Applicant’s media comments were not made in the exercise of a
public function or in a public capacity or did not concern
the exercise or
non-exercise of public power. Nothing the Applicant did in his media commentary
involved him in the discharge of
his public role as a fisheries officer, and the
commentary was not directed to changing the government. Making media comments
no part of his role as a fisheries
He did not engage in
a public or political activity by making the media comments on 29, 30 September
and 8 October 2024.
for whether the Applicant’s conduct interfered with his duties, the
Respondent’s submissions can be broadly distilled
propositions:
(1) Part 2 of the GSE Act provides the ethical framework for the government
sector. Section 7 defines the “core values”
of the government sector
and sets out principles that guide their implementation. Those values include
the values of integrity and
trust. The object of the framework includes
recognising “the role of the government sector in preserving the public
defending public value and adding professional quality and value to
the commitments of the Government of the day” (s 6(a))
and establishing an
ethical framework for, amongst other things, “an apolitical and
professional government sector that implements
the decisions of the Government
of the day” (s
The Code of Conduct
provides practical guidance in applying and gives effect to these core
(2) In commenting on the federal public sector equivalent, the High Court in
Comcare v Banerji
[2019] HCA 23
(2019) 267 CLR 373
observed such objects and values
“continue a long tradition of professionalism and political neutrality of
officers within
departments of State for the administration of which Ministers
of State are constitutionally responsible and politically accountable”
which forms the foundation for Australia’s political inheritance of the
Westminster system of responsible
government.
It is essential
to the proper functioning of the system of representative and responsible
government that the government have confidence
in the ability of the public
service to provide high quality, impartial, professional advice, and that the
public service will faithfully
and professionally implement accepted government
policy, irrespective of their individual personal political beliefs and
preferences.
For that reason,
the High Court found that social media comments by a public servant (even made
on an anonymous basis) risked “damaging
the integrity and good reputation
of the APS as an apolitical and professional public
As a public
servant, the values therefore mandate that there be a “level of
circumspection in the expression of a political
opinion in a discussion with a
journalist”
[2019] HCA 23
267 CLR 373
(3) To the extent that his comments were critical of Government policy on
operational matters, and were in breach of the Code of
Conduct (relating to
conflicts of interest and communications with the media), the Applicant’s
media statements tended to:
(a) undermine and damage the integrity and good reputation of the NSW public
service and his perceived ability to perform his functions
in a professional and
apolitical manner by faithfully serving the Government of the
(b) give rise to an apparent conflict of interest between, on the one hand, his
obligations as a public servant to serve the NSW
Government and not to undermine
its policies and, on the other hand, his own interests and the PSA’s
interests. The conflict
of interest meant that Mr Wright’s action may be
perceived to be prejudicial to the NSW Government’s interests and
a lack of impartiality when he commented publicly on NSW
Fisheries’ operations and policy without
authorisation.
(4) A member of the public service must adhere to the core values of the public
service. In that connection it was said public servants
“need to support
the decisions of the government of the day” because a failure to do so
“can undermine what we
would say is an apolitical public
The Applicant
was “expressing a view which may undermine that apolitical nature and
demonstrate a conflict of interest”,
the conflict in this case said to be
between “the personal views and industrial position of the union which is
in opposition
to the position taken by the department, especially in
circumstances where [the Applicant] has [the implementation of government
policy] as one of his statutory functions”. The Applicant’s conduct
“was contrary to his duties and substantially
interfered” with them.
The Applicant’s conduct was not protected by s210(1)(h).
What are public or political activities?
the substance of s 210(1)(h) first appearing as s 95(b2) of the
Arbitration Act
following its amendment by the
Industrial Arbitration (Amendment) Act
, there are but a few decisions considering the meaning of the words
“public or political activity” in this jurisdiction.
are a number of analogous statutory protections against detrimental treatment
for undertaking political activities and/or holding
political beliefs in
anti-discrimination legislation around the country, and in the
(Cth). I am not aware of (and the parties did not direct my
attention to), any equivalent legislative protection for any
first decision I am aware of dealing with the notion of “public”
activity under s 95(b2) of the
Industrial Arbitration Act
was in 1949. Cantour J
said this in rejecting a contention that a worker’s participation in a
disputes committee amounted to
“Without attempting to give an exhaustive definition of the words
‘public activity’—because the question
was not argued in any
detail—it seems to me that they were intended by the Legislature to apply
to activity such as activity
pertaining to the people of a country or of a
community, or to the people of a locality; or pertaining to the people as a
or activity of a person pertaining to the affairs or services of the
community; or actions devoted or directed to the general welfare;
or the like.
(The Oxford English Dictionary.) I am quite clear that the activity of Farrell
as a member of the Disputes Committee
was not public activity within the meaning
of section 95 of the Act, and so it is not activity of the character that would
a prosecution for a breach of the section, even if a case were made that
he was dismissed because of that activity.”
only other decision I am aware of (or that the parties have drawn to my
attention), is that of Commissioner Sloan in
Shand v Secretary, Department of
[2018] NSWIRComm 1055
(2018) 282 IR 200
. Commissioner Sloan did
not give an exposition on what the phrase “public” activity should
mean other than:
(1) The Commissioner’s observation (at [22] – [24]) that the word
“public” needs to be read in context, such
“public or political activity” should not be construed as equivalent
to “public activity or political
(2) The Commissioner’s observation that the ordinary and grammatical
meaning of the word “public”, divorced from
its context, would give
rise to an unacceptably wide meaning, as it would mean any activity done in
public would be subject to the
relevant protection (at [25], [41]).
(3) Jury duty was not a public or political activity within the meaning of the
phrase in s 210(1)(h) (at [41] – [42].
proper approach to construction must begin with a consideration of the text
itself. The language which has actually been employed
in the text – its
ordinary and grammatical English meaning viewed in context - is the surest guide
to legislative intention.
By examination in context, what is meant is viewing
the particular words as part of the relevant instrument viewed a whole. In
particular,
the general purpose and policy of the provision when viewed in that
way, and the mischief it is intended to
Commissioner Sloan observed, despite the disjunctive “or” in the
expression “public
political activity”, read in whole, I
agree the word “political” should inform the meaning of the word
(and vice-versa). Respectfully, however, I do not agree
that it would be wrong to read the expression “public or political
activity” as capturing conduct capable of characterisation as either or
both public activity and political activity (cf
at [24]). The
disjunctive “or” cannot be entirely ignored. In this context, it
also cannot be read as the conjunctive
“and”. The words public and
political when deployed as a characterisation of activity are not necessarily
coextensive.
Additionally,
the meaning to be given to the phrase is informed by its appearance as one of a
number of subparagraphs designed to
create behavioural norms in the conduct of
industrial relations. Those behavioural norms are part of the “fair and
framework for the conduct of industrial relations that the IR Act
The protection to
employees and prospective employees afforded by the Freedom of Association and
Freedom from Victimisation protections
are one of the key mechanisms by which
the IR Act seeks to “encourage participation in industrial relations by
representative
bodies of employees and employers
It is beneficial
legislation that ought not be read
. The remedial or
beneficial purpose is relevant to the construction of s 210. That said, I
recognise legislation rarely pursues a
single purpose at all costs, and usually
involves striking a balance between competing interests (as s 210(1)(h) self
evidently does).
That principle has utility when assessing an interpretation of
beneficial legislation that would, if accepted, be detrimental to
the persons
intended to benefit. But the principle says nothing about the extent to which a
provision is intended to benefit a person.
As always, the balance of competing
interests must ultimately be determined by reference to the text of the
provision read in context.
word “activity” in this context would, if given the ordinary English
meaning best suited to its legislative context,
mean “a specific deed or
action; sphere of action:
“Something which a person, animal, or group chooses to do; an occupation,
a pursuit. Frequently
context, the word public is deployed as an adjective qualifying the word
“activity”. When deployed as an adjective,
“public” may have several meanings. The Macquarie Online Dictionary
identifies them as including:
of, relating to, or affecting the people as a whole
or the community, state, or nation:
public affairs.
done, made, acting, etc., for the people or community as a
a public prosecutor.
open to all the people:
a public meeting.
relating to or engaged in the affairs or service of the
community or nation:
a public official.
maintained at the public expense, under public control, and
open to the public generally:
a public library.
open to the view or knowledge of all; existing, done, etc.,
the fact became public.
having relations with or being known to the public
a public character.”
would be apparent from these sometimes subtly different meanings, the
characterisation ‘public’ in each case distinguishes
the private,
whether it be relating to the interests represented, the interests affected, or
the context in which the thing was done
or by whom it was seen or known. A
public activity is not necessarily the same thing as any activity done in
public: an activity
may be “of or relating to, or affecting the people as
a whole or the community...”, an obvious example of which may be
for legislative reform in relation to matters of industrial relations, and yet
not be an activity open to all the people
or open to the view or knowledge of
the public generally (albeit it may be). It is the activity itself that must
have the requisite
public character.
Section 210 of
the IR Act gives statutory protection from victimisation for exercising certain
workplace rights, including rights
enshrined in international human rights
instruments, such as the right to freedom of
association.
The various
placita of s 210 operate to protect “employees or prospective
employees” against victimisation because of,
amongst other matters, things
they do in connection with industrial matters or in connection with or relating
to a workplace (the
making of claims or complaints about matters pertaining to
industrial matters, including health and safety, or the participation
proceedings relating to industrial matters etc).
do not accept a “public activity” is confined to an activity using
powers, duties or authorities for the public
That would not
operate contextually. It would not meet the object of protecting any
prospective
employee for a public activity (such activity, if construed
in that way, only being available in the discharge of a power, duty or
that would require existing employment), or any employee outside of the
government sector (such employment not likely having
such a power, duty or
authority, noting the phrase has been in the same form since 1996 when
the private sector). It also would not,
if given such a constrained meaning, have any application to action by an
industrial organisation
towards an employee or prospective
first of the ordinary meanings of the word public would appear the best suited
to the context of s 210. In my view, public activities
are specific deeds or
actions by a person or group that relate to or affect the people or a community
generally. That view is broadly
consistent with the preliminary view expressed
by Cantour J in
Barclay v Lake George Mines Pty Limited
(1949) 48 AR(NSW)
extracted above. However, I would not think it essential that the activities
of the employee or prospective employee be directed
to the people or community
as a whole.
be a public activity, the relevant activity obviously needs to be directed to
interests beyond the private interests of the individual
employee or prospective
employee. However, the broader context of the IR Act includes the object
“to encourage participation
in industrial relations by representative
bodies of employees and employers
The Freedom of
Association and Freedom from Victimisation provisions self-evidently facilitate
that object (amongst others), by ensuring
employees may participate in the
public or political activities of such organisations without fear of
victimisation (qualified by
the activity not interfering with the performance of
the employee’s duties).
Representative
bodies of employees or employers are typically organised along industry and/or
occupational lines. Whilst the activities
of representative bodies of employees
and employers may well be directed to the people or community as a whole, such
as lobbying
or other activity directed to reform of generally applicable laws
(such as the IR Act, the Work Health Safety Act, or the like),
or issues of
general public interest (such as changes visited upon industry by an event such
as World War II, noting the genesis
of the provision in 1943, or the impact of
artificial intelligence on society and workplaces), the activity of such
organisations
are often directed to the industries or occupations whose
interests they are eligible to represent. Construing the notion of
activity as including activity directed to furthering or
protecting the interests of an industry or occupation, being but a portion
the community or public viewed as a whole, would capture activity sufficiently
divorced from the interest of the individual employee
to be properly
characterised as “public activity”. Such an approach would better
reflect a purposive and beneficial
construction,
and facilitate
the Objects of the IR Act.
for “political” activity, there is again limited assistance to be
gained from previous authority of this jurisdiction.
Fire Brigade
Employees Union (NSW) v Fire and Rescue (NSW)
(2016) 259 IR 252
appeal being refused
Fire Brigade Employees’ Union of NSW (o/b
Challinor) v Fire and Rescue NSW
[2016] NSWIRComm 1050)
, it was not in doubt
that a Captain and Station Commander of a metropolitan fire station had engaged
in political activity by allowing
his photograph, together with an endorsement,
to appear in an election pamphlet for someone standing as a candidate for a seat
the 2015 NSW State election (published during the pre-election Caretaker
deployed as an adjective, the word “political” may have a number of
relevant meanings. The Macquarie Online Dictionary
lists amongst them:
“2. of or relating to the governing of a nation, state,
municipality, etc.: political measures.
3. exercising or seeking power in the governmental or public affairs of a
nation, state, municipality, or the like: a political
4. relating to or connected with a political party, or its principles,
aims, activities, etc.: a political campaign.
5. affecting or involving the state of government: a political offence.
6. engaged in or connected with civil administration: political office.
7. having a definite policy or system of government: a political
8. of or relating to citizens: political rights.”
Oxford English Dictionary Online lists amongst them:
“1a. Of, belonging to, or concerned with the form, organization, and
administration of a state, and with the regulation of
its relations with other
3. Involved, employed, or interested in politics; that takes a side, promotes,
or follows a particular party line in political debate.
(somewhat derogatory): having regard to or affected by the interests of a
party or parties rather than principle; partisan,
factious...
4. Having an organized form of government or society...
5. Relating to or concerned with public life and affairs as involving questions
of authority and government; relating to or concerned
with the theory or
practice of politics.
mentioned above, there are a number of examples of legislative protection from
adverse treatment because of political conviction/opinion
or political activity
found in anti-discrimination
legislation,
Fair Work Act
Opportunity Act
(Vic), like many of its equivalents across the
country, define the phrase “political belief or activity” to mean
added) “(a) holding or not holding a lawful political belief or
view; (b) engaging in, not engaging in or refusing to engage
in a lawful
political activity”, but does not define the term “lawful political
activity” (nor do its equivalent
in other statutes across the country).
authorities may be of some assistance, but those deriving from protections
against an employee’s political opinion or
political conviction ought be
approached with some caution, particularly where they examine the asserted
opinion through its manifestation.
The holding of a political opinion and the
expression of a political opinion are not necessarily co-extensive: see for
example the
caution expressed by Perram J in
Quirk v CFMEU
[2021] FCA 1587
(2021) 398 ALR
of the authorities dealing with those analogous provisions draw on the ordinary
and grammatical meaning of the word “political”
when characterising
the belief, conviction or activities captured by the relevant
expression.
(1) Nestle Australia Ltd v Equal Opportunity Board
[1990] VicRp 71
[1990] VR 805
J endorsed the reasoning of the Equal Opportunity Board of Victoria, that
adopted that ordinary meaning (at 816):
“It is to be noted that in dealing with this question the board adopted,
and in my view quite correctly, the ordinary dictionary
meanings of the word
“political” in connection with the legislation, so that it was
construed as pertaining to government
policy, administration and the
CPS Management v Equal Opportunity Board
[1991] VicRp 50
(1991) 2 VR 107
speaking of the expression political belief and political activity in the
Victorian discrimination legislation, Marks J having
noted what Vincent J had
said (at 111 – 112):
“Although as Vincent J, correctly, I think, observed in
is unnecessary to attempt an all-embracing exposition of the meaning of
"political belief', or for that matter, "political activity",
be safely said that a requisite qualifying characteristic is that the belief or
activity is one which bears on government.
This means that a belief is not
political where it has no bearing on the form, role, structure, feature,
purpose, obligations, duties
or some other aspect of government”.
(3) LaRoche v President and Members of the Equal Opportunity Board &
(1991) EOC 92-361
, in which Gobbo J of the Supreme Court of Victoria
applied both
CPS Management
(at 78,478) in rejecting a
contention that public submissions to an inquiry into the reform of the
ambulance service was a “political
activity”, because: “such
activities and/or beliefs by the applicant do not affect or alter the structure
of government,
the balance of forces within government or the composition of
government. Further...the kind of conduct on the part of the applicant
reform of the Ambulance Service cannot be seen as bearing on government or on
its form, role, structure, feature, obligation,
duty or any other relevant
aspect of government.”
Nevil Abolish Child Support v Telstra Corporation Limited
[1997] VADT 44
the Victorian Anti-Discrimination Tribunal, having
referred to
Nestle, CPS Management,
“In our view, a belief or activity will also bear on government if it
concerns the relationship between government and the
governed - that is, the
citizens of the society in question.”
Sayed v Construction Forestry Mining and Energy Union
[2015] FCA 27
327 ALR 460
, Mortimer J (as her Honour then was), discussed the meaning of
“political opinion” in s 351 of the FW Act by reference
to decisions
in refugee law
anti-discrimination law (at [164] – [177]). Her Honour embraced the
general meaning of the word ‘political’
in concluding a member of a
political party engaging in the activities of that party (what her Honour
described as the manifestation
of a political opinion), seeking to “bring
a political belief. Her Honour’s discussion was recently referred to
with approval by Rangiah J in
Lattouf v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(2025) 341 IR 105.
His Honour, having accepted (at [109]) that
decisions interpreting the expression “political opinion” in
Fair Work Act
were equally applicable to the expression “political
opinion” in
Fair Work Act
, said (at [110]):
“The expression “political opinion” within
the FWA encompasses the opinion of an employee about the policies or
actions of the government of a country or its armed forces.”
Henry v Leighton Admin Services Pty Ltd
[2015] FCCA 1923
, another case dealing with the expression “political opinion”
in s 351 of the FW Act, Manousaridis J said (at [103] -
[104], emphasis
” certainly pertains to the actual and
conceivable institutions and principles by which a society is, or should be, or
governed so that an opinion about any of these matters would be a
political opinion. But “
” applies to more than this;
it also applies to political activity, and to the matters to which such activity
is directed at
any given time.
Political activity is directed to the exercise or non-exercise of public power.
Public power, both at the Commonwealth and State
levels, is divided into
legislative, executive, and judicial power.
Political activity, therefore, is
directed to such matters as proposals or policies for the enactment, repeal, and
amendment of primary
and delegated legislation; the formulation, implementation,
modification, or abandonment of policies relating to the exercise of
power; the probity, efficiency, and quality of the exercise of executive power;
and the quality, efficiency, and consequences
of the exercise of judicial
An opinion is political if it is about, or if it relates to, any one
or more of the matters to which political activity may be directed,
or about the
persons who engage in such activity, or about the manner in which such activity
is conducted, or about the institutions
through which or by which such activity
is undertaken. Examples of political opinions would include opinions about the
suitability
or ability of persons engaged in political activity; or about the
merits or demerits of existing public institutions; or about the
demerits of proposed legislation; or about whether or not a subject not
previously regulated by statute should now be regulated;
or about the merits or
demerits of a particular policy a minister of the government is implementing; or
performance of a power vested in him or her;
or about the wisdom of a particular decision of a court.”
(7) KI v The Retail Store
[2023] TASCAT 10
in rejecting a complaint
that service was denied in a retail setting because of opinion expressed as to
the appropriateness of female
only spaces (and associated matters), was not
within the scope of protection as “Neither the activity, nor the beliefs
be classified as political because
when objectively viewed they do not
bear on government or concern the relationship between the government and the
its ordinary meaning, viewed in context, I would consider political activity to
at least include specific deed/s or action/s by
an employee or prospective
employee, that is directed to, or directed to influencing, the form,
organisation or administration of
government, including deeds or actions
directed to, or directed to influencing government policy (which I would
understand to include
deeds or actions directed to proposals for the enactment,
repeal or amendment of legislation or delegated legislation), or the
relationship
between the government and the governed.
of the clearest examples of political activity are activities associated with a
political party “such membership and involvement
being one of the
quintessential ways in which people seek to bring about change to governments,
and to government policies and
priorities”.
was an obvious example. But an activity is not political merely because it
is motivated by a political belief or
“a person’s political beliefs may lead him or her to do things which
are not, by their nature and when viewed objectively,
political. It is the
activity itself which, when objectively viewed, must by its nature or purpose be
political. However, there may
be cases where the nature or purpose of an
activity will be political because it so intrinsically involves the political
of the people carrying on the activity that it takes its character from
the expression of those beliefs. An example is a public meeting,
purpose of which is to express protest about a clearly political issue (see for
Williams v Council of Shire of Exmouth
[1990] EOC 92-296).
activities will be clearly political in their nature. Membership of or
affiliation with a political party is one of these (
Evershed v City of
[1995] EOC 92-745).
But there are many cases in which the line of
demarcation between political and non-political activities will be difficult to
and will depend on the facts of the particular case”.
is the activity itself that must have a political character. For example, media
comments on the management of the CFMEU and the
legitimacy of the Royal
Commission in the context of the Royal Commission into Trade Union Corruption,
“one of the most heated
political debates of the
, was political
activity (being the manifestation of a political belief). In both
(1986) EOC 92-182
Oldham v Women’s Information and Referral
(1986) EOC 92-158
, media comments made to gain public support for
changes in police practices and age of consent laws (
), and media
comments directed to secure public support to oppose an extension of affirmative
action laws into small business (
), were political activities
because they were directed to influencing government policy.
Respondent, however, sought to draw a distinction between activity characterised
as industrial rather than political. I do not
accept such a generic delineation
is of any real utility in applying s 210 of the IR Act.
Nestle v Equal Opportunity Board,
one of the seminal decisions on the
meaning of “political activities” in the context of discrimination
law, Vincent J
found the Equal Opportunity Board of Victoria had no jurisdiction
to hear and determine complaints of unlawful discrimination by
5 workers (all
union shop stewards) who were refused re-employment, after having been dismissed
in the course of an industrial dispute.
They had each participated in or
organised a picket line during the dispute, and otherwise described themselves
as active shop stewards
who had supported the relevant union in various
activities. They claimed the refusal to re-employ them, after they had made
applications
for employment in response to advertisements in a local newspaper,
was based on their union activities. They had not, however, asserted
those union
activities were as a result of lawfully held political beliefs or engagement in
political activities.
Board had taken the view “that as the participation in union activities by
a particular complainant may well have been motivated
by a lawfully held
political belief, discrimination based upon any such participation could
therefore constitute discrimination as
a result of the holding of a political
belief or the engagement in political activities”. Vincent J held such an
approach had
“difficulties”, emphasising “A distinction must
be drawn between political activities and those which although
motivated by some
political belief cannot be so
characterised”
If the alleged discrimination is based upon the involvement or the
refusal to engage in a particular activity, then it is the activity
possess a political
character”.
Honour observed the Board had, “quite correctly”, adopted “the
ordinary dictionary meanings of the word ‘political’
in connection
with the legislation, so that it was construed as pertaining to government
policy, administration and the
but qualified
that meaning of the words when viewed in context, concluding (at 819):
“The legislation was clearly not intended, in my view, to encompass
behaviour of the kind in which the plaintiff in the present
case is alleged to
have engaged. I find it very difficult to accept the proposition that the
legislature intended by the use of the
words "political belief” to bypass
the entire body of law and the structure which have been established at both the
and State level to deal with the type of purely industrial relations
questions which have arisen in the present matter. These considerations
reinforce my opinion that the term "political" should be given the meaning
ascribed to it by common usage which is concerned with
the processes of
government and, not in general, the structure and interactions of industrial
relations”.
Honour did, however, in a lengthy but nonetheless important passage (given the
debate in the present proceedings), discuss the
nature and role of trade unions
within the Australian polity, observing many activities of individuals in
connection with the advocacy
of trade unions may well be properly characterised
as political (at 814-816):
“In the present case it has been contended on behalf of the second to the
seventh-named defendants that belief or participation
in the industrial policies
and activities of a trade union possess characteristics and relate to matters to
which, as a consequence
of the role performed by such bodies in our society, the
epithet "political" may be property applied. According to this argument
sensible distinction can be drawn between what might be termed the "industrial"
and the "political" activities of trade unions
and, in any event, their
operations possess such importance to the functioning of government at all
levels that they should be perceived
as an integral part of the body politic.
The right of employees to enter freely into combinations or unions for their
mutual protection and advancement has, of course, long
been accepted as
fundamental to the operation of a democratic society. The existence, denial, or
even the restriction, of such a
right in a given community represents one of the
criteria by which the distribution of power including governmental power has
assessed and by means of which the particular community has itself been
characterised.
However the relationships normally under consideration in such analyses are
those which can be seen to bear upon the rights which
exist between ordinary
members of the society concerned and the individuals or groups which control its
government. Attempts to so
combine have many times been regarded, as the history
of a number of different parts of the world clearly demonstrates, as political
activities. On the other hand it is correct, I think, to state that generally
speaking in our society, at least at the present time,
where the existence of
this right is not in issue, its exercise is not necessarily so characterised.
Distinctions can be properly
drawn between activities undertaken by trade unions
which take place within the existing framework of government structures,
relationships,
and policies, to some of which the designation "industrial" can
be applied, activities which although not directed to affecting or
controlling
the framework itself may have important implications with respect to the
approaches of policies adopted by governments
and those which are directed in
some fashion or other to affecting the framework itself, perhaps by altering its
structure, the balance
of forces within it, or the composition of the government
at one or other level.
As a matter of general observation about which it would hardly seem necessary
that evidence should be required, there can be little
doubt that the activities
of trade unions in this community have not only on occasions had substantial
influence upon the operations
of government at a number of different levels but
also upon the determination of which political party or persons control its
In other words, some of these organisations have, from time to time,
been engaged in activities which according to even the most
definition of the term would be regarded as "political". However, it must be
emphasised that these comments are directed
to the possible areas of operation
and methods adopted in pursuit of objectives which have been associated with
trade unionism generally
is Australia. Whether or not they have application to
any particular body or in any given set of circumstances is a matter about
appropriate evidence would be required. It is, I think, sufficient for present
purposes to state that no simple demarcation
can be effected between the
industrial and political activities of trade unions in the Australian context.
Accordingly, it may well
be arguable in some circumstances and with respect to
particular organisations that a belief in the "industrial" policies of a
trade union may be, on this basis, regarded as incorporating a
"political" belief.
As it is difficult to separate these notions when considering the role and
activities of organisations, so also is it difficult to
do so when the beliefs
or activities of those who participate in or who find themselves at odds with
their objectives, affiliations,
and methods of operations, are taken into
is no contextual difficulty of the kind discussed by Vincent
in construing s 210: the IR Act is part of the body of law
developed at the State or Federal level to which his Honour referred.
deployment of the phrase “public or political activity” in a statute
framed to create behavioural norms in an industrial
relations context would no
doubt have been intended to capture an employee or prospective employee’s
participation in trade
union activities that could properly be characterised as
public or political, even if it could also be characterised as industrial.
characterising the Applicant’s conduct, there is no evidential difficulty
of the kind identified in
CPS Management -
it could not be said of the
PSA FCU Campaign in which the Applicant participated, that “
nothing ...which suggests that
put pressure on the government
or attempted to do so or took any particular step in that
direction”.
Obtaining public support for the legislative reform the PSA sought to drive
was all about putting pressure on government. Unlike the
situation in
the Applicant here did not assert that by being a delegate and undertaking
general organising activity (such as organising and participating
in a picket
during an industrial dispute), it could be
that the activities
he undertook were political. The Applicant’s participation in media
interviews in his own time and at the
request of the PSA, facilitated through
the media unit of the PSA, involved the Applicant participating in a campaign
advanced by
the PSA involving both industrial and political pressure (in the
form of garnering public support through the general media) directed
legislative reform in connection with commercial fishing activities, for the
purpose of improving the safety of members
of the FCU in performing their work.
my view, subject to the qualifying words “unless it interferes with the
performance of the employee’s duties”,
a union member and delegate
engaged in a public campaign of the kind being prosecuted by the PSA, directed
to changing laws to enhance
the safety of workers, is perhaps the quintessential
illustration of what the legislature must have had in mind when inserting a
protection against victimisation for employees or prospective employees engaging
public or political activity”
when crafting the Freedom
from Victimisation provisions in the context of the IR Act.
Interference with the performance of the employee’s
“public or political activity” the Applicant relies upon is the
giving of interviews to media outlets at the request
of the PSA in his own time,
in connection with and as part of the PSA FCU Campaign. The public or political
activity relied upon
the Applicant having participated in work
bans. As such, when considering whether that activity interfered with the
performance of
the Applicant’s duties, the focus is on the Applicant
having given interviews to the media (and what he said in that connection).
Respondent did not argue anything done by the Applicant in connection with the
giving of interviews physically interfered with
him performing his work in the
FCU. The Applicant’s evidence that the media interviews were done in his
own time (off duty
or when on a break) and so did not interfere with the
performance of work when on duty, was not in doubt.
Respondent’s entire argument in this connection is directed to the
operation of workplace policies maintained by the Respondent:
in particular, the
Respondent’s Code of Conduct and Ethics, the Internal Media Procedure, the
Media Spokesperson Guidelines,
and the Fisheries Compliance Enforcement Policy
and Procedure.
was not in dispute that the Applicant, as a member of the Department (part of
the public service) employed under the GSE Act, was
at the relevant time bound
by the Department’s Code of Ethics and
(the Code),
and each of the other policies identified by the Respondent. Of course, the
GSE Act must be read
harmoniously
legislation of the same polity, including the IR Act and the behavioural norms
that it seeks to establish.
note a broader Code of Ethics and Conduct for NSW Government Sector
which applies
across the public sector in lieu of a local departmental equivalent, that seeks
to give effect to the Government Sector
came into operation on
1 November 2024.
apply to the Applicant as at late September/ early October 2024 and need not be
discussed further (it is a matter, however,
to be taken into account in framing
relief). However, the Code in evidence has “May 2020” on its front
cover, but identifies
it was “first published” on 1 July 2020. Its
”. The document name is “RDOC
There is language consistent with the generic post 1 November 2024 Code of
Ethics and Conduct for NSW Government Sector
Employees. I have some concern that
this form of the Code was not the form of the Code in effect at the time of the
Applicant’s
conduct in late September/early October 2024. However, in the
absence of any particular issue having been raised about it, I will
the basis Ex 3 was the proper form of the Code (or at the least, there was no
material difference with what did apply
if it were something else).
Respondent’s argument was not expressly put as reliant upon either a
contractual or statutory duty said to be owed by the
Applicant, albeit insofar
as the Code was concerned the submission was it gave “practical guidance
in applying and gives effect
to” the core values in s 7 of the GSE Act. I
note s 8A(3) of the GSE Act (commenced in 2022) may be said to create a duty to
comply with the terms of a Code of Conduct adopted under that section, but it
was not said the Code, being a document specific to
the Department, operated in
parts of those various policies relied upon (to the extent specific parts were
relied upon) are in the nature of a restraint.
They are dealt with in detail
below, but broadly described, restraints on the making of media commentary as a
departmental spokesperson,
and in conduct that could create a potential conflict
of interest.
point was not argued, but there may be some doubt as to whether in crafting an
exception from a protection for undertaking certain
activity, said exception
being grounded in the interference with the performance of the employee’s
duties, the legislature
had a policy obligation (meaning ultimately a
contractual obligation) to refrain from doing something in mind.
ordinary meaning of “duties” in this context would appear to be (my
“action required by one’s position or occupation; office;
the duties of a soldier
the duties of a
clergyman”.
“The action which one's position or station directly requires; business,
office, function.”
ordinary meaning of the word “performance” viewed in context would
appear to be:
“execution or doing, as of work, acts, or
“The accomplishment or carrying out of something commanded or undertaken;
the doing of an action or operation....
The carrying out, discharge, or fulfilment of a command, duty, promise, purpose,
responsibility, etc.; execution,
discharge.”
verb “interfere” in context would appear to mean:
to come into opposition, as one thing with another, especially
with the effect of hampering action or procedure:
these interruptions
interfere with the work.
(of things) to strike against each other, or one against another, so as to
hamper or hinder action; come into physical
collision”.
“Of things, actions, etc.: To come into collision or opposition, so as to
affect the course of”.
to “the performance of the employee’s duties” would appear to
be directed to the
execution, doing, carrying out or accomplishment
action required
by the employee’s
position, occupation or
The exception in the protection against victimisation because of
public or political activity in s 210(1)(h) “unless it interferes
performance of the employee’s duties”, if the words used are given
their ordinary and grammatical meaning viewed
in context, operates to deny
protection for activity that would
collision or
execution, doing, carrying out or accomplishment
action required
by the employee’s position, occupation or
noted above, the Respondent did not identify any
action required
position as an SCO within the FCU, that was hampered by the Applicant having
undertaken the media interviews in his own time
at the request of the PSA.
Rather it was said that by making the “unauthorised media comments”
and failing to comply
with the allegedly relevant restraints, “his
activities interfered with the performance of the Applicant’s public
and obligations such that s 210(1)(h) did not apply as a
protection” (RSUB at [92]).
is a tension in the idea the exception operates to exclude protection for
activity that hampered the performance
of a contractual
If an “employee’s duties” in s 210(1)(h) captures an
employee’s contractual duty to comply with an employer’s
and lawful directions (or perhaps a more direct contractual restraint on
activity), including by way of a standing direction
in the form of a policy or a
Code of Conduct, the important protection afforded by the section could be
avoided by a mere administrative
fiat. Construing the word “duties”
in this context as capturing as a contractual obligation (in terms, or as a duty
comply with a reasonable and lawful direction) to refrain from undertaking
activity would denude the protection intended to operate
to the benefit of
employees or prospective employees to a significant extent (potentially
altogether, depending on the terms of the
relevant direction or contractual
term). That outcome seems so improbable and impracticable as to suggest it is
unlikely to have
been intended. The ordinary meaning of the words used suggest
what was excluded from protection was public or political activity
interference with the ability of the employee to do their job (for example,
absenting themselves for work to participate in
a protest or picket), not
compliance with a policy or contractual restraint. The submission was directed
to another issue, but I
would agree with the thrust of Mr Saunders submission
for the Applicant:
The fact that there’s a code that might say,
“You’re not allowed to do this at all” isn’t really the
question, the Code is subject to the legislation rather than the other way
another view, at a factual level, it may be that a direction (or standing
direction in the form of a policy) that denuded the employee’s
capacity to
engage in a public or political activity was not a reasonable and lawful
direction. Again, that was not a proposition
argued in this case.
light of the conclusion I otherwise have reached, it is unnecessary to finally
determine the point, and in the absence of having
heard from the parties it
would be inappropriate to do so, but I have real doubts as to whether public or
political activity that
is inconsistent with a restraint contained in a policy
(or perhaps by way of an ad hoc direction, rather than a standing direction
that kind) is
interference with the performance of the employee’s
for the purpose of s 210(1)(h) of the IR Act at all.
then to the argument as mounted, the Code records that it “sets out the
standards of behaviour expected of all departmental
employees”, and
applies to “all employees of the
Department”.
the “Department works to the same ethical framework and values and almost
400,000 other public sector employees”,
said framework (reflecting s 6 of
the GSE Act):
“- recognises the role of the government sector in
preserving the public interest, defending public value, and adding professional
quality and value to the commitments of the Government of the day, and
- establish an ethical framework for a merit-based, apolitical
and professional government sector that implements the decisions
Government of the day.”
the heading “Professional Standards”, the Code states “We all
want to be part of a workplace that helps make
NSW a place where people want to
live and work, and business choose to invest and grow”. To that end
“we need to perform
our roles to the best of our abilities and meet or
exceed commitments by ...” a list of actions, and “We need to foster
effective collaboration within and between teams”, which is said to
“- Contributing to decision-making through open, honest
and timely advice,
- Once a decision has been made, implementing that decision to
the best of our abilities
- Complying with reasonable requests from your people
records “We should take care of ourselves and our workmates” and
continues to touch on communication of “the
work the Department is doing
and how it aligns with the government’s position” (emphasis
“We should effectively communicate the work the Department is doing and
how it aligns with the government’s position.
For this reason, it is
important that:
- Only authorised employees comment publicly on the activities
of the Department, including having conversations with journalists
or posting on
social media
- Public speaking engagements are approved before commitments
are given.”
Code is crafted in general terms and itself recognises it operates with other
Departmental policies (“
To make it easier for people to understand
their responsibilities this Code links to extra information and procedure where
It also links directly to supporting systems, where these are
available”).
Relevantly, the
Respondent also led evidence of extracts of an
“Internal Media
Procedure”,
“Media Spokesperson
Guidelines”
recognise they are not referred to in the Code itself, unlike some other
matters). The Procedure states (emphasis added):
“Department of Regional NSW staff may be approached by journalists or
media organisations asking for information about a project
or policy. This can
occur via phone, email or person, particularly at events.
Staff who are approached for comment should politely refer queries to their
agency media team, either by phone or email...
Guidelines identify a “media enquiry” as (my emphasis)
“requests that come from journalists, media organisations
or publications
that require an official response, information or comment from the Department of
Regional NSW or Minister. Requests
may be received by email, phone or in
state (my emphasis):
“Only authorised staff members may act as the Department of Regional
NSW’s media spokespeople...Staff must not provide
comment or information
to journalists or media organisations on behalf of the Department of Regional
NSW or about Department of Regional
NSW’s matters unless authorised to do
so. This includes speaking to journalists or media organisations on the record,
on background
the heading “Making public comment” the Guidelines say (my
“Department of Regional NSW staff are entitled to make public comment as a
private individual, however, staff are also accountable
under the Department of
Regional NSW’s Code of Ethics and Conduct.
In the first instance, please refer to Department of Regional NSW’s
Professional Standards within the Department of regional
NSW Code of Ethics and
Conduct, which details employee responsibilities in relation to public comment
on behalf of the Department
of Regional NSW.
Public comment includes speaking engagements, comments on social media ...,
views expressed in letters to the editor, opinion pieces
in newspapers or other
publications, radio talk-back or TV interviews where the staff member is
speaking on behalf of the Department
of Regional NSW or can be identified as a
the (sic) Department of Regional NSW staff member.
Staff must NOT:
– provide internal documents, emails, presentations,
information, data or any intellectual property to the media without
authorisation from the Department of Regional NSW’s media team
– make statements on behalf of the Department of Regional
NSW without prior approval
– imply or indicate that their private views are those of
the Department of Regional NSW when making public comment on a
particular issue
or participating in political or industrial activities. This includes using
Department of Regional NSW templates
or letterheads to communicate personal
views to media.”
Code deals with Managing conflicts of
(emphasis added):
“A conflict of interests occurs when an individual’s private
interests make it difficult to perform official duties impartially
in the public
interest. Conflicts are common and can arise, for example, from close personal
relationships at work, family relationships,
social friendships or animosities,
and work done outside the Department, including volunteering or any political
activities.
When we have access to information or are in a position to make decisions, give
approvals or authorise expenditure that may benefit
or detrimentally affect
someone what we have a relationship with, there are possible conflicts of
interests. This can include for
example, decisions involving recruitment,
procurement, community grants or regulatory decisions.”
Code describes “actual”, “reasonably perceived” and
“potential” conflicts, and continues:
“If we fail to properly manage conflicts we leave ourselves open to claims
of corruption or maladministration. This can affect
the reputation of the
Department and individuals. Conflicts must be declared so they can be managed in
a careful and transparent
are handled in “a range of ways”, from “removing yourself from
the affected process to simply ensuring
transparency by declaring the
relationship”. The action to take is left to the employee, guided by the
Code to “think
the significance of the benefit or
detriment”.
series of steps that must be taken if an employee believes they may have a
to the Respondent’s contentions on s 210(1)(h) is the contention that the
Applicant’s comments were “critical
of Government policy on
operational matters” (RSUB [89]), or acted to “undermine its
policies” (RSUB [91]). At
no stage did the Respondent identify with
precision what Government policy or policies on operational matters were relied
this connection, or (assuming it be the Fisheries Compliance Enforcement
Policy) how anything said by the Applicant was “critical”
that/those policies, or operated to undermine them. As I have noted earlier in
these reasons, there was no evidence of the Government’s
“policy” position on the reforms sought in resolution of the PSA FCU
Campaign. I am not prepared to infer from the mere
absence of legislative
amendment that the government held a policy against any of the legislative
reforms being sought by the PSA.
The evidence before me indicates the Department
supported many of them (at least as explained in the Deputy Secretary
letter), and some had even progressed to the point of regulatory
drafting at the time of the PSA FCU Campaign.
is no doubt correct that in carrying out his public functions and exercising
public powers as an SCO in the FCU, the Applicant
was “required ... to
perform his role in compliance and enforcement impartially and in accordance
with the Fisheries Compliance
Enforcement Policy” (RSUB at [86]). A copy
of that policy was in
. But there is no
evidence the Applicant’s media commentary in connection with the PSA FCU
Campaign was inconsistent with the
impartial and apolitical application of the
Fisheries Compliance Enforcement Policy. The Respondent did not draw my
attention to
any part of that policy to suggest that the Applicant’s
commentary conflicted with anything in the policy, or did, or even
created an actual, perceived, or even potential conflict of interest. The
Fisheries Compliance Enforcement Policy
“The department is committed to the safety of its employees and clients
during all interactions (eg boarding of vessels, exercising
of powers of search,
seizure and arrest)... [it lists a number of ways it does this and continues]
...Officers will use their training
and skills to ensure that they do not risk
their own safety or the safety of others when performing compliance
functions”.
The Applicant’s media statements about his personal experiences at work
were not inconsistent with that part of the policy.
Applicant’s media commentary was in explanation of bans being imposed by
the PSA, bans imposed in an attempt to encourage
legislative reform to improve
the health and safety of the FCU members when at work. To the extent the
Applicant described his work
or the work of the FCU more generally, it was
largely directed to how, at least to date, officers have been left to use their
and skills to ensure that they do not risk their own safety or the
safety of others when performing compliance functions, and how
requests would assist. That is not inconsistent with the Fisheries Compliance
Enforcement Policy.
no stage is the Applicant critical of any policy position regarding enforcement
of the laws administered by the FCU. In fact, his
comments are both in terms and
substance directed to improving the tools available to the FCU to pursue the
enforcement activity
contemplated by the policy. I do not see anything in that
commentary that said, or that would suggest he (or any other FCU member),
use his/their enforcement powers in anything other than an honest and impartial
manner consistent with that policy and the
Government Sector Core Values. I do
not accept his commentary was “critical of Government policy on
operational matters”,
or as “tending to undermine and damage the
integrity and good reputation of the NSW public service”, or as damaging
perceived ability to perform his functions in a professional and
apolitical manner”, or suggesting he or his colleagues would
“faithfully serve the government of the day” (cf RSUB [89]).
an employee’s conduct infringes the values in s 7 of the GSE Act is
“a question of fact and degree”:
at [26]. There is
nothing in the Applicant’s comments in the media that is so “harsh
or extreme in their criticism of
Government or Opposition or their respective
policies, or of individual members of Parliament whatever their political
persuasion”
that they could reasonably be seen as “conduct ... bound
to raise questions about the employee’s capacity to work professionally,
efficiently, and impartially” or in a manner “likely to disrupt the
workplace”: cf
at [24]. The Applicant’s comments were
nothing like the sort of “intemperate, even vituperative...”
comments “variously
critical of the Department, other employees of the
Department, departmental policies and administration, Government and Opposition
immigration policies, and Government and Opposition members of
Parliament”,
9000 or so tweets published by Ms Banerji in
Comcare v Banerji
[2019] HCA 23
reject the submission that anything the Applicant did or said in participating
in the media interviews in his own time, at the request
of the PSA media unit,
created a conflict between his interests and those of the Department, or gave
rise to any perception that
he (or his colleagues) may exercise powers as an SFO
or FO in anything other than an impartial and apolitical way.
this part of the Respondent’s case relied heavily on the words in the Code
extracted in paragraph [221] above dealing
with authorised media spokespersons,
and in particular the absence of any reference in that part of the Code to whose
interests the
employee may be speaking for in public or in the media. But the
words in that passage of the Code are ambiguous. The reference to
authorised employees comment publicly on the activities of the department”
are in the context of describing the
effective communication of “the work
the Department is doing and how it aligns with the government’s
That context itself suggests the Code is directed to statements
on behalf of the Department. The Guidelines are much more clear.
They impose a
restraint on those who “may act as the Department of Regional NSW’s
media spokespeople”, either “on
behalf of the Department of Regional
NSW or about Department of Regional NSW’s matters”. They expressly
permit “Department
of Regional NSW staff ...to make public comment as a
private individual...”, provided they do not (amongst other things)
statements on behalf of the Department of Regional NSW without prior
approval” or importantly “imply or indicate that
their private views
are those of the Department of Regional NSW when making public comment on a
particular issue or participating
in political or industrial activities”
(my emphasis).
Guidelines themselves implicitly permit public comment when participating in
political or industrial activities as a private individual,
so long as they do
not explicitly or implicitly represent their views as those of the Department.
That would be in direct conflict
with the Code, if the Code was read as the
Respondent submitted. I do not accept that submission. On its proper reading, I
the relevant passage of the Code is directed to employees being, or
purporting to be, a spokesperson for the Department (or acting
in a manner that
could suggest they were representing the views of the Department).
for the media Procedures, Guidelines and relevant part of the Code, the
Applicant was not approached by a journalist (as contemplated
by the Procedures
and Code). Media outlets approached the PSA, and the PSA’s media unit
facilitated meeting the Applicant.
He was not, as the Procedures describe, asked
for “information about a project or policy”, or to represent the
of or act as spokesperson for the Department. He was asked to
“talk to the media as a union delegate about the industrial action
associated concerns of the
membership”.
purport to be speaking on behalf of the Department, and I accept he expressly
told the media he was not a departmental
spokesperson but was speaking as a PSA
, as is in fact noted
in many of the articles referred to earlier. He did not:
(1) provide internal documents, emails, presentations etc
(2) make statements on behalf of the Department of Regional NSW; or
(3) imply or indicate his private views were those of the Department when making
public comment as part of the PSA FCU Campaign,
which, as I have earlier noted,
was a public or political activity.
noted earlier in these reasons, the depiction of a public servant in a uniform
adjacent to comments may lead a reasonable reader
to be confused as to whether
the comments of the individual are comments of the agency, but that is not this
case. The Applicant
should not have worn his uniform in posing for the
photographs taken by journalists, but in this case no reasonable reader could
mistake the commentary attributed to the Applicant, limited as it was, in the
media articles in evidence as reflecting the views
of the Department, or as the
Applicant having represented the views of the Department.
do not accept the Applicant’s statements to the media interfered with the
performance of his duties as an SFO in the FCU.
I am otherwise satisfied the
Applicant participating in media interviews at the request of and facilitated by
the PSA, in his own
time, in connection with the PSA FCU Campaign, was a public
or political activity attracting the protection in s 210(1)(h) of the
Section 210(1)(g) – Participate or Propose to Participate
in Proceedings
specific allegation is the Applicant “
Participated in proceedings
relating to an industrial matter, being as an instructor and witness for the PSA
in industrial dispute
proceedings notified by the respondent in relation to work
bans imposed by the
“proceedings” referred to in the application were the Dispute -
obviously proceedings “relating to an industrial
two ways the Applicant claimed to have participated in or proposed to have
participated in those proceedings, was by providing
instructions and as a
is not in dispute that the Applicant did provide a witness statement in those
proceedings (on or around 11 October 2024) and did
give evidence and was
cross-examined at the hearing on 28 October 2025, and thereby did participate in
proceedings in relation to
an industrial
the Respondent submitted the fact the Applicant both proposed to be and was in
fact a witness in the proceedings could not
be relevant to the two alleged
detriments:
(1) The decision to deny the Applicant the opportunity to perform higher duties
as the Program Leader, was communicated to the Applicant
on 9 October
(2) The email containing the warning, was sent on 8 October 2024.
There is no evidence Dr Moriarty had been told the Applicant proposed to be
or would in fact be a witness in the Dispute proceedings
prior to his affidavit
having been served on 11 October 2024. The Respondent says it “did not
know, and could not have known,
that [the Applicant] proposed to participate in
proceedings as a witness” at the time the relevant decisions of Dr
were taken.
Dr Moriarty
the Applicant was to be a witness in the proceedings
seems to me to be a distraction. The question is whether the Applicant has
demonstrated
Dr Moriarty believed the Applicant would be a witness. It seems to
me on the chronology of events described below, the suggestion
Dr Moriarty did
not believe the Applicant would likely be a witness in the PSA’s case in
the Dispute, given he was the Acting
FOVB Chairperson, FOVB delegate and the
public spokesperson for the FOVB in the PSA FCU Campaign, would be naive. But
the Applicant
did not advance the case in that way. On the evidence, I accept Dr
Moriarty did not
the Applicant would be a witness in the PSA case,
and there is no evidence he knew the Applicant proposed to be a witness in that
for participation or proposing to participate in proceedings by giving
instructions, the Dispute was the subject of Conciliation
before Commissioner
McDonald on 25 September 2024. Dr Moriarty was also in attendance and it may be
inferred he observed the Applicant
was so involved. The Applicant’s
evidence was he “attended the conciliation via audio visual
that day. In the
ASUBR at [15], the Applicant’s role on that day was described as providing
instructions in the way a union
delegate customarily does “
informing union officials of the factual matters in dispute and guiding
decisions about settlement, rather than as in a formal
client/lawyer
arrangement”.
In oral submissions it was couched in this
he’s a delegate in a relatively niche occupation, informing
the union as to what is happening and what the work group desires,
what the issues are.
Respondent says there is no evidence the Applicant “gave
instructions” in the proceedings to support that
submission.
The Respondent
otherwise argues the Applicant has not demonstrated the Applicant had either
participated or proposed to participate
in proceedings
(1) The word “participate” means “take part in”. In the
context of proceedings, to participate in proceedings
is to take an active step
in the litigation, such as commencing proceedings or giving evidence:
v Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 1470
; 176 IR 346 at
Australian Licenced Aircraft engineers Association v
International Aviation Service Assistance Pty Ltd
[2011] FCA 333
Elka Simjanovska and Roads and Traffic Authority
of New South Wales
[2006] NSWIRComm 267
157 IR 40 at
(2) Mere “passive attendance” is not participation.
Applicant says:
(1) He both “proposed to participate and actually participated” in
proceedings in relation to an industrial
(2) The Applicant’s role in the Conciliation, as noted above, was said to
have been to enable him to provide instructions in
the way a union delegate
customarily does in proceedings before a body such as the Commission
ie by informing union officials of the factual matters in dispute and
guiding decisions about settlement, rather than as in a formal
client/lawyer
arrangement”.
(3) The authorities relied upon by the Respondent do not go as high as requiring
a party to have a role as a party principle or even
as a witness, before they
can be found to have been a participant in proceedings.
(4) There is no basis for the respondent’s submission that the
Applicant’s role was limited to “passive attendance”.
accept that by his involvement in the Conciliation proceedings before
Commissioner McDonald on 25 September 2025, the Applicant
did either or both
“participate, or propose to participate” in proceedings in relation
to an industrial matter:
(1) The Commission’s AVL facilities are not generally available to the
public. For the Applicant to have attended the proceedings
via AVL, there must
have been a specific request by one of the parties to the proceedings made to
the Commission to facilitate that
arrangement. I infer that was done by the
solicitors representing the PSA in the Dispute proceedings before Commission
There must have been some purpose for that arrangement to have been
(2) Whilst the Respondent is correct the Applicant did not himself give evidence
of the reason for him having been on AVL during
the Conciliation, I am not bound
by the rules of evidence and in an appropriate case can accept statements from
the bar table (or
made in submissions) as fact. In this case, the solicitor
appearing for the Applicant and instructing Counsel in these proceedings,
Trainor, is a solicitor in the direct employ of the PSA. Moreover, Mr Trainor
was the solicitor for the PSA in the Dispute proceedings
before Commissioner
McDonald (and I note Mr Saunders, counsel for the Applicant, was also counsel
for the PSA in those proceedings).
I accept that the reason the PSA had made
arrangements for the Applicant to have attended the Conciliation proceedings via
as was said in the ASUBR at [15], so he could provide instructions in
the way a union delegate customarily does:
by informing union officials of
the factual matters in dispute and guiding decisions about settlement.
(3) In any event, given the Applicant was not only a local delegate for the
PSA’s FOVB membership, but also a member of the
FOVB executive and its
Acting Secretary and Chairperson at the time, and given the fact the work bans
imposed by the PSA that lay
at the heart of the proceedings in the Commission
were imposed by the PSA following a vote of the FOVB membership (no doubt
by or at least at the request of the FOVB executive), I would infer
the Applicant’s attendance in the dispute proceedings was
facilitated so
he could be a source of instructions about the substance of and potentially
settlement of the dispute, in any event
and without reference to ASUBR [15]. I
note in that connection the PSA Delegates Handbook, in referring to proceedings
Commission in the context of dispute notifications says (pg 73):
“Once the matter is listed, the parties are called before the Commission
for a conciliation conference. Sometimes matters discussed
and agreements
reached in conciliation must be treated as confidential and not discussed
outside of the hearing.
Industrial officers handle the appearances before the Commission.
It is a good idea for delegates to attend the hearings so that they can assist
the industrial officer and report back to members.
Delegates can sometimes
actively participate in a conciliation conference.
Members, if necessary, can then determine a future course of action...”
protection in s 210(1)(g) operates in favour of those who both participate, and
those who propose to participate, in proceedings
relating to an industrial
matter. None of the authorities referred to by the Respondent support a narrow
construction of the word
“participate” in this context, so as to
require a person to have a specific role in proceedings before the protection
s 210(1)(g) may arise. Jagot J (then of the Federal Court) in
Fairfax Media Publications
[2008] FCA 1470
(2008) 176 IR 346
in rejecting a
submission that proceedings had to be extant at the time any proposal to
participate was said to have been made,
said (at [89] – [90],
emphasis added):
“The submission does not sit well with the natural and ordinary meaning of
the words “proposes to participate in ...
a proceeding under an industrial
law”. The word “participate” means to take part in. A person
can participate in
a proceeding in different ways (as the provisions recognise
by drawing a distinction between participating in and giving evidence
proceeding, s 793(1)(k) and (l)). People can participate in proceedings by (at
least) commencing proceedings, defending proceedings,
or giving evidence in
proceedings. If participation includes commencement of proceedings (as I think
it does) then a proposal to
participate in proceedings includes a proposal to
commence proceedings. On this basis, it was not necessary for the provision to
refer to “a proceeding or proposed proceeding” as the respondent
submitted. The element of futurity captured by the proposal
to participate
applies to all potential forms of participation, including by way of
commencement.
This construction of s 793(1)(k) also accords with the purpose of the provision
to prohibit an employer from taking proscribed conduct
against an employee (as
set out in s 792(1)) because an employee wishes to avail themselves of the right
to be involved in legal
process...”
J gave the ordinary expansive meaning to the word “participate” in
(dealing with a federal counterpart of s 210(1)(g)), recognising
that it would “at least” contemplate commencing proceedings,
defending proceedings, or giving evidence in proceedings, but otherwise
acknowledging a person could participate in proceedings in
ways”. Barker J in
ALAEA v International Aviation Services Assistance
[2011] FCAFC 333
(2011) 193 FCR 526
went no further than accepting that providing a
witness statement amounted to participation in proceedings. The decision of the
Bench of this Commission in
Simanjovska v Roads and Traffic Authority of
New South Wales
(2006) 157 IR 40
says nothing of the word
“participate” but gives an expansive meaning to the word
“proceedings” (so as to
potentially capture the invocation of an
Award’s dispute resolution as participation in proceedings).
ordinary and grammatical meaning of the word “participate” in this
context is “to take or have a part or share,
as with others; share:
participate in
“To take part; to have a part or share
(formerly also
) a thing; to
official or member in attendance at proceedings connected with an industrial
dispute for the purpose of providing instructions
and to enable communication
with members is, in my view, one obvious means by which they may take part in or
have a part in such
proceedings – it is one means by which a union member
or official may exercise their right to be involved in the “legal
process” (to paraphrase Jagot J in
). It is, to adopt the
language from the judgment of Barker J in
ALAEA v International Aviation
Services Assistance
to take part “
practical sense.”
am comfortably satisfied that a person (and in particular a delegate) who
attends a compulsory conference or conciliation process
in proceedings before
the Commission for the purpose of:
(1) providing information to advocates or those directly instructing advocates
(2) to enable advocates or those directly instructing advocates to canvass
potential settlement proposals in resolution of the dispute
proceedings; or
(3) directly observing what occurred so they could facilitate communication to
members of a union at a workplace affected by the
proceedings about the
proceedings, and facilitate decisions by those members as to how to proceed;
are a participant in those proceedings, whether or not they are in fact
called upon to provide that information or to canvass those
proposals. Attending and observing proceedings before the Commission for any or
all of these purposes, whether or not
the person is actually called upon, is not
“mere passive attendance”. In light of my findings I need not
consider whether
mere passive attendance would be sufficient to invoke the
protection in s 210(1)(g) of the IR Act.
Section 210(1)(j) - Complaint about a risk to health and safety
Application broadly alleged the Applicant “made complaints about workplace
matters that he considers to not be safe and/or
pose a risk to
Application did not particularise any action of the Applicant that was said to
be a “complaint” at all, let alone
one made prior to 9 October 2024
that was said to have been the cause of the detrimental action. The only conduct
of the Applicant
referred on the Application otherwise was his participation in
the proceedings (referred to above) and the media statements. The
ASUB asserted
it was “apparent that...by his actions [the Applicant] made a
‘complaint’ in the relevant sense about
a safety issue in his
workplace”.
having participated in the Dispute proceedings before Commissioner McDonald
initiated by the Respondent, the only “actions”
of the Applicant
referred to in those submissions is the Applicant’s participation in the
campaign in connection with the work
bans by “giving media comment in his
capacity as a union delegate between 22 September 2024 and 2 October
The Applicant
said that a ‘complaint’ in this context, need not be a formal
complaint or precise grievance, but it was
sufficient if the person raised
grievances or expressed dissatisfaction about a workplace matter that the person
considers is not
safe or a risk to
was no factual dispute about the Applicant having made media commentary, or as
to its content and subject matter.
Respondent submitted the Commission could not find the Applicant had made a
complaint attracting the protection in s 210(1)(j)
for a number of reasons, but
in summary:
(1) However broad the concept of ‘complaint’, a complaint to the
media (whatever its subject matter) is not a complaint
to a person or body
capable of resolving it:
CFMEU v Quirk
[2023] FCAFC 163
300 FCR 171
– [47], and [344]; and
(2) The use of the words “workplace matter” in s 210(1)(j) is
deliberate and has a connotation more narrow than “industrial
matter” as defined in s 6 of the IR Act. It should be understood as
“confined to matters which are related to, and capable
of resolution, in
the workplace”. The Applicant’s complaints in the media were about
matters requiring legislative reform,
and were not something within the
Department’s control. They were not, as such, complaints about a
‘workplace matter’.
do not accept the second submission. A complaint about the absence of relevant
safety equipment, or the absence of adequate authority
to enable a job to be
done safely, or that an employee does not have the same authority or powers as
an employee doing ostensibly
the same job in another jurisdiction, is readily
capable of characterisation as a workplace matter or being related to a
I can see no reason why the phrase ‘workplace matter’
should be constrained to matters that are “capable or resolution,
workplace” if by that limitation the Respondent’s suggests it must
be something within the employer’s direct
and immediate control. The Full
Twentieth Superpace Nominees
at [33] said the concept of
workplace matter “should be read broadly”, and “As such,
‘workplace matter’
should be read to include any matter arising in
connection with a workplace”.
ratio of the Full Federal Court in
CFMEU v Quirk
is not entirely on
point. The foundational proposition accepted by Perram J at first instance in
Quirk v CFMEU
(at [289] – [296])
was that there was no
relevant “complaint” made by two former union employees when they
purportedly engaged in “whistleblowing
to the media”, because a
complaint made to the media was not founded in a set of legal norms, and
therefore not one they were
‘able to’ make. The Full Court (for
differing reasons) found no error in that conclusion (albeit the appeal was
allowed in part). That was important because the allegation against
the employer was grounded in a contravention of a workplace right
s 341(1)(c)(ii)
Fair Work Act
(Cth). That is not a
requirement in s 210(1)(j) of the IR Act.
Katzmann J observed in the Full Court at [343], Perram J at first instance had
not decided that to be a complaint the employee
was able to make, the complaint
had to be made to a person or body who could do something about it, or indeed to
anyone in particular.
It was in that context her Honour had said (at [344]
– [345], emphasis added):
“As I have already mentioned, his Honour had referred earlier to a
submission made by Mr Seck that it was sufficient for something
complaint if it “conveys a grievance”, citing
[579]-[581], but did not accept that
said this was sufficient. If it
did, his Honour added, that reasoning would be inconsistent with the Full
Court’s decision in
. That is undeniably correct. It would also
be inconsistent with
where, at [59], the Full Court held that,
“[i]n the context of s 341(1)(c), the term ‘complaint’
connotes an expression
of discontent which seeks consideration, redress or
relief from the matter about which the complainant is aggrieved”. The
Mr Quirk and Mr Miller made on national television and in the SMH did
not seek consideration of their complaints by, or redress or
relief from, the
media. They sought a platform on which to publicise their grievances. As the
primary judge put it at [38] of his
“There is in my opinion no doubt that Mr Quirk and Mr Miller had agreed to
speak with 7.30 in order to make public their grievances
the CFMMEU was being conducted. I did not understand the contrary to be
suggested by either party”.
It follows that, if the point raised by ground 5b of the cross-appeal is the
point put in the written submissions, it must be rejected.”
genesis of the Full Court proceedings in
Alam v National Australia Bank
[2021] FCAFC 178
(2021) 288 FCR 301
were a series of internal communications made by
an employee of the National Australia Bank alleged to be a complaint or inquiry
relation to the employee’s employment for the purpose of establishing
the exercise of a workplace right under s 341(1)(c)(ii)
of the FW Act.
There was no dispute that the employer was an appropriate recipient of such
a complaint. The issue was whether any of the communications
relied upon could
in fact be considered either a complaint or inquiry for the purpose of that
section. In considering that question,
the Full Court said this (at [59] –
[60]), emphasis added:
“In the context of s 341(1)(c), the term “complaint” connotes
an expression of discontent which seeks consideration,
redress or relief from
the matter about which the complainant is aggrieved:
Cummins South
at [13]. A complaint is more than a mere request for assistance and
should state a particular grievance or finding of fault:
Shea v TRUenergy
at [579]-[581] per Dodds-Streeton J (cited with approval in
Cummins South
at [13]). Her Honour continued, at [626]-[627], by saying that it is
unnecessary for the employee to identify expressly the communication
complaint or grievance, or to use any particular form of words. Instead, what is
required is a communication which, whatever
its precise form, is reasonably
understood in context as an expression of grievance and which seeks, whether
expressly or implicitly,
that the recipient at least take notice of, and
consider, it. The characterisation of a communication as a complaint is to be
as a matter of substance, and not of form.
The distinction between a complaint and a mere request for assistance had been
made in earlier authorities:
Zhang v Royal Australian Chemical Institute
[2005] FCAFC 99
(2005) 144 FCR 347
Hill v Compass Ten Pty Ltd
[2012] FCA 761
(2012) 205 FCR 94
. It is possible that some requests for assistance may
be able to be characterised as “inquiries” for the purposes of
341(1)(c) (for example, an inquiry as to whether the recipient is able to
provide the requested assistance) but it was not suggested
characterisation of that kind was appropriate in relation to any of the
appellant’s alleged requests or inquiries.”
majority of the Full Court (Bromberg J with whom Mortimer J agreed) in
Cummins South Pacific Pty Ltd v Keenan
[2020] FCAFC 204
(2020) 281 FCR 421
, to which the
Full Court in
had referred, had said (at [13] –
“The natural meaning of the term “complaint” in the context in
which it is used in s 341(1)(c) connotes an expression
of discontent which seeks
consideration, redress or relief from a matter in relation to which the
complainant is aggrieved. A complaint
is more than a mere request for assistance
and must state a particular grievance or finding of fault
: Shea v TRUenergy
Services Pty Ltd (No 6)
[2014] FCA 271
(2014) 242 IR 1
; 314 ALR 346 (Shea) at
(Dodds-Streeton J) and the authorities there cited. Whether an employee has made
a complaint is a matter of substance, not form,
and is to be determined in light
of all the relevant circumstances, it being only necessary that the relevant
communication, whatever
its form, is “reasonably understood in context as
an expression of grievance or a finding of fault which seeks, whether expressly
or implicitly, that the employer or other relevant party at least take notice of
and consider the complaint”: Shea at [626]-[627]
(Dodds-Streeton J).
As Dodds-Streeton J observed in Shea at [619], the relevant object of s 340 (in
combination with s 341(1)(c)) “is to protect
employees from retribution in
the form of adverse action because they have exercised a workplace right by
making a complaint in relation
to their employment”. The protection from
retribution is not a protection provided for any and all complaints. What is
is the right of an employee to complain about the employee’s
employment and the matters that relate to it. That seems to be
based on the
rationale that an employee should be entitled to advocate in support of her or
his interests in the employment without
fear of retribution for having raised
those interests with her or his employer or another person or body to whom the
employee has
turned for assistance.”
the issue in
was whether the ability of an employee to make a complaint in relation to their
employment had to be sourced in, or be about, a right
or entitlement held by the
employee in order to fall within the scope of s 341(1)(c)(ii) of the FW Act. It
had nothing to do with
the issue in these proceedings.
its ordinary meaning, “complaint” means “an expression of
grief, regret, pain, censure, resentment, or discontent;
fault-finding...a cause of grief, discontent, lamentation,
against or because of injury; representation of wrong suffered; utterance of
connection with “a”, “An utterance or statement of grievance
or injustice
Full Bench in
Twentieth Superpace Nominees v Transport Workers Union of New
South Wales
an appeal from a decision of Commissioner Murphy in which he found the Appellant
had unlawfully victimised a truck driver for
raising safety concerns connected
with the over-filling of bins of sugar cane, by writing letters, participating
in a petition, and
in meetings with management as a co-delegate for the workers.
One of the issues that arose was whether the truck driver’s various
expressions of concern was sufficiently particular as to amount to a complaint.
The Full Bench found:
(1) the phrase “makes a complaint”, “should be construed
broadly and does not require a formal accusation. A complaint
can be inferred
from conduct, or a course of conduct, involving raising concerns, objections or
disagreements and should be seen
to encompass the myriad of ways in which an
employee would ordinarily raise issues or make complaints in a
(2) that the phrase “about a workplace matter” gave meaning to the
word “complaint”. Specifically, the context
within which
“complaint” is included in the section connotes something which is
informal in nature akin to the statement
of grievances or expression of dispute
in a workplace context and thereby having the following attributes:
(a) the complaint may be in the nature of a grievance or dispute rather than a
formal complaint;
(b) the complaint may be made in any one or more of the ways in which employees
would ordinarily make complaints in the workplace,
(c) there is no requirement as to form, such that the complaint could be made
orally or in writing, ultimately concluding (at [29]):
“...having regard to the ordinary meaning of the word
“complaint”, the context in which the phrase “makes
complaint” is used in s 210(1) and the protective nature of the section,
we are satisfied that the phrase “makes a
complaint” should be
construed broadly and that it is not necessary to point a specific formal
accusation as constituting the
making of the complaint. Expressing
dissatisfaction about a workplace matter may well amount to the making of a
complaint. This may
arise from an instance or the statement of a grievance or,
when viewed in context, a course of conduct involving the expression of
dissatisfaction or the raising of concerns or objections.”
broad rationale underpinning s 210(1)(j) (and for that matter s 210(1)((i),
(ia), (ib), (ic), or (k)), albeit directed to complaints
of a particular kind
(namely complaints about a workplace matter that the person considers is not
safe ...”) appears to be
accurately captured by the judgment of
J for the majority in
“...an employee should be entitled to advocate in support of her or
his interests in the employment without fear of retribution
for having raised
those interests with her or his employer or another person or body to whom the
employee has turned for assistance.”
appears likely, given its immediate neighbours in s 210(1), the absence of any
recipient for the complaint contemplated by Section
210(1)(j) was deliberate.
The subsection does not confine the complaints it protects to particular or
identified recipients. That
is to say, it would appear the legislature
deliberately chose not to limit the protection for complaints about a workplace
the person considered was not safe, to complaints made only to particular
bodies or entities (similar to the reference to “any
subsections (i), (ia) and (ic), but unlike subsection (ib) and (k) where a
particular entity is identified).
said I accept, however generously one may approach the idea that a compliant
ought express discontent or a grievance, when read
in context the term
‘complaint’ connotes not only an expression of discontent but one
that additionally “seeks
consideration, redress or relief from the matter
[here, the “workplace matter that the person considers is not safe or a
to health”] about which the complainant is aggrieved” (to
paraphrase Katzmann J in
), or is made to someone “to whom the
employee has turned for assistance” (to paraphrase Bromberg J in
). That arises not only from the ordinary meaning of the word
“complaint” viewed in context, including the other placita
210(1) and the general subject matter of s 210(1) directed to the creation of
behavioural norms in industrial relations, but
additionally because the
complaint is but one part of the protection conferred by the subsection –
the other being where the
employee “exercises functions under Part 5
(Consultation, representation and participation) of the
Work Health and
Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Act
(the WH&S Act)
with, amongst other things:
(1) Consultation required by a person conducting a business or undertaking (a
PCBU) when making certain decisions or proposing changes
that may affect the
health or safety of workers,
including direct consultation with workers who carry out work for the business
or undertaking who are, or are likely to be, directly
affected by a matter
relating to work health or safety. In the course of that consultation, workers
are entitled to receive information,
to express their views and raise work
health or safety issues in relation to the matter, and to contribute to the
decision-making
process relating to the
(2) Requests by a person (of course including an employee) that a business or
undertaking facilitate the election of a health and
representative,
triggers a process of negotiation and agreement about relevant work groups,
failing which an employee (any person) party to
the negotiations can request the
regulator appoint an inspector to decide work
Employees can
nominate for election, are entitled to vote in an election for the
representative for their work group, and if elected
have specific powers and
obligations about matters relating to their work
including the power to
direct that unsafe work cease in certain
circumstances,
enforceable provisional improvement notices in certain
circumstances;
(3) The right of employees to cease unsafe work in certain
circumstances.
consider the Applicant’s communication with the media akin to the
‘whistleblowing to the media’ considered in
litigation. The Applicant’s statements to the media (such as they are in
evidence before me, in the articles subsequently published),
did raise matters
capable of characterisation as complaints about workplace matters the Applicant
considered were not safe and presented
a risk to the health and safety of
himself and other members of the FCU. However, the Applicant’s media
communication was not
to seek consideration of his complaints by, or to seek
redress or relief from, the media. I am not satisfied the comments made by
Applicant in the media were “a complaint about a workplace matter that the
person considers is not safe or a risk to health”
within the meaning of s
210(1)(j) of the IR Act. This ground of the application can be put to one side.
REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION
successfully prosecute an application alleging a contravention of s 210 of the
IR Act, the onus is on the Applicant to ultimately
satisfy the Commission that
detrimental action was taken because of a protected characteristic within s
The rebuttable
presumption in s 210(2) aids the Applicant in that exercise. The Full Bench
Lee v Ausgrid (No 6)
(2013) 237 IR 63
NSWIRComm 62
, observed long ago that:
Section 210(2) is the legislature's recognition that the reasons
for detrimental action against an employee are, of necessity, peculiarly
the knowledge of the employer. Therefore, to avoid liability arising under the
provisions of s 210(1) and 213, the employer
must negative the statutory
presumption that its conduct has been for the reasons condemned by
s 210(1). This is not a technical
requirement. As was submitted by the
appellant, it serves the important public interest of ensuring that justice
is done and the
legislative prescription is not defeated by the
inability of an applicant to adduce evidence upon a central issue”.
terms of s 210(2) are clear: once an employee has demonstrated detriment as a
result of an action by an employer and alleges the
cause of that detriment falls
within the classes of victimisation in s 210(1), then (assuming the employee
establishes the elements
of the subsection/s of s 210(1) relied upon), it is
presumed that employee was victimised. Once the presumption in s 210(2) is
the onus is on the employer to show that the “alleged
matter” was not “a substantial and operative cause of the
detrimental action”.
borrow from the judgment of Mason J in
extracted earlier in these
the consequence is that the Applicant is not bound to adduce
evidence that the Respondent was actuated by (one of the s 210) reasons.
Applicant is entitled to succeed if the evidence is consistent with the
hypothesis that the Respondent was so actuated and that
hypothesis was not
displaced by the Respondent.
Respondent outlined a number of propositions with respect to the application of
the rebuttable presumption that were said to be
“settled” principle
(RSUB [101], albeit reference is made to s 361 of the FW Act I understand the
Respondent to say they
are equally applicable here). No particular issue was
taken with that summary. I would not necessarily accept the propositions as
framed, but (save for one matter, dealt with at [274] below) to the extent I
hold any different view (or would describe the proposition
differently), they do
not affect the determination of the current proceedings and so can be ignored.
Applicant has established detriment. He alleges the Respondent, via Dr Moriarty,
imposed that detriment because he (ASUB [15]):
(1) participated in a public or political activity per s 210(h) i.e. made media
comment as part of a campaign directed to (amongst
other things) changing laws
to enhance the workplace safety of FOVB members when at work;
(2) participated in proceedings relating to an industrial matter, being the
dispute notified by the Secretary, within the meaning
of s 201(1)(j);
(3) was an elected representative of employees and acted in that capacity per s
210(1)(a); and/or
(4) made a complaint about a WHS matter per s 210(1)(j).
Applicant has established the elements of three of those grounds. The rebuttable
presumption is engaged. The question is whether
the Respondent satisfies the
Commission that the alleged protected characteristics were not
substantial and operative cause of the detrimental action. The indefinite
article “a” is significant. It is by that mechanism
the IR Act deals
with the potential for an employer to have multiple reasons for imposing a
detriment. Where there may be multiple
reasons for imposing a detriment, an
employer seeking to discharge the rebuttable presumption will need to
demonstrate
of the protected characteristics that are relied upon to
invoke it were
substantive and operative reason for the detriment.
Respondent submitted (RSUB [102]):
“The evidence will demonstrate that the Department took the alleged
detrimental actions against Mr Wright because he breached
the Code by making the
media comments.
Even if the media comments are capable of being characterised
as an alleged protected ground or activity, the authorities make clear
will be sufficient to demonstrate that the Department characterised the conduct
differently.
The Department submits that the Commission will accept the
Department’s evidence for the following reasons.”
do not accept the underlined portion of that submission. The phrase
will be sufficient”
overstates the position.
accept that where the reason for the adverse action is capable of being
characterised as being connected to the exercise of protected
right or activity
(or status), it does not necessarily follow that the action was taken by reason
of protected characteristic: RSUB
Board of Bendigo
Regional Institute of Technical and Further Education v Barclay
248 CLR 500
onstruction, Forestry, Mining and Energy
Union v BHP Coal Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 41
253 CLR 243
make clear a
protected characteristic does not need to be entirely disassociated with the
reason a detriment is imposed to displace
the rebuttable presumption. That is so
because the focus of the rebuttable presumption is on the subjective reason of
(or where applicable, people) who made the decision to impose the
way of illustration, if the conduct of the employee can on the one hand be
characterised as the exercise of a workplace right,
but on another also
misconduct, and the subjective reason of the decision maker to impose a
detriment was said to be exclusively
based on a view the behaviour was
misconduct (
that evidence is accepted by the Court), then the
rebuttable presumption may be discharged. The reverse is also true. As
Commissioner
McDonald said in
Public Service Association and Professional
Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales (obo Saraceno)
v Commissioner
[2024] NSWIRComm 1001
“...[C]ounsel for the PSA was correct when
she submitted that “the fact of being a delegate cannot
provide some impervious
armour against any misconduct, but equally it's not
sufficient for an employer to discharge the onus by hiding behind the cloak of
disciplinary investigation.” Expressed another way, the fact
that “all the alleged misconduct was engaged in as part
Mr Saraceno’s duties as a delegate” does not, in and of
itself, protect him against the consequences of any
substantiated
misconduct. However, equally the Respondent cannot
escape a finding of victimisation if in
fact it pursued Mr Saraceno for misconduct
if such allegations are substantiated)
engaging in duties as a delegate, including by instructing the PSA in relation
to the Award Proceeding and proposing to be
a witness in the Award
Proceeding.”
the absence of evidence from the decision maker of an innocent explanation (an
explanation that is accepted as credible), if the
conduct of an employee
identified as the reason for the imposition of a detriment is capable of
characterisation in more than one
way, one establishing a contravention and the
other not, whilst not impossible (it is necessarily fact dependent), it will be
for the Respondent to discharge its burden of demonstrating the
prohibited reason was not
substantial and operative reason for the
imposition of the detriment. The position would be akin to that identified by
at 242 (extracted earlier in these reasons): the
Commission would be left with a reason for the dismissal which did not exclude
possibility of an additional reason infected by the protected
characteristic.
are three grounds under s 210(1) invoked by the Applicant that enliven the
rebuttable presumption in s 210(2). The Respondent
must satisfy the Commission
that none of them were
substantial and operative cause for the
presumption created by s 210(2) to be discharged.
Respondent submitted that in the absence of evidence of Dr Moriarty, the
decision maker, it is still necessary for the Commission
to have regard to all
the circumstances to see whether or not the evidence is capable of discharging
the rebuttable presumption created
by s 210(2). The absence of evidence from the
decision maker does not mean the Respondent must fail in discharging its
. The onus of proof
required of the Respondent in that connection is the ordinary civil standard. I
agree with all three of those
propositions.
that connection the Respondent submitted:
(1) In the absence of evidence from Dr Moriarty, the Commission is left
“to look at the objective evidence that
to determine
what were Dr Moriarty’s reason/s for imposing the detrimental action.
(2) The contemporaneous documents, said to be “often the surest
guide”, record and corroborate Dr Moriarty’s reasons
(3) The proximity in time between the Applicant’s media comments and the
taking of the detrimental action are consistent with
the contemporaneously
stated reason of Dr Moriarty for taking the actions he did.
Respondent also submitted the Commission should not draw a
Jones v Dunkel
inference against the Respondent because evidence was not led from Dr Moriarty.
The absence of his evidence is explained. I accept
that submission, but that
does not go so far as to avoid the drawing of an adverse inference of that kind
from the absence of others
who may be thought to have given evidence that may
have reflected on Dr Moriarty’s reasons for taking action against the
In particular, Mr Connor Wilson, Senior HR Business Partner, who
spoke to Dr Moriarty between 9.52am and 1.45pm on 8 October 2024,
and apparently
drafted the 8 October 2024 email from Dr Moriarty to the Applicant (the Second
Detriment relied upon by the Applicant)
after having had a discussion with him.
The potential significance of Mr Wilson’s evidence will become apparent
when seen in
the context of what transpired between 30 September 2024 and 8
October 2024. To be clear, I appreciate the inferences that may be
the absence of Mr Wilson are limited. At best, his absence may lead to an
inference that anything Mr Wilson may have said
would not have assisted the
Respondent. I proceed on that basis.
for records in evidence, the Respondent pointed to:
(1) The terms of the 8 October 2024 email from Dr Moriarty itself, and the
proximity in time between the media interview on 8 October
2024 and the email
from Dr Moriarty that day;
(2) The email sent to all staff by the Deputy Secretary on the afternoon of 30
September 2024, said to be a reminder of employee
obligations under the Code;
(3) Contemporaneous Teams messages and text messages sent by Dr Moriarty to Ms
Burdett-Symons (which I understand to be Ex 8 [17]
LBS8, [19] LBS9, [23] LBS11,
and [25] LBS13), and a Teams Message from Dr Moriarty to Mr Wilson on 9 October
2024 (Ex 5 [48(d)] AR24).These
were said to be contemporaneous records that
tended “to support the thought processes of Dr Moriarty being focussed on
media comments that were
(4) A file note said to be from Dr Moriarty’s diary, attached to the
affidavit of Ms Ange Royal (Ex 5 [48(c)), dated 22 October
2024. The Respondent
accepted absent explanation from Dr Moriarty, all this note can be given is the
weight which is apparent from
the face of the
but says it did
appear to record Dr Moriarty’s thought process and why he decided to
withdraw the acting up
The Applicant said
it should be given little weight because it was not contemporaneous, having been
made several weeks after the
decisions on 8 and 9 October, and was
‘reactive to proceedings’. The only proceedings on foot at that time
the Dispute before Commissioner McDonald. I understand this to be a
reference to the Applicant having raised concern (in substance
if not form)
that Dr Moriarty denied him the acting
up opportunity, and requested reasons for
the decision in writing (which was refused);
(5) The email exchange on 22 October 2024 between Dr Moriarty and others
regarding the meeting with the Applicant Dr Moriarty proposed
in the 8 October
2024 email.
Respondent accepted that the burden it bore, if the rebuttable presumption was
engaged, “is trying to demonstrate that other
reasons weren’t in [Dr
Moriarty’s] mind”
(I understand that to mean there were no other substantive and operative reasons
for Dr Moriarty’s decisions), recognising
that “the industrial
proceedings” were on foot at the time. In the result, the Respondent
submitted that despite the
absence of Dr Moriarty, the Commission should be
satisfied that the one and only substantive and operative reason for Dr
decision for taking the detrimental actions was because he
believed the Applicant breached the Code by making the media
Ambiguity in the
evidence is only a problem for that submission if it bares upon an adverse
inference that may be drawn as to the
reason for Dr Moriarty’s decision
– if ambiguity in the evidence does not bare upon an adverse inference of
the ambiguity is a neutral
consideration.
the reasons explained below, I do not accept the Respondent has discharged the
rebuttable presumption created by s 210(2) of the
IR Act. I am not satisfied a
belief the Applicant had engaged in misconduct by making what Dr Moriarty
described as unauthorised
media statements was the only substantive and
operative reason for his decision to impose the detriments identified. It is
to express my reasons as part of a chronological examination of the
would be apparent from what is set out above, over the weekend of 28 and 29
September 2024, and on Monday 30 September 2024, following
Conciliation
proceedings before Commissioner McDonald that week, a number of media articles
were published that related to the PSA
FCU Campaign, the imposition of the work
bans by the PSA in support of the Campaign, and the Dispute.
6:30am on Monday, 30 September 2024, Dr Moriarty sent a meeting invitation via
Teams, to Ms Burdett-Symons and four other persons.
The title of the meeting
invitation was “SLT Check In re articles” and was to occur at 9am
that morning. I understand
SLT means Senior Leadership Team. The timing of that
email is significant, as is the timing of the media publications referred to
Senior Leadership Team of the FCU (the SLT, made up of the “program
leaders” and the Director, Dr Moriarty) would
apparently hold regular
The meeting on 30
September 2025 was not one of those meetings. It was described as a
“special meeting” of the SLT convened
specifically to discuss the
“recent media coverage of comments made by the PSA and Mr
her written evidence, Ms Burdett-Symons originally described that meeting as the
usual SLT weekly meeting on 8 October 2024. She
corrected that in her
supplementary statement to 30 September after having identified additional
records in response to a summons
to produce. In her first statement she
described having become aware at that meeting “that Dr Moriarty was
shocked that Mr
Wright had made comments to the media and that he had appeared
in the media in his Fisheries uniform, without approval from the
Department”.
supplementary statement she described that first account of the meeting as
assume she meant, save for the date and the fact it was not a usual weekly
oral evidence was to a different effect.
Burdett-Symons took no notes of the meeting. Notes of the meeting were, however,
prepared by Ms Chrisina Rae (described by Ms Burdett-Symons
highly” skilled and “exceptional employee” including as a
note-taker in meetings).
Those notes were produced under summons and were tendered by the
Burdett-Symons was the only person who gave evidence in the Respondent’s
case as to what transpired at that meeting. In cross-examination
she described
the minutes taken by Ms Rae as “a fair recollection” of the
. Those minutes
demonstrate Ms Burdett-Symons’ initial account of the meeting at paragraph
[20] of her first statement (Ex 7)
was not “accurate”, or perhaps to
be more fair to her, far from a complete account of what transpired at that
cross-examination Ms Burdett-Symons described Dr Moriarty’s demeanour in
this meeting as “extremely agitated, extremely
wound up, very
‘shocked’ as in the statement). That appears consistent with the
tenor of the language attributed to Dr Moriarty
at the meeting in Ms Rae’s
minutes. I appreciate they are but notes, and are not and do not purport to be
an exact account
of all that Dr Moriarty said at the meeting. However, all the
comments recorded on the
were apparently made
by Dr Moriarty,
(1) Referring to “Joe”, plainly a reference to the Applicant, Dr
Moriarty used the words “Pinup Boy”, “Hero”
“Marta”. I understand the last word to be “martyr”. A
reference in this context to “someone who
is put to death or endures great
suffering on behalf of any belief, principle, or
, appears to fit
the context of the meeting more than a woman’s name. I do not understand
that to be in issue. The Respondent
invited me to accept these were
“merely adjectives to described how he perceived Mr Wright may have
presented himself”
and “has to be a reference to what he's been
doing out in the
(2) A reference to having met with a law firm well experienced in employment
law, notably the firm on the record in these proceedings,
“to discuss
the Breach of Code of Conduct by Joe –
Nil approval to do Media
attack on Dept and Minister
” (emphasis added). The
Respondent emphasised the “Nil approval to do Media”, as being
consistent with that being
Dr Moriarty’s concern about the
Applicant’s conduct.
little later in the notes this is recorded (emphasis added):
“LB to consider who would be best as the SFO Far North as DFC does know
how long Mr Wright will be around. Jackie maybe but
she was in the IRC [last]
week and don’t know she would be much better.. Maybe someone left field
that would like the opportunity”
There is no suggestion in the evidence that “the SFO Far North
Coast”, the Applicant, would be going anywhere prior to
this notation. It
appears to me the word “does” is a typographical error and what was
likely said was “doesn’t”
(the sentence simply makes no sense
in terms or context otherwise). I understand “Jackie” to be a
reference to another
attendance in the proceedings before Commissioner McDonald some 5 days prior. LB
was a reference to Ms Burdett-Symons.
In cross-examination, Ms Burdett Symons
gave this evidence:
“Q. What did you understand Dr Moriarty to mean by saying he
didn’t know how long Mr Wright would be around?
A. I took that to mean that there would be some action taken against
Mr Wright for his comments in the media. I didn’t really
what action that would be.”
The Respondent submitted the reference to the Applicant is too vague to draw
any reliable inferences, and in any event, to the extent
it is capable of being
read as Dr Moriarty expressing the view some action may be taken against the
Applicant, in context it would
be because of his doing media commentary without
(3) “FOVB Not running the FCU – DFC is and its got him pissed
off” and “FOVB members beating their chest and
pumped up”. I
understand “DFC” to be a reference to the Director, Fisheries
Compliance, being Dr Moriarty –
it was Dr Moriarty, the decision maker
here, described as being “pissed off” with the FOVB. The Respondent
that this was “clearly” a reference to the media comments
that are being made, “they’re [the FOVB] the ones
who are going out
there and seeking to dictate the agenda because they’re out there beating
their chest...that can be the only
(4) “DFC hasn’t started to track emails yet but well within his
ability to do so. Emails in error Ange Royal has with
staff using work emails
and work time to discuss the Ban and when the best time would be to release it,
the most impact for Media.
Anthony Jesus was one of them.” (emphasis
(5) Finally, a number of other observations were recorded that were
apparently also directed to the proceedings before Commissioner
McDonald in the
week prior (emphasis added):
“Those who turned up to the IRC last week didn’t get DFC approval to
do so – they clearly don’t think they
need approval, Ange going back
to PSA to say so are we docking pay are they submitting leave etc etc
The reply is due Wed/Thurs this week at 4pm, our job [is] to debunk their safety
theory and have the Commissioner see there is NO
safety issue and to give a
Direction to Return to Work.
If choose not to return to work dock pay.
Backed us into a corner, need them back to work that is what the aim is that is
the end game.
Lie their ass off just to win the argument and get them back to work”.
last sentence is not particularly clear. The “and” between the first
and last parts of the sentence appears to be
an error, reflecting the fact these
are but minutes of something said by Dr Moriarty in a meeting rather than a
transcript of what
was said. I infer references to “Lie their ass off just
to win the argument” was not Dr Moriarty having said in front
entire SLT, that someone from the Respondent would lie their ass off just to win
the argument and get workers back to work.
I understand that reference to
“Lie their ass off just to win the argument” to be referable to what
the PSA would say
(or given this is post conciliation, perhaps had said)
regarding the “safety issue” and “safety theory” that
Moriarty was saying the Respondent would seek to “debunk” in the
proceedings. I don’t understand that to be
the Respondent’s submission, whilst that reference to “Lie their ass
off” appears to be a reference to the IRC
proceedings, and collectively,
the perception, rightly or wrongly, that “the union or the FOVB were
trying to win an argument”,
it does not relate to a protected attribute of
the Applicant. As the submission went, “it might be an indication of a
attitude that Dr Moriarty had a feisty and robust disagreement with the
PSA’s position in the Industrial proceedings. That
doesn’t convert
it into an inference that he acted for an unlawful
Respondent accepted that there were a number of inferences that could be drawn
from the file note.
Respondent accepted the evidence demonstrated that Dr Moriarty was annoyed, and
that both the FOVB and the PSA were “vexing
him”, but that does not
necessarily mean actions were taken against the Applicant for one of the
prescribed reasons.
looking at the contemporaneous documentation in whole “one has to construe
it and properly understand what the inferences
are on the balance ... the fact
that there might be a possible inference available doesn’t necessarily
mean its the most reasonable
inference to be
Respondent accepted that the minutes demonstrate (together with Ms
Burdett-Symons evidence) that Dr Moriarty was “annoyed”,
“he was annoyed by Mr Wright’s actions.” The question, it
said, is whether those actions were for a prescribed
reason. That requires
inferences to be drawn from the documents and context, noting “the fact
that there might be a possible
inference available doesn’t necessarily
mean it’s the most reasonable inference to be
substance, the Respondent invited me to conclude the proper inference that
should be rationally drawn from Ex 1, was corroborative
of what the evidence
otherwise showed about Dr Moriarty’s comments and actions towards the
Applicant, and to the extent they
bare upon Dr Moriarty’s reason for
taking action against the Applicant, that it was because he had engaged in
unauthorised
media comments in breach of the Code.
do not accept that submission. In my view, it is not the preferable inference to
be drawn on the balance of probabilities from the
whole of the evidence.
Respondent’s submission on Ex 1 closely parses the terms of a file note
(not a transcript), seeking to characterise particular
parts in favour of its
case, whilst largely ignoring the document as a whole and viewed in context (or
at least some of the surrounding
Moriarty is the Director of Fisheries Compliance. Work bans were imposed by the
PSA, at the urging of (and following an overwhelmingly
vote by) its members
within the FCU – ie the FOVB – seeking reform. That is no doubt what
Dr Moriarty was referring to
when he said words to the effect of “FOVB Not
running the FCU – DFC is and its got him pissed off” and “FOVB
members beating their chest and pumped up”. The Applicant at that time was
a member of the FOVB, the FOVB delegate for the
area, and was also not only a
member of the FOVB executive but its Acting chairperson and Secretary. He was
the person nominated
by the FOVB to be the FOVB spokesperson for the PSA FCU
Campaign and it was in that capacity he came to speak to the media. That
stated in terms in many of the media articles that were published, to which Dr
Moriarty no doubt had regard by 8 and 9 October
to the effect the “FOVB [and] members beating their chest and pumped
up”, and to the “FOVB Not running
the FCU – DFC is and its got
him pissed off”, by Dr Moriarty, a man described as appearing
“extremely agitated,
extremely wound up, very angry”, cannot
rationally or reasonably in context be understood as
directed to
the Applicant’s media statements. In terms, entirely consistent with the
surrounding context, it is the FOVB and
its members, no doubt including the
Applicant, that had “pissed off” Dr Moriarty for, as he perceived
it, trying to run
the FCU and making his job as DFC more difficult.
is in that context this “extremely agitated, extremely wound up, very
angry”, man raised matters such as:
(1) action against those who “turned up to the IRC last week”
(noting it would appear he was of the view those behind
the IRC proceedings had
or would “Lie their ass off just to win the argument”);
(2) that the Applicant may not be around for long;
(3) if he were not, his replacement perhaps ought not be “Jackie”
(another PSA delegate) apparently because “she
was in the IRC [last] week
and don’t know she would be much better” (whether that was because
she was a participant in
those proceedings, she was also a Delegate, or may also
engage in public activity in support of the PSA FCU Campaign doesn’t
matter, because in context any of those inferences would be reasonably
available); and
(4) to starting to track emails because some of the FOVB had used work emails
and work time to “discuss the Ban and when would
be the best time to
release it, the most impact for Media.”
in that context, it is not only rational and reasonable to draw an inference
that what angered Dr Moriarty, and what was prompting
him to consider taking
action (against more than just the Applicant), went well beyond the Applicant
having made unapproved comments
to the media. It seems far more likely Dr
Moriarty’s anger was also directed to the PSA FCU Campaign more generally,
had both industrial and media aspects to it, and to those participating in
it, obviously including the Applicant.
is reinforced by the apparently pejorative references to the Applicant as a
“Pinup Boy” and a “martyr”
(perhaps to a lesser extent
‘hero’) – language reflecting a focus on the Applicant because
of his participation
in the advancement of a cause or belief, rather the simple
act of a public servant making media comment without authorisation.
have no doubt Dr Moriarty referred to the Applicant in the way he did in that
meeting for reasons that included the Applicant having
made statements to the
media without approval (whether the Applicant did or didn’t require
approval may be put to one side
for assessing Dr Moriarty’s reasons for
decision – I accept Dr Moriarty likely thought he did need approval
is noted in Ex 1 and in multiple other documents), but there is no
reason in terms or logic to ignore the Applicant’s role
in the FOVB,
including the fact he was a delegate and involved in that capacity in the PSA
FCU Campaign more generally, including
his participation in the IRC proceedings
some 5 days before, when describing the Applicant as a “pin-up boy”,
and “matyr”, or in suggesting action be taken
against him.
of the latter correspondence emanating from Dr Moriarty personally after 8
October 2024, discussed below, further reinforces
that view and further that
this view was still operating on Dr Moriarty’s mind when he came to impose
the detriments on 8 and
9 October 2024 (and at least up until 22 October 2024).
Dr Moriarty was angered not merely by the Applicant having spoken to the media
without approval, but by the PSA campaign more
generally is again further
reinforced when close regard is paid to the content of the published media to
which Dr Moriarty was most
likely referring, when attending that meeting at 9am
on 30 September 2024.
first indication of what articles Dr Moriarty may have had in mind when going
into the meeting on 30 September 2024, comes from
an out of hours text message
sent from Dr Moriarty to Ms Burdett-Symons at 7:27am on Sunday, 29 September
2024. It contained a link
to the ABC news article extracted at length earlier in
these reasons (the first article referred to in the evidence).
Teams invitation to the 30 September 2024 SLT meeting described earlier was,
according to the notation under the heading “Tracking”
sent by Dr Moriarty to 5 participants (the SLT) at 6:30am Monday 30 September
2024. The meeting itself was to occur between
9 and 9:30am. Ms Burdett-Symons
confirmed it occurred at that
evidence shows that Dr Moriarty received an email from a company known as
“Isentia” entitled “Daily Fisheries
Media Report”, at
9:52am Monday, 30 September
, containing links to the
first tranche of media articles identified in the evidence. A daily media report
“is a regular report
prepared by the Department’s Communications
team which sets out anything in the media that might impact or be relevant to
Department”.
9:59am that morning, 30 September 2024, apparently
the SLT meeting,
Dr Moriarty forwarded that Isentia email and the attached Daily Fisheries Media
Report to the Deputy Secretary Fisheries
and Forestry for the Department, Sean
Sloan, the Senior HR Business Partner, Connor Wilson, the Manager Industrial
Relations, Ange
Royal, and the Acting Director Media, Lyndall Hilder, together
with a screen shot of a webpage showing an ABC interview that morning,
“See highlighted story from below – Joe has also undertaken a radio
interview for ABC and it is doing the rounds
evidence shows a second tranche of media commentary was forwarded to Dr Moriarty
by Lyndall Hilder at 9.55pm on 30 September
Moriarty’s decision to trigger the ‘special meeting’ of the
SLT (presumably made around the time the Teams invite
was sent at 6.30am Monday
morning), and indeed the meeting itself, on the evidence, occurred
the Daily Media Report was sent to Dr Moriarty at about 10am, and certainly many
hours before the email Dr Moriarty received later
from Ms Hilder. That meeting
invitation was sent
to many of the media articles contained in the
Isentia Media Report (or otherwise described in the Respondent’s evidence)
even occurred.
only media in the evidence that Dr Moriarty
have been referring to
when referring to “articles” in his Teams invite sent at 6:30am on
Monday 30 September 2024, are
those referred to in paragraphs [43] – [60]
above. As mentioned above, unlike the matters attributed to the Assistant
Secretary of the PSA, nothing attributed to the Applicant in any of that
media can, on a reasonable reading of it, be described as
an “attack on
Dept and Minister”. It appears to me the far more rational and reasonable
inference is the anger being
displayed by Dr Moriarty at that time was about
much more than just
the Applicant’s
media statements. It is, in my
view, far more likely that Dr Moriarty was angered not only by the
Applicant’s personal conduct,
but by the actions of the PSA more
generally, including the imposition of the bans and the PSA Media Release which,
as noted already,
received far more media attention than did the
Applicant’s benign commentary. So much appears almost obvious when one
the words “FOVB not running the FCU – DFC is and its got him
pissed off” and “FOVB and members beating their
chest and pumped
up” in context.
view about what was generally aggravating Dr Moriarty, is also consistent with
the fact no-one bothered to reach out to the Applicant
personally and tell him
to stop what he was doing – no-one even appears to have suggested to him
that he stop making media
comments until the 8 October 2024 email.
recognise, as noted above, that on 30 September 2024 at 4.40pm the Deputy
Secretary, Fisheries and Forestry, Mr Sean Sloan, sent
a broadcast email to a
mailbox for all fisheries and forestry staff, including all the staff in the
but it relevantly said
nothing more than:
“All staff are reminded to follow the Department’s Code of Conduct
and Ethics, as well as relevant policies and guidelines.
If you are unsure of
these, please ask your Director or Executive Director.
Any media inquiries on these matters should be referred to the
Department’s media unit...”
is hardly a proper way to have drawn concerns about the Applicant’s
attention. To the extent any inference can be drawn from
this email at all, it is far more consistent with attempts to deter PSA/FOVB
members generally from participating in the PSA FCU Campaign.
would appear there was a usual SLT meeting on 8 October 2024. The timing of that
SLT is not known. The context and circumstances
surrounding the creation of the
document are not known, but a document said to be a diary entry of Dr Moriarty
was produced under
summons (Ex 6), in which it seems Dr Moriarty made notes
under the heading “FCU SLT check in” on 8 October 2024. By reference
to “work ban” it is noted “Submission this Thurs Aft”,
“PSA have til thurs 4pm to respond”, and
relevantly, “need to
watch staff who may want to participate in work time – FOVBE”. The
reference to the PSA response
would have been to the PSA’s evidence and
submissions in the Dispute. Subject to some administrative matters, appearing as
a witness for the PSA entitles a PSA delegate to paid special leave: Award cl
54.1.6. Again, there are a number of inferences that
may be drawn from this last
passage, but one of them is Dr Moriarty was still highly concerned about the
conduct of the FOVB executive,
which includes the Applicant, and the potential
they may wish to participate in the Dispute (including, one may infer, giving
Again, no-one had told the Applicant to cease making statements to
the media at this time.
noted in describing the background to the Second Alleged Detriment, at 7:41am on
8 October 2024, the Applicant gave an interview
to an ABC Central Coast
journalist. That appears to have been drawn to Dr Moriarty’s that morning.
At 9:52am Dr Moriarty sent
an email to Mr Wilson, the Senior HR Business Partner
saying “FYI – he’s still doing it!!!”. That led to
meeting between Dr Moriarty and Mr Wilson, and to Mr Wilson sending a draft
email to Dr Moriarty at 1:45pm that day. On 2:24pm,
Dr Moriarty, having amended
the email slightly to include reference to a meeting between himself and the
Applicant when the Applicant
returned from leave, sent the email to the
Applicant. That meeting between Dr Moriarty and the Applicant never occurred,
for reasons
described below.
might reasonably infer that in the “discussion” between Dr Moriarty
and Mr Wilson, the Senior HR Business Partner
who drafted the email to the
Applicant, Dr Moriarty would almost certainly have discussed what he wanted to
have happen (perhaps
including to the Applicant, given what occurred in the 30
September 2024 SLT meeting) and more importantly, why. He was, it would
the HR person to whom Dr Moriarty turned to for advice when he appreciated
“He’s still doing it!!!”.
the circumstances, albeit the inferences that may be available from his absence
are a relatively minor consideration on the whole
of the evidence, I infer that
Mr Wilson’s evidence would not have helped the Respondent establish that
the only substantial
and operative reason for the detriments imposed on the
Applicant were Dr Moriarty’s subjective view he had engaged in misconduct.
Applicant gave evidence that on 9 October 2024 at about 10:20am, he received an
email place-holder meeting invitation advising
him that Dr Moriarty had
organised a meeting for 15 October 2024 at 10:00AM. The subject of the meeting
was ‘Discussion around
conduct’. At this time, the Dispute
proceedings before Commissioner McDonald was listed for hearing on 18 October
Applicant says “just after 10:20am”, he missed a call from Ms
Burdett-Symons. He returned that call. The initial call
from Ms Burdett Symons
appears to have its genesis in a conversation she had with Dr Moriarty that
morning. I will refer to her evidence
described a conversation he had with Ms Burdett-Symons when he returned her
“On 9 October 2024 just after 10:20AM, I missed a call from Ms
Burdett-Symons. A short time later I returned her call and we
had a conversation
to the following effect:
Ms Burdett-Symons: Hi Joe. The DFC has directed that you will not be given the
acting program leader opportunity. He said that it
was due to your recent
industrial action and your associated comments to the media.
Mr Wright: Right okay. Can I please get this in writing?
Ms Burdett-Symons: Yes okay, I will take this to the DFC and either he or I will
respond in writing.
I refer to the decision of Dr Moriarty to withdraw my temporary assignment, as
communicated via Ms Burdett-Symons as the ‘
PLNE Decision
I felt that I needed to request for Dr Moriarty’s final decision in
writing because I intended to seek PSA’s assistance
as I was concerned
(and I remain concerned) that Dr Moriarty was taking action against me because
of my activities as a union delegate”.
her first statement (Ex 7), Ms Burdett-Symons referred to a conversation she had
with Dr Moriarty that morning during which it
would appear she disclosed to him
the arrangement for the Applicant and Mr Audet to share the acting position of
PLNE during her
period of upcoming leave. Ms Burdett-Symons said, having
described the arrangement (at [21] – [24], underlining added):
“Dr Moriarty said words to the effect of, "
I do not think it is
appropriate for Joe to
be acting in that role at this time".
remember if Dr Moriarty explained why he said this.
From the Fisheries Compliance Unit Senior Leadership team meeting of 8 October
2024 (set out in paragraph 19 above) and my conversation
with Dr Moriarty of 9
October 2024 (set out in paragraph 21 above), I understood that the reason Dr
Moriarty did not think it was
appropriate for Mr Wright to be acting in the PLNE
position was because Mr Wright had made comments to the media and appeared in
the media in his Fisheries uniform.
23 Later that day, on 9 October 2024, I spoke with Mr Wright about the PLNE
acting opportunity. I cannot remember exactly what I
said, but to the best of my
recollection we had an exchange in words to the following effect.
I said: "Hi Joe. Andrew has said that it would not be appropriate for you to act
in my role when I'm on leave, due to the industrial
action and you being the
spokesperson for the PSA."
Mr Wright said: "Ok, I'm not surprised. Can I get that in writing?"
I said: "Good question, I'll go and ask".
24 When I said to Mr Wright that the reasons that he would not be given the
opportunity to cover my role were "due to the industrial
action and [him] being
the spokesperson for the PSA
". I assumed that the reason that Dr
Moriarty had said that it was not appropriate for Mr Wright to be acting in the
PLNE role at
this time was generally due to the Fisheries Officers work ban and
that Mr Wright was appearing in the media. This assumption was
based on the
timing of the NSW Fisheries Officers industrial action and the decision by Dr
Moriarty to not allow Mr Wright to act
in the PLNE role. It was not based on any
direct knowledge of Dr Moriarty's reasons.”
her second statement (Ex 8), Ms Burdet-Symons gave additional evidence
qualifying some of what she said in the above passage.
she states she found an additional Teams exchange between herself, Dr Moriarty,
and Ms Rae. It is undated but it must have
occurred after the 8 October 2024
email was sent. The exchange was as follows (underlining added):
“Moriarty: Morning both – the backfill arrangements for PLNE –
did I approve these?
LBS: We didn’t get any applicants from the EOI. On approaching Ben and Joe
neither wanted to do it for the 6 weeks but was
willing to share. This was
before the work ban.
Moriarty: Given Joe has just received an email from me around his conduct he
will not be suitable. Please engage Ben to do the full
6 weeks or if he refuses
then they will both report to me for the gap (3 weeks).
LBS: Ok I will inform him”
she states she identified text messages between herself and Dr Moriarty around
10:28am on 9 October 2025, in which Ms Burdett-Symons
indicated she had just
spoken to the Applicant and “he had asked for him being denied A/PL in
writing...do you want me to send
an email or from you?”. Dr Moriarty
indicated “nothing in writing” as per the way the arrangement was
set up, and
“We have a meeting on Tues next week regarding his conduct
– he can raise it then if he likes.”
she qualified what she said in her first statement about having had a
conversation with Dr Moriarty on 9 October 2024:
“At the time of making my First Witness Statement, I did not recall the 9
October Teams Exchange taking place, though I did
recall the substance of what
had been communicated between Dr Moriarty and me. Now that I have found the 9
October Teams Exchange,
I cannot recall 100% either way whether or not I also
had a conversation with Dr Moriarty about the same or similar subject matter
9 October 2024. I therefore wish to clarify paragraph 21 of my First Witness
Statement by saying that I
have had a conversation with Dr Moriarty
to the effect set out in that paragraph which was consistent with the 9 October
Teams Exchange
but I am not certain that it occurred.
I recall I took the screenshot of the 9 October Teams Exchange because there was
a lot happening at the time and I thought that it
could be controversial, in the
sense that Dr Moriarty’s position that Mr Wright was not permitted to act
in my role due to
his conduct seemed unusual to me.
I can see in the 9 October Teams Exchange that Dr Moriarty refers to Mr Wright
not being suitable to act in my role due to his conduct,
which Dr Moriarty says
he sent Mr Wright an email about. I interpreted the reference to the email to
mean the 8 October 2024 email
that Dr Moriarty sent to Mr Wright, and to which I
was copied, regarding Mr Wright’s “unapproved public comments”
to the media. ...
I acknowledge that the 8 October 2024 email [from Dr Moriarty to the Applicant]
refers only to Mr Wright’s activity in the
media. However, in my mind and
at the time I did not draw a distinction between Mr Wright’s media
activities and his participation
as a delegate in the industrial action. This
was in part because in at least one of the articles in which Mr Wright made
to the media there was also commentary about the work bans that were
taking place at the time. ...
I had assumed that Dr Moriarty’s actions in relation to Mr Wright were
because of his media activities which I had assumed
from the context were not
said on behalf of the Department and said on behalf of the PSA, but Dr Moriarty
never said that to me that
those were the reasons for his actions. That is the
reason I made the statement to Mr Wright in paragraph 23 of my First Witness
Statement that it would not be appropriate for Mr Wright to act as PLNE
“due to the industrial action and you being the spokesperson
perhaps goes without saying that Ms Burdett-Symons was not a reliable historian.
In her second statement (Ex 8) she said, as I
have noted above, that the meeting
referred to in the underlined passage at [21] of her first statement was not the
usual SLT meeting
on 8 October 2024, but was in fact the special meeting of the
SLT called by Dr Moriarty at 9am on 30 September 2024, at which she
described Dr
Moriarty appearing angry, and at which he made various references to
FOVB and members beating their chest and pumped up”,
FOVB Not running the FCU – DFC is and its got him pissed
. It would appear highly likely that her observations of Dr
Moriarty in that 30 September 2024 ‘special’ meeting of the
(albeit wrongly identified in her first statement as having occurred on 8
October 2022) was part of what led Ms Burdett-Symons
“assumption”, perhaps more accurately an inference, that the reason
Dr Moriarty took the unusual step of interfering
with the arrangement she had
made to have the Applicant act up in her absence was, as she had said to the
Applicant, “due to
the industrial action and you being the spokesperson
for the PSA."
Moriarty sent a Teams message Mr Wilson at 10.36am on 9 October 2024, relating
to his decision to deny the Applicant the opportunity
to act in Ms
Burdett-Symons position. He said, having described the background to the
arrangement, amongst other things (emphasis
“I have indicated to Lee that I did not approve it [the acting up
opportunity for the Applicant] and that Joe is not suitable
due to the email I
sent him yesterday about his conduct. Lee has informed him of this and now Joe
is claiming he is being denied
an A/PL opportunity and wants it in writing. I
have indicated that as per the way the arrangement was set up (without my
and verbally is the way it will also be removed – I have
indicated that I will not be sending anything to him in writing and
has an issue he can call me or we can discuss it at the meeting set up on Tues
next week regarding his conduct. This is
in line with Sean’s discussions
with me also”.
understand “Sean” is likely a reference to Mr Sean Sloan, Deputy
Secretary Fisheries and Forestry. He did not give evidence
in these proceedings.
There is no evidence as to what he had “discussed” with Dr Moriarty,
or what Dr Moriarty meant
by the phrase “in line” with that
discussion. It is not at all clear whether the “This” Dr Moriarty is
to in the concluding sentence is denying the Applicant the A/PL
opportunity, or the denial of reasons for this decision, or both.
Moriarty’s Teams message says the “email” he sent the
Applicant yesterday was what made him “not suitable”
for the acting
up position. Precisely what he meant, and why he just didn’t refer to
unauthorised media statements if that
was what he meant, is not clear. The Teams
message is, however, significant as it demonstrates that Dr Moriarty was aware
the Applicant
had apparently had a concern about the reason for the acting up
opportunity being declined (hence the request for the reasons in
writing), as at
9 October 2024 (well before his handwritten note of 22 October 2024 referred to
that stage the Applicant was due to meet with Dr Moriarty on 15 October 2024,
and the hearing of the Dispute was to occur on 18
October 2024. It would appear
someone within the Respondent’s “IR unit” had formed the view
that the meeting between
Dr Moriarty and the Applicant should not proceed
(perhaps Mr Wilson, but there is no evidence of that). Precisely why is not
in the evidence, but to the extent there is any evidence of an
explanation, it is either because of the “impending IRC
or because the
email of 8 October 2024 was “self-explanatory and no meeting is
Whatever the
reason, Dr Moriarty appears to have been concerned that the meeting take place.
What he said about it in his internal
email correspondence (Ex 1 pages 8 and 9)
is, in my view, significant.
first reference to the meeting not going ahead is made in an email from the
Applicant to Dr Moriarty, amongst others, on 15 October
2024. In his email the
Applicant refers to advice from the PSA that the “NSWDPIRD IR Unit would
be taking steps for this meeting
cancelled/suspended” given the impending IRC proceedings. The electronic
meeting invite apparently remained
active, so the Applicant, in his email of 15
October, was enquiring as to whether the meeting was going ahead. It did
22 October 2024, obviously enough after the hearing of 18 October 2024 had been
vacated due to Dr Moriarty having come down with
COVID19, Dr Moriarty sent an
email (at 8:37am) to three human resources/industrial relations staff of the
Respondent: Ange Royal,
Manager Industrial Relations, Jennifer Grainger, Senior
Industrial Relations Specialist, and Mr Wilson, Senior HR Business Partner.
stated (emphasis
“I don’t believe that leaving this hanging and allowing the PSA to
influence internal Departmental processes is wise.
I am proposing to respond. Please let me know if any discussions have taken
place ASAP”.
Grainger replied (to the group) at 1:08pm that day, describing the
“letter” (I understand this to be referring to the
October 2024), as “self explanatory and no meeting is needed unless Joseph
has some questions”, followed by
a draft response that, amongst other
things cancelled the meeting.
Moriarty replied (to the group) at 1:20pm that day stating (emphasis
“There is a principle involved here Jen that flows to the issues at hand I
believe. IE me being able to fully acquit my role
as a Director and with out
outside interference.
A senior person in my team has exhibited behaviours outside of what the
Department expects and not in a minor way!
It is my role to call out the behaviour – which I have done in an email
and which I believe verbally over Teams is also warranted
– this also
allows Joe to put any circumstances to me and we can discuss them.
I have moved the meeting to 10am Fri – Connor cannot make it. If you wish
to attend I am fine with it’.
emails in Dr Moriarty’s own words emphasise his concern was to not allow
the PSA to “influence Departmental processes”
appear that was how this latest communication about the triviality of a meeting
“flows to the issues at hand”.
A strong inference from this exchange
is that it was the “principle” Dr Moriarty was concerned about. The
intermingling
of the issue of “principle” with consideration of the
Applicant’s conduct, appears to reflect the mindset evident
in the angered
use of the words “pin-up boy” and “martyr” in the SLT
meeting on 30 September 2024. The HR
team were advising Dr Moriarty all that was
required was the email. Dr Moriarty plainly wanted the Applicant to be paraded
him over Teams so he could verbally express his displeasure (and, being
generous, potentially hear any explanation), I would infer
in part to deal with
the “principle” of PSA interference with the running of the FCU (as
Dr Moriarty saw it).
consistent with what I believe is the preferable inference on the balance of
probabilities from the evidence as a whole, it
is, in my view, far more likely
that Dr Moriarty was angered not only by the Applicant’s personal conduct,
but by the actions
of the PSA more generally, and likely the Applicant’s
part in it. The “principle” Dr Moriarty referred to in this
exchange on 22 October 2024 reflect his comments in the 30 September meeting:
“FOVB not running the FCU – DFC is
and its got him pissed off”
and “FOVB and members beating their chest and pumped up”. It
reflects the concern about
FOVBE participation in the Dispute (in the context of
the PSA’s evidence being due) in the SLT meeting file note of 8 October
there is a document said to be a handwritten notation in a diary of Dr Moriarty,
dated 22 October 2024, 8:53am. Ms Royal,
who introduced the diary note as a
business record, says it reflects a conversation between Ms Burdett-Symons and
Dr Moriarty on
9 October 2024. How or why she says that in light of it being
dated 22 October 2024 is unknown.
the notation it appears (the handwriting is somewhat difficult to decipher in
parts) to refer to a conversation with Ms Burdett
Symons around her having
offered the Applicant and Mr Audet the acting up opportunity. It relevantly says
(underlining added):
“I said you don’t arrange anything of this nature without my
approval. I said I have concerns about Joe’s decision
making given his
recent media interviews done without my approval – I intimated to the
relevant email I sent to Joe. I instructed
Lee to fix this by going back to Joe
and letting him know that I had not approved this acting and it won’t be
approved given
his recent behaviour of undertaking unsanctioned media interviews
and that I have a question mark regarding his decision making.
I also said that
if Joe wants to discuss my decision not to have him act then he can do it at the
upcoming meeting to discuss my
email to him regarding his recent
behaviour.”
Burdett-Symons was not sure if there was a conversation directly with Dr
Moriarty about his reason for denying the Applicant the
acting up opportunity,
emphasising what she had said to the Applicant was based on her assumption of
what those reasons may have
been. This file note of Dr Moriarty dated 8:57am on
22 October 2024 suggests there was a conversation between Dr Moriarty and Ms
Burdett-Symons as to why he denied the Applicant that opportunity, but does not
corroborate the date suggested by Ms Burdett-Symons,
and introduces an entirely
new reason, apparently directed to the Applicant’s “decision
is absolutely nothing in the evidence indicating any concern as to the
Applicant’s decision making at any time prior to
the PSA FCU Campaign, or
the Applicant’s participation in that campaign. That Ms Burdett-Symons was
offering the Applicant
the opportunity to act in her stead whilst she was absent
reflects an absence of concern about his performance or decision making,
including his capacity to exercise judgment in that higher role in her absence,
from his immediate line manager.
do not consider the terms or circumstances surrounding this note dated 22
October 2024 can be given any real weight. On any view
of it, it is a post facto
justification for why he denied the Applicant the acting-up opportunity –
but how or why Dr Moriarty
would come to make this particular note, dealing with
this subject, on 22 October 2024 is entirely unexplained in the evidence.
to the Applicant’s ‘decision-making’, in context, is
also capable of referring to a number of factual matters.
example, there is no reason the reference to ‘decision-making’
should be limited
to a reference to the decision to participate in
media about the PSA FCU Campaign without first seeking approval, albeit that was
no doubt one of the things Dr Moriarty would have had in mind (having regard to
the whole of the evidence). It may well have been
Dr Moriarty thought it
inappropriate for a person who was a delegate and FOVB member to have been
acting in a more senior mid-level
manager type role, when the FOVB was taking
industrial action. The fact Dr Moriarty had, in the special SLT meeting on 30
2024, indicted he thought ‘Jackie’, another PSA delegate
who had attended the Conciliation before Commissioner McDonald
on 25 September
2024, may not be an appropriate person to fill even the Applicant’s team
leader type role if he was no longer
there, lends weight to the idea Dr Moriarty
had an issue with a delegate connected with the PSA FCU Campaign being in a
Respondent, quite rightly, emphasised caution when drawing inferences. The
parties did not address on the point, but an often-cited
passage that
encapsulates the proper approach to finding facts based on inference in a civil
case can be seen in the judgment of
the Full Court in
Bradshaw v McEwans
[1950] HCA 56
(1951) ALR 1
at 5 (emphasis added):
“Of course as far as logical consistency goes many hypotheses may be put
which the evidence does not exclude positively. But
this is a civil and not a
criminal case. We are concerned with probabilities, not with possibilities. The
difference between the
criminal standard of proof in its application to
circumstantial evidence and the civil is that in the former the facts must be
as to exclude reasonable hypotheses consistent with innocence while the
latter you need only circumstances raising a more probable
inference in favour
of what is alleged. In questions of this sort where direct proof is not
available it is enough if the circumstances
appearing in the evidence give rise
to a reasonable and definite inference: they must do more than give rise to
conflicting inferences
of equal degrees of probability so that the choice
between them is mere matter of conjecture (see per Lord Robson, Richard Evans
& Co Ltd v Astley
[1911] UKLawRpAC 47
[1911] AC 674
at 687). But if circumstances are proved in
which it is reasonable to find a balance of probabilities in favour of the
sought then though the conclusion may fall short of certainty it is
not to be regarded as a mere conjecture or surmise: cf per Lord
Loreburn, above,
onus on the Respondent, on the case it has advanced on the operation of s 210(2)
of the IR Act, is to establish, by reasonable
and definite inference (given the
absence of Dr Moriarty), that the
substantial and operative reason
for Dr Moriarty having imposed the detriments upon which the Applicant relies,
was that Dr Moriarty
was subjectively of the view the Applicant had breached the
Code by making unapproved statements to the media (RSUB [102]). I have
difficulty accepting that concern was at least one of the substantial and
operative reasons Dr Moriarty had for imposing the detriments.
I go so far as
accepting that it may have been the predominant factor in Dr Moriarty’s
mind. But on the balance of probabilities,
I do not accept the evidence permits
a finding (a reasonable and definite inference) that it was the only substantive
and operative
factor influencing Dr Moriarty’s decision to issue the 8
October 2024 warning email or deny the Applicant the acting up opportunity
October 2024. The evidence does not permit a finding (a reasonable and definite
inference), that none of the protected characteristics
relied upon by the
Applicant were not also substantial and operative reasons. Each of those
reasons, including the suggested breach
of the Code by having made unapproved
media comments, is consistent with the evidence.
have discussed the inferences that I think are appropriately drawn from the
minutes of the special meeting of the SLT on 30 September
2024 and the media
containing comments from the Applicant up to that time at [291] – [312]
above. I do not accept that the
apparent anger displayed at the meeting at 9am
on 30 September 2024, including the thinly veiled threat to take action against
Applicant, referred to by Dr Moriarty as a “pin up boy”
“hero” and “martyr”, can be attributed
solely to his
media statements as part of the PSA FCU Campaign.
the context of the work bans, the Conciliation of the Dispute on 25 September
2024, a dispute Dr Moriarty appears to have believed
was based on lies
(“Lie their ass off jut to win the argument”), and the media
articles over 29 and 30 September, which
involved far greater coverage of the
more pointed comments of the Assistant General Secretary in the official PSA
Media Statement
(the “attack on Dept and Minister”) than the
relatively benign comments of the Applicant, I am comfortably satisfied
Moriarty was angered by the PSA FCU Campaign generally, and those who
participated in and/or supported it. So much appears obvious
from the words
attributed to Dr Moriarty at that meeting: “FOVB and members beating their
chest and pumped up” and “FOVB
not running the FCU – DFC is
and its got him pissed off”. That Dr Moriarty was frustrated by the
actions of the PSA and
the FOVBE is still evident as at 22 October 2024, two
weeks after the imposition of detriments on the Applicant, where he rails
“allowing the PSA to influence internal Departmental
processes”, and him “being able to fully acquit [his] role
Director ...without outside interference” - as he described it, the
“principle involved here”.
is also consistent with Dr Moriarty’s apparent concern about the
participation of FOVBE members in the Dispute proceedings,
evident in the
minutes of the 30 September 2024 special SLT meeting, but also in the notes of
the regular SLT meeting on 8 October
evidence does not permit me to exclude the Applicant’s participation in
the PSA FOVB Campaign (by making statements to the
media in support of that
campaign), a public or political activity as I have found, that clearly angered
Dr Moriarty, was a substantial
and operative reason for Dr Moriarty imposing the
detriments. It is entirely possible (in my view, highly likely), that Dr
took the detrimental action in retribution for, and to prevent further,
participation by the Applicant in the PSA FCU Campaign by
making statements to
the media, not only because he believed the Applicant was acting in breach of
the Code by doing so, but because
he was angered and frustrated by it (hence the
three exclamation marks in the email of 8 October 2024, “He’s still
it!!!”, and him questioning the Applicant’s “decision
making” despite there being no suggestion in the evidence
there had ever
been any reason to doubt his decision making in the course of his job).
evidence also does not permit me to exclude the possibility that the fact the
Applicant was an FOVB executive member, acting FOVB
Chairperson and importantly
FOVB delegate, of the body that unanimously voted to impose work bans, and the
local face of and significant
influence in the PSA FCU Campaign (the
“hero”, “Pin-up Boy” and significantly
“martyr”), a campaign
that apparently angered and frustrated Dr
Moriarty because it interfered with Departmental processes and his ability to
fully acquit
his role as Director, was a substantial and operative reason for Dr
Moriarty imposing detriments on the Applicant, in retribution
for being the FOVB
delegate or to discourage him from continuing in that FOVB delegate role, or
same can be said for the Applicant’s participation in the Dispute. The
Applicant and Dr Moriarty both participated in the
conciliation on 25 September
2024, and from that one may infer Dr Moriarty was aware of his participation.
The evidence demonstrates
Dr Moriarty had expressed concerns with FOVB members
participation in the Dispute proceedings (not only the Applicant), in the
SLT meeting minutes from 30 September 2024 (Ex1) and the handwritten
notes of the SLT meeting on 8 October 2024 (Ex 6) (which is
recorded in
connection with the date the PSA was to file its material in those proceedings).
The evidence does not permit me to exclude
the possibility the Applicant’s
participation in the Dispute proceedings was a substantial and operative reason
for Dr Moriarty
imposing the detriments.
situation is not greatly different to that reflected in
paraphrase Mason J’s reasoning, I am left with a reason for the detriments
(breach of the Code via unapproved media statements)
which does not exclude the
possibility that it was associated with the circumstance that the Applicant was
a PSA delegate and elected
representative of the FOVB membership, was engaged in
a public or political activity (which I have found did not interfere with his
duties), and/or had participated in the Dispute. If this was no more than a
slender possibility the circumstance might be discarded
as one which was not a
substantial and operative factor, but I have already said enough to indicate why
the possibility cannot be
so regarded.
the reasons outlined above, I am comfortably satisfied the Applicant has proved
he suffered detriment at the hands of the Respondent
(as claimed), and had three
of the protected characteristics upon which he relied in alleging a
contravention of s 210 of the IR
Act. In those circumstances, s 210(2) of the IR
Act provides “it is presumed that [the Applicant] ...was victimised
of a matter referred to in subsection (1) that is alleged by the
applicant to be the cause of the detrimental action”, unless
“presumption is rebutted”. The presumption will be rebutted
“if the employer ...satisfies the Commission that
the alleged matter was
substantial and operative cause of the detrimental action”
(emphasis added). I accept one of the substantial and operative
Moriarty imposed the detriments was because he was of the view the Applicant had
breached the Code by making unapproved
media statements, but I am not satisfied
the evidence permits a finding that was the only substantial and operative
reason for taking
that action. The evidence otherwise leaves open the
possibility (indeed, in my view, probability) that each or all of the protected
characteristics relied upon by the Applicant were also a substantial and
operative reason for Dr Moriarty having taken the detrimental
find the Respondent did, by the decisions and actions of Dr Moriarty, unlawfully
victimise the Applicant as alleged.
Applicant seeks orders pursuant to s 213 enforcing the protections under s 210
(1) requiring the Department to formally withdraw the 8 October 2024 email
(described as a caution or a warning), and confirm same
in writing;
(2) reimburse the Applicant for wages lost due to the denial of the acting-up
opportunity; and
(3) prohibiting the Department and Dr Moriarty from taking further action
against the Applicant or any other PSA delegate for speaking
to the media about
industrial campaigns, except to the extent that any such participation impedes
the employee’s ability to
perform their duties.
Respondent denied the Applicant was entitled to any remedy, but
additionally:
(1) To the extent the Applicant claims he suffered a loss arising out of the
acting up opportunity, “he has not established
that he would have accepted
this opportunity. To the contrary, the evidence shows that Mr Wright was not
interested in the opportunity”:
RSUB [107].
(2) The final Order sought is in the nature of a permanent injunction against Dr
Moriarty and the whole of the Department. It ought
not be made.
am satisfied that it is appropriate to grant the first two orders for relief
sought by the Applicant, but not the third.
first and second Orders sought are obviously causally connected with the
findings I have made, and directed to redressing the
detriments identified. The
Respondent’s contention the Applicant has not established he would have
accepted the acting up opportunity
is obviously mistaken on the facts. I
understand the RSUB (dated 26 May 2025) containing that submission, may have
been made prior
to the location of emails between the Applicant and Ms
Burdett-Symons (produced under summons and contained in her supplementary
statement Ex 8), in which the Applicant clearly had in fact agreed he would
accept the acting up opportunity. In any event, I reject
the submission. I
accept the Applicant had agreed to undertake the second tranche of acting up
(the latter 3 weeks of Ms Burdett-Symons
6 week leave period) and has lost that
opportunity because of Dr Moriarty’s decision to deny him it. The
financial value of
that acting up period was agreed as $892 (gross). I am
satisfied it is appropriate to Order the Respondent pay the Applicant $892,
reflecting the denial of that opportunity, plus interest.
to the third Order, I agree it is in the nature of a permanent injunction. It
may be open and appropriate to make an Order of that
kind in an appropriate
case, but I am not satisfied it is appropriate to do so here. The Respondent
raised a number of matters against
the making of those orders (RSUBR at [16] -
[18]). For present purposes it is sufficient to note amongst those matters
(1) The Applicant bares the onus of satisfying the Commission the relief sought
is appropriate;
(2) Whilst the Commission has a broad discretion in granting relief to enforce
the protections in s 210
orders enforcing the prohibitions in s 210 ought not (indeed, cannot) extend
beyond that which is causally connected with and directed
to enforcing the
contravention of said protections found by the Commission.
(3) The relief sought in this connection extends well beyond the circumstances
of the Applicant (extending to all PSA delegates),
well beyond the facts (the
facts being directed to the PSA FCU Campaign, which continues and there is no
suggestion of further action
against the Applicant or any other delegate), and
beyond the subjective decision making of Dr Moriarty (who is no longer the DFC).
It is not properly causally linked to any protected characteristic in s 210(1)
or the actions of the Respondent. It seeks a permanent
injunction directed to
the whole of the Department in circumstances where there is no basis in the
evidence for a concern a similar
situation may arise again. The proposed Order
could potentially create unnecessary conflicts with the new Code of Conduct post
November 2024 (which provides greater guidance on appropriate engagement in
public and political activity in a person’s private
Additionally, there are new protections in s 209(3) and s 210 of the IR Act that
could influence the potential for such
decisions to be reached in the future.
Applicant accepted that any relief granted to ‘enforce’ the Freedom
from Victimisation prohibitions in s 210, can
only be directed to the
contraventions found.
injunctive Orders sought by the Applicant go well beyond the specific findings I
have made. The findings I have made, particularly
in relation to the operation
of s 210(1)(j), are directed to the present facts, including my finding that the
Applicant’s media
commentary did not interfere with the performance of his
duties. In another case media comments may well, depending on what they
the context. I recognise the third order sought is qualified its operation by
the words “except to the extent that
any such participation impedes the
employee’s ability to perform their duties”, but such a
qualification is inherently
uncertain in its operation, such uncertainty itself
counting against the imposition of a mandatory injunction. I am not satisfied
injunction of the kind ought (or on the facts in this case, any injunction) is a
form of relief reasonably adapted and appropriate
to the enforcement of s 210 of
the IR Act in light of the findings I have made.
make the following Orders pursuant to s 213 of the IR Act:
(1) The Respondent is to formally withdraw the 8 October 2024 email from Dr
Moriarty to the Applicant, and confirm same in writing,
within 21 days of this
decision being published.
(2) The Respondent is to pay to the Applicant an amount of $892, plus interest
calculated in accordance with s 372 of the IR Act
(in other words, interest
ought be calculated as though these proceedings were a recovery of money
proceeding of the kind to which
s 372 directly applies), within 21 days of this
decision being published.
Ex 5 at [22], pg
TS 10/6/2025 pg 49 at
lines 8 to 16.
TS 10/6/2025 pg 49 line 18
Ex 5 AR 12 pg
Ex 2 at [40]; Ex 5 at
Industrial Relations
Secretary on behalf of the Department of Primary Industries and Regional
Development v Public Service Association
and Professional Officers' Association
Amalgamated Union of New South Wales (Work Bans by Fisheries Officers)
NSWIRComm 1065
Industrial Relations Secretary on behalf of the Department of Primary Industries
and Regional Development v Public Service Association
and Professional Officers'
Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales (Work Bans by Fisheries
[2024] NSWIRComm
The decision refers
to the Police Minister, but a permit to possess or use a prohibited weapon, such
as a taser or OC spray, is granted
by the Commissioner of Police: see
Prohibition Act 1998
10/6/2025 pg 44 line 42 to pg 46 line 1; pg 48 line 40 – pg 50 line 5; pg
54 line 8 – pg 56 line
Ex 5 AR 12 pg
TS 10/6/2025 pg 49 line
37 to pg 57 line 13
10/6/2025 pg 50 line 36 to
TS 10/6/20205 pg 50 line
TS 10/6/2025 pg 50
line 9 to 30
TS 10/6/2025 pg
57 line 15 to 24
Ex 2 at [32] –
Ex 2 at [34] –
Ex 5 AR18 pg
TS 10/6/2025 pg 61 line
Ex 5 AR 15 pg 302
LBS12 pg 26 -
Ex 5, AR18 pg
Noting the publication
time recorded on AR14 pg 275, copy at AR15 pg
Ex 5 AR15 pg
Ex 5 AR 15 pg12
Ex 5 AR15 pg 286, 294,
296 and theoretically pg 282 on 30 S12eptember 2024 at
Ex 5 pg 284, 326 -
Ex 5 pg 313 – 314,
and partially at pg 279
Ex 5 pg 283,
Ex 5 pg 335, although I
note the full article is not
Ex 5 pg 286, 294,
Ex 5 pg 280, 281, 286,
294, 282 & 333, although the two line comment in these transcripts do not
attribute any quote to anyone
and in fact refer to New South Wales Fisheries
having made a comment on officers being threatened too often by poachers and
Ex 7 at [8] and
TS 11/6/2025 pg 13 line
TS 11/6/2025 pg 13
Ex 7 at [15]
TS 10/6/2025 pg
72 line 4 - 8
TS 10/6/2025
pg 72 line 20 -22
10/6/2025 pg 76 line 37 - 38
Ex 7 at [18]
Ex 8 at [15];
TS 11/6/2025 pg 16 line
TS 10/6/2025 pg 77
line 32 to 49
TS 11/6/2025 pg 13 line
TS 11/6/2025 pg 13
TS 11/6/2025 pg
16 line 28-30
Ex 5 AR21 pg
, Schedule 1
items [13] – [17], and [38] of the Workplace Protections
Fisher v Hedderburn Ltd
[1960] HCA 80
(1960) 105 CLR 188
at 194, now reflected in
Interpretation Act 1987
Workplace Protections
Act, Sch 1, item [38]
Service Association and Professional Officers’ Association Amalgamated
Union of New South Wales (obo Saraceno) v Commissioner
NSWIRComm 1001
– [64] per Commissioner McDonald and Public Service
Association and Professional Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union
New South Wales v Commissioner of Police
[2024] NSWIRComm 1062
, in which the
Full Bench affirmed the Commissioner’s decision at first instance. See for
example Paula Lee v Ausgrid (No 6)
[2013] NSWIRComm 62
; Kinninmont
v Ku-ring-gai Council
[2020] NSWIRComm 1064
A copy of the
Respondent’s Code of Conduct (Ex 3); A copy of the PSA Delegates Manual
(Ex 4); A copy of the relevant Delegations
Manual for the Respondent (Ex 9); A
copy of the PSA Rules (Ex 10); FCU People Plan (Ex 11); a letter addressed to Dr
Moriarty dated
23 July 2025 (Ex 12); and a copy of the role description for the
position Dr Moriarty now occupies on a permanent basis, being the
Aquatic Assessment Regulation and Engagement, (Ex
The email dated 14
August 2025 from the Respondent’s solicitors containing that information
will be marked Exhibit 14 in the
proceedings.
TS 4/8/2025 pg
3 at line 812
TS 4/8/2025 pg
3 line 17 to 43
TS 4/8/2025
pg 4 line 4 to 15
4/8/2025 pg 14 line 33
4/8/2025 pg 13 lines 35 - 44
Lee v Ausgrid (No 6)
[2013] NSWIRComm 62
(2013) 237 IR 63
; [2013] NS12WIRComm 62 at
RSUB Further Note at
[2], referring to PSA v Commissioner of Police
[2025] NSWSC 624
See for example
[2020] NSWIRComm 1064
; Public Service Association and Professional
Officers' Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales v Commissioner of
New South Wales Police Force
[2024] NSWIRComm 1062
ASUB at [18]; TS
4/8/2025 pg 4 line 30 - 50
Janssen v SWSLHD
[2018] NSWIRComm 1022
per Seymour C; Davis v
Amalgamated Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd
[1998] NSWIRComm 289
(1998) 81 IR 364
TS 4/8/2025 pg 15
referring to PSA v Teterycz
[1997] NSWIRComm 159
; Davis v Amalgamated Television
Services Pty Ltd
[1998] NSWIRComm 289
(1998) 81 IR 364
at 380-381; Buchanan v Fire and Rescue NSW
[2020] NSWIRComm 1019
TS 4/8/2025 pg 15 lines
“unfavourable treatment” under discrimination laws: by way of
illustration, see Kidman v Casino Canberra Ltd
[2020] ACAT 1250
considering the concept of “unfavourable treatment” in the
Discrimination Act 1991
TS 4/8/2025 pg 6 line
50 to pg 7 line 22
demonstrates a loss of over $850 for that
ASUBR at [6]
– [7]; TS 4/8/2025 pg 6 line 26 to pg 7 line
Reference was made to cl
20 of the GSE Regulation 2014 and the Delegations Manual (Ex9) pg 15 that
confirms a Manager (such as Ms
Burdett-Symons) can approve a temporary
assignment allowance, and pg 16 which showed that a Manager did not have
delegation to “Approve
temporary assignment of a non-executive to another
non-executive role (either at or above level) for up to 2
TS 4/8/2025 pg
22 line 46 to pg 23 line 14; RSUB [32], referring to Jackson v Heart Research
Institute Ltd
[2025] FCA 301
TS 10/6/2025 pg 77
line 4 to 21
TS 4/8/2025 pg
6 line 26 to pg 7 line 22
ASUBR at [3] – [5], referring to Kidman v Casino Canberra
[2020] ACAT
TS 4/8/2025 pg 5 line 31
(2002) 120 FCR 170
at [156] – [158]
Kidman v Casino Canberra Ltd
[2020] ACAT 50
Finance Sector Union
v ANZ Banking Group (2002) 120 FCR 170 at [138] –
TS 4/8/2025 pg 15
lines 18 to 42
Banking Group
[2002] FCA 631
(2002) 120 FCR 107
TS 4/8/2025 pg 16
lines 11 - 13
Cf Wilcox CJ in FSU
v ANZ Banking Group at
The term used in Dr
Moriarty’s email sent at 1.20pm 22 October 2024, extracted at [121]
See for example
Alam v National Australia Bank
[2021] FCAFC 178
(2021) 288 FCR 301
Rule 30 of the PSA
Rules: Ex 10 pg 19
paragraph [35] above
[19(c)], ASUBR [8]
Referring to Re Dispute at Broken Hill Pty Ltd Steel Works, Newcastle
RSUB at [40]
specifically Sectio n5 of the Crown Employees (Public Service Conditions of
Employment) Reviewed Award
RSUB at [50] –
[65]; RSN at [5] –
[2020] ACAT 50
[34] – [37]
10, Rule 143
CB Tab 1 pg 3 at
RSUB at [71]
TS 4/8/2025
pg 7 line 48-49
TS 4/8/2025 pg 7
TS 4/8/2025 pg 8
TS 4/8/2025 pg
40 line 43 - 46
4/8/2025 pg 40 line 48 – 50; pg 41 line 3
Referring to CPS
Management v Equal Opportunity Board
[1991] VicRp 50
[1991] 2 VR 107
at 114-115; Nestle
Australia Ltd v The Equal Opportunity Board
[1990] VicRp 71
[1990] VR 805
at 819; Cairns
Regional Council v Carey
[2012] QCATA 150
V v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[1999] FCA 428
(1999) 92 FCR 355
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2015] FCA 27
327 ALR 460
; Henry v Leighton Admin Services Pty Ltd
[2015] FCCA 1923
KI v The Retail Store
[2023] TASCAT 10
Automotive, Food,
Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union v The Age Company
(2004) 133 IR 197
at [46]; Director of the Fair Work Building Industry
Inspectorate v McCullough
[2016] FCA 1291
NSWIRComm 1055
(2018) 282 IR 200
P.C Barclay v Lake
George Mines Pty Limited (1949) 95 NSWIG 20 at
RSUB [79] –
CSR Viridian Ltd v
[2008] FCAFC 177
171 FCR 554
Express Holdings Ltd v Australian Federation of Air Pilots
[2017] HCA 55
[50] and the cases cited
267 CLR 373
267 CLR 373
[100]-[104].
[2019] HCA 23
267 CLR 373
TS 4/8/2025 pg 44
line 10 - 15
481(1)(h) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1991
(NSW); with respect, Commissioner
Sloan was incorrect in his observation in Shand at [34], that there was no
equivalent provision
Industrial Arbitration Act 1940
, albeit that comment
was certainly true if one has regard to the form of that Act when first
Barclay v Lake
George Mines Pty Limited
(1949) 48 AR(NSW) 557
at 558; 95 NSWIG 32 at
See Certain Lloyd's
Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
(2012) 248 CLR 378
at 389‑390 at [23]
Twentieth Superpace
Nominees Pty Ltd v TWU
[2006] NSWIRComm 218
(2006) 156 IR 323
See La Perouse
Local Aboriginal Land Council v Quarry Street Pty Ltd
[2025] HCA 32
Gordon and Steward JJ. See also Edelman J at [130] – [140]. Each of their
Honour’s referring to New South Wales Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister
Administering the Crown Lands Act ("Berrima Gaol")
(2016) 260 CLR 232
[32]-[33], 270‑271 [91]-[94], 288 [146], 297 [174] (quoting IW v City of
[1997] HCA 30
(1997) 191 CLR 1
at 12, 39 (in turn quoting Coburn v Human
Rights Commission
[1994] 3 NZLR 323
at 333) and R v Kearney; Ex parte Jurlama
[1984] HCA 14
(1984) 158 CLR 426
at 433) and Carr v Western Australia
(2007) 232 CLR 138
. See also Construction Forestry Mining and
Energy Union v Mammoet Australia Pty Ltd
(2013) 248 CLR 619
at 632-633 [40]; New
South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(2016) 260 CLR 232
Dictionary Online
Dictionary Online
v State of New South Wales
[2025] NSWIRComm 1028
Akin to the notion
of a ‘public authority’ in Renmark Hotel Inc v Commissioner of
[1949] HCA 7
(1949) 79 CLR 10
;or public officer in R v Whitaker
[1914] 3 KB 11283
1296 – 1297; cf RSUB [79] –
Such as in the
factual circumstances reflected in McPaul v Williams
(1990) 34 IR 299
Australasian Society of Engineers
[1953] CthArbRp 840
(1953) 78 CAR 149
and Lane v Australian
Workers’ Union
[1938] CthArbRp 107
(1938) 39 CAR 322.
Those matters concerned rules that
apparently stifled political activity by members within a union (and so were
struck down as being
oppressive). Section 210 would appear designed in part to
protect employees of industrial organisations where their actions may be
directed to the proper democratic control of the union (subject to the
qualification it must nonetheless not interfere with the performance
IR Act, subs
Twentieth Superpace
Nominees Pty Ltd v Transport Workers' Union at [25] –
Equal Opportunity Act 2010
Discrimination Act 1991
regarding “political conviction” which is defined to mean
“having [and not having] a political conviction,
belief, opinion or
affiliation” and “engaging in [or not engaging in] political
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(WA) dealing with
discrimination on the ground of “political conviction”;
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
(Qld); s 16(m) and (n) of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1988 (Tas); s 19(1)(n)
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
See sections 351 and
772(1)(f) of the FW Act. The FW Act also identifies a term of a proposed
enterprise agreement that discriminates
against an employee on the grounds of,
amongst other things, their political opinion, a “discriminatory
term” (see s
195(1)), and is thereby an unlawful term (see s 194(a), which
would prima facie prevent the approval of the proposed agreement: see
of the FW Act.
example, Vincent J in Nestle at 813 -
For example, V v
Minister for Immigration
[1999] FCA 428
(1999) 92 FCR 355
Generally discussed at
[19] - [25]
Nevil Abolish Child
Support v Telstra Corporation Limited
[1997] VADT
Quirk v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2021] FCA 1587
[2021] 398 ALR 39
Cf CPS Management at
Commissioner of Police
(NSW) v Cottle
[2022] HCA 7
(2022) 276 CLR 62
per Kiefel CJ, Keane, Gordon, Steward
JJ; Commissioner of Police (NSW) v Eaton
[2013] HCA 2
(2013) 252 CLR 1
Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ, citing Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
per McHugh, Gummow,
Kirby and Hayne JJ.
8A(3) of the GSE Act
7 of the GSE Act: see
copy was contained at Tab 14 of the Respondent’s Bundle of Authorities
filed 1 August 2025.
Macquarie Online
Dictionary Online
Macquarie Online
Dictionary Online
Macquarie Dictionary
Oxford Dictionary
TS 4/8/2025 pg 9
Ex 5 AR1 CB pg
Ex 5 AR1 CB pg
Ex 5 AR1 CB pg
Ex 5 AR1 CB pg
Ex 5 AR1 CB pg
Application
paragraph [3](a), CB Tab 1 pg
Ex 2 at [40], CB Tab
TS 4/8/2025 pg 8
lines 21 - 24
Macquarie Dictionary
Oxford English
Dictionary Online
1 pg 3 at [3(c)]
CB Tab 2 pg 20 [23(c)]
ASUB at CB Tab 2 pg 15-16 at
ASUB at CB Tab 2 pg
19 at [19(d)], referring to Twentieth Superpace Nominees v Transport Workers
Union of NSW ob Purdy
[2006] NSWIRComm 219
– [29], and Janssen v
[2018] NSWIRComm
RSUB at [95] –
Applied to the facts
later in the judgment at [69] –
Discussed at [36]
Dictionary Online
English Dictionary Onlne
Oxford English Dictionary
[2006] NSWIRComm 218
(2006) 156 IR 323
156 IR 323 at
WH&S Act Part 5,
Div 3, Subdivision 5
WH&S Act s 85
WH&S Act Part 5, Division
RSUB [25], referring
to Twentieth Superpace Nominees v TWU
[2006] NSWIRComm 218
; cited with
approval in Kinninmont v Ku-ring-gai Council
[2020] NSWIRComm 1064
[84]; Basan v Commissioner of Police (No 3)
[2023] NSWIRComm 1028
v Health Secretary (in respect of Western Sydney Local Health District)
NSWIRComm 1032
Twentieth Superpace Nominees v TWU
[2006] NSWIRComm 218
referring to Barclay
at [62]; BHP Coal at [89]-[93]; Endeavour Coal Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 76
; Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v De Martin &
Gasparini Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2017] FCA 1046
and [307]; Western Union
[2019] FCAFC 181
272 FCR 547
By reference
to Wigney J in Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v De Martin &
Gasparini Pty Limited (No 2)
[2017] FCA 1046
– [307] and the
judgment of Gageler J as the current Chief Justice then was) in Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
v BHP Coal Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 41
253 CLR 243
– [93]. Commissioner McDonald’s decision was affirmed on
appeal and again on judicial review: Public Service Association
and Professional
Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales v Commissioner
[2024] NSWIRComm 1062
and PSA v Commissioner of Police
[2025] NSWSC
RSUB [101] (e) and
TS 4/8/2025 pg 45
line 49 to pg 46 line 4
TS 4/8/2025 pg 48 line 43 -
TS 4/8/2025 pg 47 line
TS 4/8/2025 pg 48
TS 4/8/2025 pg
48 line 47-48
TS 4/8/2025 pg 52
line 16 - 18
TS 11/6/2025 pg 17
line 4 - 16
page of the bundle marked Ex
TS 11/6/2025 pg 17 line
TS 11/6/2025 pg 17
Which are the
first page of the bundle that was marked Ex
TS 11/6/2025 pg 17 line
33-34, pg 18 lines 5-10
Macquarie Online
TS 4/8/2025 pg
49 line 36 - 41
4/8/2025 pg 49 line 45 pg 50 line
TS 10/6/2025 pg 26 line
TS 4/8/2025 pg 50
TS 4/8/2025 pg
55 line 8-10
TS 4/8/2025
pg 49 line 20-21
4/8/2025 pg 54 line 31 -
TS 4/8/2025 pg 54 line
TS 4/8/2025 pg 54
Ex 5 AR14 pg
Ex 5 AR14 pg
Ex 5 AR17 pg
Ex 2 at [51]; see
also Ex 5 at [48(c)]
at [52] – [54]
pg 9, email from the Applicant to Dr Moriarty and others on 15 October
Ex 1 pg 8, email
from Jennifer Granger to Dr Moriarty, 22 October
See Ters v Health
Secretary in respect of the South Western Sydney Local Health District
[2023] NSWIRComm 1009
TS 4/8/2025 pg
56 line 30 - 33
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.07 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter