URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/454.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wedo Media Beta Pty Ltd v Chanlor Pharmaceutical Pty Ltd [2025] NSWDC 454 (7 November 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Wedo Media Beta Pty Ltd v Chanlor Pharmaceutical Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 454
Hearing Date(s):
1-2 September 2025
Date of Orders:
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Habib SC DCJ
(1) The proceedings are
(2) If a Party wishes to file submissions on
costs, then within 7 days, it is:
(a) To file those
submissions together with any affidavits in support. Without leave, such
submissions to be not more than 5 pages
(b) Indicate whether it requires an oral hearing or
whether it is content for the Court to determine costs in Chambers on the
Catchwords:
CONTRACTS — Construction — Context – Surrounding
Circumstances – Termination Consequences of termination –
– Mitigation of loss
RESTITUTION — Nature of
restitutionary liability —Quantum meruit
Cases Cited:
Balog v Crestani
(1975) 132 CLR 289
[1975] HCA 16
Electricity
Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
(2014) 251 CLR 640
Fitzgerald v Masters
(1956) 95 CLR 420
[1956] HCA 53
Finance Pty Ltd v Gordon Nominees Pty Ltd
(2019) 58 VR 393
[2019] VSCA
Lumbers v W Cook Builders Pty Ltd (in liq)
(2008) 232 CLR 635
Masters in Building Training Pty Ltd v State of New South Wales
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
(2004) 78 ALJR 1045
QBT Pty Ltd v Wilson
[2024] NSWCA 114
Robinson v Becata Pty Ltd
Timis v Mina
[1999] NSWCA 140
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm
Pty Ltd (2004) 219 CLR 165;
[2004] HCA 52
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Rossato
271 CLR 456
; [2021] HCA 23
Principal judgment
Wedo Media Beta Pty Ltd (Plaintiff)
Chanlor Pharmaceutical Pty Ltd
(Defendant)
Representation:
Y Araki (Plaintiff)
V Bedrossian SC
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
Longton Legal (Plaintiff)
Amberlake Lawyers
(Defendant)
File Number(s):
2024/183911
Publication Restriction:
Introduction
Plaintiff, Wedo Media Beta Pty Ltd (Wedo), claims the amount of $330,000 plus
interest from the Defendant, Chanlor Pharmaceutical
Pty Ltd (Chanlor).
is a marketing agency. Chanlor sold, amongst other things, skincare products. It
wished to advertise skincare products at Sydney
International Airport
and Chanlor entered an agreement dated 27 March 2023 (the Agreement). The
Agreement concerned 52 weeks of advertising at SIA.
Ultimately, advertising of
the Chanlor products at SIA occurred over eight months.
secured the advertising by entering a contract with JCDecaux Australia and New
Zealand (JCD) on 27 March 2023.
issued an invoice to Chanlor on 28 March 2023 (the Invoice). Chanlor refused to
pay the Invoice.
alleges Chanlor breached the Agreement by failing to pay the Invoice.
Alternatively, Wedo makes a claim in quantum
narrowed its defence at the hearing from that identified in its filed Amended
Defence. In particular, Chanlor abandoned any
defence based on a failure by Wedo
to perform the Agreement, either because:
(a) The placement of the advertising was inadequate; or
(b) The advertising spanned only 8 months and not 52 weeks.
issues joined by the Parties at the hearing were:
(a) The proper construction of the Agreement insofar as it concerned
Wedo’s obligations. Wedo asserted that its obligation
was only to
“procure” advertising but not provide advertising. Chanlor asserted
that Wedo’s obligation was to provide
advertising and not merely to
procure it;
(b) Whether Chanlor terminated the Agreement, and if so, when?
(c) If Chanlor terminated the Agreement, what were the consequences of that
termination?
(d) If relevant, did Wedo fail to mitigate its loss?
(e) If Chanlor failed on its contract claim, did it have a quantum meruit claim
upon which it could succeed?
(a) An affidavit of Mr Feng Lin was read in the proceedings, and he was
cross-examined; and
(b) Two affidavits of Ms Diya Ye, who worked for Wedo, were also read and she
was cross-examined.
affidavit of Mr Lin primarily concerned his dealings with the sole director of
the Defendant, Ms Yahan Wang, prior to and after
entry into the Agreement, and
his dealings with JCD.
Ye’s affidavit evidence was primarily directed to the issue of the
placement of the advertising and the question of Chanlor’s
approval of
that placement. Whether or not Chanlor approved the placement of the advertising
was not advanced as an issue by Chanlor
at the final hearing. She was
cross-examined on matters going to the mitigation issue and the termination
both Mr Lin and Ms Ye had some difficulties recalling events, I make no adverse
credit findings in relation to either witness.
I accept that in their evidence
they were seeking to be truthful, however, I have assessed their evidence
against the objective material
arising from the contemporaneous documents in
did not call any witnesses in its case.
documents were tendered in the proceedings, primarily contained in exhibits to
the affidavits of Mr Lin and Ms Ye. The exhibit
to Mr Lin’s affidavit
contained numerous messages between him and Ms Wang on the communications
application, “WeChat”.
10 January 2023 and 27 March 2023, Mr Lin and Ms Wang communicated primarily on,
“We Chat”, and in person. Mr
Lin was at the time, and is, the sole
director of Wedo. Ms Wang was, and is, the sole director of Chanlor.
communications concerned Ms Wang’s desire to have Chanlor skincare
products advertised at SIA, amongst other locations.
She particularly wanted the
advertising to be placed at a location where Chinese tourists typically arrived
was clear from what Mr Lin told Ms Wang, that Wedo was communicating with a
third party to arrange advertising at SIA and that
the cost of such advertising
was being conveyed to Wedo by that third party.
third party that Wedo was dealing with to organise the advertising was JCD. It
is less clear that Ms Wang knew the third party
was JCD. In his WeChat messages
to Ms Wang, Mr Lin referred to the party he was dealing with to organise the
advertising variously
as “the airport billboard side”, “the
airport side”, and “the airport”. In more than one message,
included a picture of a billboard at SIA which contained JCD’s name and
branding. Mr Lin’s affidavit suggests that
he spoke to Ms Wang about JCD
by name, however the WeChat messages to which he referred in his affidavit to
support his evidence
do not bear that out. I do not consider it material whether
Ms Wang knew it was JCD with whom Mr Lin was dealing or whether she thought
was dealing directly with SIA (or another third party). Either way, it was clear
to Ms Wang that Wedo did not have the infrastructure
on which the advertising
would appear but was organising the advertising through another party.
Lin conveyed to Ms Wang the price he said he was obtaining for the advertising.
He obtained that price from JCD. He initially quoted
a price of $450,000 plus
GST for 1 year of advertising. Ms Wang urged Mr Lin to obtain a better price. On
13 March 2023, Mr Lin messaged
Ms Wang and informed her that he had negotiated a
price of $330,000 inclusive of GST for 1 year of advertising which consisted of
48 weeks of electronic advertising at the arrivals section of SIA, and 4 weeks
of advertising on a lightbox, also in the arrivals
Mr Lin conveyed to Ms Wang the final negotiated price of $330,000, he told her
that the “contract” must be signed
within a week. At that time, Ms
Wang was in China. Mr Lin told her that she could sign an agreement first and
“deal with the
money when” she came back. At this point, no
contractual document had been conveyed to Ms Wang or Chanlor. Over the next few
days, Mr Lin continued to urge Ms Wang to proceed with a contract given the
risk, as he put it, that the advertising space may be
given to another entity.
As no contract had been provided to Ms Wang at this point, I infer that Mr Lin
was in fact seeking Ms Wang’s
confirmation that she wanted to go ahead
with advertising at SIA for the quoted price.
23 March 2023, in response to Mr Lin’s urgings, Ms Wang said in a message
to Mr Lin: “And we are paying for advertising,
so they should follow our
time”. That message indicates that Ms Wang understood that the time
pressure was being imposed by
the relevant third party (here, JCD).
Ultimately,
on 24 March 2023, Mr Lin sent Ms Wang the Agreement. On 27 March 2023, Ms Wang
signed the Agreement on behalf of Chanlor
and Mr Lin signed it on behalf of
27 March 2023, Mr Lin, on behalf of Wedo, also signed an Outdoor Advertising
Order with JCD (the JCD Order) for the advertising
of Chanlor’s skincare
product with a commencement date of 10 April 2023 and an end date of 2 June
2024. The JCD Order had terms
and conditions forming part of a contract between
Wedo and JCD. The terms and conditions included terms to the following
(a) Wedo was relevantly defined as the Client notwithstanding it was also an
Agent as defined in the contract (being an advertising
(b) The contract was for the period referred to above. Wedo could not cancel the
contract without JCD’s consent which was at
JCD’s discretion. If
Wedo did cancel the contract, it was liable to pay any losses suffered by JCD
for any advertising space
that it could not sell for any period otherwise
covered by the contract;
(c) Wedo was the party obliged to pay JCD under the contract regardless of
whether it received payment from the advertiser (here,
(d) The amount due under the contract was $284,697.93 inclusive of GST which was
payable in monthly instalments at a rate set out
in the contract.
fees payable under the JCD Order were set out on its front page which also
included the words, “Agency Rebate/Fee: 10%”.
I infer that under
this contract, JCD would rebate 10% of its fee as a form of commission to
the Agreement was entered, Ms Wang expressed dissatisfaction with respect to the
proposed placement of the advertising. Mr Lin
indicated to her that her
dissatisfaction only arose after entry into the Agreement and that it was not
likely that the positioning
could change.
messages were exchanged in June 2023. In summary, Mr Lin conveyed to Ms Wang
that if she did not want to proceed, she should
not delay as “they”
could resell the space. Mr Lin said, “Otherwise, if you keep holding the
billboard, you will
be charged every day”. Mr Lin further explained that
although “they” will sell the space if Ms Wang did not proceed,
“they will trace the cost of” any period during which the space was
not re-sold. Ms Wang responded, “We won’t
pay”. In these
messages, Mr Lin sought to convey that if JCD imposed charges because of a
cancellation of the advertising at
SIA, Chanlor would be the party required to
pay for any losses suffered by JCD.
Wang and Mr Lin continued to exchange messages relating to Ms Wang’s
dissatisfaction with the positioning of the advertising.
These messages are
important to the question of whether Chanlor terminated the Agreement. I will
detail the material evidence in
this regard when I deal, below, with the
question of termination.
23 October 2024, Ms Ye, on behalf of Wedo, emailed JCD suggesting that it
consider temporarily removing the advertising at SIA.
She said the reason for
that suggestion was that Chanlor “had not yet provided formal confirmation
for the advertisement placement”.
Ms Ye noted that Wedo understood that it
was the contracting party with JCD and it was responsible for fulfilling the
terms of that
contract. In response, JCD said it would look into reselling the
space and if it could find someone to take on the space, it would
advertising campaign.
advertising of Chanlor’s skincare product commenced in April 2023 and
continued until around 3 December 2023 at which point
JCD cancelled the balance
of the advertising campaign. Ultimately, JCD only charged Wedo $130,699.57
(including GST) pursuant to
their contract. Although there is no direct evidence
on this point, I infer from the fact that JCD said it would seek to resell the
advertising space, and from the terms of their contract as identified in
paragraph [
above, that JCD was able to resell the space.
Notwithstanding
that Wedo was only charged $130,688.57 by JCD for the advertising that actually
took place, it seeks payment of its
Invoice of $330,000 from Chanlor pursuant,
primarily, to the Agreement.
is no evidence that Wedo provided Chanlor with a copy of Wedo’s proposed
contract with JCD at any stage prior to entry
The Agreement
Agreement had the following relevant features and terms:
(a) A recital which stated that the terms and conditions applied to “each
booking made by the Client” with Wedo “for
the display or publishing
of certain advertising as set out in, and through the use of the
agreement”.
(b) Clause 2(a) stated that: “An invoice for services will be issued to
Party A [Chanlor] .... payment of an invoice is due
within 30 working days after
the invoice date”.
(c) Clause 4(a) was in the following terms:
“Party B [Wedo] endeavors to provide continuous uninterrupted service at
all time [sic]. However the service provided is not
fault free and relies on
factors outside the control of Party B. Party B will not take responsibilities
of the technical failure
unexpected that is not caused by Party B.”
(d) Clause 6 was in the following terms:
“Party B [Wedo] may stop your service in the circumstances contemplated in
this clause, provided that reasonable notice will
be given when possible.
a) Technical failure, modifications or maintenance. Under this circumstance
Party B will endeavor [sic] to procure the resumption
of the service as
reasonably practicable.
b) if Party A’s [Chanlor’s] advertisement includes obscene,
defamatory or offensive material. In this situation, Party
A shall remain liable
for all charges due through the period of suspension ...”
(e) Clause 8 was in the following terms:
“Either party may terminate this Agreement in the event that the other
party breaches a material term of this Agreement, provided
non-defaulting party has provided notice of the breach and the breach remains
unremedied for a period of at least 15 days
from the date of the notice or
cannot be remedied.
a) In the event that Party A [Chanlor] requests that this Agreement be
terminated, Party A must give 4 weeks’ written notice
to Party B and must
pay all monies due to Party B for all services provided by Party B to Party A up
until termination date.”
Principles of Construction
Agreement was a commercial contract.
is well-settled that Australian law applies an objective approach to the
construction of contracts. The law does not seek to ascertain
the parties’
subjective understanding of a contractual obligation, but what the contractual
words convey to a reasonable person
in the position of the parties in the
circumstances in which the contract is entered into. Evidence of the
parties’ subjective
intention is usually inadmissible on the question of
construction.
(FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty
the High Court stated the
applicable principle as follows (footnotes omitted):
[40] This Court, in
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
, has recently
reaffirmed the principle of objectivity by which the rights and liabilities of
the parties to a contract are determined.
It is not the subjective beliefs or
understandings of the parties about their rights and liabilities that govern
their contractual
relations. What matters is what each party by words and
conduct would have led a reasonable person in the position of the other party
believe. References to the common intention of the parties to a contract are to
be understood as referring to what a reasonable
person would understand by the
language in which the parties have expressed their agreement. The meaning of the
terms of a contractual
document is to be determined by what a reasonable person
would have understood them to mean. That, normally, requires consideration
only of the text, but also of the surrounding circumstances known to the
parties, and the purpose and object of the transaction.
the High Court summarised the core principles of the construction of commercial
contracts as follows in
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside
[35] ... The meaning of the terms of a commercial contract is to be determined
by what a reasonable businessperson would have understood
those terms to mean
... [that] require[s] consideration of the language used by the parties, the
surrounding circumstances known
to them and the commercial purpose or objects to
be secured by the contract [which] is facilitated by an understanding “of
the genesis of the transaction, the background, the context and the market in
which the parties are operating” ... unless a
contrary intention is
indicated, a court is entitled to approach the task of giving a commercial
contract a businesslike interpretation
on the assumption that the parties
intended to produce a commercial result. A commercial contract is to be
construed so as to avoid
it “making commercial nonsense or working
commercial inconvenience”.
resolving ambiguity, a court will seek to adopt a commonsense approach that is
in accordance with the apparent purpose of the contract.
However, such an
approach has no place where there is no ambiguity, and the court will not
rewrite the terms of a contract to relieve
against harsh or unreasonable terms.
As the High Court (Kiefel CJ, Keane, Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ)
recently observed
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Rossato
[63] ... It is no part of the judicial function in relation to the construction
of contracts to strain language and legal concepts
in order to moderate a
perceived unfairness resulting from a disparity in bargaining power between the
parties so as to adjust their
bargain. It has rightly been said that it is not a
legitimate role for a court to force upon the words of the parties’
“a meaning which they cannot fairly bear [to] substitute for the
bargain actually made one which the court believes could better
made”. Even the recognised doctrines of unconscionability or undue
influence do not support such a course ...
principles of contractual construction will permit a court to add, omit, or
correct words in an otherwise unambiguous contract
where it is clearly necessary
to avoid absurdity,
but only where
the intended meaning can be discerned. As stated by Leeming JA (with whom Bell
CJ and Ward P agreed) in
QBT Pty Ltd v
[74] If it is unclear how the absurdity is to be resolved, then the principles
of construction where there is an obvious error are
not available to authorise a
departure from the ordinary literal meaning.
What services did Wedo agree to provide?
Each Party’s case
important issue in the proceedings was the nature of Wedo’s obligation
under the Agreement. That is, what was the service
being provided by Wedo to
Chanlor which entitled it to the agreed fee?
case is that it was obliged to “procure” advertising for Chanlor, as
opposed to providing advertising. In
final submissions, Wedo submitted that it
procured the agreed advertising by “booking” it with JCD. It did so
by entering
into a contract with JCD. At that point, Wedo says it fulfilled its
obligation under the Agreement and was entitled to the agreed
fee. At another
point in final address, Counsel for Wedo, Mr Araki, put the position slightly
differently by saying that Wedo’s
obligation was “to cause, to make
the booking, and to facilitate for the airport advertising”. It is not
clear that takes
the matter much further than the proposition that Wedo’s
obligation was to “book” the advertising. Wedo relies
on the terms
of the Agreement together with the surrounding circumstances at the time of the
Agreement. Wedo, in submissions, described
its service as “advertising
procurement services”.
case is that the relevant service that Wedo was required to provide was the
actual provision of advertising. Only
upon that provision, was Wedo entitled to
a fee for services rendered under the Agreement. It says that Wedo’s
entitlement
to fees is limited to fees for the advertising actually provided by
Wedo. Chanlor says that Wedo’s obligation was not merely
advertising with a third party. Chanlor says that this is the correct
construction of the terms of the Agreement.
Consideration
to the Agreement, it was the common knowledge of the Parties that Wedo needed to
arrange Chanlor’s advertising with a
third party. I have referred to
communications between the Parties which establish that fact in paragraphs [
Accordingly,
each Party knew that Wedo, itself, was not the provider of the infrastructure
upon which the advertising would appear
and that it was seeking to secure an
arrangement with a third party so that the advertising could occur on that
infrastructure. The
infrastructure was a light board, and a billboard at
prior to the Agreement, Wedo conveyed to Chanlor a price for 1 year of
advertising (being 4 weeks complimentary on a light
board, and 48 weeks on a
billboard) that Chanlor understood was provided to Wedo from the third party. As
set out in [
Wedo informed Chanlor that the price was $330,000 including GST.
summary, the common knowledge (or at least understanding) of the Parties
immediately prior to entry into the Agreement was:
(a) Wedo was arranging advertising through a third party; and
(b) The third party would set a price for that advertising.
those surrounding circumstances in mind, it is necessary to turn to the terms of
the Agreement. I set out below the aspects of
the Agreement that I consider are
relevant to determining the service that Wedo agreed to provide under the
the recital of the Agreement, as noted above, referred to “each booking
[being] made by the Client [Chanlor] with Wedo
... for the display or publishing
of certain advertising”. It does not refer to a booking being made by Wedo
on behalf of or
for the Client.
clause 2 stated that an invoice for services would be issued by Wedo. It did not
identify how the amount of the invoice
would be calculated. It did not provide
for payment in advance of the stated services. It entitled Wedo to issue an
for services
. In my view, the ordinary meaning of clause 2 was
that Wedo was entitled to issue an invoice for services rendered. I consider
is a business-like construction. The question remains as to what those
services involved.
the term “service” was not defined in the Agreement. In my view,
clause 4 provided an indication of the nature
of the service which entitled Wedo
to render a fee. By clause 4, Wedo agreed that it endeavoured to provide
“continued uninterrupted
at all time [sic]”. It noted
provided by Wedo was not fault free and relied on
factors outside the control of Wedo. It further provided that Wedo did not take
responsibility for technical failure that was unexpected and not caused by Wedo.
4 was more naturally directed to events occurring
the provision of
the service provided by Wedo. In my view, clause 4 does not sit well with a
construction that limits Wedo’s
service to the booking of advertising as
the conduct of “booking” advertising is discrete, not ongoing.
Further, if the
service was complete upon the booking of advertising, it is
difficult to see what technical failures could have been contemplated
parties that could have affected Wedo’s continuous service referred to in
clause 6 stated that Wedo could stop “your service” in the
circumstances contemplated by the clause. In my view,
the term “your
service” must mean the service provided to the Client (Chanlor) by Wedo
because the only service otherwise
referred to in the Agreement is a service
provided by Wedo. That is to be expected given the Agreement is between Chanlor
The circumstances in which Wedo could stop providing a service to
Chanlor included:
(a) Technical failure. In that circumstance, the clause provided that Wedo would
endeavour to procure the resumption of the service
as reasonably practicable;
(b) If Chanlor’s advertisement was obscene, defamatory or offensive. In
such a circumstance Chanlor remained liable for “all
charges due”
through the period of suspension.
to clause 4, clause 6 was more naturally directed, in my view, to events
occurring during the provision of the service provided
by Wedo. It provided
circumstances pursuant to which Wedo could suspend the service. If Wedo’s
only obligation was to procure
advertising by booking advertising with a third
party, then the notion of a suspension of its services makes little sense,
particularly
when regard is had to the obligation in some circumstances for the
Client (Chanlor) to remain liable for all “charges due through
of suspension”.
the Agreement had a contract price of $330,000 inclusive of GST. That was the
cost, as understood by Chanlor, of 52 weeks
of advertising at SIA (inclusive of
4 weeks complimentary lightbox advertising). That is, the cost imposed on
Chanlor was not directed
to agency booking services per se, or the time spent by
Wedo in organising advertising, but rather the cost of Chanlor’s
advertisement
displayed at SIA as disclosed by Wedo to Chanlor prior to entry
into the Agreement. That is consistent with the recital which describes
terms and conditions of the Agreement as applying to “each booking made by
[Chanlor] with Wedo ... for the display or publishing
advertising”.
Conclusion on construction
into account each of the matters referred to at paragraphs [
] above, and bearing in
mind the principles set out at paragraphs [
] above, in my view, on the proper construction of the
Agreement, Wedo’s obligation was to provide advertising – that
Chanlor was paying for the actual provision of advertising and not for a service
limited to booking advertising with a third
party, or a service in facilitating
advertising by a third party. The fact that Chanlor was aware that Wedo had to
arrange advertising
through a third party (and obtain a price from that third
party) does not negate this conclusion. It was Wedo’s obligation
provide the advertising; it was a matter for Wedo as tohow it went about
fulfilling that obligation.
my view the most compelling indicators supporting that construction are the
recital, clause 4, and clause 6, as explained above.
The contract price, for the
reasons mentioned above, also tends to support such a construction.
Wedo’s obligations were limited to “procuring” advertising,
but not the actual provision of advertising, it would
have been very easy for
the Parties to make that plain in the Agreement.
it is relevant that Chanlor had no contractual relationship with JCD, nor was
one intended by the Parties. That is, if JCD
breached its agreement with Wedo,
and for example, ceased advertising after 3 months, Chanlor would have no
contractual recourse
against JCD. Further, on Wedo’s construction, Wedo
would have no contractual obligation to enforce its contract with JCD. On
construction, the risk distribution of a failure of advertising falls squarely
on Chanlor with no contractual remedy available.
construction I favour potentially left Wedo exposed to a liability to JCD if,
for example, Chanlor validly terminated the Agreement,
and the consequence of
that termination was that it ceased having any future obligation to pay fees for
advertising. However, Wedo
was in a position to protect itself by including a
clause or clauses in the Agreement to indemnify itself against any liability it
incurs to JCD because of such a termination, or to otherwise accommodate that
risk in the Agreement or in its agreement with JCD.
The Agreement had an
indemnity clause, however, it was confined to limited circumstances not relevant
to these proceedings. Wedo,
during the hearing, expressly disclaimed any claim
for damages arising from its liability to JCD under its contract with JCD.
the words in
in my view, the construction I favour is one which
adopts a businesslike interpretation on the assumption that the Parties intended
to produce a commercial result.
construction, in my view, is also somewhat uncertain. As noted above, Wedo
described its services as “advertising
procurement services”.
However, what it meant by that was not clear. When pressed on what
“procuring advertising”
meant, its Counsel described the obligation
as “to cause, to make the booking, and to facilitate for the airport
advertising”.
The meaning of “to cause” or “to
facilitate” is itself uncertain. The Agreement does not use such words,
and there is no basis, in my view, to introduce, by way the application of rules
of construction, such concepts into the Agreement.
course, in this case, Wedo’s conduct did in fact produce advertising at
SIA for a period of eight months. As I noted earlier,
at the final hearing, no
point was taken by Chanlor that eight months was not substantial performance of
the Agreement, and no point
was taken about the nature of the advertising.
a result, on the issues ultimately joined by the Parties, my conclusion on the
question of construction has relevance to the determination
of the consequences
of a valid termination of the Agreement by Chanlor. If Chanlor validly
terminated the Agreement sometime in June
2023, the issue that arises is the
identification of the amount, if any, it is obliged to pay Wedo pursuant to
clause 8 of the Agreement.
That, in turn, depends upon the nature of the service
Wedo provided up until the effective date of termination.
Accordingly,
I now turn to these issues.
Did Chanlor terminate the Agreement,
and if so, what are the consequences of that termination?
following facts, some of which are additional to those set out in paragraphs [
] above, are relevant
to the termination issue.
noted in paragraph [
] above, after entry into the Agreement, Ms Wang
expressed dissatisfaction with respect to the positioning of the advertising.
various messages on WeChat, the following messages were sent:
(a) On 12 June 2023, Ms Wang asked for the placement of the billboard to be
changed to a better location than Chanlor’s competitor’s
She said that it is “better not to do it” and that the placement was
very embarrassing. She went on to say,
“the positions at the airport are
really not OK”;
(b) On 12 June 2023, Mr Lin replied: “So it’s not going to be done,
right? I’ll reply to them [JCD] this week.
See what they plan to
(c) On 23 June 2023, Ms Wang enquired whether the positions could be changed
because she did not like the current positions. She
said: “We are lucky
this time that we did not take that advertising position. The position is
extremely bad. There is basically
no advertisement”. The position she was
describing was a position towards Exit B at SIA. She further messaged, “We
want A ... Otherwise we won’t do it”. Mr Lin replied that that
position had been taken up by a competitor and he could
not ask the airport to
break its contract with the competitor. There was then the exchange referred to
in paragraph [
(d) Later on 23 June 2023, having been told that position “A” was
unavailable, Ms Wang said that “if we can’t
get that one, we
won’t do it”, “Leave it to the lawyers from now on”,
“We’ll let the lawyers
participate in this matter”, “The
contract said it could be ended in 4 weeks”. She went on to say that she
a position at Exit A, that the position was wrong and “Forget it.
Let the lawyers handle it”;
(e) Mr Lin ultimately responded to those messages: “Oh well, forget it.
Let the lawyers handle it”;
(f) The pair exchanged further messages on 23 June 2023 which did not detract
from the messages referred to above. The further messages
were of a type in
which each Party sought to justify their position;
(g) The next relevant messages on WeChat between Mr Lin and Ms Wang did not
occur until 12 October 2023. They are instructive and
I set the relevant parts
out here (emphasis added):
Mr Lin: The airport has started to act. Let’s all get ready.
Ms Wang: What?
Ms Wang: Wasn’t it cancelled a long time ago?
Mr Lin: ...The airport doesn’t agree to cancel.
Ms Wang: Wasn’t it cancelled long ago?
Ms Wang: It was said long ago that it was not okay.
Ms Wang: Let the lawyers contact. Oh well.
Mr Lin: The contract was signed in March, the advertisement was put up in April,
you said to cancel in June
cross-examination, Mr Lin was asked questions concerning the issue of
termination. He was shown an email from Ms Ye to JCD
dated 19 June 2023 (to
which reference is made below) and it was suggested that that email acknowledged
that Chanlor had terminated
the Agreement. Mr Lin gave evidence that, as at 19
June 2023, it was his understanding that Chanlor was merely thinking about
terminating
the Agreement. The following exchange then occurred between Mr
Bedrossian SC and Mr Lin (emphasis added):
Q. Is the only reason you say that Ms Wang had not terminated the
advertising contract because she continued to speak to you afterwards?
that what you're saying?
A. INTERPRETER: No.
Because later on, Ms Wang told me
clearly that she would terminate the contract and she will not pay for
Q. When do you say she said that to you?
A. INTERPRETER: Roughly, it should be either 23rd or 26th, but I
cannot recall the exact time.
Q. On that occasion,
whenever it happened, she sent you a WeChat
message; correct?
A. INTERPRETER:
Ye was taken to her email of 19 June 2023 to JCD during her cross-examination.
In that email she said the following:
“I am writing to express our sincerest apologies that our client Cemoy
[Chanlor] made their own decision of termination of
the airport campaign
contract without discussion with us ... Regrettably ... we were unable to
convince the brand to fulfil their
contractual obligations due to their
dissatisfaction with the advertising placement ...”
been taken to that email, Ms Ye’s evidence was that she wrote that passage
in her email because Mr Lin had told her Chanlor
had terminated the
“advertising contract”.
Legal Principles
a contrary contractual requirement, notice of termination need not take any form
or use any specific words provided that a
clear intention to terminate the
contract is expressed. It is the substance of what the notice conveys, rather
than its form, that
a communication to be regarded as a notice of termination, what is required is
that a reasonable person in the position of the
recipient is “‘left
in no doubt’ that the right to terminate has been
exercised”.
The notice of
termination may come from a single communication or from a series of
communications taken together.
a communication or series of communications amounts to an effective notice of
termination is assessed objectively, having
regard to the commercial purpose of
any requirement for termination, and the surrounding
circumstances.
Consideration
8 of the Agreement entitled Chanlor to terminate the Agreement on 4 weeks’
written notice. The communications it relies
upon to found such a notice are
WeChat messages. No suggestion was made that such messages are not written
communications.
Accordingly,
the issue is whether the messages relied upon would leave a reasonable person in
the position of Wedo in no doubt that
Chanlor had terminated the Agreement.
my opinion, on 23 June 2023, the WeChat messages, sent by Chanlor to Wedo, would
make plain to a reasonable person in the position
of Wedo that Chanlor was
terminating the Agreement. Those messages went beyond messages of complaint. Ms
Wang expressly referred
to the 4 weeks’ notice period in the Agreement,
told Mr Lin to “Forget it. Let the lawyers handle it” and Mr Lin
replied similarly, “... forget it. Let the lawyers handle it.” These
statements were made in the context of the communications
on 12 June 2023
referred to above and the earlier communications on 23 June 2023 referred to
above. A reasonable person in Wedo’s
position would have had no doubt that
Chanlor was terminating the Agreement.
am fortified in my conclusion in this regard by the fact that Mr Lin himself
understood those communications as amounting to a notice
of termination as he
conceded when giving evidence. Indeed, on Ms Ye’s evidence, Mr Lin had
told her that Chanlor had terminated
the “advertising contract” a
few days earlier.
these reasons, I find that on 23 June 2023, Chanlor gave notice of termination
of the Agreement. Pursuant to clause 8 of the Agreement,
that termination took
effect 4 weeks after 23 June 2023.
Consequences of
termination
8 of the Agreement provided that upon termination Chanlor was obliged to pay
“for all services provided” by Wedo
to it up until termination date
(being the date 4 weeks after 23 June 2023).
have earlier concluded that on the proper construction of the Agreement, the
service provided by Wedo was the actual provision of
advertising. Clearly, Wedo
did provide advertising pursuant to the Agreement in that period. The
complimentary 4-week lightbox advertising
commenced in April 2023 and the
billboard advertising commenced in June 2023.
Agreement made no provision as to how the contract price of $330,000 inclusive
of GST was to be paid. As noted earlier, clause
2 provided that an invoice could
be issued “for services”.
the service to be provided by Wedo was the provision of advertising, clause 8,
required Chanlor to pay for the advertising provided
up until the effective date
of termination.
the Agreement does not provide a mechanism by which that amount could be
ascertained, it would be reasonable to approach
the quantification of that
amount on a pro rata basis.
I do not need to determine the manner of quantification pursuant to clause 8
because Wedo made it clear, in final submissions,
that it put its case only on
the basis that its entitlement was for the full $330,000 and did not bring any
alternative contractual
claim for a lessor amount calculated on the basis
of a valid termination.
Accordingly,
for the above reasons, I find that Chanlor gave written notice of termination on
23 June 2023, and the termination was
effective 4 weeks after that date. Wedo is
not entitled to a payment of $330,000 because it is only entitled to be paid for
its service.
Its service was the provision of advertising which it did for a
relatively short period prior to termination becoming effective.
contractual claim is singular in the sense that it is a claim for $330,000 and
not any other claim.
raised in its defence an allegation that if Wedo established a breach of
contract, it failed to mitigate its loss. On the
issues ultimately joined by the
Parties, mitigation is not a relevant issue. If Chanlor validly terminated the
Agreement, as I have
found, then in those circumstances, clause 8 regulates the
Parties’ rights and obligations and no question of mitigation arises
because there is no breach of contract. If Chanlor did not terminate the
Agreement, the Agreement remained on foot and Wedo was entitled
to the full
contract price. If Wedo’s construction of the Agreement was correct, then
it was entitled to the full contract
price when it procured the advertising
through JCD, and accordingly, there was no future loss to
Conclusion on Wedo’s contract claim
the foregoing reasons, Wedo’s contract claim has
Quantum Meruit
the alternative, Wedo claimed relief by way of quantum meruit.
Mann v Paterson Constructions Pty Ltd
Mann v Paterson
Constructions
Keifel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ at [16] cited with approval the following
statement: “... an essential step in considering a claim
in quantum meruit
... is to ask whether and how that claim fits with any particular contract the
parties have made.”
Honours concluded at [19] that “in circumstances where the respondent has
enforceable contractual rights to money that
has become due under the contract,
there is no room for a right in the respondent to elect to claim a reasonable
remuneration unconstrained
by the contract between the parties.”
Similarly, at [64], , Gageler J (as his Honour then was) cited with approval the
statement: “[n]o action can be brought for restitution while an
inconsistent contractual promise subsists between the parties
in relation to the
subject matter of the
I have found that Chanlor terminated the Agreement on 23 June 2023 and that
clause 8 of the Agreement regulated the contractual
entitlement of Wedo to fees
for its services. Accordingly, there is no room for a corresponding right in
Wedo to reasonable remuneration
unconstrained by the terms of clause 8, unless,
subsequently to Chanlor’s termination, the conduct of the Parties was such
as to entitle relief by way of restitution.
has not established any conduct after 23 June 2023 that could sustain a claim in
quantum meruit. As is plain from the facts set
out earlier, Chanlor was
dissatisfied with the placement of the advertising at SIA and did not wish to
proceed with it. Further,
Wedo has not established that after termination,
Chanlor was aware of, and accepted the benefit of, any advertising at SIA.
the exchange of messages in October 2023, as set out in paragraph [
] above, strongly
suggests that Chanlor was not aware that the advertising occurred
post-termination and did not request any such
advertising.
the extent advertising occurred after termination, it occurred pursuant to the
contract between Wedo and JCD. Chanlor was not a
party to that contract.
my view, notwithstanding advertising at SIA did in fact occur until December
2023, Wedo has not established that the advertising
post-termination was at the
implied request, or acceptance, of Chanlor to ground an entitlement to
restitutionary relief. Wedo had
bound itself to a contract with JCD and it was
not until about December 2023 that JCD agreed to bring that contract to an end.
fact that that contract may have provided benefits to Chanlor is
insufficient, of itself, to entitle quantum meruit
the above reasons, the Plaintiff has failed to establish its claim, and the
proceedings must be dismissed.
Parties have requested an opportunity to consider any costs application.
Accordingly,
the orders I make are:
(1) The proceedings are dismissed;
(2) If a Party wishes to file submissions on costs, then within 7 days, it is:
(a) To file those submissions together with any affidavits in support. Without
leave, such submissions to be not more than 5 pages
in length; and
(b) Indicate whether it requires an oral hearing or whether it is content for
the Court to determine costs in Chambers on the papers;
the Parties do not file submissions on costs in accordance with the orders in
paragraph [
above, I propose to order the Plaintiff to pay the Defendants costs of the
proceedings.
10 November 2025 - 10 November 2025 - Amendment to Solicitor Firm for
(2004) 219 CLR 165;
(2014) 251 CLR 640
(2021) 271 CLR 456
[2021] HCA 23.
Fitzgerald v
[1956] HCA 53
(1956) 95 CLR 420
at 426-427;
[1956] HCA 53 (Dixon
CJ and Fitzgerald
[2024] NSWCA
Balog v Crestani
[1975] HCA 16
132 CLR 289
at 296-297;
Masters in Building
Training Pty Ltd v State of New South Wales
[2022] NSWSC 499
Robinson v Becata Pty
[2004] NSWSC 310
JPA Finance Pty Ltd
v Gordon Nominees Pty Ltd
(2019) 58 VR 393
[2019] VSCA 159
Robinson v Becata Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWSC 310
(2019) 267 CLR 560
[2019] HCA 32.
Lumbers v W
Cook Builders Pty Ltd (in liq)
(2008) 232 CLR 635
[2008] HCA 27
See also Timis v Mina
[1999] NSWCA 140
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (325 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter