URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/65.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Elmobayed v Woolworths Group Limited [2025] NSWPICPD 65; (8 September 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Elmobayed v Woolworths Group Limited
[2025] NSWPICPD 65
Rayanne Elmobayed
RESPONDENT:
Woolworths Group Limited
Woolworths Limited
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W25690/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Acting Deputy President Paul Sweeney
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
8 September 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Certificate of Determination dated 17 December 2024 is
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION –
Workers Compensation Act 1987
whether need for surgery results from injury – scope of
estoppel created by consent award for respondent in prior proceedings
Bindah v Carter Holt Harvey Woodproducts Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA
Bouchmouni v Bakhos Matta t/as Western Red Services
[2013] NSWWCCPD 4
considered –
factual finding that need for
surgery resulted from injury caught by the estoppel
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr B McManamey, counsel
Withstand Lawyers
Respondent:
Mr P Stockley, counsel
Turks Legal
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Elmobayed v Woolworths Group Ltd
[2024] NSWPIC 706
Mr J Wynyard
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
17 December 2024
INTRODUCTION
issue on this appeal is whether an estoppel created by consent orders made on
25 March 2024 precluded the appellant recovering
the cost of surgery
undertaken by Dr Banzic and Dr Stewart on 30 July 2024.
Elmobayed (the appellant) was formerly employed by Woolworths Group Limited (the
respondent) as a picker and filler. On 9
June 2022, while lifting crates at the
respondent’s premises at Eastlake, she experienced pain in her neck, left
shoulder and
her symptoms persisted, the appellant sought treatment from doctors at the
Excelsior Family Medical Centre at Guildford. On 22
June 2022, she was advised
by Dr Rehman, a general practitioner, that a scan of her cervical spine was
suggestive of a lesion in
her left first rib area. A CT scan confirmed the
presence of a tumour at the left rib. Accordingly, on 29 June 2022, the
consulted with a cardiothoracic surgeon, Dr Kal Perera, who undertook
surgery to resection her first left rib at Westmead Private
Hospital on 17 July
Dr Perera did not remove the
entirety of the lesion in the appellant’s first left rib as he considered
that more extensive
intervention “could result in permanent neurological
dysfunction”.
the appellant continued to suffer symptoms in her chest, neck, and left arm
following surgery, she was referred to several specialists
for further
investigation. She saw Dr Sammons, a neurosurgeon, Dr Taylor, a pain
specialist, and on 31 May 2023, Dr Hugh Winters,
an interventional and vascular
neurologist.
26 March 2024, the appellant saw Dr David Stewart, a plastic and reconstructive
surgeon on referral from Dr Igor Banzic, a vascular
surgeon. He diagnosed
thoracic outlet syndrome secondary to first rib fibrous dysplasia and
recommended that she undergo further
surgery involving an excision of her first
rib and a thoracic outlet decompression. That surgery was undertaken by Dr
Stewart and
Dr Banzic at North Shore Private Hospital on 30 July
Dr Banzic performed the
excision of her first rib and Dr Stewart performed the thoracic outlet
decompression.
appellant’s left arm symptoms improved following that surgery.
CLAIM FOR COMPENSATION
2023, a dispute arose as to the appellant’s entitlement to compensation.
On 8 December 2023, the appellant’s solicitor
lodged an ARD with the
Commission (W9322/23) claiming compensation in respect of her injuries. The
matter was allocated to Member
Whiffin who conducted a preliminary conference on
31 January 2024, at which time the matter was listed for a conciliation
and arbitration hearing on 22 March 2024. Following the conciliation
conference, the Member issued a Certificate of Determination
Orders which recorded the following orders:
“1. There will be
an award for the respondent in respect of an aggravation of the
[appellant’s] left first rib tumour,
as well as in respect of the surgical
treatment carried out upon her by Dr Perera on 18 July 2022.
proceedings will otherwise be discontinued and I dispense with the requirement
to file an election to discontinue.”
The Member also noted an
agreement between the parties by which the respondent agreed to pay the
appellant weekly payments of compensation
pursuant to ss 36 and 37 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act).
is the effect of Order 1 on the appellant’s rights to compensation that
gives rise to the dispute in these proceedings.
CLAIM FOR THE COST OF SURGERY – 30 JULY 2024
a Notice issued pursuant to s 78 of the
Workplace Injury Management and
Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) dated 5 June
the respondent’s
insurer denied liability to pay compensation in respect of the cost of the
surgery performed by Dr Stewart
and Dr Banzic on 30 July 2024. The s 78
Notice stated that the respondent had previously accepted liability in respect
to the appellant’s neck and left shoulder. However, the surgery
undertaken by Dr Stewart related to a condition “which
[the respondent]
has previously disputed and has received an award in its
The Notice recorded
the terms of the consent orders dated 25 March 2024.
a review notice issued pursuant to s 287A of the 1998 Act dated 5 August
the insurer considered
further medical evidence furnished by the appellant’s solicitor and the
medical report of Dr Howard
de Torres, plastic surgeon, which it had obtained
for the purpose of considering its liability to the appellant. It maintained its
denial of liability to pay the costs of and incidental to the surgery.
THE ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS
30 August 2024, the appellant’s solicitors lodged a further ARD with the
Commission. It described the appellant’s injury
“Due to the nature and conditions of her employment
and particularly the duties she was required to perform on 9 June 2022,
the repetitive lifting of crates from the ground to head height, the [appellant]
developed a gradual onset of pain and symptoms
in her neck and left shoulder.
Furthermore, the [appellant] suffered an aggravation, acceleration or
exacerbation or deterioration
of the tumour in her left first rib with
irritation of the lower brachial plexus nerves and as a result, developed
neurological symptoms
in her left upper limb.
Alternatively, the [appellant] aggravated her injuries.”
appellant claimed compensation pursuant to s 60 of the 1987 Act for the cost of
the left thoracic outlet decompression and excision
of the first rib undertaken
at North Shore Private Hospital on 30 July 2024. The ARD claimed the sum of
the matter came on for a conciliation conference and an arbitration hearing on
23 October 2024 before Member Wynyard, Mr McManamey,
of counsel, appeared
for the appellant and Ms Balendra, of counsel, appeared for the respondent. The
matter could not be resolved.
It proceeded on the written evidence. The Member
recorded the sole issue remaining in dispute as
“(a) Is Ms Elmobayed estopped from bringing this
action as a result of a consent order made on 25 March
Unfortunately,
there are omissions in the transcript of the hearing. However, the broad thrust
of the arguments of counsel is tolerably
clear and neither party submitted the
omissions precluded a fair determination of the appeal.
reviewing the medical evidence before the Commission, Mr McManamey submitted
that the need for the surgery of 30 July 2024 was
attributable to an aggravation
or exacerbation of the appellant’s thoracic outlet syndrome caused by the
work she performed
respondent.
While the tumour at
the first left rib may have played some background role, the evidence
established that it was the “thoracic
outlet syndrome which required the
surgery”. The tumour was essentially benign. The thoracic outlet syndrome
was a different
condition to the first rib tumour and not subject to the
estoppel created by the order of 25 March
McManamey referred to the respondent’s failure to adduce evidence from Dr
de Torres. He referred to the insurer’s statement
in the review notice
that Dr de Torres diagnosed a brachial plexus injury but that this condition was
outside his area of expertise.
Balendra, on the other hand, emphasised the aspects of the evidence which
explained the perpetuation of the neuropathic symptoms
in the appellant’s
neck and left arm by the residual
In particular, Ms
Balendra relied upon the opinion of Dr Granot. She emphasised that the doctor
stated that the “residual tumour
would be a plausible explanation for an
symptomatology”.
Balendra also argued that the medical evidence supported a conclusion that
“whatever is going on now is as a result of the
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
considering the medical evidence, the Member reiterated the appellant’s
argument, which:
“was based on the hypothesis that the purpose
of the surgical treatment for which compensation is sought was to treat the
injury, whereas the purpose of the surgery for which the [appellant]
had given an award for the respondent was solely to treat the
tumour itself. I
understood this submission to be a factual distinction, as Mr McManamey did
not refer to any authority or legislative
provision.”
Member referred to the reasoning of the President, Judge Phillips, in
Etherton v ISS Property Services Pty
where the President
cited with approval the principles expounded by Roche DP in
Bouchmouni v
Bakhos Matta t/as Western Red
estoppels arising from consent orders
The Member then disposed of the
indicated, the medical opinion, both treating and expert, prior to the entering
of the consent order implicated the first
rib tumour as being causative to Ms
Elmobayed’s symptomatology. It also supported that finding in the post-30
July 2024 reports
of Dr Stewart and Dr Banzic. The dichotomy relied on by
the [appellant] does not resonate very far, as whilst the surgery of 18 July
2022 was concerned with the tumour itself, by the time the consent order was
agreed on 24 March 2024, it was within the [appellant’s]
knowledge that
the tumour had contributed to her symptoms and an objective person would
reasonably understand that the actions by
Ms Elmobayed of lifting totes above
shoulder height had not only caused a soft tissue strain injury, but had also,
to employ the
terms used by Dr Porteous, ‘resulted in irritation of the
tumour in the lower trunk of the brachial plexus’ which had
resulted in
the aggravation, exacerbation or deterioration of the tumour and produced
neurological symptoms in the left arm.”
his Certificate of Determination dated 17 December 2024 the Member made an award
in favour of the respondent.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant raises three grounds of appeal:
(a) The Member erred in fact and law when he failed to consider what the terms
of the order of 24 March 2012 actually meant. (
(b) The Member erred in fact and law when he considered that the fact that there
was evidence that the first rib tumour was causative
of the appellant’s
symptoms determined the meaning and effect of the consent orders. (
(c) The Member erred in fact and law when he failed to consider that there was
evidence of injury other than aggravation of the tumour
and did not consider
whether the need for the surgery in July 2024 resulted from that injury.
Grounds 2 and 3 of the appeal largely turn on the medical evidence adduced by
the appellant, it is necessary to compendiously review
aspects of that evidence.
What follows is not intended to be a survey of the entirety of the evidence or a
substitute for the Member’s
careful summary of the medicine. Rather, I set
out the salient points of the evidence so that the parties can understand the
in which the Commission has determined this appeal.
Dr Kal Perera
Perera, a cardiothoracic surgeon, saw the appellant on 29 June
at the request of Dr
Rehman. He noted that her most recent CT scan showed an “expansive left
first rib tumour with cortical
thinning”. He recorded that the appellant
complained of paraesthesia and weakness in her left arm and hand. He recommended
that she undergo a first rib resection “via an infraclavicular
Perera’s operative findings, recorded in a report of 18 July 2022,
included an enlarged first left rib with discolouration
of the substance of the
rib. The “brachial plexus [was] densely adherent to rib
posteriorly”. Under the heading “Operative
Details”, the
doctor records that the “rib was resected posteriorly as far as was safely
accessible”.
17 August 2022, Dr Perera reported that the appellant had “ongoing pain
and weakness in her left arm”. He stated that
this was “unchanged
from pre-operatively”.
advised that there were risks associated with a further resection to remove the
residual first rib. He treated the appellant with
Lyrica for her neuropathic
pain. He ordered a further MRI.
a report of 16 November 2022, Dr Perera recorded that the appellant’s
recent MRI scan demonstrated the continued presence
of an expansile lesion in
the first left rib causing mass effect on the inferior trunk of the left
brachial plexus. He continued:
“It is likely that her symptoms
are related to [t]his impingement caused by the residual rip [sic, rib]. I have
explained to
her and her mother that removing it could result in permanent
neurological
dysfunction.”
a letter to Dr Rehman dated 23 November 2022, Dr Perera stated that the
appellant had “ongoing pain requiring analgesia”.
He recommended
referral to a pain specialist. On 8 February 2023, Dr Perera reported that
the neurological symptoms in the appellant’s
left arm were
“stable”. He reported that a nerve conduction study did not
demonstrate any abnormality. He did not advise
intervention”.
28 June 2023, Dr Perera reported that the appellant complained of ongoing
symptoms in her left hand and neck together with migraines.
He stated that she
felt a further resection of the residual first rib “may be her only
Dr Vanessa Sammons
Sammons, a neurosurgeon, wrote to Dr Taylor of the Northern Pain Centre on 24
stating that she had
examined the appellant, “who has what appears to me to be complex regional
pain syndrome involving her
left hand”. Dr Sammons noted that the
appellant was “keen for her surgery”. However, the doctor was
sure” of the efficacy of further surgery given the
unrestricted function of the appellant’s hand and arm.
5 September 2023, Dr Sammons reported that the appellant continued to complain
of severe neuropathic pain and discomfort on movement
of her left arm. She
thought that this might result from “traction to the brachial
plexus”. However, she also thought
that there was a “likely complex
regional pain syndrome involving her left upper limb”. She noted that the
did not feel that she could “live with the symptoms” and
that she was “desperately seeking some kind of improvement”.
Sammons recorded:
“I do quite clearly get from Rayanne that
she has neuropathic sounding pain which she has had since her
31 October 2023,
reported that the appellant had seen Dr Taylor:
“who could not
identify any clear therapy that would provide Rayanne some benefit outside of
surgical exploration of the plexus”.
Dr Sammons expressed concern that further surgical exploration may leave the
appellant “functionally worse”. However,
she was prepared to
undertake surgery “where we could potentially divide the clavicle, resect
the first rib and decompress
the plexus” in association with Dr
Dr Hugh Winters
Winters first saw the appellant on 31 May
He advised that there
should be further imaging of her clavicle region and brachial plexus to
determine “if there has been
radiological progression”. He
“The big question will be whether the pain is
because of continued mechanical compression of the nerve or pain arising from
previous injury to the brachial plexus. Either way, we should treat her pain
with a neuropathic agent such as gabapentin.”
If the imaging supported the need for further surgery, he suggested a
referral to a peripheral nerve surgeon “such as Dr Vanessa
a further report dated 19 October
Dr Winters stated that the
appellant’s diagnosis was compression of the brachial plexus
“secondary to [a] rib osteoma”.
He stated that he agreed with the
opinion of Dr Porteous that the appellant’s employment duties “were
likely the main
aggravating factor due to the temporal relationship between
these activities and the onset of her symptoms.” He
“(5) The persistence of symptoms after her surgery
is not unexpected. I note the resection was not complete. Post-operative
swelling, intra-operative irritation of the plexus, focal osteoma progression
(despite resection) and further impingement are all
factors which may have
contributed to her symptoms post-operatively. Although this seems to be related
but a separate issue to her
initial work related aggravation.”
Dr Nathan Taylor
17 October 2023,
reported to Dr Sammons that as the appellant continued to experience neuropathic
pain down her left arm, further surgery
was “a reasonable option”.
He expressed the opinion that the appellant did not have “major allodynia
or other stigmata
Dr Andrew Porteous
Porteous is an occupational physician, who saw the appellant on 7 March 2023 at
the request of her solicitor and provided a series
of reports commencing on 27
March 2023.
The doctor recorded
that the appellant developed tightness in her left shoulder after lifting crates
over an extended period on 9
June 2022. Shortly afterwards, she experienced neck
and shoulder discomfort and weakness in the left hand. Following surgery, she
had tingling pins and needles in the left arm and hand which she continued to
experience.
Porteous records that the appellant saw Dr McGroder, an occupational physician,
possibly at the request of the respondent’s
insurer. Dr McGroder thought
that the appellant was unfit for work at that time by reason of the
“surgery required for a lesion
of the first rib”. Dr Porteous
quoted Dr McGroder as stating:
“It is possible that the
medical condition involving the lesion on the rib caused the onset of symptoms
involving the left neck,
shoulder and arm. Ms Elmobayed originally attributed
this to the nature of her work. Either scenario was possible although the former
is more likely.”
Porteous reported that the appellant continued to have chronic left neck,
shoulder, and arm pain with numbness and tingling down
the posterior arm to the
third and fourth fingers. She reported that she was socially and recreationally
isolated and unable to work.
The doctor diagnosed a soft tissue strain injury to
the left mid musculature in the left shoulder. He accepted that at the time of
this injury she “had a tumour in her left first rib” as a scan
reported that the tumour was “impacting the lower
trunk of the brachial
plexus and nerves that supply the left arm”. The doctor
“In my opinion, her repetitive lifting at or above
chest height caused the soft tissue sprain injury but also more than likely
not resulted in irritation of the tumour in the lower trunk of the brachial
plexus from the tumour resulting in detection earlier
than otherwise expected
and the repetitive use of the left arm above shoulder height with frequent
looking and stretching out resulted
in an aggravation or deterioration of the
underlying condition and symptoms including neurological symptoms in the left
have continued despite excision of the
Porteous was asked to address whether employment was the main contributing
factor in causing or aggravating the injury to the appellant’s
left shoulder. He stated:
“But for the lifting of the empty
totes from ground to around head height, she would not have had the onset of the
shoulder musculoskeletal soft tissue injury but also not irritated the
brachial plexus related to the left arm because of the tumour
then irritating
and she would not have developed neurological symptoms which continue to
doctor expressed the opinion that there was no evidence that the
“on its own did or would cause neck and shoulder pain
and there is no reason why the surgery would cause neck and shoulder
the doctor concluded that the ongoing symptoms in the appellant’s left arm
“as a result of exacerbation or deterioration of the
tumour size or shape by the subject accident, with subsequent earlier than
expected irritation of the lower brachial plexus nerves and that has resulted in
ongoing neurological symptoms and her ongoing neurological
symptoms and pain in
the left arm.”
doctor provided a supplementary report of 15 December 2023, addressing the issue
of whether the appellant’s treatment was
reasonably necessary as a result
of her work injury. Much of the report is not material to the issue in dispute.
The doctor reiterated
his opinion that:
“she had a left
shoulder soft tissue sprain injury and also had an aggravation or exacerbation
of the tumour that affected the
lower trunk of the brachial plexus resulting in
detection earlier than otherwise
doctor continued that:
“The resultant chronic pain from the
aggravation or exacerbation of the underlying rib tumour that had more likely
resulted from irritation of the lower trunk of the brachial plexus and
that resulted in referred pain in the neck and restricted
neck range as well as
the symptoms through the left arm and to the hand, as previously
Dr Rob Granot
Granot, neurologist, saw the appellant on 7 August
at the request of her
solicitors. He took a consistent history. He expressed the following
“The repetitive overhead movements aggravated the
neural contact (of the brachial plexus) with the underlying tumour. This
precipitated
the onset of her symptoms. These have persisted, despite the
cessation of work (the original aggravation), at least in part related
residual tumour (which may possibly be expanding since – the dimensions
are highly variable in comparing report to report)”.
The doctor thought that “operative intervention seems to most likely
[sic] path forward towards resolution.”
Granot’s working diagnosis was:
“Brachial plexus
irritation and displacement related to first rib tumour, triggered by repetitive
He expressed the opinion that he found it difficult to support the view of Dr
Porteous that the appellant’s work changed the
size or shape of the
He accepted that overuse
could “inflame, irritate or aggravate a heretofore asymptomatic
condition”. He continued:
“I would suggest that the mechanism of the initial exacerbation was due
to repetitive upper limb movement, required to raise
the carton to a pallet at
head height. As is known, thoracic outlet syndrome (which this technically is,
only secondary to the tumour
rather than a first rib, for example) is often
triggered by movements of the arms above shoulder height, so this is both
and supported by the literature.”
Granot thought that in the absence of ongoing work “it would appear that
the residual tumour would be a plausible explanation
for her ongoing
symptomatology at this stage. If this is operated upon, that would potentially
clarify the diagnostic and prognostic
Dr Igor Banzic
Banzic provided a report to Dr Rehman post-operatively on 4 September 2024. He
stated that the appellant’s symptoms had improved
“in comparison to
pre-operative clinical status”. Her histopathology revealed a benign
The doctor also stated
“The aetiology behind this Thoracic Outlet Syndrome and
tumour/fibrous dysplasia is unknown but can be associated with some
motion of the arm/shoulder at work, or trauma, as two most common reasons for
thoracic outlet syndrome.”
Dr David Stewart
Stewart, plastic and reconstructive surgeon, first saw the appellant on 26 March
He recorded a consistent
history of the injury with worsening symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome with
irritation of the brachial
plexus. By a further report of 13 August 2024
addressed to a physiotherapist, Dr Stewart expressed the opinion that the
was making “good early progress” but should undertake
“range of motion
exercises”.
a report dated 1 October 2024
Stewart reiterated the diagnosis of neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome
“secondary to the tumour and exacerbated by the
workplace injury and also
by the subsequent surgery.” He continued:
prognosis was that Rayanne would continue to have significant discomfort unless
the thoracic outlet syndrome was decompressed,
with a supraclavicular approach
and a decompression of the brachial plexus, as well as excision of the first rib
exacerbation of the thoracic outlet syndrome caused by the work case [sic]
injury materially contributed to the need for surgery.
The rationale for this
was that Rayanne was entirely asymptomatic prior to the injury, which
exacerbated the condition. Fibrous dysplasia
is a benign condition that can
comfortably be watched and without the symptoms that may never have come to
light without the workplace
injury, the tumour could have comfortably observed
without the need for major surgery.”
Stewart continued:
“Given the underlying fibrous dysplasia as
a precipitating cause of Rayanne’s thoracic outlet syndrome, there is no
surgical treatment other than the excision of the tumour. The co-existence
of brachial plexus irritation and scarring from the previous
surgery also
mandates a supraclavicular decompression of the plexus to make it safe to
proceed with the rib excision.”
The doctor thought that the appellant’s prognosis was reasonable.
ON THE PAPERS
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings,
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents that are before me,
and the submissions by the parties that the
appeal can proceed to be determined
on the basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information to proceed
‘on the papers’ without holding any
conference or formal hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
decision of the Court of Appeal in
State of New South Wales v
Raulston v Toll Pty
was published after
the parties lodged their submissions. While I doubt that the reasoning in
is of great significance in this case, I gave both parties the
opportunity to address it. Only the appellant took the opportunity.
referring to
Ferguson v Connemara Jack Pty
Mr McManamey
submitted that as a proper consideration of the evidence led to the conclusion
that the respondent had not established
an estoppel, I should “substitute
a finding that there is no estoppel as found by the
Other aspects of
this submission, however, are relevant to the grounds of appeal and I will refer
to these below.
the same Direction, I sought to resolve inconsistencies between the submissions
on appeal and the evidence before the Member as
Both the appellant’s chronology and the respondent’s submissions
refer to the Application to Resolve a Dispute
in Matter W9322/23. It does not
appear to have been tendered in evidence before the Member. If it is intended
that it should form
part of the evidence on this appeal it should be forwarded
under cover of an Application to Lodge Additional Documents by 5pm on
August 2025.
appellant also makes numerous references to the evidence in the prior
proceedings in her chronology. As that evidence was not
tendered before the
Member, an amended chronology referring to the evidence before the Member should
be lodged by 5pm on Monday 4
August 2025.”
appellant lodged an amended chronology in accordance with clause 3 of the
Direction. The respondent submitted documentary evidence
tendered in the prior
proceedings. As I was uncertain whether the appellant consented to the
tender of this evidence, I have not
considered it in determining the
Proposed Notice of Contention
[6] and [7] of the respondent’s submissions, Mr Stockley submitted
“had Member Wynyard referred to allegation of injury
disposed of by the consent order, he would have summarily dismissed the
application. This submission is advanced as a notice of contention in this
Rule 125 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the Rules)
“(1) The respondent must file a notice of
contention if the respondent—
(a) wishes to contend that the decision to which a workers compensation dispute
appeal relates should be affirmed on grounds other
than those relied on by the
non-presidential member, and
(b) does not seek a discharge or variation of any part of the decision.
(2) The notice of contention must—
(a) be lodged and a sealed copy served on the other parties to the proceedings
at the same time as the notice of opposition in the
proceedings is lodged and
served, and
(b) state, briefly but specifically, the grounds relied on and
submissions in support of the contention.
(3) The appellant may, within 14 days of service of the notice of
opposition and notice of contention—
(a) lodge submissions in reply to the notice of opposition and the
notice of contention, and
(b) serve a sealed copy of the submissions on the other
Notice of Contention was lodged by the appellant. By its Notice of Opposition
the appellant indicated that it did not wish to file
a Notice of Contention. As
the point was not taken below and given the failure of the respondent to comply
with the Rules, I do not
intend to further consider this aspect of the
respondent’s submission.
LEGISLATION
60 of the 1987 Act insofar as is relevant is as
“(1) If, as a result of an injury received by a
worker, it is reasonably necessary that—
(a) any medical or related treatment (other than domestic assistance)
be given, or
(b) any hospital treatment be given, or
(c) any ambulance service be provided, or
(d) any workplace rehabilitation service be provided,
the worker’s employer is liable to pay, in addition to any other
compensation under this Act, the cost of that treatment or
service and the
related travel expenses specified in subsection (2).”
nature of an appeal under s 352 of the 1998 Act was recently considered by the
Court of Appeal in
. It is clear, as the appellant argues, that
the approach to s 352 stated
and the cases which
follow it, is wrong. The first “general principle” stated in
at [19] is predicated on too narrow a view of the appellate
function conferred by s 352. That approach is also inconsistent with
previous appellate caselaw.
proper approach to an appeal pursuant to s 352 can be found in the
reasoning of the High Court in
(Bell CJ, Kirk, McHugh and Free JJA agreeing) quoted
the following passage from
as illustrative of the proposition that,
when an appellate court is in as good a position as the trial judge to determine
a determination that a conclusion was “open” is
rejected the essential planks of the trial judge’s reasoning, it was not
to the point for the Court of Appeal
to formulate the question as which of the
two hypotheses the trial judge considered to be the more probable. Nor was it to
to consider whether the trial judge had been unduly influenced by the
DNA evidence. It was an error for the Court of Appeal to dismiss
the appeals in
this ‘very closely balanced’ case on the footing that the trial
was neither glaringly improbable nor contrary to
compelling inferences. It was the duty of the Court of Appeal to decide for
which of the two hypotheses was the more probable. It was the duty of the
Court of Appeal to persist in its task of ‘weighing
[the] conflicting
evidence and drawing its own inferences and conclusions’, and, ultimately,
to decide for itself which of
the two hypotheses was the more probable. It did
not. The appellant’s second ground is made good.” (citations
emphasis added)
, Leeming JA stated:
“Future appeals under s 352 should apply the approach in
Fox v Percy
. Appropriate deference is to be given to
members where their findings are based on evidence in respect of which they have
an advantage
(such as the kind identified in
at [55]) over the
Presidential member hearing an appeal. But it is not sufficient for an appeal to
be dismissed on the basis that
an inference was ‘open’ to the
member, as if the member were a jury and there was some evidence supporting it.
Presidential member, after making appropriate allowance for the
advantages enjoyed by the member, would reach a different conclusion
question of fact, he or she should not shrink from giving effect to it.
Otherwise, the Presidential member will be dismissing
an appeal but without
fully addressing whether there is an error of fact, law or
discretion.”
the advantage of the Member in this matter is constrained by the fact that it
was determined on the papers. Nonetheless,
it remains necessary for the
appellant to prove error if it is to succeed on the appeal. It must also remain
the case that the mere
preference of a Presidential member for another outcome
in a factual dispute does not inevitably establish error. That is particularly
so in evaluative decisions, such as those arising under s 9A or
contemplates a rehearing on the basis of the errors asserted in the grounds
of appeal and not a review, the statutory methodology
for an appeal prior to the
2011 amendments to s 352.
was common ground at the arbitration hearing that the consent orders of 24 March
2024 created an estoppel between the parties.
That is undoubtedly correct. In
Habib v Radio 2UE Sydney Pty
McColl JA (Giles
and Campbell JJA agreeing) at [186] stated:
“Orders made by
consent may create an estoppel as between parties, (and, no doubt may be
considered for the purpose of determining
whether subsequent proceedings would
lead to conflicting judgments), however they do so ‘only as to those
matters which are
necessarily decided’, to ascertain which ‘the
Court will closely examine all such evidence, if any, as is available and
admissible, and, by the aid of such materials, will ascertain whether any and
what adjudication of matters in dispute was expressed,
or necessarily involved,
in the actual decision assented to’.”
Isaacs v Ocean Accident and Guarantee Corporation
a case referred to by
Justice McColl, the Court at [75] referred extensively to Spencer Bower on Res
Judicata. Street CJ and Roper
CJ in Eq stated:
“Again, at p
114, para 174, the learned author says: ‘In the case of judgments and
orders by consent ... it is absolutely
essential to refer to the pleadings or
affidavits of the parties, if the judgment or order is in a naked and general
form, in order
to ascertain what, if any, decision of particular questions or
issues was impliedly consented or submitted to by the party against
consent judgment or order was made.”
President Roche referred to both cases in his extensive review of the caselaw in
Bouchmouni.
At [47] the Deputy President enumerated the principles that
he extracted from his consideration of the authorities:
consent orders create res judicata estoppels, but only to the extent of what
was ‘necessarily decided’ (
(b) to determine what was ‘necessarily decided’, the Commission
will closely examine the pleadings and particulars,
the s 74 notice, and the
legislation, because that material forms part of the mutually known facts and
assists in objectively determining
the ‘genesis’ and
‘aim’ of the orders (
at 75; Spencer Bower at [39];
DTR Nominees
(c) consent orders should be construed by reference to what a reasonable person
would understand by the language the parties have
used in the orders, having
regard to the context in which the words appear and the purpose and object of
the transaction (
Cordon Investments
(d) where the words in the consent orders are ambiguous, or susceptible of more
than one meaning, extrinsic evidence is admissible
to show the facts which the
negotiating parties had in their minds (
at 350), but such
evidence is not admissible to contradict the language of the orders when it has
a plain meaning and is not ambiguous
or susceptible of more than one meaning
(e) prior negotiations that tend to establish
background facts
which were known to both parties and the subject matter of the consent orders
will be admissible (
(f) evidence of prior negotiations that are reflective of the parties’
actual (subjective) intentions is not receivable (
at 352), and
(g) the interpretation of consent orders is not governed by the parties’
subjective beliefs or understandings about their
rights and liabilities. It is
an objective test of what a reasonable person would understand by the language
in which the parties
have expressed their agreement (
Cordon Investments
it is convenient to address the grounds of appeal together, I recapitulate the
parties’ submissions in respect of each ground
Ground 1 – Error in failing to consider what the orders
of 24 March 2024 actually meant
Appellant’s submissions
appellant asserts that the Member failed to consider the surrounding factual
matrix, including the pleadings, to determine what
had been “necessarily
decided” by the orders of 24 March 2024 and, more importantly, failed to
consider “the actual
words of the
Nonetheless,
the orders “are relatively clear”; “[t]he effect of the orders
can only mean that there is no liability
on the respondent for any allegation of
an aggravation of the appellant’s left first rib
the appellant asserts that the surgery of 30 July 2024 was “self-evidently
to treat the thoracic outlet syndrome being
the work-related injury.” The
excision of the first rib was the “secondary component of the
recognised by Dr Stewart in his report dated 26 March 2024.
the Member had properly engaged with the language of the consent orders, he
would have concluded that:
(a) whilst there was no liability for an allegation of aggravation of the tumour
there could still be liability for an exacerbation,
acceleration or
deterioration of the tumour, and
(b) the orders did not relate to any other body part. In particular they did not
relate to the brachial plexus or thoracic outlet
Member further erred in considering the consent orders in the context of the
medical evidence available to the parties at the
time. The fact that there was
evidence available to the appellant that work aggravated the tumour did not
“assist in the interpretation
of the consent
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that there can be “no real controversy about what the
terms meant.” It refers to the appellant’s
submission that
“the orders are relevantly
argument pressed by the appellant at the arbitration hearing was that the
aggravation of the tumour “did not include whatever
caused the need for
surgery to the thoracic
appellant’s suggestion that the Member failed to consider the distinction
between aggravation, on the one hand, exacerbation,
acceleration or
deterioration of the tumour, on the other hand, was “unseemly and
preposterous”. It was not clear that
it was “rehearsed before Member
the Member considered the “true gravamen of the appellant’s
argument”, failure to set out detailed reasons for
matters “not
truly in dispute” cannot support a finding of error.
Appellant’s further submissions
its further submissions, the appellant submits that the consent orders do not
extend to the current condition of thoracic outlet
syndrome or injury to the
brachial plexus. It submits that:
“The fact that [the] orders
are expressly limited to the specific aggravation and make no mention of its
consequences is a strong
indication that the orders which had been agreed by the
respondent were to be limited to their express and limited terms.”
Ground 2 – Error concluding that the medical evidence
determined the meaning and effect of the consent orders
Appellant’s submissions
2 also criticises the Member for failure to properly construe the consent
orders. The appellant criticises the Member’s
use of extrinsic evidence to
determine “the meaning of the consent orders”. The Member did not
explain why it was necessary
to address what “the objective person would
conclude about the state of the
The appellant
submits that extrinsic evidence should only be considered when the consent
orders are ambiguous. In this case they
appellant argues that “at most the medical evidence indicated a dispute
The submission
“Because the Member did not engage in any
consideration of the words of the consent orders, he did not reach any
concluded that the orders were clear in their terms and the only
meaning to be
subscribed to them was that the Respondent was not liable for an aggravation of
the tumour. The orders were silent
on any other allegation of injury or any
other body part and therefore had no application to any allegation of injury to
the thoracic
outlet or the brachial
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the Member’s reasons at [67] addressed the
“objective evidence which informed interpretation
of the consent
Member’s conclusions in this paragraph were “correct”,
“it was simply unnecessary.” The respondent
submits that the
“case ultimately turned on [the Member’s] rejection of the argument
that there was a legitimate dichotomy
between a thoracic outlet syndrome caused
by the accepted injury or the presence or removal of the
Ground 3 – Error in failing to consider whether the need
for surgery in July 2024 resulted from an injury other than the tumour
Appellant’s submissions
this ground the appellant reiterates the argument that the estoppel created by
the orders of 24 March 2024 was limited to an “aggravation”
tumour. They did not extend to an exacerbation or deterioration of the tumour.
Each of the words in s 4(b)(ii) of the 1987
Act are to be given
“their separate
There was no
medical evidence “which explicitly describes or diagnoses an aggravation
to a tumour”.
the medical opinion, in particular that of Dr Granot, established that the
appellant’s work, which “aggravated
the neural contact (of the
brachial plexus) with the underlying tumour”, “precipitated the
onset” of her
conclusion in the consent order that the tumour had not been
“aggravated” did not repudiate the existence of other
injuries for
which the employer paid compensation.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submitted that an argument based on Dr Granot’s opinion that
the appellant suffered injury by way of irritation
of the tumour by the brachial
plexus was not open on the pleadings. “The irritation of the brachial
plexus was pleaded as a
consequence
of the aggravation of the tumour, not
the other way around.”
respondent also asserts at [25] that the Member recorded the aspects of Dr
Granot’s opinion on which the appellant relied.
That “demonstrates
the fact that he considered
It might be
inferred that he rejected it. “The evidence does not support the
proposition advanced on behalf of the
appellant.”
The appellant
had not established error.
Consideration
have set out above
the parties’ submissions at the arbitration hearing. It was not suggested,
however, that the Member’s summary
of the submissions commencing at [28]
of his reasons was inaccurate. The Member recorded the argument put by the
appellant as follows:
“the estoppel would lie if the sole
purpose of the proposed surgery was to treat the tumour or the aggravation of
the tumour.
The evidence, he submitted, demonstrated that the dual surgical
procedures carried out on 30 July 2024 were to treat the thoracic
syndrome, and that they were in fact successful in doing
Member recorded that Mr McManamey submitted that a review of the medical
evidence established these propositions. Further, he
recorded that in reply the
appellant argued that the respondent had:
appreciate the difference between the two surgeries. The first surgery was a
partial excision of the tumour and related
solely to that issue, whereas the
surgeries of 30 July 2024 related to the thoracic outlet syndrome and brachial
plexus irritation.”
[40] the Member recorded that Mr McManamey submitted that:
was the exacerbation of the thoracic outlet syndrome caused by the workplace
injury that materially contributed to the need
for the July 2024
surgeries”.
[30] the Member recorded that the respondent submitted that “anything
resulting from the surgery which had been the subject
of the consent award of 25
March 2024 was also caught by the estoppel raised by that award.” While
the appellant argued that
the surgery of 30 July was for “thoracic outlet
syndrome and not the aggravation of the tumour, Dr Granot’s opinion and
that of Dr Winter demonstrated that the two were not
separable”.
the submissions of the parties focused on the question of whether the need for
the surgery of 30 July 2024 resulted from the
left rib tumour or from an injury
to the brachial plexus/thoracic outlet. Mr McManamey argued that if the latter
materially contributed
to the need for that surgery, the estoppel could not
defeat his client’s claim. Conversely, the respondent argued that the
for surgery resulted solely from the tumour and/or the previous surgery. If
there was a difference between the parties, it may
be that the respondent
asserted that the consent award caught the consequences of the tumour at sites
adjacent to the first rib,
whereas the appellant submitted that it should be
limited to the tumour.
Exacerbation, acceleration or deterioration of the
is evident from the above review of the submissions that the argument that the
consent orders did not exclude liability for “an
exacerbation,
acceleration or deterioration of the tumour” was never put to the Member.
It is generally not permissible to
raise a new point on
It is true, as the
appellant argues, that the four words in s 4(b)(ii) are not
“synonymous with each other” and have
“differing shades of
It is equally
true that consent orders are to be construed:
“taking into
account the circumstances in which they were made, at least to the extent that
those circumstances were known to
Consistently
with the authorities discussed in
is authority
for the proposition that the “circumstances” include:
“the communications between the parties describing the
essence of their dispute and the legal context relating to that dispute,
provided by the provisions of the 1987 Act and the [1998]
is not an exhaustive list of the evidence which may be adduced in construing the
terms of the orders. Plainly, if the substance
of this ground had been raised at
the hearing, the respondent would have had the opportunity to address the issue
and to adduce evidence
on the point. In those circumstances, the
appellant’s contention in Grounds 1 and 2 that the Member failed to
consider or hold
that the terms of the consent order did not exclude liability
for acceleration, exacerbation, or deterioration of the tumour at the
rib must fail. It was not raised or argued before the Member.
Consent orders only operate on circumstances at the time
they are made
a related argument which is found in Ground 3, the appellant submits that it was
“open” to the appellant to argue that
“whilst the tumour had
not been aggravated by work as at 24 March 2024 there had been an
aggravation after that
submission is difficult to understand. The appellant did not work between the
date of the consent orders and the date of surgery.
It is, therefore, difficult
to comprehend how further work caused an aggravation of the tumour. As this
submission was not developed
further, I do not intend to pursue
Error in interpreting the orders
review of the submissions does not suggest that either party argued that the
Member should construe the consent orders to ascertain
the scope of the
estoppel. The submissions are silent on both the legal principles and the
evidence relevant to this task. It is
not evident that there was any appreciable
difference between the parties as to the meaning of the orders. At the
commencement of
the arbitration hearing, Mr McManamey
“There’s no dispute about .. (not
transcribable) .. matters, it’s purely whether this surgery is brought
[sic, caught]
by that estoppel. It’s only caught by that estoppel if the
surgery was the .. (not transcribable) .. for the purposes of treating
or aggravation of the
entirety of the appellant’s submission is concerned with an analysis of
the medical evidence for the purpose of establishing
that the surgery on 30 July
2024 was not undertaken merely to treat the tumour the subject of the estoppel.
This is consistent with
the submission recorded by the Member that the estoppel
would only lie if the sole purpose of the surgery on 30 July 2024 was to
“treat the tumour or the aggravation of the tumour”.
was not put that the Member was required to “interpret” the consent
award to determine its meaning. The respondent
did not tender the pleadings,
particulars, or statutory notices served by the insurer in the previous
proceedings (W9322/23). It
is not evident that either party suggested the orders
were capable of disparate interpretations. Rather, the dispute raised by the
pleadings crystallised into a factual issue concerning the cause or causes of
the surgery of 30 June 2024.
Member recognised the ambit of the dispute at [61] when he
“Mr McManamey’s argument was based on the
hypothesis that the purpose of the surgical treatment for which compensation
sought was to treat the work-place injury, whereas the purpose of the surgery
for which the [appellant] had given an award for
the respondent was solely to
treat the tumour itself. I understood this submission to be a factual
distinction, as Mr McManamey did
not refer to any authority or legislative
provision.”
Nevertheless,
the Member considered the meaning of the orders in the context of the medical
evidence. The appellant argued that as
the terms of the consent orders were not
ambiguous, this approach was erroneous. The respondent submitted that it was
unnecessary”. But it did not cause the decision to
doubt that it was permissible to determine the meaning and operation of the
consent orders by reference to the appellant’s
knowledge of the medical
evidence in this case. It was not argued that the consent orders were ambiguous.
However, this conclusion
may distract from the real issue between the parties,
namely whether the Member failed to consider whether an injury other than the
aggravation of the tumour contributed to the need for surgery.
Failure to consider whether injury other than the tumour
resulted in the need for surgery
appellant submits that it was incumbent on the Member to determine the principal
argument she put at the arbitration. That argument
was at the heart of the
dispute between the parties. The respondent submitted that the Member dealt with
this argument at [67] of
his reasons. I doubt that submission is correct. To
reiterate, the relevant portion of [67] is as follows:
dichotomy relied on by the [appellant] does not resonate very far, as whilst the
surgery of 18 July 2022 was concerned
with the tumour itself, by the time the
consent order was agreed on 24 March 2024, it was within the [appellant’s]
that the tumour had contributed to her symptoms and an objective
person would reasonably understand that the actions by Ms Elmobayed
totes above shoulder height had not only caused a soft tissue strain injury, but
had also, to employ the terms used by
Dr Porteous, ‘resulted in
irritation of the tumour in the lower trunk of the brachial plexus’ which
had resulted in the
aggravation, exacerbation or deterioration of the tumour and
produced neurological symptoms in the left arm.”
Member’s reasoning in the above paragraph is concerned with the reasonable
observer’s understanding of the meaning
of the consent orders of 24 March
2024. It does not contain an explicit finding that the surgery of 30 July 2024
was not caused by
an injury other than the aggravation of the tumour. However,
the reasons must be read as a whole. Arguably, the Member accepted that
for surgery resulted from the aggravation of the first left rib tumour. At [54]
to [56] he refers to aspects of the medical
evidence which
“implicated” the aggravation of the tumour in the in “the
symptom complex of her thoracic outlet
syndrome.” But that conclusion does
not answer the argument put by the appellant at the arbitration. In my opinion,
has not determined the essence of the dispute between the parties,
namely whether the tumour was the sole cause of the surgery of
30 July 2024 or,
alternatively, whether it resulted partly from injury to the brachial plexus as
the appellant argued. Failure to
address a prominent aspect of a party’s
case constitutes error.
issue was required to be resolved by a consideration of the evidence.
Accordingly, I conclude that the appellant has proven error.
The estoppel
appellant submits that the consent orders must mean that the respondent is not
liable “for any allegation of an aggravation
of the appellant’s left
first rib tumour.” I accept that interpretation of the consent orders. As
it cannot be suggested
on the evidence that the tumour was caused by work, the
award for the respondent in respect of the aggravation of the tumour must
relieve the respondent of liability for the tumour under the 1987 Act.
appellant particularised this aspect of her claim in these proceedings (and
apparently in the earlier proceedings) on the basis
“suffered an aggravation, acceleration or exacerbation or
deterioration of the tumour in her left first rib with irritation
of the lower
brachial plexus nerves and as a result, developed neurological symptoms in her
left upper limb.”
This does not suggest a discrete injury to the brachial plexus caused by
work. Rather, it suggests irritation of the brachial plexus
resulting from the
work caused aggravation of the left rib tumour. It is true that the appellant
argued at the arbitration and on
this appeal that there was a discrete injury to
the brachial plexus which had given rise to thoracic outlet syndrome. It was
on the basis of the opinion of Dr Granot, that the appellant’s work
“aggravated the neural contact (of the brachial plexus)
underlying tumour.” The appellant also argued that the medical evidence
established that the left rib “tumour
aggravated”.
is also true that the medical evidence which addresses the causes of the need
for surgery is not always transparent. In my opinion,
however, the balance of
the medical evidence does not bear out the appellant’s argument. Clearly,
there was considerable doubt
in the medical evidence available to the parties
prior to 24 March 2024 as to whether the appellant’s first left rib tumour
was related to her employment. Dr Abdalla, one of the appellant’s general
practitioners, noted on 30 June 2022 and 15 August
2022 that the tumour was an
incidental finding: a “non related left rib
Perera, the surgeon who undertook the partial rib resection on 18 July 2022, did
not suggest the appellant’s work caused
or aggravated her tumour. He
expressed the opinion that the appellant’s continuing symptoms after the
surgery were “caused
by the residual
which scans had
shown to be “causing mass effect on the inferior trunk of the left
brachial plexus”. It is tolerably
clear that the doctor thought that the
appellant’s neurological symptoms were caused by the tumour impinging on
the brachial
108. Ostensibly,
Dr McGroder also expressed the opinion that the more likely explanation for the
appellant’s symptom complex
was the lesion at the left
Subsequently,
in 2023, Dr Porteous expressed the opinion that the appellant’s work
caused musculoskeletal injury to the neck
and shoulder but also “irritated
the brachial plexus related to the left arm because of the tumour then
irritating.”
contemplated there may have been some exacerbation or deterioration in the
tumour size or shape by the nature of her work causing
“earlier than
expected” irritation of the lower brachial plexus nerves. This opinion is
incompatible with the submission
that the appellant’s work did not
aggravate the tumour. It undoubtedly conveys the sense that it was the
aggravation of the
tumour by work that brought it into contact with the brachial
her report of 31 October 2023, Dr Sammons stated that the appellant’s
diagnosis was “fibrous dysplasia” and “pain
secondary to
surgery for rib
dysplasia”.
Plainly, Dr
Sammons attributes the appellant’s symptoms to the pathological effect of
the tumour. As Dr Sammons also recorded
that the appellant only developed
neuropathic pain since her surgery, the history underlying her opinion may be
inaccurate.
the latter part of 2023, the medical opinion evidence coalesces around an
acceptance of the opinion of Dr Porteous that the appellant’s
aggravated her tumour. The doctor’s report or opinion was provided to
other specialist medical practitioners who were
asked to comment on it. On 19
October 2023, Dr Winters wrote that he agreed with Dr Porteous’
assessment. He expressed the
opinion that the appellant’s diagnosis was
compression of the brachial plexus “secondary to rib
He accounted for
the persistence of symptoms following the initial surgery by
“[p]ost-operative swelling, intra-operative irritation
of the plexus,
focal osteoma progression (despite resection) and further impingement.” He
acknowledged that these may be “a
separate issue to [the
appellant’s] initial work-related
aggravation.”
seems clear that the doctor attributes the appellant’s symptoms to the
pathological effect of the tumour.
Granot opines that the appellant’s work “aggravated the neural
accept the opinion of Dr Porteous that the appellant’s work changed the
size or shape of the tumour.
doctor’s working diagnosis was “brachial plexus irritation and
displacement related to her first rib tumour, triggered
by repetitive
Stewart also endorsed the view that the appellant’s work had
“exacerbated” her condition. He stated that both
an MRI scan and a
CT scan demonstrated “a significant enlargement of the first left rib from
fibrous dysplasia.”
opined that the appellant’s thoracic outlet syndrome was secondary to this
first rib dysplasia. For that reason there was
“no other surgical
treatment other than the excision of the tumour”. Dr Stewart thought that
it was necessary to undertake
concurrently a supraclavicular decompression of
the plexus and further dissection of the rib that resulted from “brachial
irritation and scarring from the previous
60 necessities a determination of whether the need for surgery results from a
proven or accepted injury. There is an impressive
body of medical evidence that
the need for the surgery on 30 July 2024 resulted from the tumour at the left
rib in conjunction with
the previous surgery. The radiological evidence
demonstrates a significant enlargement of the left rib caused by the dysplasia.
scans and the medical opinion demonstrate that it was compressing the
brachial plexus and causing compression of the nerves within.
As the respondent
is not liable for the tumour, it is necessary to consider whether there is an
injury that materially contributes
to the need for surgery. While Dr Granot does
suggest that the appellant’s work caused the brachial plexus to come into
with the tumour, his evidence is ambiguous. Much of the other evidence
is to the contrary. The nature of any injury to the brachial
plexus and the
mechanism by which it materially contributed to the need for surgery remains
the Member I conclude that, as the need for surgery results from the tumour, the
appellant has not proven that it results from
a compensable injury pursuant to s
60. While the appellant has proven error, an analysis of the evidence
establishes that the determination
of the Member was correct.
appeal is dismissed.
Member’s Certificate dated 17 December 2024 is confirmed.
Paul Sweeney
ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT
8 September 2025
Application to Resolve a
Dispute (ARD), p 3.
Reply to Application to
Resolve a Dispute, p 8.
Elmobayed v Woolworths
[2024] NSWPIC 706
Transcript of
proceedings 23 October 2024 (transcript), p
Transcript, p
Transcript, p
Transcript, p
Transcript, p
[2019] NSWWCCPD
[2013] NSWWCCPD 4
Reasons, [67].
ARD, p 60 (italics as in
Application to Admit
Late Documents (AALD) 24 September 2024, p
AALD, 3 October 2024, p
[2025] NSWCA 157
NSWWCCPD 25
NSWPICPD 55.
Appellant’s further submission,
per Leeming JA.
142 CLR 531.
266 CLR 129
[2003] HCA 22.
See the discussion of
the applicability of the correctness standard in
White v Redding
[2009] NSWCA
(1957) 58 SR (NSW)
Appellant’s
Submissions (AS),
Respondent’s
Submissions (RS), [16].
Water Board v
[1998] HCA 12
180 CLR 491
Whisprun Pty Limited v
[2003] HCA 48
Federal Broom Co Pty
Ltd v Semlitch
[1964] HCA 34
, [7], per Kitto J.
Bindah v Carter Holt
Harvey Woodproducts Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 264
[22], per Meagher JA.
Transcript, p 5.
State of New South Wales
[2014] NSWCA 47
, per Leeming JA (Barrett JA and Tobias AJA agreeing),
ARD, pp 199,
AALD, 3 October 2024, p
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.67 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter