URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/143.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HJG v Commissioner for Fair Trading [2025] NSWCATOD 143; (24 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
HJG v Commissioner for Fair Trading
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 143
Hearing Date(s):
17 October 2025
Date of Orders:
24 October 2025
Decision Date:
24 October 2025
Occupational Division
N Isenberg, Senior Member
(1) The publication or broadcast of the name of the
applicant is prohibited. This order is made under
section 64(1)(a)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
. Note: a reference to the name of a
person includes a reference to any information, picture or other material that
identifies the
person or is likely to lead to the identification of the
(2) The decision under review is
Catchwords:
LICENSING – real estate – conviction for dishonesty offence
– whether grounds to ignore – whether Applicant
a fit and proper
person to hold licence
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Property and Stock Agents Act 2002
Cases Cited:
Bek v Commissioner for Fair Trading
[2004] NSWADT 149
Commissioner
for Fair Trading, NSW Office of Fair Trading v O’Connor (GD)
NSWADTAP 37
Director General, Department of Transport v Z (No.2) (GD)
NSWADTAP 37
Gambino v Commissioner for NSW Fair Trading
[2014] NSWCATOD
Hunt v Director General, Department of Services Technology and
Administration
[2010] NSWADT 186
Jones v Commissioner for Fair
Trading [2023) NSWCATOD 169
McDonald v Director General of Social
Security (1984) 1FCR 353
Maher v Department of Fair
[2019] NSWCATOD 21
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, New
South Wales Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAP 10
Paul Voutef v Commissioner
for Fair Trading
[2023] NSWCATOD 79
Shi v Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31.
Sobey v Commercial Agents
(1979) 22 SASR 70
Stojanovic v Commissioner for Fair Trading, NSW
Office of Fair Trading
[2008] NSWADT 109
Trim v Department of Fair
[1999] NSWADT 72
Wilson v Commissioner for NSW Fair
[2014] NSWCATOD 79
Principal judgment
HJG (Applicant)
Commissioner for Fair Trading (Respondent)
Representation:
File Number(s):
2025/00243799
Publication Restriction:
The publication or broadcast of the name of the applicant is prohibited.
This order is made under
section 64(1)(a)
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
. Note: a reference to the name of a person includes a
reference to any information, picture or other material that identifies the
person or is likely to lead to the identification of the person.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Applicant, HJG held a property licence under the
Property and Stock Agents
from 24 January 2018 until it expired on 23
January 2024, latterly, as a Class 1 Agent. On 23 January 2025, the Applicant
for a Class 1 licence under the PSA Act, but his application was
refused. That decision was affirmed on internal review. The Applicant
review by this Tribunal.
Relevant legislation
14 of the PSA Act sets out the eligibility requirements for a licence and
provides, relevantly:
(1) An individual is eligible to hold a licence only if the Secretary is
satisfied that the individual—
(b) is a fit and proper person to hold a licence and each person with whom the
individual is in partnership in connection with the
business concerned is a fit
and proper person to hold a licence, and
(d) is not a disqualified person, and
16 of the PSA Act defines disqualified persons, relevantly:
(1) A person is a disqualified person for the purposes of this Act if the
(a) has a conviction in New South Wales or elsewhere for an offence involving
dishonesty that was recorded in the last 10 years,
unless the Secretary has
determined under subsection (2) that the offence should be ignored
16(2) of the PSA Act provides:
The Secretary may determine that an offence committed by a person should be
ignored for the purposes of this section because of the
time that has passed
since the offence was committed or because of the triviality of the acts or
omissions giving rise to the offence.
211(2) of the PSA Act provides:
(1) This section applies to—
(a) any money received by a licensee or registered person on behalf of any
person in respect of any transaction in the licensee’s
or registered
person’s capacity as a licensee or registered person, or any part of any
such money, and
(b) any money so received that is held by the licensee or registered person as a
stakeholder or in trust pending the completion of
any transaction.
(2) If the licensee or registered person fraudulently converts the money or any
part of that money to his or her own use or to the
use of any other person, the
licensee or registered person is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to
imprisonment for a term
of not more than 10 years.
Applicant provided detailed submissions, gave evidence and was cross examined.
I also asked him questions.
Applicant also provided a reference from Professor Michael Brydon OAM, the
former Head of Paediatrics at Westmead Children’s
Hospital and an old
family friend.
Respondent provided material in accordance with s 58 of the
Administrative
Decisions Review Act 1997
(ADR Act) and detailed submissions.
Tribunal’s approach
63 of the ADR Act provides that in determining an application for review the
Tribunal is to make the correct and preferable
decision having regard to the
material before it, and any applicable written or unwritten law. It is well
established that a tribunal
is not restricted to a consideration of the material
that was before the decision-maker, but may have regard to any relevant material
before it at the time of the review:
v Migration
Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31.
Under s 28(2) of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
2013 (CAT Act) the Tribunal is not bound
by the rules of evidence and may
inquire into and inform itself on any matter in such manner as it thinks fit,
subject to the rules
of natural justice: s 38(2) of the CAT Act. The Tribunal
makes its own decision in place of the Commissioner’s, and there
presumption that the decision of the Commissioner is correct:
v Director General of Social Security
(1984) 1FCR 353 at 357. The
standard of proof that applies in these proceedings is the civil standard, that
is, on the balance
of probabilities. There is no onus of
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police
[2014] NSWCATAP 10.
5 December 2018 and 6 July 2022, the Applicant was the licensee in charge of a
real estate agency (the Agency). On 16 February
2024, he was convicted of an
offence under ss 218(2) and 211(2) of the PSA Act of fraudulently converting
money that was received
by him as licensee.
23 January 2025, when he applied for a Class 1 property individual licence under
the PSA Act, he wrote “no” in answer
to the question:
you ever been convicted in NSW or elsewhere of ANY offence that was recorded in
the last 10 years?”
in circumstances where he knew this was not the
CONSIDERATION
Issue before the Tribunal
substantive issue before the Tribunal is whether the Applicant is a disqualified
person under the PSA Act and, if so, whether
that can be ignored, and whether he
is a fit and proper person to hold a real estate licence.
Applicant a disqualified person: s 16(1) of the PSA Act?
Applicant was convicted of a dishonesty offence which included an element of
fraud: s 211(2) of the PSA Act. He was sentenced
to an 18-month Community
Corrections Order (CCO), which expired on 15 August 2025. There was no dispute
that the Applicant has a
conviction for an offence involving dishonesty that was
recorded in the last 10 years. He is therefore a disqualified person for
purposes of the PSA Act.
Should the offence be ignored because
of the time that has passed since the offence was committed or because of the
triviality of
the acts giving rise to the offence?: s 16(2) of the PSA Act.
of time and triviality and are alternatives and do not need to be established
cumulatively in order for the offences to be
Paul Voutef v
Commissioner for Fair Trading
[2023] NSWCATOD 79
Having said that, the period of time sufficient to warrant an exercise of the
discretion to ignore an offence must be viewed in
the context of the offence for
which an Applicant has been convicted:
Gambino v Commissioner for NSW
Fair Trading
[2014] NSWCATOD 135
Wilson v Commissioner for NSW Fair Trading
NSWCATOD 79
Bek v Commissioner for Fair
[2004] NSWADT 149
) at [47]. The
appropriate length of time to have passed before the discretion is exercised
depends on the triviality and nature
of the acts or omissions:
Director General, Department of Services Technology and
Administration
[2010] NSWADT 186
JM Montgomery held [at 47]:
... I note that in
almost nine years that had passed since the
offence was committed justified the exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion
the offence. However in
the period of four and a half
years without incident after an offence was not considered a sufficient amount
of lime given the nature
of the offence. It is my view that the period of time
that is necessary to have passed must be linked to the offence for which an
applicant has been convicted.
the applicant was convicted of “Driver/Rider State False Name
or Address” and was fined $300, JM Montgomery considered
that the offence
“at the lower end of the scale”
the nature of Mr Bek’s offence, three
a half years is
sufficient” to warrant ignoring the offence: at [46]-[47]. See also, more
Jones v Commissioner for Fair Trading
[2023] NSWCATOD
JM Higgins considered the offences of obtaining money by deception
involving the amount of $6,957.08 as serious.
was fined and placed
on a 12-month good behaviour bond. He submitted that the acts and omissions
giving rise to his convictions occurred
within several days of each other and
almost 5 years had passed since they occurred. JM Higgins held [at
In light of my finding as to the seriousness of Mr Hunt’s conduct, in my
opinion, a period of 5 years since the offences were
committed is not sufficient
time so as to make a determination that the offences should be ignored. That
determination, in my opinion
cannot be made for another 3 years; namely 8 years
from the date the offences were committed. This period of time, in my opinion,
is the appropriate time given the nature of Mr Hunt’s offending conduct.
Had the offences not occurred in the course of the
licensed activity for which
he now seeks an authority, I may have come to a different view.
the Applicant’s offending occurred in early 2022, now only 3.5 years ago.
I do not consider that the time that has passed
since the offence is sufficient,
at this time, to warrant the offence being ignored, particularly given the
amount of money involved
and that the offence related directly to the
Applicant’s role as a real estate agent.
offence for which the Applicant was convicted involved a significant breach of
trust committed fraudulently: between 10 and 18
February 2022 over $65,000 was
transferred from the Agency’s trust account in 10 transactions. The
offence is objectively serious
as reflected in the maximum penalty that can be
imposed: 10 years imprisonment, with the Local Court’s jurisdictional
being 2 years imprisonment. The conduct occurred in the course of the very
licensed activity for which the Applicant now seeks an
authority. I am not
satisfied that the acts giving rise to the offence are trivial, especially as it
involved improper use of the
Agency’s trust account for an amount in
excess of $65,000.
Circumstances giving rise to the
Applicant submitted that the circumstances giving rise to the offence should be
taken into account. According to the Statement
of Facts from the prosecution,
his written submissions and in his evidence before me, he claimed that in
January 2022 he borrowed
money through associates of a former client as a
“short term bridging loan”
to help another person –
“a friend”. When the friend disappeared the Applicant was pursued to
repay the debt, as
it was he who had introduced the friend to the
loan-providers. Before me he was unable to articulate how he planned to make
repayment, and he claimed to have been the victim of extortion. He said that
from early February 2022 people were intimidating him
by driving past his house,
knocking on his door at all hours, and coming to his workplace and open homes.
One night he was taken
to a room where his life was threatened and he was
harassed for the money. On another occasion he was tied up, and had a gun put
his mouth and a blow-torch was held against his kneecap and his testicles. He
made the mistake of showing the extortioners his
bank accounts on his phone,
which included the Agency’s trust account. He was forced to provide the
trust account password,
and, he said, the extortionists made the transfers. The
money was transferred from the Agency’s trust account to the
Applicant’s
personal bank account, then cash withdrawals were made, and
that cash was then provided to the extortionists. He said he paid them
the money but
“it was never enough”;
there was interest upon
interest. He did not report the extortion to Police because he was afraid for
his life, but did speak to a
friend who is a Police officer.
the Agency’s trust account was frozen by the Respondent, he felt trapped
and considered suicide. He said in his evidence
though that the
Respondent’s actions in fact “saved [his] life” as he no
longer had access to the Agency’s
funds, so he was then no longer pursued.
Conversely, he said he remains in fear for his life as “retaliation”
notwithstanding
the debt has been repaid in full.
Applicant said he was severely traumatized and was referred to a psychologist;
he may have PTSD but it is unclear if there has
been a formal diagnosis. He has
lost his business, his reputation, his long-term partner and has had to move
house twice. His life
is a misery. He was clearly distressed in giving his
account of the threats that had been made in the course of the claimed
funds were repaid to the trust account by the Applicant’s business
partner, to whom, in return, he transferred his share
in the business.
to whether these circumstances can be taken into account, in
Commissioner for
Fair Trading, NSW Office of Fair Trading v O’Connor (GD)
NSWADTAP 37
) the Appeal Panel considered the proper
construction of s 16(2) of the PSA Act and, at [34] noted that there were only
two factors
to be taken into account in the exercise of the discretion, namely
“the time that had passed since the offence was committed”,
“the triviality of the acts or omissions giving rise to the
the present matter the offending behaviour was directly linked to the
Applicant’s role as a real estate agent as he accessed
funds from the
Agency’s trust account. The amount of money fraudulently converted was
significant. In so doing, the Applicant
breached his fundamental obligations as
a trustee which directly related to his role as a licensee under the PSA Act.
Applicant completed his CCO successfully and has not come to attention again. It
is clear from the views expressed by the Appeal
however, that the subsequent good behaviour of an applicant
is not a relevant consideration.
summary, because the only matters I can consider for the purposes of s 16(2) of
the PSA Act are triviality and passage of time
since offending, I decline to
exercise the discretion under s16(2) of the PSA Act and determine that the
dishonesty offence committed
by the Applicant should not be ignored for the
purposes of s 16.
Is the Applicant a fit and proper person
to hold the licence sought?
Respondent also submitted that the Applicant is not a fit and proper person to
hold a real estate agent licence because of his
history of offending and because
he has been disingenuous with the regulator. For completeness, I considered
this also, notwithstanding
my view expressed above that the Applicant is a
disqualified
from holding a licence.
question whether a person is “fit and proper” is one of value
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
The expression, on its own, carries no precise meaning and takes its
meaning from its context, from the activities in which the
person is or will be
engaged and the ends to be served by those activities: at 380. See
Hughes and Vale Pty Ltd v New South Wales (No.2)
Re Percival and Australian Securities
[1993] AATA 196
Re Brennan & Australian Casino
Surveillance Authority
(1995) 38 ALP 794 at [41].
v Commercial Agents Board
(1979) 22 SASR 70
at 76, Walters J said
in relation to the licensing of commercial and private agents, that the
expression means that an applicant
must show that he or she “is possessed
of sufficient moral integrity and rectitude of character as to permit him to be
accredited to the public, without further inquiry, as a person to be
entrusted with the sort of work which the licence entails.”
PSA Act establishes that integrity, honesty and trustworthiness are central to
the certification and licensing regime for persons
engaged in the real estate
industry in NSW:
Stojanovic v Commissioner for Fair Trading, NSW Office
of Fair Trading
[2008] NSWADT 109
the Tribunal noted in
Maher v Department of Fair Trading
NSWCATOD 21
A licensed real estate agent carries privileges and obligations. Agents are
entrusted to hold deposits on sales of properties and
to receive rent on behalf
of landlords. The industry is regulated to provide the public with a measure of
confidence that agents
follow rules in respect of trust money and conduct
themselves competently, honestly and fairly.
Respondent contended that the Tribunal should not be satisfied the Applicant is
a fit and proper person, and submitted, in particular,
the Applicant’s offending was directly linked to the real estate licence
he held and which he again seeks. The Applicant
took funds from the
Agency’s trust account to which he only had access to because of his
licence. The Respondent submitted
that the circumstances that the Applicant
claimed the offending occurred, were not supported by evidence. However, I do
with this criticism because it is unlikely that such corroborative
evidence of the alleged extortion would be available in any event.
the Applicant’s account contained some anomalies. The funds were largely
recorded as being transferred to his father.
He said that these payments were
so that his father could take cash to the extortionists because he, the
Applicant, wanted nothing
to do with them As to payments by his father to
gambling sites, the Applicant said this was an additional means of accessing
“turnover” and agreed that such a strategy would actually
require the person betting to win, otherwise the cash would
be lost. He said he
wasn’t thinking clearly and agreed it would have been easier just to make
a withdrawal up to his card’s
daily limit (of which there was no evidence)
and repeat that process the following day until the amount payable to the
extortionists
was reached. The described process contradicted his account of the
transfers having been made by the extortionists after he had been
disclose the passwords to his accounts, including the Agency’s trust
establish fitness and propriety it is necessary for an applicant to accept
responsibility for the wrongdoing: see
Trlin v Department of Fair Trading
Director General, Department of Transport v Z
(No.2) (GD)
[2002] NSWADTAP 37.
In his written submissions the Applicant
indicated that he has taken full responsibility for his actions in the offending
However, on several occasions in the submissions he appeared to have
attempted to minimise his conduct. For example he wrote to
the effect that he
was manipulated by his so-called friend – which presumably related to his
facilitating the loan. He referred
to the breach as being an “isolated
issue” whereas there was at least 10 fraudulent transactions. He did not
there to have been “dishonesty or fraud”, which is plainly
inaccurate. In noting the amount had been repaid, he neglected
to mention that
it was his business partner who re-instated the funds to the Agency’s
trust account.
Respondent submitted that the Applicant’s description of his actions
minimises the offending and does not indicate he has
taken full responsibility
for his actions. I also observe that the Applicant sought to distance himself
from the actual transactions
– suggesting they were in fact made by the
extortionists, rather than by him personally.
accept the Applicant’s submission that he is “not a lawyer”
and that his submissions demonstrate his lack of drafting
skills. I note though
that the Applicant has trained as a real estate, having completed high school
(and was school captain); I do
not accept he is as unsophisticated as he sought
to make out.
Dishonesty in licence application
outlined above, the Applicant was dishonest in the licence application that is
the subject of these proceedings: he wrote “no”
in answer to the
“Have you ever been convicted in NSW or elsewhere of ANY
offence that was recorded in the last 10 years?”
Applicant said it was the last day he could submit the application before the
12-month period to renew the licence ended. The
Applicant indicated in his
internal review request and in his evidence before me that he answered
‘no’ to the question
misunderstanding”. He said that the online application would not allow
him to continue
without attaching a criminal history if he answered
‘yes’ to the question. I accept that he provided evidence that he
requested a criminal history check from the NSW Police on 21 January 2025,
shortly before the licence application was submitted which
was the last
available date he could make the application. Because he had not received the
criminal history check his evidence was
that he telephoned the Department was
advised to lodge the application nonetheless. He misunderstood that he could
subsequently amend
his application when the Police check was to hand. When the
Police check was received, he said he sought to amend his application
told that it could not be amended. Conversely, the Applicant in fact emailed the
Respondent with changes to his postal address
and email address on 22 April
2024. Otherwise, he made no attempt to send in the Police check and instead
thought he would rely on
the appeal process to have the record corrected. He
said he just “handled the process poorly”. The Applicant noted that
it would be naive of him to suggest that he could pass off the fact of the
conviction especially as it had directly involved the
Respondent. While there
may have been no intention to deceive the Respondent as the Applicant claims, it
remains that his approach
was cavalier,
especially in circumstances where
he took other steps to amend his application.
The Applicant has been
disingenuous, and this reflects on his fitness and propriety to hold the
Previous non-compliance
his written submissions, the Applicant stated: “Over my lifetime in the
industry I have never had any issues, disciplinary
action or suspensions for any
misconduct or breaches previously.” While there was no history of trust
account non-compliance
other than the offence in 2022, the Applicant’s
statement was not accurate. In fact, Penalty Notices were issued to him
and/or the Agency (while the Applicant was licensee in charge) in
2019, 2020, and 2021. They related to contravening the code of
conduct, failure
to supervise the business and failure to respond to departmental requests.
Character reference
character reference from Dr Brydon was prepared for the purpose of the criminal
proceedings. The reference spoke very favourably
of the Applicant, in
circumstances where Dr Brydon was clearly aware of the Applicant’s
was no dispute that the Applicant has no criminal history, and that he
acknowledged before me that he had “done the wrong
thing” and that
what had occurred was “completely out of character”. I have also
taken the very positive reference
into account. On the other hand, as I have
observed, there was some obfuscation in the Applicant’s evidence in
relation to
details of the extortion, his attempts to overcome the falsehood in
his application and his failure to acknowledge previous transgressions.
these reasons, I am not satisfied that the Applicant is a fit and proper person
to hold the licence sought.
his final submissions the Applicant said he would accept a Class 2 licence,
which, in summary would authorise him to work in a
real estate agency. I
observe, firstly that that is not the application before me and, in any event in
consideration for such a licence
the same tests in relation to disqualification
and fitness and propriety also apply. As to whether a (Class 1) licence could
conditions which would preclude his access to a trust account – a de
facto Class 2 licence - such that he might be able to
again undertake licensed
work in the industry I consider that no conditions can be placed on the
Applicant’s licence to remedy
the identified issues with respect to
disqualification and fitness and propriety.
(1) The publication or broadcast of the name of the applicant is
prohibited. This order is made under
section 64(1)(a)
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
. Note: a reference to the name of a person
includes a reference to any information, picture or other material that
identifies the
person or is likely to lead to the identification of the
(2) The decision under review is affirmed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (276 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter