URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MBK [2013] NSWGT 38 (4 December 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 38
(4 DECEMBER 2013)
APPLICATION FOR GUARDIANSHIP AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ORDERS
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
4 December 2013 at Newcastle
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Ms Rhonda Booby
Professional Member:
Dr (Robert) T H Yeoh
Community Member:
Ms Maria Circuitt
Guardianship and financial management –
enduring guardianship appointment made – enduring power of attorney
appointment
made - informal access to services available – applications
dismissed – no need for orders.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 4 December 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal dismissed the application for guardianship in relation to Mrs MBK made
The Tribunal dismissed the application for the appointment of a financial
MBK is 81 years old and she lives in her own home in regional NSW. Her daughter,
Ms SVA, lives in Northern Sydney NSW.
5 August 2011 Mrs MBK appointed Ms SVA as her enduring attorney and as her
enduring guardian.
3 July 2013 the Tribunal received an application seeking the appointment of a
financial manager for Mrs MBK and on 8 August 2013
the Tribunal received an
application seeling the appointment of a guardian for Mrs MBK. The applicant at
both times was Ms RWC who
is a Mrs MBK’s case manager from Service
Provider A.
her applications Ms RWC states that Mrs MBK is of advanced age and is refusing
necessary support services and making poor financial
applications were first considered by a differently constituted Tribunal on 3
September 2013 at which time the hearing of the
applications was adjourned for
approximately three months.
The Hearing
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate. Throughout
the hearing Mrs MBK disagreed
with Ms RWC’s assessment of her circumstances. The Tribunal took both
views into account and
was of the opinion that it was not appropriate to attempt
to bring the parties to a settlement.
What did the Tribunal
have to decide?
GUARDIANSHIP
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal in relation to guardianship
someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because she has a disability
which prevents her from being able to make
important life decisions?
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Who should be
the guardian?
How long should
the order last?
Is Mrs MBK someone for whom the
Tribunal could make an order because she has a disability which prevents her
from being able to make
important life decisions
Guardianship Act 1987
provides that the Tribunal may make a
guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that he/she is “a
person in need of
a guardian.” A person in need of a guardian is “a
person who because of a disability is totally or partially incapable
of managing
his or her person”
(section 3(1)
Guardianship Act 1987
). A person
with a disability is a person who is:
(a) intellectually
, physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled
(b) of advanced
(c) a mentally
ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act 2007
(d) otherwise
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one
or more major life activities to such an extent that he or she requires
supervision
or social habilitation
(section 3(2)
Guardianship Act 1987
Tribunal had regard to a number of documents related to Mrs MBK’s
Aged Care Client Record (ACCR) dated 29 May 2013 notes that Mrs MBK
“always” has short-term memory problems and that
in October 2012 she
scored 26/30 on the mini mental state examination (MMSE). She refused to
participate in a cognitive screening
questionnaire at the time of the ACCR.
a letter dated 18 July 2013 Dr SLB, a geriatrician, states that Mrs MBK scored
25/30 on the MMSE and that she has a mild pressure
of speech which might have
resulted from a past stroke. He states that Mrs MBK’s condition can result
in difficulties in completing
activities of daily living and also financial
management. Dr SLB was unable to support Mrs MBK’s desire the regain her
licence and said that in his opinion she would require a full
occupational therapy driving assessment.
the application Ms RWC states that Mrs MBK refuses necessary services unless
they from services with whom she is familiar and that
services from her
preferred agency cannot be provided for some 12 months. In a letter to the
Tribunal dated 29 July 2013 Ms RWC states
that Mrs MBK has been had her
driver’s licence suspended due to her heath conditions. She states that
Mrs MBK had a motor vehicle
accident on 20 June 2013 and despite evidence
provided by witnesses she refuses to accept that she was at fault, stating a
that the witnesses have “set her up”.
the hearing Ms RWC said that she is concerned about Mrs MBK’s ability to
make good decisions about her nutrition and
health and noted that she requires
assistance regarding the squalor of her home.
the hearing Mrs MBK denied that she has any recent memory decline. She admitted
that she has a poor short-term memory problem
but said that she has had that all
her life. Ms KGF, a tenant in the “granny flat” owned by Mrs MBK
said that she does
not think that Mrs MBK has memory problems.
into account all of the evidence the Tribunal was satisfied on balance, that Mrs
MBK has a disability being cognitive decline
that restricts her ability to make
decisions about her lifestyle and that as a result she is at least partially
unable to manage
her person. She is therefore a person for whom the Tribunal
could make a guardianship order.
Should the Tribunal make a
guardianship order and what order should be made?
considering whether to make a guardianship order and what order should be made
the Tribunal is required to take into account
as far possible the views of Mrs
MBK as well as the importance of preserving her family relationships and
cultural or linguistic
environment and must also consider the practicability of
services being provided to her in the absence of an order. The Tribunal
required to act in accordance with the principles set out in
Guardianship Act, 1987
(the Act) which requires that the following
additional matters be considered in respect of Mrs MBK:
Her welfare and
interests are to be given paramount consideration;
Her freedom of
decision and freedom of action should be restricted as little as possible;
She should be
encouraged as far as possible to live a normal life in the community;
She should be
encouraged as far as possible to be self reliant in matters relating to her
personal and domestic affairs;
She should be
protected from neglect, abuse and exploitation.
The Tribunal
considered these matters in relation to Mrs MBK’s circumstances.
noted above, Mrs MBK appointed her daughter, Ms SVA as her enduring guardian. In
a letter to the Tribunal dated 29 July 2013 Ms
RWC states that she believes that
Ms SVA is not able to adequately perform that role due to her own
“significant health problems”
as well as her “ongoing family
and legal matters”, and states her belief that Ms SVA lacks insight into
her mother’s
condition. She states that Ms SVA did not accept that her
mother’s driving licence should have been suspended and was supporting
mother’s efforts to have in reinstated. Ms RWCs states that she believes
that Mrs MBK would be able to continue living
in her own home so long as she
accepts services. However she states that Mrs MBK had been offered a Community
Aged Care package through
Service Provider B but had refused it because she was
opposed to accepting services from any group other than Service Provider C
Service Provider A. However services were not available from those agencies and
were not expected to be available for some 12
the hearing of the applications on 3 September 2013 the Tribunal was advised by
Ms SVA that Mrs MBK was on a waiting list for
services from Service Provider C
and that in the meantime she had arranged for Ms KGF to provide care for Mrs
MBK, including management
of the insulin required for her diabetes and
management of her other medication. That Tribunal adjourned the hearing to
whether decisions to support Mrs MBK could be made informally.
MBK told the current Tribunal that she has a “wonderful” new doctor
whom she is happy to visit and Ms SVA said that
Mrs MBK has seen that doctor
some four to five times in the past three months. Ms SVA said that since her
discharge from hospital
on about 5 September Mrs MBK has received a ComPacs care
package from Service Provider C under which she receives 4 hours of assistance
per week in addition to assistance with meals and liaison with the a care
service for chronic disease at the a Local Medical Centre
for assistance
regarding her diabetes.
Tribunal was advised that it is expected that a Community Aged Care package from
Service Provider C would become available to
Mrs MBK by the time her ComPacs
package expires so that her current services can be continued. Ms RWC said that
she was of the view
that this arrangement was “ideal” for Mrs
SVA said that she has made the following additional arrangements for Mrs
MBK’s care:
Service Provider
C staff had been provided with the combination for Mrs MBK’s lockbox so
they can gain entry to the house.
Mrs MBK has a
“uniden” telephone with Ms SVA’s number keyed in so that it
rings her automatically.
SVA also said that she has made contact with a nurse but is awaiting a referral
from Mrs MBK’s GP to arrange that service.
She said that she has arranged
with the pharmacy that they will check Mrs MBK’s diabetes, and that as Mrs
MBK now has a good
relationship with her GP she is more likely to attend the GP
for those check-ups. She said that she also intends to provide Mrs MBK
computer and a mobile telephone and to teach her to use those to keep in touch.
KGF told the Tribunal that either she, or a co-tenant is always available to
assist Mrs MBK.
into account all of the evidence the Tribunal was satisfied that decisions that
required regarding Mrs MBK’s lifestyle
can be made by her enduring
guardian and by other informal means and therefore the Tribunal concluded that
it should not make a guardianship
order. Having reached that conclusion the
Tribunal ordered that the application for guardianship be dismissed.
decided the application should be dismissed, there was no need to address the
other questions set out above.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal in relation to financial
management were:
incapable of managing her affairs?
Is there a need
for another person to manage Mrs MBK’s affairs and is it in her best
interests for a financial management order
to be made?
should be appointed financial manager?
incapable of managing her affairs?
person’s capability to manage his or her affairs was considered by
Campbell J in the NSW Supreme Court in
Re GHI (a protected person)
Campbell J affirmed the approach enunciated in
2 NSWLR 700
by Powell J, at paragraph 7:
“It is my view that a
person is not shown to be incapable of managing his or her own affairs unless,
at the least, it appears:
he or she is incapable of dealing, in a reasonably competent fashion with the
ordinary routine affairs of man; and
by reason of that lack of competence there is shown to be a real risk that
she may be disadvantaged in the conduct of such affairs; or
such moneys or property that he or she may possess may be dissipated or lost ...
it is not sufficient in my view merely to demonstrate
that the person lacks the
high level of ability needed to deal with complicated transactions or that he or
she does not deal with
even simple or routine transactions in the most
efficient manner...”
(unreported) NSW Supreme Court 20 March 2000, in dealing with
the capacity test as it has been enunciated in NSW, said that dealing
“ordinary affairs of man” does not simply mean being able to go to
the bank and draw out housekeeping money.
Most people’s affairs, his
Honour said,
“are more complicated than that, and the
ordinary affairs of mankind involve at least planning for the future, working
one will feed oneself and one’s family and how one is going to
generate income and look after capital. Accordingly, whilst
one does not have to
be a person who is capable of managing complex financial affairs, one has to go
beyond just managing household
should be noted that the relevant time for considering whether a person is
incapable of managing his or her affairs is not merely
the day of the hearing
but the reasonably foreseeable future (
(1983) 3 NSWLR 81
will be apparent from the preceding section of these Reasons the Tribunal
considered the issue of Mrs MBK’s health, medical
and cognitive
circumstances in the context of considering the application for a guardianship
order. The Tribunal took those matters
into consideration regarding her capacity
to manage her financial affairs.
Tribunal also took into account that Mrs MBK has a number of unpaid bills and
had received disconnection notices for utilities
and frequently writes cheques
that are not met when presented. In her letter dated 29 July 2013 Ms RWC also
notes that Mrs MBK had
a $1000 lay-by at a jewellers.
the basis of the evidence the Tribunal was satisfied that Mrs MBK is incapable
of managing her financial affairs.
Is there a need for another
person to manage Mrs MBK’s affairs and is it in her best interests for a
financial management order
to be made?
SVA provided the Tribunal with a document outlining measures she had put in
place to assist Mrs MBK with financial management including
organising direct
debits for utilities and other items such as rates and insurance, and
introducing a system of envelopes in which
to place funds to be used for
different purposes. Ms SVA also reported that Mrs MBK was paying off a dentist
bill and the lay-by
by instalments. Ms SVA said that Mrs MBK enjoys paying some
of her bills in person and she did not wish to deprive her that enjoyment,
had put in place systems to assist with her financial management.
all of the evidence into account, the Tribunal was satisfied that as Mrs
MBK’s attorney, Ms SVA has put in place arrangements
that will assist with
her financial management and that at this stage there is no need to appoint
another person to manage her affairs,
and it would not be in her interests to do
so. The Tribunal noted that if the arrangements put in place are unsuccessful
application for financial management could be submitted.
decided that there is no current need for a financial management order and that
it would not be Mrs MBK’s best interests
given the current arrangements,
the Tribunal ordered that that the application for financial management should
be dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (556 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter