URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/116.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AGC Roof Maintenance Pty Limited v The Owners Corporation of Strata Plan 7704 [2025] NSWCATCD 116; (18 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
AGC Roof Maintenance Pty Limited v The Owners Corporation of Strata Plan
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 116
Hearing Date(s):
13 August 2025
Date of Orders:
18 August 2025
Decision Date:
18 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
P Moran, Senior Member
The respondent is to pay the applicant $17,044.03 within twenty-one (21)
Catchwords:
BUILDING CLAIM – non-payment of invoice – breach of
Legislation Cited:
Cases Cited:
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
AGC Roof Maintenance Pty Limited (applicant)
The Owners Corporation of
Strata Plan 7704 (respondent)
Representation:
Applicant: M Osborn (Director)
Respondent: A Lewis (Chairperson of
Owners Corporation)
File Number(s):
2025/00150999
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Background/Application
applicant, AGC Roof Maintenance Pty Limited (hereafter referred to as AGC) is a
roof maintenance company. The respondent (hereafter
referred to as the Owners
Corporation) is the owner of a strata scheme situated in [address], Meadowbank
in the state of New South
all material times the strata scheme was managed by BCS Strata Management
trading as BCS Epping (
Application lodged with the Tribunal on 17 April 2025 the applicant seeks an
amount of $17,044.03 from the respondent; that being
the sum of an outstanding
says that it supplied to the Owner’s Corporation a quotation to erect
scaffolding, carry out roof repairs, clean rainwater
gutters and instal
additional downpipes to help alleviate storm water build up at the Premises. It
says that the respondent accepted
the quotation, that it has carried out and
completed the quoted works but that the respondent has not paid the sum of
) gives the Tribunal
accordance with Part 3A of the Act.
Building claim
is defined in s48 to
mean a claim for (relevantly for present purposes) the payment of a specified
sum of money that arises from
a supply of building goods or services.
Building goods or services
is defined in the same section to mean goods
or services supplied for or in connection with the carrying out of residential
works or specialist work being goods or services (again relevantly)
supplied by the person who contracts to do, or otherwise does,
the documents adduced and the parties submissions I am satisfied that the
applicant’s claim is a building claim and that
the Tribunal has
Applicant’s
applicant relies upon documents lodged with the Tribunal on 23 June 2025
) as well as evidence given at the hearing by Mr Osborn. What follows
is a summary of those of the applicant’s documents that
are considered
materially relevant to the Application. The documents are paginated.
3 is an email of the Chairperson of the Owner’s Corporation, Mr Lewis, to
a person then employed by the applicant seeking
a quotation following from a
discussion that is said to have occurred that morning. The date of the email is
14 August 2024.
4 is a Quotation Report of the applicant dated 14 August 2024. It is a quotation
number #48977EJ addressed to the Owner’s
Corporation. It refers to a
recent site attendance and by its terms is a quotation “on the issue
pertaining to lots 12 and
17 adjoining wall”. It also refers to
identification of “other items that required rectification on the
The total quoted figure is $30,989.16. Page 5 is a Client Work
Order dated 12 November 2024 issued to AGC. It is stated as being
behalf of the respondent and informs that the Owner’s Corporation was to
be the entity billed. The description of
work is, relevantly, “as per
quotation #84977EJ dated 14 August 2024 for $30,989.16 including gst.” It
specifically seeks
that the applicant “. . . . .
complete the roof repairs for the complex as noted in the quotation”.
of what the applicant says formed the executed contract between the parties
commence at page 6 of the AD. The contract price
is recorded as the
abovementioned figure and Mr Lewis has signed adjacent to “owner’s
signature”. There is also
a signature of a Cheryl Dewhurst adjacent to the
same words. A Horace Peterson has signed adjacent to “contractor’s
signature”.
Mr Lewis and Ms Dewhurst have also both signed under a heading
“Acknowledgement of Owners” whereby they acknowledge having
given a copy of the Consumer Building Guide and that they have read and
understood it. Clause 12 of the contract is reproduced
in the AD. That states
that the owner must pay the contract price by progress payments within five (5)
business days of the completion
of the stages of work nominated in the schedule
of progress payments. Clause 14 is also reproduced. That states that the owner
pay the contractor the amount of a written claim for progress payment
within five (5) business days of receipt unless the owner notifies
contractor in writing within that five (5) business day period the owner
disagrees that the contractor is entitled to be paid
the progress claim or other
amount due. It provides that the owners notification must be in writing and set
out the reasons for the
disagreement and that any dispute had to be resolved in
accordance with dispute resolution procedures set out in Clause 27.
27, headed “Disputes”, provides that if either the owner or the
contractor considered that a dispute has arisen
the party asserting the dispute
is required to give the other party written notice of the terms of the dispute.
It then sets out
a process for resolving such disputes then says –
relevantly for present purposes:
“Even if a dispute has arisen the parties must, unless acting in
accordance with an express provision of this contract, continue
to perform their
obligations under the contract so that the work is completed satisfactorily
within the agreed time.”
7 and 8 of AD are tax invoices of AGC OF 2 December 2024 and 16 January 2025
that have been paid by the respondent. Pages 9
to 19 are photographs of the
Premises and the roof of the Premises.
2 is the applicants tax invoice #84977EJ dated 27 February 2025 addressed to the
respondent in the amount of $17,044.03. It is
this tax invoice that the
applicant contends is due and owing to it and which the respondent has not
21 to 27 of the AD are not, in my view, materially relevant in that they are a
series of email communications between the parties
where different proposals are
put for the potential resolution of issues that had emerged between the parties.
The email communications
commence with an email of the applicant’s Mr
Osborn of 3 April 2025.
Osborn informed the hearing that although there were meetings and proposals for
resolution as set out in the emails there was no
final concluded agreement hence
the commencement of the Tribunal proceedings.
giving oral evidence at the hearing the applicant’s Mr Osborn said that
although the assets of the applicant company had
been sold to a company called
Tomcat on 24 March 2025 the applicant company still existed and the debt was
owed to the applicant.
was asked about the
certificate and gave evidence of it having
been received from the insurer. He said that AGC had not been asked by the
for a copy of the certificate.
Respondent’s
respondent’s documents (
) were lodged with the Tribunal on 14
5 to 9 of the RD is the respondent’s outline of the sequence of events.
Pages 10 to 12 set out the respondent’s
“Reasons in summary why
SP7704 have not fully paid AGC”. Relevantly for the purposes of the issues
requiring the Tribunal’s
determination, the respondent’s sequence of
events include at [1] on page 5 that the applicant was chosen by the respondent
to conduct “. . . . . maintenance and repairs required.” The
Owner’s Corporation says at [4] that the quotation
provided by the
applicant was discussed with the applicant’s Mr Peterson on 14 August 2024
and that it received a revised quotation
on 2 September 2024.
[11] on page 6 the Owner’s Corporation says that Mr Lewis, as its
Chairperson, signed the contract with AGC; further, that
an invoice of $3,098.92
was paid on 21 December 2024. At [14] the Owner’s Corporation contends
that a truck delivering materials,
as arranged by the applicant, damaged a
pedestrian crossing on 14 January
2025. Page 6
of the RD sets out occasions
where it says the applicant or its representatives were required to attend the
Premises but did not
do so; further, that on 3 February 2025 subcontractors of
the applicant had erected scaffolding to an adjoining building.
[19] to [29] are not in my view materially relevant to determination of the
Application; those paragraphs recording issues
that the respondent had with the
manner in which the applicant was performing works pursuant to the contract.
They raise such issues
as occasions where the applicant had – so the
respondent contends – failed to reply to text messages or telephone calls.
The respondent says at [30] that on 25 March 2025 it advised [the applicant]
that water was pooling in the gutters, that “all
down pipes installed by
[the applicant]t were leaking, that there was a missing down pipe and that [the
applicant] had not attended
to a clean up.”
[31] to [39] document meetings and communications between the applicant and the
respondent in an effort at resolving the
dispute which had by then existed
between the parties.
follows is a summary of those of the respondent’s documents that I
consider materially relevant to the determination of
the Application.
17 is an email of Mr Lewis to AGC saying that the author had “been
advised” that the applicant’s scaffolder
had attended the wrong
property that morning and that, once that was realised, the result was a delay
with the start date and potential
issues with the neighbouring property. The
email enquires as to why that occurred. It also requests that the applicant take
and provide
daily photos of works completed as well as a daily
“report/email” as to what work had occurred and where.
19 is described as “AGC Roof Maintenance Pty Limited Final Report”.
At [29] of the RD is a document that was emailed
to BCS by AGC showing
“before” and “after” pictures of the roof of the
Premises; the “after”
photos showing the work performed by the
document at page 27 of RD is an email of the applicant to the respondent
summarising discussions that had taken place the previous
day and setting out a
proposal to resolve the dispute that had by then existed between the
document at pages 29 to 36 of RD is described as “Roof Report”
prepared by ANZ Roofing, dated 23 May 2025 and is addressed
to the Owner’s
Corporation. It is described on page 8 of the RD as a “. . . . . Quote
from ANZ Roofing regarding costs
to repair the issues SP7704 have after AGC
is no other description in the evidence as to this document. It refers at page
29 to its purpose being “. . . . . to identify
issues related to recent
works . . . . .” It does not identify with
precision what “recent works” are being referred
to nor the identity
of the person or entity that is alleged to have performed such works. The
document then sets out under “General
Observations” what are
described as “leak issues” outside garages 1, 2, 6, 9/10, 14, and
17, to a leak issue “corner
between first and second entry” and
another “corner to rear of second entry”. In discussing each
“leak issue”
the author (who is not identified) refers to “the
horizontal section” of a rainwater head and the suggestion that as
horizontal head lacked a support bracket that
compromise its
stability. The author also refers to a leak at the junction between a rainwater
head and the “horizontal offset”
which was “contributing to
moisture ingress and dampness”. It then sets out a recommendation. Similar
comments are made
in relation to other leak issues referred to on pages 30 and
31 of the RD. Other comments made by the author of the report are that
have been fixed using nails many of which have loosened from the facia boards
and that that “. . . . . contributes
to water overflow during
respect of each “leak issue” the author sets out a recommendation
for rectification. There is a comment at the conclusion
of the report that the
existing guttering system was aged and nearing the end of its service life. A
full replacement of the existing
guttering was strongly recommended. Another
comment on page 35 of the AD was that the report was based on a visual
inspection only;
further, that the scope of the report was to identify major
defects and to form an opinion of the general condition of the building
time of inspection. In the same section, the author states that the report did
not include cost estimates for repairs or rectification
is not a report that is stated to comply with the Tribunal’s procedural
guidelines for expert evidence.
indicated earlier pages 10 to 12 of RD are headed “Reasons in summary why
SP7704 have not fully paid AGC”. There are
three headings; firstly,
“poor product management and lack of communication”. Secondly,
“observed work methods
performed by AGC is not fit for purpose” and
thirdly, “resolving the matter to ensure a fit for purpose roofing
has been obtained for SP7704”. Dealing with the third heading
first, the respondent there sets out its position following the
carried out by the applicant and the discussions that took place between the
applicant and the respondent to resolve the
issues raised under “poor project management and lack of
communication” are:
(a) That contractors/trades coming the Premises were to contact the on site
representative Mr Lewis before attending. The document
says that that was a
“clearly stated requirement”. The respondent says that that did not
(b) The respondent contends “deficient project progress reporting to
clearly identify what work had been done”. It says
that it required
clearly identified before and after photos.
(c) The respondent also raises “continuous staff turnover”. It says
that a Mr Gatley performed the original assessment
and that a Mr Peterson
provided a revised quotation. It then says that Mr Gatley had left the
company and that a Bianca Moscato was
the advised Project Manager but that she
did not attend the site.
far as “observed work methods performed by AGC is not fit for
purpose” the respondent raises the fact that scaffolding
eventually erected on the building after it had had almost fully been installed
at a neighbouring property, and that a scissor
lift brought to the site could
not be stabilised.
respondent also says that “the force placed on the existing guttering to
secure and remove new down pipes and guttering
on ladders could not possibly be
performed without disrupting the alignment and functionality of the gutters . .
. . . ”. The
respondent also says “new leaks have been identified by
building owners and the most likely cause of these new leaks has most
been caused by AGC deficient work methods . . . . .”.
the course of the Tribunal hearing the respondent’s Mr Lewis conceded that
the respondent had accepted the applicant’s
quotation and entered into the
Consideration and Findings
accept the evidence of the applicant including the oral evidence of
Mr Osborn. The works the subject of the outstanding invoice
have, I find,
been undertaken. The applicant was entitled, subsequent to those works being
carried out to have the invoice paid by
the contracting party, namely the
respondent. The respondent has not made payment.
of the reasons advanced at pages 10-12 of the RD provide the respondent with a
legal entitlement to withhold payment.
the respondent contends to have been a “clearly stated requirement for all
contractors/trades to make contact with Mr Lewis”
does not form part of
the quotation or agreement. Nor within the agreement is the asserted requirement
of taking daily photographs
and reports.
respondent does not point to any of the complained of “work methods”
causing loss or damage or otherwise giving the
respondent an entitlement under
the contract to refuse payment. Nor does the respondent assert the manner or
respects in which it
says that any of the “poor project management and
lack of communication” issues have caused it loss or damage or otherwise
entitle it to refuse to make payment of the agreed contract sum.
Roof Report commencing at page 20 of RD does not, even if the findings by the
author of that report are accepted, give the respondent
a legal entitlement to
withhold payment. The report is not an expert report tendered pursuant to the
NCAT guidelines. There is no
reference to the author abiding by the Code of
Conduct. Although there is discussion in the report concerning “. . . . .
related to recent works . . . . .” the report does not identify the
applicant as the entity performing the works nor does the
report reference the
works that the applicant agreed to perform pursuant to its quotation and the
subsequent agreement entered into.
Further, the inspection that led to the
report appears to have taken place some two months after the applicant completed
at the Premises. The Roof Report, additionally, does not by its terms
clearly contend negligent or defective work. As an example
the author says that
the horizontal sections lacked a support bracket and that “may”
contribute to instability and improper
find that the applicant and the respondent entered into a contract, extracts of
which commence at page 6 of AD. It is a contract
that was entered into after
submission by the applicant of a quotation and the provision to the applicant by
the respondent of a
12 November 2024 work order in which the quotation was
specifically referenced. The respondent does not put in evidence any different
or varied form of agreement. The provisions of the agreement as adduced by the
applicant require the respondent to make payment of
progress payments within
five (5) business days of the completion of the stage of the work nominated in
the schedule of the progress
payments. The applicant submitted progress payments
claims pursuant to the contract and those payments have not been made. There
no contractual provision advanced by the respondent giving it a legal
entitlement to refuse payment.
of the reasons advanced by the Owner’s Corporation at pages 10 to 12 of RD
are rejected.
(1) The respondent is to pay the applicant $17,044.33 within twenty-one (21)
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (252 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter