URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDRGC/2008/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
In the matter of Bradley Hatfield [2008] NSWDRGC 1 (30 January 2008)
of New South Wales
In the matter of Bradley Hatfield
[2008] NSWDRGC 1
Hatfield, Bradley
FILE NUMBER(S) :
His Honour Senior Judge Roger Dive
CATCHWORDS:
:- Compulsory Drug Treatment Order (CDTO) – Parole jurisdiction of
Drug Court – grant of parole causes CDTO to expire
pharmacotherapy on CDTO disadvantage to community and offender – parole
LEGISLATION CITED:
Drug Court Act 1998
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
(Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
Crimes (Administration of
Sentences) Act 1999
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
(Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
Crimes (Administration of
Sentences) Act 1999
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act
CASES CITED:
DATES OF HEARING:
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
30 January 2008
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES:
1 The issue before the Drug Court is whether a
prisoner, Mr Bradley Hatfield, should be granted parole. Mr Hatfield is the
first participant
of the Compulsory Drug Treatment Correctional Centre
(“CDTCC”) to become eligible for parole, so it may be helpful to
out the Court’s determination more fully on this occasion.
2 Mr Hatfield was sentenced by Judge Karpin in the Sydney
District Court on 28 April 2006 to a total term of imprisonment of 6 years,
a 3½ year non-parole period, followed by 2½ years on parole. That
non-parole period commenced on 9 September 2004,
and is due to expire on 8 March
2008. As the sentence is over 3 years, the grant of parole does not
automatically arise as it does
for sentences under three years
3 After sentence, Mr Hatfield was referred to the Drug Court for the
consideration of a Compulsory Drug Treatment Order (“CDTO”),
following eligibility and suitability assessments, such an order was made on 23
November 2006.
4 Mr Hatfield completed Stage 1 of his CDTO on 30 May
2007, and was then allowed the opportunity of semi-open detention on Stage 2.
Hatfield was regressed back to Stage 1 on 21 August 2007 when he failed to
comply with conditions of his Personal Plan, having
attempted to disguise drug
use by providing diluted urine samples, and the admitted use of cannabis,
buprenorphine and heroin. He
was allowed to progress to Stage 2 again on 7
November 2007. There is now a Progress Report supporting Mr Hatfield’s
progression
to the community custody of Stage 3 of his CDTO, and that order will
be made today. So as at the day he is eligible for parole, he
completed 15 ½ months in compulsory drug treatment.
The role of
the Drug Court
5 The issue of parole is before the Drug Court
because, by virtue of
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act
, the Drug Court constitutes the Parole Authority for offenders in
compulsory drug treatment detention, and the Senior Judge of the
constitutes the Chairperson of the Parole Authority for such matters.
In my view, the situation is as follows:
1. Mr Hatfield is a person who will soon be eligible for parole, as he will
complete the non-parole period of his sentences on 8
2. The Drug Court, as the Parole Authority, may only make a parole order if it
is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that
the release of the offender
is appropriate in the public interest
3. The amendments made to the
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
Compulsory Drug Treatment Correctional Centre Act 2004
was passed provide
avenues for the termination of a CDTO. The cessation of such an order would be
necessary if Mr Hatfield is to
be released onto parole.
Section 106Q
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
allows the Drug Court to revoke a
CDTO in a number of circumstances, and
section 106R
sets out the effect of a
revocation order.
4. Revocation is couched in negative terms, as are the effects of a revocation
order, and the legislation appears to be dealing with
a lack of success on
program under
, and the effect of revocation accords with that, as there
can be no forward date provided for the revocation to come into effect,
example, to allow commencement of parole on a future date. Indeed if the Drug
Court revokes a CDTO, the court “is to issue”
a warrant committing
the offender to a correctional
5. An alternate avenue regarding the CDTO coming to an end is provided in
Section 106E
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
Section 106E
106E Duration of compulsory drug treatment order
sooner revoked, an offender’s compulsory drug treatment order expires:
(a) at the end of the term of the sentence to which it relates,
(b) when the offender is released on parole,
whichever occurs first.
7 In my view the end of the term
of the sentence is a reference to the end of the total term of imprisonment. So
should the duration
of the CDTO for Mr Hatfield now expire because it is
appropriate to release him on parole?
Should Parole be
8 The Drug Court Registrar has taken all the necessary
administrative steps in her role as Secretary of the Parole Authority, and
Drug Court must now consider the question of parole as his non-parole period
expires on 8 March 2008. I note that the operation
above is not
limited to offenders who are in any particular Stage of their CDTO.
Drug Court does have before it the necessary report from the Probation and
Parole Service, and that report addresses a number
of specific
. That report is a very positive one. The Court is told that
Mr Hatfield’s general behaviour and conduct could be described
excellent, however misbehaviour did lead to regression from Stage 2 to Stage 1
for ten weeks for providing “dilute”
urine samples, and admitted use
of cannabis, buprenorphine and heroin whilst in the Centre.
January 2008 Mr Hatfield had participated in 66 occasions of day leave, and six
weekend leaves on Stage 2. Compliance with
external leave has continued, and the
Court is aware of Mr Hatfield again having full-time employment, and of having
previously worked
for two months in a labouring position when in Stage 2,
between June and August 2007. His latest Progress Report, dated 23 January
describes his behaviour and conduct in Stage 2 as “excellent, both within
the CDTCC community and whilst on external
leave from the centre”. He has
met all of the requirements for progression to Stage 3, which will take effect
from today.
11 As part of his CDTCC program, Mr Hatfield successfully
participated in 30 sessions of the “Think First” program, and
valued group member in the weekly Process groups which address relapse
prevention and interpersonal issues. He has also completed
a variety of skills
programs, including first aid, horticulture, drama therapy and some literacy
12 Mr Hatfield has been assessed as falling in the low to
medium category for recidivism, and has strong post-release plans, whereby
will be working full-time and residing with his sister. He has strong family
support, and they are good pro-social models. In
the ordinary course of events,
given such a report, Mr Hatfield could expect to be granted parole on the first
available date.
13 In Mr Hatfield’s case, the report recommends
that Mr Hatfield remain on his CDTO, and engage in the community custody of
Stage 3 as a transition to parole in approximately six months time. Whilst such
a proposal would provide some continuity in the provision
of support in the
community, the Probation and Parole Service can also provide close support for
Mr Hatfield, and over the quite
lengthy period of parole that applies to Mr
Hatfield by virtue of his sentence. Mr Hatfield will need to make the transition
his CDTO to Parole in a matter of months in any case.
14 The Drug
Court, like the Parole Authority, has immense experience in dealing with
offenders who are addicted to illicit drugs.
Seventy percent of prisoners
identify drugs and/or alcohol as the reason for their offending. It is also a
fact that many persons
who make a sustained recovery from drug addiction do
relapse into drug use again. That is the nature of addiction.
many prisoners with drug addiction issues return to drug use after release,
despite their treatment and their determination
to remain drug free. It is also
a well-established fact that in the days and months after release from gaol,
prisoners are at high
risk of death from overdose. That is because, amongst
other factors, their general tolerance to drugs has diminished considerably,
they have no tolerance to opioids and no awareness of the purity of drug
currently available on the street.
16 It is, of course, the expectation
that because Mr Hatfield has now achieved significant periods of abstinence from
drug use during
his CDTO, and has learnt new skills to maintain his drug free
status, he will remain free of illicit drug use. However if Mr Hatfield
relapse into drug use after release, whoever is then responsible for maintaining
and assisting Mr Hatfield in the community on
any supervised order would need to
consider an effective plan to ensure he was safe, and that his recovery was as
swift and effective
as possible.
17 Given the unfortunate emphasis placed
on non-pharmacotherapy treatment plans in the Compulsory Drug Treatment program,
stabilisation
on pharmacotherapy would not be possible on Stage 3 of his CDTO,
but would be available in a parole setting. To ignore the possible
pharmacotherapy after release to the community would be to the
community’s, and Mr Hatfield’s, detriment.
18 In summary, it
is apparent that Mr Hatfield is eligible for parole, and that his release on
parole, subject to many conditions,
is appropriate in the public interest, which
is the issue of primary importance. The court has, as required, had regard to
to protect the safety of the community and the need to maintain public
confidence in the administration of justice. I also note that
Mr Hatfield will
have the assistance of Stage 3 of a CDTO for a period of approximately one month
before becoming eligible for parole.
I see no particular advantage to the
community accruing if parole is refused and Mr Hatfield is required to remain on
the CDTO, only
to transfer to parole later. Indeed, there is the potential
disadvantage of a lack of a pharmacotherapy option.
19 None of the above
is intended to suggest that Mr Hatfield is seen as likely to relapse into drug
use and crime. If that were the
case, then parole would not be appropriate. The
court, as the Parole Authority, must be both well informed and careful when
this role so as to ensure the community, and Mr Hatfield, are as safe
as possible.
20 The court has also noted the following specific
• The sentencing judge set a non-parole period, and found special
circumstances in fixing that non-parole period.
• The offender has participated in extensive external leave programs, as
set out above, and has the strong support of family.
• The offender has suitable post release plans, and has full-time
employment.
21 Accordingly, the following orders
will be made:
1. The Personal Plan for Mr Hatfield to progress to Stage 3 is approved, and the
Community Supervision Order is made.
2. Parole will be granted, effective from 8 March 2008. The grant of parole will
cause his CDTO to expire on that date.
3. The parole conditions are as attached, and include additional conditions over
and above the standard conditions:
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act
Section 126
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act
Section 135
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act
Section 106S
Crimes (Administration of Sentences)
Section 135A
Crimes (Administration of
Sentences) Act 1999
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (29.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter