URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/310.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BYR v Children's Guardian [2013] NSWADT 310 (17 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
BYR v Children's Guardian
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 310
Hearing Date(s):
17 December 2013
Decision Date:
17 December 2013
Community Services Division
S Higgins, Deputy President
1. Declare that the applicant not be treated as a disqualified person
for the purposes of the
Child Protection (Working with Children)
in respect of the offence of rape, of which he was convicted on 25 March
2. Pursuant to subsection 28(6) of the
Child Protection (Working
with Children)
Act 2012, the Children's Guardian is to grant the applicant
with a working with children clearance.
Catchwords:
Working with children clearance - disqualified person - presumed to be a
risk to children - whether applicant has proven to the contrary
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Child Protection (Working
with Children) Act 2012
Child Protection (Working with Children) Regulation
Child Protection (Prohibited Employment) Act 1998
Commission for Children and Young People 1998
Cases Cited:
ADV v Commission for Children and Young People
[2012] NSWADT 8
Commission for Children and Young People v FZ
[2011] NSWCA 111
Commission for Children and Young People v V
[2002] NSWSC 949
Commission for Children and Young People
[2009] NSWADT 202
L v Commission
for Children and Young People & anor
[2008] NSWIRComm 195
R v Commission
for Children and Young People
[2002] NSWIRComm 101
RD v Commissioner NSW
Commission for Children and Young People
[2011] NSWADT 140
RV v Commission
for Children and Young People
[2007] NSWADT 299
Principal judgment
BYR (Applicant)
Children's Guardian (Respondent)
Representation
D Ward (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
BYR (Applicant in person)
Crown Solicitor (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
REASONS FOR
Introduction
applicant, BYR, made an application under
Child Protection
(Working with Children) Act
2012 (the Act), for an enabling order that he
not be treated as a 'disqualified person' for the purposes of that Act and be
a clearance to work with children. The applicant is a 'disqualified
person' by reason of his conviction, in March 1971, of rape:
see subs 18(1) of
the Act. At the time, the applicant was 21 years of age.
the applicant is a minister of religion in his local congregation. With the
coming into force of the Act, the applicant was
required to obtain a working
with children clearance check if he wished to continue with this work: see subs
6(2) of the Act.
required, the applicant made an application, to the Children's Guardian, for
such a clearance under s 13 of the Act.
27 September 2013, the Children's Guardian determined not to grant the applicant
with a clearance as a result of his 1971 conviction:
see subs 18(1)(a) of the
28 October 2013, the applicant, as he was entitled to do, made an application,
under s 28 of the Act, to the Tribunal, for an enabling
order and a working with
children clearance check.
application was heard, before me, on 17 December 2013.
respondent, the Children's Guardian, did not oppose the applicant's application
for an enabling order.
support of his application the applicant relied on a statement he made on 18
November 2013 and two references. One reference was
from the applicant's
congregation and the other reference was from his employer.
respondent tendered into evidence a bundle of documents, which included a copy
of the applicant's criminal record, a copy of the
decision of the Court of
Criminal Appeal in regard to the applicant's appeal and that of one of his
co-accused and copies of responses
to enquiries made by the respondent.
considering the relevant legislative provisions in the Act, the material filed
and the submissions of the parties, I made the
orders sought.
also agreed to publish detailed reasons for decision, in light of this being
only the second application to be determined under
Legislation
Child Protection (Working with Children) Act
2012 (Act), is a new
legislative scheme regulating those persons who can engage in, or continue to
engage in, child-related work.
The Act came into force on 15 June 2013. On
coming into force, the Act repealed the previous legislative scheme in
Commission for Children and Young People
: see cl 6 of
Schedule 4.2 of the Act.
1 of the Act
contains provisions in relation to the commencement of the Act,
its objects and definitions of terms used within the Act.
objects of the Act are set out in s 3 as follows:
3 Object of Act
The object of this Act is to protect children:
(a) by not permitting certain persons to engage in child-related work,
(b) by requiring persons engaged in child-related work to have working with
children check clearances.
4 of the Act provides that the 'safety, welfare and well-being of children and,
in particular, protecting them from child
abuse, is the paramount consideration'
in the operation of the Act.
word 'children' is defined in subs 5(1) to mean persons under the age of 18
years. Consequently the word 'child' has the same
2 of the Act
deals with restrictions on child-related work. The relevant
restrictions are those contained in ss 6, 8 and 9 within this
6(1) of the Act provides that a person is engaged in 'child-related work' for
the purpose of the Act if:
(a) the person is engaged in work referred to in subs 6(2) that involves
direct contact by the person with children, or
(b) the person is engaged in a child-related role referred to in subs
term 'direct contact' with children is defined in subs 6(4) to mean (a) physical
6(2) provides that the work referred to for the purpose of subs 6(1)(a) is work
for, or in connection with any of the activities
as listed in para 6(2)(a) to
(m), and which are declared by the regulations to be child-related work.
Included in the activities
in subs 6(2), is 'religious services' by any
religious organisation: see para 6(2)(j).
Child Protection (Working with Children) Regulation
Regulations) declares those aspects of the activities listed in para 6(2)(a) to
(m) of the Act which are child-related work.
regard to 'religious services', cl 13 provides:
Religious services
Work for a religious organisation where children form part of the
congregation or organisation is child-related work, if the work
(a) as a minister, priest, rabbi, mufti or other like religious leader or
spiritual officer of the organisation, or
(b) in any other role in the organisation involving activities primarily
related to children, including youth groups, youth camps,
teaching children and
child care.
is no dispute that the applicant's work as a minister falls is child- related
work falling within the above description.
8(1) of the Act prohibits a person from engaging in child-related work, unless
(a) the person holds the relevant working
with children check clearance, or (b)
there is a current application, by the person, to the Children's Guardian for
the relevant
working with children check clearance. This prohibition is an
offence, carrying a maximum penalty of 100 penalty units, or imprisonment
two years, or both.
9(1) contains a similar prohibition on an employer, employing or continuing to
employ a person in child-related work where
the employer knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the person is not the holder of a relevant working with
children check
clearance, or there is no current application by the person for
such a clearance.
3 of the Act
deals with working with children clearances. That Part is
divided into 3 Divisions as follows:
- Division 1, sets out the classes of clearance. There are essentially two
classes of clearance, a volunteer clearance authorising
a person to engage in
unpaid child-related work and a non-volunteer clearance authorising a person to
engage in paid and unpaid child-related
work: see s 12 of the Act;
- Division 2, deals with applications for clearances: see s 13 of the Act.
Such applications are made to the Children's Guardian;
- Division 3, deals with risk assessment of persons who have made an
application for a clearance or who are holders of a clearance.
Section 15 makes
provision for the Children's Guardian to conduct such risk assessment and if
appropriate, while making such an assessment,
the Children's Guardian has the
power to impose an interim bar on the person the subject of a risk assessment,
pending determination
of the clearance application;
- Division 4, deals with determinations, by the Children's Guardian, of
applications for clearance. I have dealt with the provisions
in this part in
more detail below;
- Division 5, deals with the duration of a clearance (5 years) and the
circumstances in which a clearance can be cancelled: see ss
- Division 6, establishes the working with children register.
18(1), in Division 4 of Part 3, provides that the Children's Guardian must not
grant a working with children check clearance
to a 'disqualified person'. That
subs is in the following terms:
Determination of applications for clearances
(1) The Children's Guardian must not grant a working with children check
clearance to the following persons (
disqualified persons
(a) a person convicted before, on or after the commencement of this section
of an offence specified in Schedule 2, if the offence
was committed as an
(b) a person against whom proceedings for any such offence have been
commenced, if the offence was committed as an adult, pending
determination of
the proceedings for the offence.
word 'conviction' is defined in subs 5(1) to include 'a finding that the charge
for an offence is proven, or that a person is
guilty of an offence, even though
the court does not proceed to conviction.'
1(1)(f) of Schedule 2 of the Act specifies the 'common law offence of rape or
attempted rape'. There is no dispute that the offence,
of which the applicant
was convicted, in 1971, falls within this description.
4 of the Act
deals with reviews and appeals.
26 provides that where (a) a person has been convicted of the murder of a child,
or (b) the person's application for a clearance
has been refused wholly or
partly on the grounds that the person has been charged with an offence, which
has not been finally determined,
cannot make an application under this
27 makes provision for administrative review, by the Tribunal, of decisions of
the Children's Guardian to (a) refuse a working
with children check clearance,
(b) to cancel a person's clearance and (c) impose an interim bar on a person's
clearance. As I have
mentioned, where a person is a 'disqualified person,' para
18(1)(a) of the Act operates as a mandatory refusal. Accordingly, on
administrative
review, the same mandatory refusal would apply.
28 deals with 'disqualified persons'. That section is in the following terms:
28 Orders relating to disqualified and ineligible persons
(1) The Tribunal may, on the application of a disqualified person, make an
order declaring that the person is not to be treated as
a disqualified person
for the purposes of this Act in respect of an offence specified in the order (an
enabling order
). Any such order has effect according to its tenor.
(2) The Tribunal may, on the application of a person who is not eligible to
apply for a clearance because the person has been previously
clearance, make an order declaring that the person is to be treated as a person
who is eligible to apply for a clearance
enabling order
). Any such
order has effect according to its tenor.
(3) A disqualified person may make an application under this section only
(a) the person has been refused a working with children check clearance,
(b) the person's clearance has been cancelled,
because the person is a disqualified person.
(4) The Children's Guardian is to be a party to any proceedings for an order
under this section and may make submissions in opposition
to or support of the
making of the order.
(5) An applicant must fully disclose to the Tribunal any matters relevant to
the application.
(6) If the Tribunal makes an enabling order, the Tribunal may order the
Children's Guardian to revoke an interim bar or to grant the
(7) In any proceedings where an enabling order is sought, it is to be
presumed, unless the applicant proves to the contrary, that
the applicant poses
a risk to the safety of children.
(8) An enabling order may not be made subject to conditions.
(9) (Repealed).
30 sets out how an application under s 27 is to be determined by the Tribunal.
It is in the following terms:
30 Determination of applications and other matters
(1) The Tribunal must consider the following in determining an application
under this Part:
(a) the seriousness of the offences with respect to which the person is a
disqualified person or any matters that caused a refusal
of a clearance or
imposition of an interim bar,
(b) the period of time since those offences or matters occurred and the
conduct of the person since they occurred,
(c) the age of the person at the time the offences or matters occurred,
(d) the age of each victim of any relevant offence or conduct at the time
they occurred and any matters relating to the vulnerability
of the victim,
(e) the difference in age between the victim and the person and the
relationship (if any) between the victim and the person,
(f) whether the person knew, or could reasonably have known, that the victim
was a child,
(g) the person's present age,
(h) the seriousness of the person's total criminal record and the conduct of
the person since the offences occurred,
(i) the likelihood of any repetition by the person of the offences or conduct
and the impact on children of any such repetition,
(j) any information given by the applicant in, or in relation to, the
application,
(k) any other matters that the Children's Guardian considers necessary.
(2) On an application under section 28 or 29, the Tribunal may, by order,
stay the operation of a determination by the Children's
Guardian under this Act
relating to the applicant pending the determination of the matter.
Note. Division 2 of Part 3 of Chapter 3 of the
Administrative
Decisions Review Act 1997
enables a decision the subject of an application
under section 27 of this Act for an administrative review under that Act to be
by the Tribunal.
(3) (Repealed).
Consideration
indicated in the objects of the Act and s 4, the Tribunal's jurisdiction under s
28 remains protective and not punitive in nature:
Commission for Children
and Young People v FZ
[2011] NSWCA 111
per Young JA at [61] and
Commission for Children and Young People
[2002] NSWIRComm 101
is, the object of the Act is not to impose additional punishment on a
disqualified person, but to eliminate possible risks
to children. The Tribunal's
review jurisdiction, under s 27, is similarly protective in
this application, the issue for determination is whether, having regard to the
matters in subs 30(1) of the Act and the relevant
facts, the applicant has
established (i.e. proven on the balance of probabilities) that he does not pose
a risk to children.
I have mentioned, subs 28(7) of the Act presumes that the applicant does pose a
risk to children.
meaning of the word 'risk' was considered by Young CJ (in Equity) in
Commission for Children and Young People v V
[2002] NSWSC 949
, at [42]. His Honour's consideration was made in the context of subs 9(4) of
Child Protection (Prohibited Employment) Act
His Honour said:
42 ...[what] one is looking for is whether, in all the circumstances, there
is a real and appreciable risk in the sense of a risk
that is greater than the
risk of any adult preying on a child. One, however, must link the word "risk"
with the words that follow,
namely, "to the safety of children". ...
remarks of His Honour have continued to be cited with approval, by the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal, in construing the
meaning of 'risk' as it
appeared in subs 33J(1) of the repealed
Commission for Children
and Young People Act
ADV v Commission for Children and Young
[2012] NSWADT 8
RD v Commissioner NSW Commission for Children and
Young People
[2011] NSWADT 140
RV v Commission for Children and
Young People
[2007] NSWADT 299
L v Commission for
Children and Young People & anor
[2008] NSWIRComm 195
(supra) at [60].
my view, the remarks of His Honour equally apply to the meaning of 'risk' as it
appears in s 28 of the Act. However, in light of
subs 28(8) of the Act, which
provides that an enabling order cannot be made subject to conditions, the
qualifying remarks of His
at [43] and [44], are no
longer applicable.
regard to the matters the Tribunal is required to consider, as set out in subs
30(1), I find as follows:
Seriousness of the Schedule 2 offence -
the applicant accepts that
the offence was very serious.
The events leading to the charge occurred, one evening, in June 1970. They
occurred at a private home, across the road from where
the applicant lived at
that time. The private home was that of friends or acquaintances of the
applicant. The victim was brought
to the home by her boyfriend, who had
collected her from her home earlier that evening. The victim, her boyfriend, the
and friends or acquaintances of the applicant all met up at a nearby
hotel. After leaving the hotel, they all drove to the private
boyfriend left, leaving her in the home of the applicant's friends and
acquaintances. During that evening the
applicant had non-consensual intercourse
with the victim. This was after one of the applicant's friends or acquaintance
had non-consensual
intercourse with the victim and another had attempted to do
so. The applicant was convicted of the offence of rape and was sentenced
years imprisonment, with a non-parole period of four years and six months. The
applicant appealed his conviction and sentence.
The Court of Criminal Appeal
dismissed his appeal on conviction, but reduced his sentence to imprisonment for
six years, with a non-parole
period of three years. In reducing the sentence the
Court said:
'... [True] enough, he participated in the scheme to lure the girl to [X's]
being a leading party,
was a party to her being raped by others as well as himself, and also
notwithstanding that he made an earlier
unsuccessful attempt and was warned by
her that she was a virgin, but there are features on the other side of the
scale. In addition
to his youth - he is twenty years of age - there was no
physical injury to this girl nor were there other acts of gross indecency
which often characterise pack rapes, or violence or threats of violence or even
of torn or destroyed clothing. ...
[the] police say that he is not an associate of criminals or other persons of
disrepute, he was in employment at the time of his arrest
and had a good
antecedent work record. ...'
Subsequent to the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal, the applicant
unsuccessfully sought special leave to appeal to the High
Period of time since the offence was committed
- it is now more
than 43 years since the offence was committed.
Age of the applicant at the time of the offence -
mentioned, the applicant was 20 years of age at the time the offence was
Age of the victim, any matters relating to the vulnerability of the
the victim was aged between 16 and 17 years of age when the offence
was committed. As noted by the Court of Criminal Appeal, the victim
was a virgin
and she informed the applicant of this. As pointed out by the respondent, the
victim was a child, who had been taken
to a strange home that evening by her
Difference in age between the victim and the applicant and the
relationship (if any) between the victim and the applicant -
there was a
three to four year age difference between the victim and the applicant.
Whether the applicant knew, or could reasonably know that the victim
was a child
- In his statement the applicant said that he had no way of
knowing that the victim was a child. He said he assumed she was 18 years
as earlier that evening she had accompanied her boyfriend, the applicant and
others to a nearby hotel. He said she appeared
to be 18 years of age and was
drinking alcohol. The respondent noted that the victim was part of a wider
friendship group of the
applicant and there was no evidence that the applicant
had targeted the victim.
The applicant's present age
- the applicant is currently 63 years
The seriousness of the applicant's total criminal conduct
applicant has two further convictions. The first conviction was in April 1968
for the offence of indecent language - he was
fined $20 or ten days hard labour.
The second conviction occurred in November 1973, for the offence of 'drive with
prescribed concentration
of alcohol'. He was fined $100 or 20 days hard labour.
The applicant explained that this latter offence occurred while he was on
release from prison, when he was involved in a car accident. He was found to
have above the prescribed limit of alcohol.
The likelihood of repetition
- As I have mentioned, it is now 43
years since the offence, which brings the applicant within the terms of s
18(1)(a) (disqualified
person), was committed. Since that time he has not
committed a further offence of this nature. Indeed there is no evidence of the
applicant being involved in any criminal conduct, inappropriate conduct, or
disciplinary matters in the last 40 years. As I have
mentioned below, in that
time, the applicant has had a stable family and professional life. In my view,
these are factors that indicate
that the likelihood of repetition, by the
applicant, of an offence or conduct of that nature is very low.
Information given by the applicant
- the applicant explained that
after serving three years in prison he immediately found work. He said he was
fortunate to have learnt
a trade while in prison. He said he started his own
business and married in 1976. He has two children, now aged 32 and 34. He said
his children are balanced and doing well in their community and have never been
in trouble with the police.
He said he remains in a stable marriage and has been employed as a sales
person for the last six years. He has been a member of his
church since 1984. He
was baptised in 1987 and has been a minister of a congregation, of about 120
people, since 1999.
On being informed about the decision of the Children's Guardian, in regard to
his application for clearance, the applicant informed
the leaders of his church
and stood down from his role as a minister pending his application to the
In a reference, signed by three members of his congregation, it is stated
that the applicant is an exemplary family man and a respected
Other matters the Children's Guardian considers relevant
have noted, the respondent did not oppose the applicant's application. I also
note that in its enquiries, for which the applicant
provided full assistance,
there is no evidence of the applicant having been the subject of any
disciplinary proceedings. Nor has
he ever come to the notice of the Department
of Family and Community Services. I note that in response to the respondent's
to the applicant's church, its Director said that the applicant had
been appointed a minister because of his 'exemplary conduct and
behaviour' since
he became a member of that church. The Director went on to say that the
applicant 'has earned the respect of all
in the congregation where he is a
Conclusions and Orders
regard to the matters referred to above, together with the paramount
consideration in s 4 of the Act, I am satisfied that the
applicant has
discharged his onus, as required under subs 28(7) of the Act. That is, I am
satisfied the applicant has established
(on the balance of probabilities) that
he does not pose a risk to the safety of children. The offence, of which the
applicant was
convicted in 1971, was serious. The applicant acknowledges the
seriousness of the offence. However, it was committed more than 43
years ago and
since that time the applicant has committed no further offence of this nature.
Nor has he been the subject of any disciplinary
proceedings or any adverse
findings in regard to his conduct. The likelihood of repetition is very low
given the passage of time
and the applicant's current circumstance. He is in a
stable marriage with two grown up children.
respondent does not oppose the making of the order and in light of my findings
it is appropriate to make the order sought. The
effect of that order being that
the Children's Guardian is to grant the applicant a working with children
Accordingly,
1. Declare that the applicant not be treated as a disqualified person for the
purposes of the
Child Protection (Working with Children)
Act 2012 in
respect of the offence of rape, of which he was convicted on 25 March 1971.
2. Pursuant to subsection 28(6) of the
Child Protection (Working with
Act 2012, the Children's Guardian is to grant the applicant with a
working with children clearance.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (191 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter