URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2018/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HAIG, Andrew David [2018] NSWMPSC 9 (9 November 2018)
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
CONSTITUTED PURSUANT TO PART 8 of
THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
To HOLD AN INQUIRY INTO
A COMPLAINT IN
RELATION TO
Dr Andrew David Haig
Dates of Inquiry:
11 October 2018, 29 October 2018
Committee members:
Dr Arthur Glass, (non medical) Chairperson
Dr Eileen Rogan
Peter Procopis
Ms Betty Radcliffe
Officer assisting Committee:
Iolanda Wilcox
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Brianna Butt, Legal officer
Appearance for Dr Andrew Haig:
Mr Tim Saunders, Counsel
Ms Marianne Nicolle, Meridian Lawyers
Date of decision:
9 November 2018
Publication of decision:
Refer to page 14 of this decision for details of non-publication
A hearing was held on 11 October 2018 and again on 29 October 2018. The
particulars of the Complaint were found proven and the Committee
considered that
this amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Respondent was
reprimanded.
background section of the Complaint and the preamble to the particulars reads
slightly altered:
Between February and November 2015, the Respondent was employed as a visiting
medical officer (VMO) and Head of the Emergency Medicine
Department ('ED') at
the Blue Mountains District ANZAC Memorial Hospital ('Blue Mountains Hospital').
On 1 November 2015 the Respondent
attended the ED of the Hospital with Patient
A, a close family member. The Respondent inappropriately administered an
intravenous
general anaesthetic agent (propofol) to Patient A.
2. A notification to the Medical Council from Dr
Helen Parsons Acting District Director Medical Workforce Nepean Blue Mountains
(of 22 December 2015) raised concerns about the Respondent and his treatment
of Patient A on 1 November 2015. Subsequently Dr Kate
Cush notified her concerns
3. Statements were obtained from nurses and practitioners on duty at the Blue
Mountains Hospital at the relevant time. A statement
was obtained from Patient A
and also from Andrea Williams, General Manager of the Blue Mountains Hospital,
as the Respondent and
she had exchanged relevant text messages on 1 November
4. On 3 November 2016 a peer review report was requested by the HCCC from Dr
Hore, a specialist in Emergency Medicine and Intensive
Care Medicine. He
provided a report on 9 December 2016. The Respondent’s section 40 response
was subsequently provided to Dr
Hore. Upon reading this and a report provided by
the respondent by A/P Ward, Dr Hore amended his initial report. The second
was provided in March 2017; and again, with some additions in September
2017. The Complaint before us is based on the September report.
5. The Complaint is set out in full as an attachment to this decision. It
alleges that Dr Haig is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct on the
basis of two provisions of section 139B(1) of the
National Law
First, 139B(1)(a) - he has engaged in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge,
skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by
him in the practice of
medicine is significantly below the expected standard. Second, 139B(1)(l) - that
he has engaged in “other
improper or unethical conduct”.
6. The Particulars of the complaint are set out in detail below as we use
these to organise the material before the Committee. In
short, it is alleged
that the respondent should not have provided a particular treatment – an
intravenous general anaesthetic
of propofol - to a close family member.
THE RESPONDENT’S BACKGROUND
7. The Respondent is 53 years of age. He is an emergency medicine specialist
and a Fellow of the Australasian College of Emergency
Medicine (ACEM) since
2001. He is now married to patient A, his second wife. Until recently he was
retraining in general practice
through the remote location training scheme
8. The Respondent graduated as a Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery
from the University of London in 1989. He moved to New
Zealand in 1991 and
worked as a Registrar in anaesthesia, psychiatry and emergency medicine. He came
to Australia in 1999 and worked
as a Registrar in Emergency Medicine in Perth.
He returned to the United Kingdom for work and then back to Australia in late
9. He worked in Sydney and was first granted registration in NSW to work in
Emergency Medicine in October 2006. He was granted general
registration in NSW
in March 2009. He has no conditions on his registration. In 2012 he moved to
Queensland.
10. In February 2015 he was employed by the Nepean Blue Mountains LHD to work
in the Emergency Department of the Blue Mountains Hospital.
Initially he was
engaged as a VMO specialist but within a short period of time he was appointed
head of Department, VMO Emergency
11. He left this position at the end of 2015 and
accepted a fixed term part time appointment in Emergency Medicine in Bairnsdale
Health Service, Victoria. He then worked as a Registrar GP for
Bairnsdale Family Medical Centre. He left the practice in April 2018
and started
another group practice in Bairnsdale with two other GPs. In his statement of
August 2018, he notes that he expects to
commence working at this practice in
January 2019.
12. At the hearing the Respondent said that his wife has now been offered a
position as a medical student at Griffith University in
QLD. As a result, he is
now thinking of relocating to Brisbane. His thinking at present is that if he
does this he will work part
time in Emergency Medicine and reapply to continue
with his GP Fellowship.
13. He has also worked as a locum VMO in ED at Calvary Hospital in Canberra
for the past 9-10 years. At the time of the hearing he
said that he currently
works 3-4 shifts per week at Calvary, plus some other locum ED VMO
THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
14. Section 139B of the National Law states:
"unsatisfactory professional conduct"
of registered health practitioner
generally [NSW]
(1) Unsatisfactory professional conduct of a registered
medical practitioner includes each of the following:
significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by the practitioner in the practice
of practitioner’s profession is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level
of training or experience.
Other improper and unethical conduct
“Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice...of
the practitioner’s profession”
15. The standard of proof which the Committee must apply is one of reasonable
satisfaction. And as the much used statement of
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
"Reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or
established independently of the nature and consequence of the
fact or facts to
be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of
an occurrence of a given description,
or the gravity of the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
whether the Issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters 'reasonable satisfaction' should
not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences".
16. These remarks, of course, focus the decision-makers’ attention upon
the nature of the evidence required to establish the
case. They do not change
the standard of proof, which remains that of reasonable satisfaction.
17. This is the legal framework in which we are to consider the material
placed before us. For the Complaint to be proven, the Committee
reasonably satisfied on balance that Dr Haig committed the conduct complained of
and that this conduct satisfies the statutory
definition of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. In this sense the onus is on the Commission to establish
that Dr Haig has departed
to the requisite degree from the appropriate
standards. The standard of proof relevant to our fact-finding exercise is
conventionally
referred to as the
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(discussed above). Basically, the standard of proof is proportionate to the
gravity of the issue to be proved. These disciplinary
proceedings will have
professional and personal consequences for Dr Haig and we have taken account of
this in our deliberations.
18. In evaluating Dr Haig’s conduct, he is to be judged by the
standards of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
and experience of
a VMO Specialist in Emergency Medicine. Having done this work since 1998 he is a
significantly experienced practitioner
and is to be judged
accordingly.
19. The issues to be determined by this
Committee are as follows.
First, whether the Committee is reasonably satisfied on balance that the
factual particulars of the Complaints are proven.
Second, whether the conduct overall amounts to unsatisfactory professional
And third, whether orders of directions made by way of Part 8, Division 3,
Subdivision 3 of the National Law are appropriate.
20. An issue for the Chairperson is whether non-publication directions should
THE MATERIAL BEFORE US AND OUR REASONING RELEVANT TO EACH
21. Particular 1 (the only particular) raises one allegation against Dr Haig
with four parts. We set out the material before us on
these matters separated
for the most part between material disclosed by the documents before us and
material presented at the hearing.
The hearing was held on 11 October 2018 when
evidence was given by Dr Hore (by telephone) and the Respondent. The hearing was
for the presentation of submissions on 29 October 2018.
22. We have had the benefit of submissions from both the HCCC and the
Respondent’s legal advisers. We have listened to these
carefully and make
reference to them below where appropriate. It was agreed at the commencement of
the hearing that this was a one
stage hearing. Unfortunately, the submissions
could not be concluded on the first day. And as the Respondent’s lawyers
oral submissions rather than written submissions, a further hearing
date was arranged for the morning of 29 October 2018.
Particular 1 reads
: On 1 November 2015 the practitioner attended
the ED of the Hospital with Patient A. The practitioner inappropriately
administered
an intravenous general anaesthetic agent (propofol) to Patient A in
circumstances where;
(a) Patient A was a close family member;
(b) Patient A did not have a regular GP and had not consulted a
GP about her current symptoms or condition;
(c) other suitably qualified medical practitioners were available in the ED
to treat Patient A;
(d) the practitioner acted contrary to the NSW Medical Council
“Guideline for self-treatment and treating family members”
3.14 of the Medical Board of Australia's Code of
24. Particular 1(d) refers to the Medical Board of Australia's
Code of Conduct and the NSW Medical Council “Guideline for self-treatment
and treating family members”. The Good Medical Practice: A Code of
Conduct for Doctors in Australia (March 2014) states at
Wherever possible, avoid providing medical care to anyone with whom you have
a close personal relationship. In most cases, providing
care to close friends
those you work with and family members is inappropriate because of the lack of
objectivity, possible discontinuity
of care, and risks to the doctor and
patient. In some cases, providing care to those close to you is unavoidable.
Whenever this is
the case good medical practice requires recognition and careful
management of these issues.
25. The Medical Council Guideline of December 2014, “Guideline for
self-treatment and treating family members” refers
to the above provision
and adds, among other matters:
Medical practitioners should not initiate treatment (including prescribing)
for themselves or members of their family
In emergency situations or isolated settings where there is no help
available, medical practitioners may treat themselves or members
of their family
until another medical practitioner becomes available
26. The Respondent does not admit he is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct. But he admits the facts as set out above as
parts (a) and (b) and (d).
As to (c), he says that he admits the allegation but adds – “whilst
there was not a specialist
in emergency medicine available to treat Patient A
there were other suitably qualified medical practitioners available to provide
treatment options to Patient A”.
The Respondent
has provided a lengthy statement dated 20 August
2018 and he gave evidence at the hearing. We set out below what we regard as
in this material.
28. The Respondent outlines his experience with the use of propofol. He has
used procedural propofol in the ED setting throughout
his career. His first
experience with using propofol for the treatment of migraine in the ED setting
was at the Northside Emergency
Centre (Holy Spirit Private Hospital) in Brisbane
in 2012. By the end of 2015 he estimated that he had treated about 33 to 35
presenting with migraine with propofol in an ED Setting. Following the
complaint in December 2015 he ceased using propofol for the
treatment of
migraines, he says, as he did not want to practice in a way that attracted
29. In explaining the background to his actions on 1 November 2015, the
Respondent said he was in a de facto relationship with Patient
A at the time.
They have since married (in February 2016). On 1 November 2015 the Respondent
was on 3 months leave without pay (commencing
12 October 2015). His younger
children were relocating to New Zealand and he wanted to spend more time with
them. He was on leave
for these family reasons but also because of the work
issues discussed below.
30. Patient A had frequent headaches and had consulted a neurologist in
Brisbane in December 2014. She had been prescribed sumatriptan
to take during an
episode of migraine. In the last week of October 2015, she experienced a cluster
of bad headaches; the worst he
has seen her experience. Sumatriptan and
over-the-counter medicines had not resolved her migraine symptoms.
31. On Sunday 1 November 2016 her headache had worsened. He discussed with
Patient A what they should do next. He phoned (or texted)
the Blue Mountains
Hospital and found out that Dr X was the doctor on duty in the ED that morning.
(We do not name the doctor as
allegations are made against him that we are in no
position to test.) The Respondent says that Patient A did not want to be treated
by Dr X and nor did he want him to treat her because of the past history between
him and Dr X. He did not think that Dr X would deliver
the expected standard of
care. In these circumstances the Respondent says that he suggested they go to
the Nepean Hospital. But this
would have meant up to a one to
one-and-a-half-hour drive and a long waiting time in a busy ED. Although with
this level of migraine
she would be a category 3 patient (who should be seen in
30 minutes) the waiting time on the weekend could be up to 2 or 3 hours,
32. As to why he and Patient A had concerns about Dr X, the Respondent gives
an account in his August 2018 statement of how before
he took the job at Blue
Mountains Hospital he was cautioned by the General Manager (Ms Williams) that
the ED was very dysfunctional.
He introduced some changes as to how the
Department was organised and some doctors resisted these changes. Dr X was one
doctors. Working with Dr X became very difficult and he had frequent
meetings with Ms Williams as to how to manage these issues.
He had observed Dr X
at work since February 2015 and in his view, Dr X’s “clinical
practice was not at the appropriate
level”. In his view he did not bring a
professional attitude to the position. So, on 1 November 2015 when considering
options, he did not think “Dr X would give Patient A the right
standard care. He was frightened he would not do the right thing.”
33. On the morning of 1 November 2016, Patient A said that she was too sick
to travel to Nepean Hospital. They then discussed the
option of the Respondent
treating her at the ED at Blue Mountains Hospital. The Respondent says that he
was aware at this time that
there were issues around treating a relative. He
wanted to be open about this and that is why he sought the approval of the
Manager, Ms Williams. He texted her at 10:04 AM:
Hi Andrea, I’m back in Sydney for a few days my partner ... gets
migraines and has had one since yesterday morning. I’ve
tried everything
at home and I think that it’s Dr X and a locum working at the ED. Would
you mind if I took her up to give
her some treatment?
34. The Respondent says he texted rather than called as he had a history of
communicating with Ms Williams in this way and it was
a Sunday. Also, he thought
she might wish to reflect upon his request. The Respondent says that at this
time he was thinking of the
Guidelines and he wanted to document any deviation
from them, if this was needed. Ms Williams knew of his issues with Dr X, he
as she knew he was performance managing him.
35. Ms Williams replied at 11:33 AM – “Of course you can”.
After receiving this text, the Respondent took Patient
A to the Hospital. As to
what happened between 10.04 and 11.33 the Respondent said that Patient A wanted
to wait. If they received
no answer they would have gone to Nepean Hospital, or
“waited out” the migraine symptoms at home, he said.
36. Patient A was admitted at 11.55 AM. The Respondent says that he
administered the propofol appropriately and Patient A had relief
minutes. He administered a total of 200mg propofol in 10-20mg increments over 60
minutes. Patient A left the ED within
one hour of treatment in the company of Dr
Haig. The Respondent says that at the time he was aware of his position as a
medical practitioner
treating a close relative and he “made it clear to
everyone what he was doing”.
37. At 2:25 PM Ms Williams texted:
Hi Andrew. Sorry I thought you would go to get one of the other doctors to
cate (sic) for her. Prob best in future if you don’t
test (sic) her ESP
when on leave. Hope she is feeling better
After receiving this the Respondent says that this was first time he realised
he did not have unqualified approval for what he had
38. With hindsight the Respondent’s view of his actions is that he
should have gone with Patient A to Nepean Hospital. At the
time he was aware of
the guidelines “but his understanding could have been better”. He
says that at the time he was aware
of the exceptions in the Medical Council
Guidelines for emergencies or isolated settings. At the time he thought it was
an emergency
for Patient A (the symptoms had become worse and she was
distressed) and it was an isolated setting, in the sense that it was an
occasional episode. It was this understanding of the Council Guideline that was
behind what he calls his “defensive in tone”
email to Dr Parsons on
20 December 2 and his initial response to the HCCC in March 2016.
39. The Respondent says that since these early responses he has reflected
more upon his actions. He sets out in his statement the
materials that he has
read - codes of conduct, cases, articles. And he discusses the point of the
restriction upon treating family
members from the perspective of the clinician,
the patient, fellow professionals and the general public. He notes the risk that
medical practitioners’ professional objectivity may be compromised,
the risk to patient autonomy and he notes the difficulties
this could present to
other health professionals. In this context he notes that staff members were
uncomfortable with his decision
to treat Patient A on 1 November 2016 and he now
appreciates that perspective.
40. The Respondent says that since this incident he has not treated any
family members and there is no risk that he will do this again.
This has been a
very “daunting experience”.
41. In cross examination the Respondent said that Patient A was aware of his
concerns about Dr X and based on the information he had
given her she also had
concerns about him treating her. The Respondent was questioned about his earlier
responses to the HCCC (even
up until March 2016) where he did not accept that
his treatment of Patient A was in breach of the Code of Conduct or the
– because, as he argued, it was an emergency and/or an isolated
setting. The Respondent admitted that he was trying to limit
the effect of his
actions and this type of response was “defensive”. In his response
to the HCCC in December 2016 the
Respondent concedes that “his
decision-making on the day was flawed”. As to what led to this change from
his previous
views to this view, the Respondent said that he looked more closely
at the guidelines and the cases and reflected upon them. He said
he read cases
that have been before the Medical Tribunal, his lawyers had sent him cases and
he looked at the Medical Council website.
“He had made a mistake then he
wanted to know about it”.
42. In response to questions from the Committee the Respondent said that he
had referred Patient A to Dr Lander, the Brisbane neurologist.
It was noted that
in his statement the Respondent said that in the week leading up to 1 November
2015 Patient A was taking paracetamol
ibuprofen, aspirin and sumatriptan. The
sumatriptan was prescribed by Dr Lander, the Respondent said. The Respondent
conceded that
he may have written a script for Patient A for sumatriptan at some
point of time but he did not think that this had been dispensed.
As to how he
thought Dr X would behave unprofessionally on 1 November 2015 the Respondent
said that their relationship was “strained”
and that “he may
leave Patient A waiting longer or play down the severity of her headache”.
The Respondent said he was
not aware of how Dr X treated migraine and there was
much variation in approaches. As to why he sought the approval of the General
Manager, he said, he thought he was in a position analogous to when a patient
was not competent to give consent. At the time he knew
of the exceptions in the
guidelines and he thought that this was both an emergency and an isolated event.
As to why he waited 90
minutes for a reply from the Manager if it was an
emergency, the Respondent said that Patient A felt too unwell to travel to
Hospital. Her headache was severe and unremitting.
the HCCC peer reviewer has provided three reports (9
December 2016, 24 March 2017, 29 September 2017). He is a dual trained FACEM
(emergency medicine) and FCICM (intensive care) physician. He is at present the
Clinical Director of Intensive Care Medicine at Port
Macquarie Hospital. After
considering the Respondent’s Section 40 statement (and its supporting
evidence), Dr Hore revised
his earlier opinion about the actual administration
of propofol by the Respondent to Patient A without any other clinicians present.
He is now of the view that this aspect of the Respondent’s actions was not
a significant departure from the expected standards.
44. However, that the Respondent treated a close family member in this way on
1 November 2015 was, in Dr Hore’s view, outside
the principles of medical
practice as set out in the Code of Conduct and the New South Wales Medical
Council’s Guidelines.
Notably there were other suitable practitioners at Blue Mountains Hospital
available at the time of Patient A’s attendance to
provide appropriate
care for her condition. Further it is my opinion that the Respondent’s
administration of propofol to his
partner in this circumstance would meet the
Commission’s proposed definition of improper or unethical conduct, in that
be regarded by reasonable persons as falling below the standards of
conduct expected of a medical practitioner in the position of
the Respondent, in
that it has a tendency to bring into disrepute the medical profession or to
reduce public confidence in the profession.
Therefore, it is my opinion that:
i. the conduct alleged in this case was significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner with the respondent’s
training or experience, and
ii. the conduct alleged is improper or unethical using the commission’s
proposed definition
45. At the hearing Dr Hore commented that people could well be comfortable if
a medical practitioner provided for a family member
something very small, for
example prescribed antibiotics. But when doing something like administering
propofol, there is the potential
to change the patient’s level of
consciousness, altering the patient’s mood. With the Guideline in mind
this is not a
reasonable thing to do to a family member, he said.
46. In cross examination, Dr Hore said that the fact that the Respondent
texted Ms Williams rather than ringing her suggested that
Patient A’s
condition was not an emergency. Dr Hore accepted that the exchange of text
messages showed that the Respondent
had made a genuine attempt to get consent
for what he was about to do from the General Manager. But Dr Hore resisted the
that this made the seriousness of what the Respondent did “at
the lower end of the scale”. For Dr Hore remained
“uncomfortable”
with the Respondent treating a close family member
intravenously with a drug which altered consciousness. It wasn’t a
of whether he had the experience to do this, he should not have been
doing this to a close family member.
47. In cross examination Dr Hore was asked a number of specific questions.
Did the Respondent attempt to get consent from the Manager?
Was it reasonable
for him to assume consent had been obtained? Was the Respondent’s
treatment of Patient A clinically acceptable?
Did he make no attempt to conceal
the treatment? Was the Respondent qualified to give the treatment? Dr Hore
answered yes to these
questions. And Dr Hore agreed that Nepean Hospital was up
to 90 minutes away and as a category 3 patient there would be delays before
Patient A was seen. Dr Hore was aware of the breakdown in the relationship
between Dr X and the Respondent and that the locum on
duty was inexperienced. Dr
Hore agreed that the “Guidelines” were meant only as guidelines and
allowed a degree of discretion
in their application. It was put to Dr Hore that
on 1 November 2015 Patient A’s case was an emergency. His response was
this was not black-and-white and while it could be seen as an emergency in
his view, categories 1 or 2 were emergencies not category
3. And if the
Respondent thought it was an emergency why did he not telephone the General
Manager rather than text her, he replied.
48. In view of the answers Dr Hore had given to the specific questions he was
asked whether on reflection he would temper his criticism
of the Respondent. His
reply was that he now saw his conduct in treating a close family member as below
the appropriate standards
but not significantly below the standards.
49. However, on re-examination Dr Hore made it clear that while he had
shifted in his view about the degree of departure from the
expected standards
(i.e. a departure rather than a significant departure) it was still his opinion
that the Respondent’s action
in treating a close family member was
50. In response to questions from the Committee Dr Hore said in his view 200
mg of propofol over 60 minutes could be described as
a non-sedating dose. It
would not be given all at once but 10 or 20 mg at a time. As to the
Respondent’s attempt to get the
consent of the manager, Dr Hore thought
that this should not be done by text message but rather the Respondent should
have obtained
verbal or written consent. And he should have made it clear that
he was administering propofol and that he was doing this himself.
view of the above
51. The facts of particular 1 are conceded by the Respondent and we find them
proven. True as to part (c), the Respondent in his written
statement merely
concedes that there were suitably qualified medical practitioners available to
provide treatment options for Patient
A; not that there was a specialist in
emergency medicine available to treat Patient A. In the circumstances of this
case we do not
think that there is any significance in this distinction. In any
event, in his final submission the Respondent admitted all the particulars
argued that this did not amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
52. In his submission the Respondent rightly pointed out that unsatisfactory
professional conduct can only be established in this
case in three ways. First
as conduct that falls significantly below the expected standards. Second, as
conduct that is characterised
as “improper”. And third, as conduct
that is characterised as “unethical”.
53. As to the first way, Dr Hore in his written reports was of the view that
the Respondent’s actions in treating a family member
as he did was a
significant departure from the expected standards. However, in his evidence
before the Committee Dr Hore revised
this earlier view and was now of the
opinion that the events of 1 November 2015 was a departure but not a significant
departure from
the expected standards. If the Committee was obliged to accept
this view it could not find that the Respondent’s actions were
unsatisfactory professional conduct by way of S139B(1)(a). But is the Committee
so obliged?
54. As is well known a Professional Standards Committee (like the Medical
Tribunal) brings its own knowledge to the decision-making
process and in
appropriate circumstances might form a view which is different from that of a
peer review. This point is made in
[2018] NSWCATOD 133
, a case the Respondent made use of for other
purposes (which we discuss below). Paragraph 16 of
The professional members of the Tribunal are entitled to apply their own
specialist expertise to the evidence in forming opinions
been a departure from the relevant standard of conduct, with appropriate
attention to the expert evidence
if there is a genuine difference of view:
HCCC v Fraser
[2014] NSWCATOD 29
The reference to Paragraph 238 of
HCCC v Fraser
In reaching this conclusion, however, we do not overlook the primary reason
for the constitution of the Tribunal that includes two
professional members of
the same division as the practitioner the subject of the proceedings. That
primary reason is so that the
specialist members of the Tribunal can apply their
knowledge and expertise to the evidence before them (see
Kalil v Bray
[1977] 1 NSWLR 356 per Street CJ at [261-262];
Minister for Health v
[1985] FCA 208
(1985) 8 FCR 213
at 224. However, prudence dictates that where there
is a “genuine difference of view within the body of the profession
such a conflict is best resolved by reducing the expert
evidence before the tribunal (
Kalil v Bray
per Moffit P).
55. In this case there is only one peer reviewer, but he has given two
different views as to whether the Respondent’s actions
on 1 November 2015
were a significant departure from the expected standards. The Committee’s
view is more in line with the
view Dr Hore expressed in his Reports (i.e. a
significant breach) rather than the view he came to accept at the hearing (a
mere breach).
However, we accept that this second view was Dr Hore’s later
and, in this sense, more considered view. And we are concerned
with the due
process aspects of our judgment on this matter, as we only raised the issue of
(possibly) having a different view from
Dr Hore with the Respondent during
submissions, after the conclusion of the evidence. In our view this last point
would not prevent
us now coming to a different view from Dr Hore. But we do not
pursue this aspect of the case, as these proceedings can be decided
more simply
without any due process concerns by way of an other part S139B(1), namely,
S139B(1)(l). For the questions posed by (l)
in this case - is the conduct
(relating to the practice of medicine) “improper” or
“unethical”? - raises
in this case no due process concerns.
56 To assist the Committee in the application of S139B(1)(l) the Respondent
referred to a number of cases –
HCCC v Fisher
[2016] NSWCATOD 62
HCCC v Phung
[2012] NSWDT 1(10July 2012)
HCCC v Flesker
[2016] NSWCATOD 1
Dr Slezak NSWMPSC 10
(14 September 2011) and
HCCC v Aref
[2018] NSWCATOD 133.
Respondent pointed out that these cases involved dishonesty, fraud or in the
stealing. The argument was that in this context
“improper” or “unethical” conduct extends only to this
of behavior, which was not present in this case.
57. However, a reading of these cases makes clear that “improper”
conduct in this context is broader than this and “does
not need to be
intentional and includes conduct not in conformity with standards of
professional conduct”. And improper conduct
may be conduct “in
breach of explicit professional standards such as codes of conduct and
guidelines” see
HCCC v Aref
[2018] NSWCATOD 133
[2016] NSWCATOD 62
58. A reading of Dr Hore’s reports shows that he sought guidance from
the HCCC as to the meaning in this context of “improper”
conduct. He
was told that improper conduct was conduct that “would be regarded by
reasonable persons as falling below the standard
of conduct to be expected of a
medical practitioner in the position of the Respondent in that it has a tendency
to bring into disrepute
the profession or to reduce public confidence in the
profession”. In the light of this definition Dr Hore considered the
Respondent’s
conduct on 1 November 2015 to be “improper”.
There was some discussion during the submissions as to whether Dr Hore had
changed his mind about this when giving oral evidence. The Respondent thought
that he had, the HCCC and the Committee thought that
he had not. During its
deliberation the Committee listened to the recording of Dr Hore’s evidence
on this point which confirmed
the view that on this point Dr Hore’s oral
evidence was consistent with his written reports. He states clearly in
re-examination
that it remains his view that the Respondent’s conduct on 1
November 2015 can be described as “improper”.
59. We agree with Dr Hore on this point. In our view the Respondent’s
conduct in treating Patient A was a clear breach of the
Medical Council
Guideline of December 2014, “Guideline for self-treatment and treating
family members” (set out above
at para 25). And this case did not fall
under the exceptions – it was not an emergency situation or an isolated
setting where
there was no other help available. The Respondent, himself, now
concedes these points. In assessing this breach of the Guideline
two matters in
our view are particularly relevant. First, the type of procedure that the
respondent performed on a close family member,
namely, he administered an
intravenous general anaesthetic agent (propofol). As was pointed out in the
submissions, it is not part
of the Complaint before us that the Respondent was
not qualified to do this or that he departed from the expected standards in how
he carried out the procedure. However, the type of treatment the Respondent
administered to a close family member is relevant when
considering the
seriousness or otherwise of the breach of the Guideline. Second, his breach of
the Guideline had implications for
staff at the Blue Mountains Hospital. This
was a procedure not known to them. This is made clear in several of the
statements from
the staff before us. And in his actions the Respondent made it
clear that he did not trust or value the staff rostered on that day.
At the time
the Respondent was Head of Department of Emergency Medicine. The Respondent,
himself, now appreciates this aspect of
the case. In his recent statement he
I also appreciate the difficulty it represents to other health professionals,
especially when the attending clinician is a senior
member of the team. It has
the potential to influence their decision-making and autonomy. It can create a
tense situation and disharmony.
This obviously did occur on 1 November 2015.
Staff members in the ED were uncomfortable with my decision to treat (Patient A)
I do appreciate the perspective.
60. The Respondent in his submission points to a number of “mitigating
factors”. This was a one-off incident at a time
when the Respondent was
subject to difficult work-related and personal circumstances. The treatment was
clinically appropriate and
his treatment of Patient A was effective. At the time
the Respondent thought that his actions were within the Guideline. He sought
consent for his actions from the hospital administrator, Ms Williams, and
reasonably thought that he had this consent. He did not
try and conceal his
61. On the evidence before us it is certainly arguable that the above is a
fair description of the context in which the Respondent
decided to treat Patient
A. However, even if we accepted this, for the reasons set out in paragraph 59 we
are in agreement with Dr
Hore. To adopt the definition provided to Dr Hore by
the HCCC - it would be regarded by reasonable persons as falling below the
of conduct to be expected of a medical practitioner in the position of
the Respondent in that it has a tendency to bring into disrepute
the profession
or to reduce public confidence in the profession; and, we add, confidence in the
competence of the staff at the Blue
Mountains Hospital. The treatment of Patient
A by the Respondent was a clear nontrivial breach of the Guideline which is
appropriately
described as “improper conduct” relating to the
practice of medicine.
Summary of our findings
62. The Preamble to Particular 1 and parts (a), (b), (c) and (d) are made
63. In our view this amounts to “improper conduct” relating to
the practice of medicine and thus unsatisfactory professional
conduct by way of
S 139B(1)(l) of the National Law.
THE APPROPRIATE ORDERS
64. With regard to the appropriate orders in this matter, the Committee notes
its jurisdiction in these disciplinary proceedings is
both to protect the
public, and to assist in maintaining the appropriate ethical and clinical
standards of the profession. With these
objects in mind we must take account
both of the likelihood of the Respondent repeating the professional conduct we
have found to
be unsatisfactory in these proceedings, and also the need to deter
others from falling short of the expected standards. It is not
our role to
punish the Respondent.
65. We must now consider the relevant protective orders to be made. The
Committee notes that the powers available to it in this regard
are set out in
s146(B) of the National Law. A Committee may do one or more of the
or reprimand the practitioner;
that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s practicing of the
practitioner’s profession, it considers appropriate
be imposed on the
practitioner’s registration;
that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or
counselling;
that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by the
that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice at the times,
in the way and to the persons specified by the
that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the management of the
practitioner’s practice, from the persons
specified by the
66. The HCCC submitted that the Respondent should be reprimanded, a condition
should be imposed that the Respondent not self-treat
or treat close relatives
(with the machinery provision that he provides the names of family members to
the Council) and the Respondent
should be ordered to complete an ethics course.
The Respondent argued that if the Committee found that unsatisfactory
professional
conduct was made out, no action was appropriate other than a
67. The Respondent has put before us many references which we have read. Our
view of the evidence before us is that the Respondent
will not treat family
members in the future and is not in need of an ethics course, as he has shown
that he now fully understands
this aspect of medical practice.
68. As to whether the Respondent should be cautioned or reprimanded, the
Committee was initially divided on this point. Basically,
it was a difference of
opinion as to how to weight the matters set out above at paragraphs 58 to 61 and
67. However, after further
deliberation the Committee decided that a reprimand
was appropriate in this case. At the relevant time Dr Haig was the senior
charged with leadership of the ED at Blue Mountains Hospital. His
actions on 1 November 2015 were a clear nontrivial breach of the
concerning the non-treatment of family members. This breach had the potential to
damage the reputation of the profession
and the reputation of the staff at the
Blue Mountains Hospital. It is an aspect of our decision-making to make clear
the expected
standards and to deter others from falling short of them. In these
circumstances the Respondent’s actions warrant a reprimand.
PUBLICATION OF DECISION
69. Pursuant to section 171E(1) of the National Law the Committee provides
copy of this written statement of decision to the Dr Haig,
the Health Care
Complaints Commission and the Medical Council of NSW.
NON-PUBLICATION DIRECTION
70. At the Directions Hearing on 6 September 2018
non-publication orders were sought and made by the Chairperson with regard to
name and address of Patient A.
71. The Chairperson has continued this non-publication direction regarding
the name and address of Patient A (by way of Schedule 5D,
clause 7 of the
National Law (NSW)) and any information which might identify her in these
proceedings is not to be published by any
72. This direction does not operate to exclude any provision of the National
Law and does not preclude the Medical Council from undertaking
its statutory
‘Publication’ may include communicating either in
writing or verbally to any person.
73. An appeal to the Occupational Division of the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal on a point of law is to be made within 28
handing down of the decision.
_______________________
Dr Arthur Glass
Chairperson
_____________________
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
Executive Officer Medical Council of NSW Punt
GLADESVILLE NSW 2111
Health Care Complaints Commission
of Level 13, 323 Castlereagh
Street, Sydney, NSW, having consulted with the
Medical Council of New South
in accordance with
sections 39(2)
and 908(3) of the
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
('the National Law');
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Dr Andrew Haig of 73 Anderson St BAIRNSDALE VIC 3875 being a medical
practitioner registered under the
National Law
("the practitioner"),
COMPLAINT ONE
Is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 1398 (1)(a) and
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
(i) engaged in conduct that demonstrates the judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of medicine
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of medicine.
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT
Between February and November 2015 the practitioner
was employed as the Head of Department (VMO) of Emergency Medicine ('ED') at the
Blue Mountains District ANZAC Memorial Hospital
('Hospital').
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
1 November 2015 the practitioner attended the ED of the Hospital with
practitioner inappropriately administered an intravenous general anaesthetic
agent (propofol) to Patient A in circumstances where;
A was a close family member;
A did not have a regular GP and had not consulted a GP about her current
symptoms or condition;
suitably qualified medical practitioners were available in the ED to treat
practitioner acted contrary to the NSW Medical Board Policy
Practitioners treating relatives and Self
and Part 3.14 of the Medical Board
of Australia's Code of Conduct.
Dated: ..............December 2017
(Amended 5 February 2018)
Karen Mobbs
Director of Proceedings
Health Care Complaints Commission
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (954 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter