URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWRT/2002/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:11:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gedeon v Prestige Realty Group Pty Ltd [2002] NSWRT 30 (7 February 2002)
Gedeon v Prestige Realty Group Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWRT 30
(7 February
STRATA SCHEMES MANAGEMENT ACT 1996
APPLICATION NO : SB01/00412
STRATA SCHEME : SP757
OF : 104 Croydon Street,
STRATA SCHEME LAKEMBA NSW
APPLICANTS : J Gedeon
RESPONDENT : Prestige Realty Group
On 19 September 2001 the Residential Tribunal sitting as the Strata
Schemes Board made the following order:
Appeal dismissed.
Tribunal now provides the parties with the following written reasons.
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE APPLICATION
The issue in the proceedings is which strata managing agent has been
appointed to act as the owners corporation’s duly appointed
agent under
This application is an appeal from the determination made by the
Strata Adjudicator on 27 June 2001. The adjudicator dismissed Mr
application. That application sought orders that Advance Strata Management Pty
Ltd ("Advance") was the duly appointed
Managing Agent of the owners corporation
and that Prestige Realty Pty Ltd ("Prestige") be required to hand over the
owners corporation’s
books and records to Advance.
The appeal was
listed on 13 July 2001. At this hearing Mr Gedeon appeared in person and Ms
Janet Smith, the Licensee of Prestige,
appeared on behalf of the respondent.
Following evidence of the parties on 13 July 2001 the proceedings were adjourned
for further
hearing. The adjournment was to allow the proprietors of the strata
plan to make any submissions they might wish as to the Tribunal
appointing a
third strata managing agent under section 162(3) of the Act. This possibility
had been raised by the Tribunal during
the proceedings on 13 July
During the adjournment letters were sent to each proprietor. The
proceedings were then listed for 30 August 2001 but were adjourned
as the member
hearing the application was ill.
The proceedings were then listed on 19
September 2001 at which Mr Gedeon and Ms Smith appeared.
Submissions
were received by two lot owners opposed to the appointment of a compulsory
strata managing agent and supporting Prestige
continuing to act in this role. A
separate petition, dated 21 July 2001, signed by five proprietors, also opposed
the appointment
of a compulsory strata managing agent, the petitioner’s
supporting the claim that Advance was the validly appointed agent.
all, seven submissions were received from the 12 proprietors of lots in the
strata scheme.
The Tribunal is satisfied that in the circumstances a
compulsory strata managing agent should not be appointed under section 162(3)
the Act. Not only are all of the residents who have made submissions opposed,
but the conflict in the management of the strata
plan should be resolved upon
determining which of the agents has been duly appointed.
History of the Dispute
Clisdell Pty Ltd was the managing agent of the strata scheme in 1999.
the AGM held on 12 August 1999 the minutes record that the owners of units 5 and
12 were present and Mr Gedeon held the proxy for
It should be
noted that Mr Gedeon did not own a lot in the strata scheme. His brother owned
unit 8. At all relevant times Mr Gedeon
held his brother’s proxy and took
an active part in the management of the strata scheme. Hence the reference to Mr
these reasons is to Mr Joe Gedeon.
The minutes of the meeting
of 12 August 1999 record that nominations for the executive committee were
received from Mr Gedeon (unit
8), Ms Spirina (unit12) and Mr Mariatis (unit 5).
They were duly elected with Mr Gedeon as secretary and Ms Spirina as
In cross-examination Mr Gedeon conceded that he "may have"
nominated himself for election to the executive committee. In an undated
statutory declaration Mr Gedeon’s brother states that he nominated his
brother as a member of the executive committee on 12
August 1999. Whilst an
outsider may be elected to office, they can only do so if nominated by a lot
owner not standing for election.
It is not necessary to consider the effect of
any defect in Mr Gedeon’s appointment as it has been overtaken by
On 3 June 2000 an EGM was held at which no owner was
present, the managing agent holding proxies for units 3, 4, 11 and 12. The
resolved to appoint Clisdell’s as strata managing agent for a
further 12 months from 1 July 2000.
Minutes of the executive committee
meeting of 3 August 2000 record dissatisfaction with the performance of
On 8 August 2000 Clisdells wrote to the secretary, Mr Gedeon,
resigning as strata managing agent citing the "
persistent and misinformed
attitude of your
....". The books and records of the owners
corporation were to be available on 31 August 2000.
Van Dyke & Van
Dyke Management Pty Ltd ("Van Dyke") then acted as strata managing agent. The
circumstances by which it assumed
this position is obscure. In a letter of 26
September 2000 the licensee, Mr J. F. Josephs, wrote to proprietors
"Please be advised that [Van Dyke] have(sic) assumed the role
of strata managing agents with effect from 8
September 2000 having
taken over from Clisdells Strata Management at Hurstville."
followed two extraordinary general meetings, of 6 October 2000 and 30 November
2000. The minutes of these two meetings are in
conflict. It is necessary to give
close attention to these two meetings in deciding which of the two agents has
been duly appointed
by the owners corporation.
The first EGM was held on
6 October 2000. Van Dyke had no involvement in this meeting. Present were the
owners of units 1, 5, 10 and
12. Mr Gedeon was recorded as "representing owner
of unit 8" and acted as chairman. The minutes record the
"MOTION NO. 2; That the owners of Unit 8 be permitted to
purchase a 3.0m wide car space for their exclusive use and install a garage
reducing therefore the remaining three open car spaces width’s(sic) to
2.2m, instead of the present 2.4m or reducing the remaining
car spaces to two at
3.3m wide whichever is more comfortable.
After a discussion in which
Mr Gedeon stated that the price offered for the carspace was $3,000, the meeting
voted unamimously to
reject the motion.
MOTION NO. 3: That the
remaining space be divided into either 3 spaces as before or reduced to 2 car
As motion No. 2 was rejected, motion No.3
MOTION NO. 4: That the price of such a purchase be determined
at the meeting.
As the price tendered during discussion of Motion No.
2 was $3,000, and Motion No. 2 was rejected, Motion N0. 4
DISCUSSION: During the meeting, a discussion of the reasons
for the sacking/resignation of Peter Clisdell
P/L from the management of
the strata scheme took place. [Details of the record of this discussion
After the discussion, Mr Gedeon closed the meeting at around
7.00pm, declared his resignation as Secretary of the Strata Scheme, and
After this had occurred, the owner of unit 5 had to leave
because of other commitments. During subsequent discussions between the
remaining owners, it was resolved that the owner of unit 1 approach Peter
Clisdell P/L and investigate options for future action
regarding management of
the Strata Scheme. It was resolved that the owner of unit 1 investigate the
situation regarding the apparent
appointment of Van Dyke and Van Dyke Management
P/L as managers of the Strata Scheme. This discussion concluded at around
Mr Gedeon has asserted that Mr Forster of unit 1 has
falsified the minutes of this meeting and that a copy of the minutes was not
supplied to Mr Gedeon until May 2001. No evidence was given by Mr Forster or any
other proprietor who attended this meeting. Nevertheless,
the Board is not
prepared to accept Mr Gedeon’s assertion of fraud without clear evidence
to support such a finding. There
is reference in the evidence provided to the
Adjudicator of an application for an apprehended violence order being made by Mr
against Mr Forster following the meeting of 21 December 2000. However,
this application was dismissed on 20 April 2001 and an order
for costs made
against Mr Gedeon.
Although the minutes do not appear to have been
adopted as a true record at any subsequent meeting, this does not mean they
be disregarded. It is clear from the meeting of 6 October 2000 and
subsequent events that there was confusion amongst proprietors
as to management
of the strata scheme. In this context it is not surprising that protocols were
overlooked. There is no dispute that
the meeting of 6 October 2000 took place
and the Board accepts the minutes as an accurate record of the business
Then followed the EGM of 30 November 2000. There are matters
relating to this meeting which deserve comment. The requisition for this
signed by Ms Spirina (unit 12), Mr Stone (unit10) and Mr Gedeon’s brother
(unit 8) on 27 October 2000. The requisition
gave notice of three motions to be
put to this meeting.
Motion 1 was for the minutes of the meeting held on
4 August 2000 to be confirmed. There was no evidence before the Board as to the
nature of this meeting.
Motion 2 was to terminate the services of Van
Dyke from 11 December 2000. As there is no evidence that Van Dyke had been
appointed, this motion was unnecessary. However, given the actions of
Van Dyke, the motion is understandable.
Motion 3 was to appoint Advance
as strata managing agent from 11 December 2000.
In the notice of the EGM
of 22 November 2000 motion 3 in the requisition had been altered to substitute
"Owners Corporate Management
Services" for Advance and three additional motions
were included. These being:
"4. That the owners of unit 8 purchase a
3.0m. wide open car space at a price of $2,000 for their exclusive use and
install a garage
reducing therefore the remaining three open car spaces
width’s(sic) to 2.2m instead of the present 2.4m or reducing the remaining
car spaces to two at 3.3m wide whichever is more comfortable.
All cost is to
be borne by the owners of unit 8.
That the remaining space be
divided in either 3 car spaces as before or reduced to 2 car spaces.
That a special levy of $200
to $300 per unit be raised to pay all overdue bills
if and only if
4 above is not passed."
The EGM of 30 November 2000 was
held in Mr Gedeon’s unit at 79 Croydon Avenue Lakemba. No owner was
present. The minutes record
that the Secretary held proxies for units 3, 8, 11
and 12. The meeting resolved not to retain Van Dyke, to appoint Owners Corporate
Management Services as the owners corporation managing agent and that the owners
of unit 8 purchase the car space in motion 4 for
$2,000 for their exclusive use
and the remaining car spaces be reduced to two. The Board notes that Mr Gedeon
had himself obtained
a valuation report from Mr Paul McQueen on 10 September
1999 that a carspace in the block of units at 104 Croydon Street, Lakemba
valued at $5,000.
That no owner was present at the meeting on 30
November 2000 does seem quite extraordinary given that the meeting of 6 October
had unanimously voted to reject motion 4 at a higher price.
the owners of units 3, 8, 11 and 12 were not present at the meeting of 6 October
2000, Mr Gedeon was, and held proxies for
unit 3 and 11, both of which are dated
28 September 2000. There was no evidence as to why these proxies appear not to
declared to the meeting or if the voting rights conferred on Mr Gedeon
were exercised. In addition, The Board has concerns about
the selective use of
proxies to benefit those associated with the holder of the proxy without clear
evidence of disclosure.
The minutes of the EGM of 30 November 2000
record that the Secretary held the proxy of Ms Spirina (unit 12). This is
incorrect. Although
the proxy appointment form provided to Ms Spirina had Mr
Gedeon’s name printed as appointee, it is clear she did not wish Mr
to have this power. Ms Spirina wrote:
"my proxy goes to Mr T. Stone
What he say I am go with his desigen(sic)"
If the owners corporation
had changed its mind on the exclusive use of common property car parking space
at a validly constituted
meeting, then the question arises as to why no
exclusive use by law was registered. In a letter dated 1 May 2001 to Mrs Melvey,
Gedeon says:
"I sincerely apologise for not replying to Mr
Melvey’s letter ofOctober 05, 2000 because it was not an issue anymore
owners of unit 8 changed their mind shortly after the meeting and
decided not to go ahead with the purchase which, if they did, would
have helped
increase our funds for SP757."
There is no further evidence before
the Board to explain this change of mind.
In all of these circumstances,
I am not prepared, upon the evidence before the Board, to accept the resolutions
recorded at the meeting
of 30 November 2001 at which only Mr Gedeon was present,
as those of the owners corporation.
Then followed an EGM held at Van
Dyke"s office on 21 December 2000. The minutes record that Mr Forster (unit 1),
Mr Tzamouranis (unit
6), Mr Stone (unit10) and Ms Spirina were present. The
chairperson, Mr Josephs of Van Dyke, held the proxy of unit 5. The meeting
resolved to appoint Van Dyke as the managing agent of the owners corporation.
That Van Dyke could purport to act as strata managing
agent for some four months
without being duly authorised to do so is quite extraordinary.
meeting of 21 December 2000 also resolved to declare meetings convened by Mr
Gedeon as invalid. Mr Gedeon had no authority to
convene meetings following his
resignation as secretary on 6 October 2000. However, there is no basis for
declaring meetings prior
to that date invalid. Similarly, the meeting had no
power to prevent Mr Gedeon from taking part in the management of the strata
through voting as his brother’s proxy at annual or extraordinary
general meetings. Mr Gedeon was asked to leave the meeting
on 21 December 2000.
Mr Gedeon states that he left the meeting voluntarily after declaring the
meeting invalid. The Board is satisfied
that there was no defect in the conduct
of the meeting as a consequence of Mr Gedeon’s departure..
Dyke came under investigation by the Department of Fair Trading. As a result
steps were taken to dispose of its strata business.
An EGM was held on 13
January 2001. The owners of units 5 and 10 were present. Van Dyke held the proxy
of unit 4 and Ms Smith of
Prestige held that of unit 11. Van Dyke resigned and
Prestige was appointed as managing agent of the owners corporation. An
dated 13 January 2001 appointing Prestige as strata managing agent
and executed under seal of the owners corporation was produced
in evidence.
On 16 March 2001 an EGM was held at Mr Gedeon’s unit. Mr Gedeon,
recorded as "Secretary" was present together with Ms Panikkar
of Advance. Mr
Gedeon held the proxies of units 2,3,4,7,8 and 11. The meeting resolved that the
minutes of the meeting of 30 November
2000 be confirmed except it be noted that
the reference to Owners Corporate Management was a typing error and should have
been Advance.
It was further resolved that Advance be confirmed as the managing
agent of the owners corporation from 30 November 2000 and Prestige
terminated.
Mr Gedeon produced proxy appointment forms from the owners of
units 2, 3, 4, 7, 8 and 11. However, the Board notes that the owner
(P.J. Melvey) wrote to Mr Gedeon on 29 March 2001 acknowledging receipt of the
minutes of the meeting of 16 March 2001
and including the
"I) We received a letter late yesterday from Prestige
Realty Group Pty. Ltd. Claiming that they have been appointed Strata Managing
Agent of the Owners Corporation at an extraordinary (sic) held on
January, 2001, as a result of the resignation of Vandyke and
ii) In conversation with Janet Smith, the Strata Manager,
today I have been informed of the
the building at 104 Croydon Street is insured with Corporate Home Unit
Underwriting Agencies with guaranteed cover up to 10/07/2001,
contrary to your
advice in your letter of March 3;
*that the Water Board have
guaranteed the water supply to any Strata Plans involved in the Vandyke
situation until Prestige Realty
Group has time to check the
*that Prestige Realty Group Pty. Ltd. Has received trust
funds held by Vandyke and Vandyke from the receiver as of last Friday and
there is a balance in the Strata Plan Account of $566.69, again contrary to your
letter of March 3, which claimed that there
.........."
It is clear from the tenor of this
letter that Mr and Mrs Melvey had been given inaccurate information prior to Mr
Melvey appointing
Mr Gedeon as his proxy. There is a question as to whether
other unit owners who appointed Mr Gedeon as their proxy in early March
were similarly misled. The proxy appointment forms lend support to such a
conclusion. Each of the six owners has stated that
in regard to a vote on
managing agent the proxy was to vote for
"Advance Strata Mg [to] remain in
It is difficult to see how Mr Gedeon could have been under any
misapprehension as to the position with Advance at the time of obtaining
proxies. Not only is there reference to an entity other than Advance in the
ineffective resolution of 30 November 2000 (subsequently
said to be a
typographical error), but more importantly, a managing agent can only be
appointed under section 27(1) of the Act by
an instrument in writing executed
under seal of the owners corporation. At no time was such an agreement entered
into with Advance.
The appropriate course was for the EGM of 16 March
2001 to resolve to terminate the appointment of Prestige in accordance with the
agreement of 13 January 2001 and resolve to enter into a new agreement with
Advance. Indeed, the minutes of the meeting record that
was purportedly the
procedure adopted. However, there is no evidence that the owners at the time of
giving their proxies to Mr Gedeon
were aware of the appointment of Prestige as
managing agent. There is evidence that Mr Melvey was not.
Adjudicator requested Mr Gedeon supply statutory declarations from those giving
him their proxy. The statutory declarations provided
simply stated that the
appointment was "true and correct". They are of no assistance.
necessary to have regard to the conduct of Mr Gedeon in the management of the
strata scheme. As to which I would make the
following observations. Mr
Gedeon’s correspondence with Ms Kalabatasios (unit 5) and Mr Josephs of
Van Dyke display a spiteful
and bullying tone which reflect no credit upon Mr
Gedeon, and raise concerns as to his ability to act with propriety in dealing
those he opposes. Further, he professes to have acted in the interests of
all unit owners whilst seeking to obtain exclusive use
of car parking space for
his brother at far below what he knew to be the value of that benefit. Mr
Gedeon’s continued pursuit
of this advantage despite the clear opposition
of the meeting of 6 October 2001, casts a shadow over the validity of the
resolutions
at the meeting of 16 March 2001. As to Mr Gedeon’s demeanour
during his evidence, the Board found he was evasive in answering
questions put
to him in cross-examination.
For all of these reasons, I find that I cannot
rely upon the uncorroborated evidence of Mr Gedeon given in these proceedings,
that as to the validity of the meeting of 16 March 2001.
any event, the proxies given to Mr Gedeon prior to the meeting on 16 March 2001
limited his capacity to vote in paragraph 3 of
the instrument to Advance
remaining in office. Accordingly, the votes cast by Mr Gedeon to remove Prestige
and appoint Advance as
strata managing agent retrospectively from 30 November
2000, were invalid by virtue of Clause 11(7) in Schedule 2 to the Act.
follows that Prestige is, at the date of determination, the validly appointed
strata managing agent of the owners corporation.
The appeal of Mr Gedeon
against the Adjudicator’s determination is
Strata Schemes
7 February 2002
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (32.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter