URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2008/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Paek [2008] NSWPB 3 (12 March 2008)
[2008] NSWPB 3
Kym Ayscough v Sung Hye (Denise) Paek
12 March 2008
The complaints included a complaint regarding a conviction under Clause
22(a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
and a complaint
alleging professional misconduct regarding the circumstances giving rise to the
conviction and other misconduct
involving the supply of pseudoephedrine based
products. The pharmacist was a sole proprietor of a small to medium size
pharmacy and the pharmacist in charge at all relevant times. In a
period of 9 months during 2004 and 2005 the pharmacy was the fifth
purchaser of Actifed tablets in NSW. The subsequent supplies of pseudoephedrine
based products to various persons named in
the complaint were alleged to have
been made in circumstances where the pharmacist knew or ought to have known that
pseudoephedrine
was an active ingredient of the products supplied and that
pseudoephedrine is the primary precursor substance used in the illicit
manufacture of amphetamines.
The conviction complaint was based on the supply by the pharmacist on 5
separate occasions of multiple packs of various pseudoephedrine
based products
to a police undercover operative. The transactions were recorded by approved
listening devices and occurred in circumstances
where the pharmacist failed to
make appropriate, or any, enquiries and counsel the purchaser. The pharmacist
also failed to ascertain
that each supply was in a quantity and for a purpose in
accordance with recognised therapeutic standards.
The pharmacist also supplied up to 1,200 packets to Actifed tablets to
another customer over a period of 9 months in circumstances
where the customer
indicated that he was a pigeon breeder and that the Actifed tablets were
required for his pigeons. Such supplies
from the pharmacy were alleged to have
been made in the circumstances where the pharmacist could not be satisfied that
each supply
was in a quantity and/or for a purpose in accordance with recognised
therapeutic standards and the pharmacist failed to taken any
or any adequate
steps to satisfy herself in this regard.
The pharmacist has also supplied various pseudoephedrine based products to
two other customers who the pharmacist knew or ought to
have known were
“pseudo runners” and/or were obtaining the supplies for other than
recognised therapeutic purposes. These
supplies were alleged to have occurred in
circumstances where the pharmacist could not be satisfied that each supply was
in a quantity
and/or for a purpose in accordance with recognised therapeutic
standards and that the recipients would be using the products for
therapeutic purposes. The pharmacist sold the pharmacy in May 2006. Most of the
complaint particulars were admitted with
the exception of one particular
concerning the supply of Actifed tablets to the pigeon breeder, namely that the
supplies were not
in a quantity and for a purpose in accordance with recognised
therapeutic purposes.
Board is comfortably satisfied that the pharmacist failed to take any or any
adequate steps to satisfy herself regarding each
of the supplies was in a
quantity or for a purpose in accordance with recognised therapeutic standards
regarding the supply of Actifed
tablets to the pigeon breeder given her
admissions during the hearing and her extremely limited understanding of her
statutory obligation
to be satisfied as to quantity and purpose.
Board is satisfied with regard to the balance of the particulars which were
admitted by the pharmacist that having regard to the
totality of the evidence
and the oral evidence of the pharmacist that she is guilty of professional
misconduct, having demonstrated
a lack of adequate knowledge, judgment and/or
care in the practice of pharmacy and that she has engaged in improper or
conduct relating to the practice of
The pharmacist demonstrated indifference to her professional obligations and
continued to lack remorse and insight into the gravity
of her conduct and its
effect on the profession as a whole and the community. There was no evidence as
to rehabilitative steps or
continuing professional education undertaken
subsequent to the misconduct.
the time of misconduct there was significant information available to
pharmacists about pseudoephedrine and its diversion for illicit
purposes. The
pharmacist by her evidence was aware of those dangers and that she was supplying
pseudoephedrine based products to
persons who were diverting the drugs for
illicit purposes. The pharmacist was aware that Omar Hussein was a pseudo-runner
but continued
to supply him with pseudoephedrine products. The
pharmacist’s evidence on record keeping was indicative of a significant
of knowledge or indifference to her obligations in this area
Board considers the nature and circumstances of the offence in which the
pharmacist was convicted were serious enough to render
the Respondent unfit in
the public interest to be registered as a pharmacist pursuant to
section 20(3)
Pharmacy Act 1964
Board orders that the name of Sung Hye (Denise) Paek be removed from the
register of pharmacists.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on 31 July 2007 into a complaint of
professional misconduct made under the provisions of the
Pharmacy Act, 1964
“Act”), by Kym Ayscough, Nominal Complainant and Registrar of
the Pharmacy Board of New South Wales (the“Complainant”),
Sung Hye (Denise) Paek (the “Respondent
) formerly of The
Bridge Pharmacy, 43 Beecroft Road, Epping, New South Wales 2121 (the
“Pharmacy”), whilst being a pharmacist
registered in New South Wales
under the Act.
THE COMPLAINT
The Complaint dated 18 April 2006 (“the
Complaint”), alleges that the Respondent:
Complaint 1
Has been convicted in New South Wales of an offence under clause 22 (a) of
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulations, 2002
Complaint 2
Has been guilty of professional misconduct in that she has:
Demonstrated
a lack of adequate knowledge, judgment and/or care in the practice of pharmacy
pursuant to Section 19A(a) of the Act,
in either improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy
pursuant to Section 19A(g) of the Act.
PARTICULARS OF THE COMPLAINT
The particulars of the Complaint are:
Complaint 1
the period from 16 November 2004 until 10 May 2005, the Respondent supplied a
police undercover operative named “Robert”
the quantities of
pseudoephedrine based products set out in Annexure “A” to the
Complaint, contrary to Clause 22(a) of
Therapeutic Goods Regulation, 2002
7 July 2005 the Respondent was convicted of an offence under Clause 22(a) of the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation, 2002
at Parramatta Local
Complaint 2
Respondent was at all relevant times the pharmacist in charge and the sole
proprietor of the Pharmacy.
the period May 2004 to February 2005, the Respondent ordered from and was
supplied by pharmaceutical wholesalers Costsave NSW
and QDL Limited trading as
Sigma, a total of 1,836 packs of various pseudoephedrine based products,
including 1,257 packets of Actifed
tablets, 30 pack size and 415 packs of
Telfast Decongestant tablets, 10 pack size.
at 27 May 2005 the Respondent’s Pharmacy had no stocks of Actifed tablets,
30 pack size and no stocks of Telfast Decongestant
tablets, 10 pack size in the
the period from 1 May 2004 until March 2005 the Respondent’s Pharmacy
supplied Mr Keith Latimer up to 30 packs of Actifed
tablets, 30 pack size on a
weekly basis, a total of about 1,200 packets in circumstances where:
Respondent knew or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is an active
ingredient of Actifed tablets;
Respondent knew or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is the primary
precursor substance used in the illicit manufacture
of amphetamines;
Respondent failed to take any or any adequate steps to satisfy herself that each
supply referred to above was in a quantity
and/or for a purpose in accordance
with recognised therapeutic standards;
Respondent could not be satisfied that such supplies were in a quantity and/or
for a purpose in accordance with recognised
therapeutic standards;
Respondent’s Pharmacy supplied Actifed tablets, 30 pack size to the
general public for $17 and supplied them to Keith
Latimer for $30
the dates specified in column 1 of annexure A to the Complaint the Respondent
supplied an undercover police officer name “Robert”
quantity of the pseudoephedrine based products appearing opposite in column 2 of
Annexure “A” to this complaint
in circumstances where:
Respondent knew or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is an active
ingredient in all the tablets referred to in Annexure
Respondent knew or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is the primary
precursor used in the illicit manufacture of amphetamine;
Respondent failed to make appropriate inquiries and counsel Robert in respect of
such supplies;
Respondent failed to ascertain that each supply was in a quantity and/or for a
purpose in accordance with recognised therapeutic
the period May 2004 to March 2005 the Respondent supplied to Mr Omar Hussein,
pack size and/or 10 packets of
Sudafed Sinus and Nasal Decongestant tablets, 30 pack size.
the period of June 2004 to December 2004 the Respondent supplied Mr Ambrose Russ
12 packets of Logicin Sinus tablets, 30 pack
supplies referred to in paragraph 6 and 7 above occurred in circumstances
Respondent knew or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is the sole active
ingredient in Logicin Sinus tablets and Sudafed
Sinus and Nasal tablets;
Respondent knew or ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is the primary
precursor used in the illicit manufacture of amphetamine;
Respondent knew or ought have known that Mr Hussein and Mr Russ were obtaining
the supplies for purposes other than recognised
therapeutic purposes and/or that
they were “pseudo runners”;
Respondent failed to satisfy herself that each supply was in a quantity and/or
for a purpose in accordance with recognised
therapeutic standards;
Respondent’s Pharmacy supplied other customers with Logicin Sinus tablets
and/or Sudafed Sinus and Nasal tablets at
a price between $14 and $16 per packet
and supplied Mr Hussein and Mr Russ with the same products at approximately $30
per packet.
the relevant period the Respondent did not record, in a manner approved by the
Director-General, the supply of pseudoephedrine
products, namely, 23 packs of
Sudafed Sinus and Nasal Decongestant tablets and/or Logicin Sinus tablets in
accordance with clauses
23 and 54 of the
and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 2002
THE RESPONDENT
The Respondent was first registered as a Pharmacist in New South Wales in
1995 having obtained a pharmacy qualification from the University
The Respondent also completed an Honours year. In 1998 the Respondent became the
sole proprietor of the Pharmacy. In
the period in question the Pharmacy traded
5.5 days per week, approximately 11 hours per week day and half a day on
Saturday. The
Respondent disposed of her interest in the Pharmacy in May 2006,
but continues to be registered as a pharmacist.
The Respondent was cross examined by counsel for the Complainant at the
No other witnesses were required by the parties to give evidence or to be
cross examined.
Through her solicitor at the hearing the Respondent admitted all particulars
of complaints 1 and 2, save for particular 4(d) of the
second complaint.
PARTICULAR 4(d)
In relation to paragraph 4(d) of the second complaint concerning Keith
Latimer, initially the Respondent did not accept that she failed
to take any, or
any adequate, steps to satisfy herself that each of the supplies was in a
quantity and/or for a purpose in accordance
with recognised therapeutic
The Respondent claimed that she supplied Mr Latimer with Actifed tablets
because he told her that he was a pigeon breeder and that
he required the
Actifed for his pigeons. When the Respondent was questioned during cross
examination in relation to her understanding
of the obligation to satisfy
herself as to quantity and purpose, her answers primarily related to confirming
whether or not Mr Latimer
bred pigeons. Notwithstanding the fact that the
Respondent was supplying Mr Latimer with up to 30 packs of Actifed a week over a
period of about nine months, approximately 1200 packs in total, she did not have
any proper regard to the purpose of Actifed in relation
to pigeons, and the
quantity for which would have been appropriate for that purpose.
The Board also notes the following extract from the transcript of the
Q: In order for you to know that the purpose he wanted it for was a real
or legitimate purchase, you would need to know about the
effects of these drugs
on pigeons?
A: Yes, that’s right.
Q: You had no idea?
A: No, I had no idea, yes.
Q: And you didn’t do anything to obtain that information, did
A: No, because---
Q: Just let me finish, in that case, Ms Paek, it necessarily follows that
you failed to take any, indeed, or any adequate steps to
satisfactory [sic] your
self that the supply was in a quantity or for a purpose in accordance with
recognised therapeutic standards?
Q: What do you mean by okay?
A: I see where you are coming from, because the way I understood this
paragraph was I thought that I didn’t take any action
at all, you know, to
find out if he was a pigeon breeder.
Q: Whether he was a pigeon breeder or not hardly matters?
Q: The fact is whether there is any purpose in giving pigeons
A: I wouldn’t know because I am not in that area
Q: Do you understand your obligation is to be satisfied that your supply
of products like Actifed—
Q: --are for a purpose and in a quantity in conformity with recognised
therapeutic standards? Do you understand that’s your
obligation?
A: Yes, yes.
Q: What does that obligation mean to you in relation to Actifed?
A: That Actifed I can’t sell to anybody who is using it for illicit
purposes. That’s how I understand it.
Q: Did you understand that the obligation extends to being satisfied that
the purpose is a legitimate one?
A: No, I didn’t.
Q: Did you understand that the obligation extends to ensuring that the
amount or quantity you supply is appropriate? Did you understand
A: Can you repeat that?
Q: Did you understand that your obligation extended to being satisfied
that the quantity you were providing was appropriate for the
A: No, I didn’t.
Q: Because there is no way you can have formed the view that 30 packs of
Actifed tablets were reasonably required for pigeons, is
there? You would have
no way of knowing?
A: No way of knowing, yes, that’s true, yes.
The Board also notes the following opinion expressed by Mr Albert Regoli in
his peer review report :
Rarely, a pharmacist may be asked to supply a Scheduled item for a purpose
not indicated by the manufacturer. It may be possible to
supply the scheduled
item if there is a significant, reliable and generally accepted evidence of its
use in this regard.
Actifed Tablets is a combination product. It contains both pseudoephedrine
and an antihistamine called tripolidine. Pseudoephedrine
is generally known for
its stimulant properties. Tripolidine on the other hand has sedating properties.
The combination often results
in sedation rather than stimulation. The
manufacturer warns Actifed may cause drowsiness and then product information
lists impaired
alertness as a common side-effect.
Based on Mr Latimer’s intended use in pigeons, I would question the
validity of the request based on the overall pharmacology
of the preparation. It
would appear Ms Paek made little or no effort to verify the information provided
by Mr Latimer.
I am not aware of any reported use of Actifed tablets in pigeons.
The Board is comfortably satisfied that the Respondent failed to take any, or
any adequate, steps to satisfy herself that each of
the supplies was in a
quantity and/or for a purpose in accordance with recognised therapeutic
standards, firstly, having regard to
the Respondent’s subsequent admission
in her evidence at the hearing that she failed to do so and secondly, having
the Respondent’s extremely limited understanding of the
obligation upon her to be satisfied as to quantity and purpose.
As to the balance of the Complaint and the particulars thereof, which have
been admitted by the Respondent, the Board is comfortably
satisfied (Briginshaw
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1983) 60 CLR 336)
having considered the totality of the evidence
tendered by the parties and the oral evidence given by the Respondent at the
that the Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct within the
meaning of section 19A(a) of the Act in that she has demonstrated
adequate knowledge, judgment and/or care in the practice of pharmacy and that
she has engaged in either improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practise
of pharmacy pursuant to Section 19A(g) of the Act.
In determining what consequences or orders should follow from the finding of
professional misconduct, the Board notes its concerns
in relation to the
(a) The relevant events occurred in 2004 and 2005. Prior to the first supply,
which is particularised in 2004, the Respondent knew
that the products involved
pseudoephedrine and that such products could be diverted for illicit purposes.
The Respondent was also
aware that caution was required in relation to the
supply of those products. With that knowledge, over a period of up to a year,
the Respondent supplied excessive quantities of pseudoephedrine products to four
(b) In relation to the supplies to Omar Hussein, the Respondent was aware that
he was a pseudo-runner and yet she continued to supply
him. She also went so far
as to warn him that what he was doing may have consequences for him in terms of
gaol, yet, she continued
to supply him.
The Board notes the following extract from the transcript of the
Q: Why did you sell him any at all?
A: Well, it’s my mistake. I didn’t think two packets every
fortnight was going to make any difference.
Q; Any difference to what?
A: Well, it is not a large quantity. I know he was telling me he was
getting like 10 packets or six packets wherever he went and I
didn’t think
two packets was going to make much difference.
Q: Make much difference to what?
A: To overall, you know, I didn’t think two packets was that big a
Q: For what?
A: Whatever he is using or whatever, you know, he is selling. I know he
was a pseudo runner so I didn’t, like a didn’t
think, you know,
it’s not like I was going to sell him large packets anyway, so I
didn’t feel like responsible. Do you
know what I mean? I didn’t feel
like I was creating a big crime or something.
(c) Ambrose Russ came in on occasions with Mr Hussein. Although the Respondent
only supplied 12 packets to Mr Russ, the Respondent
supplied him knowing that he
was a pseudo-runner.
(d) In relation to the supply to the undercover police operative,
“Robert”, the Respondent made no attempt to properly
determine for
herself that the purpose or quantity was appropriate. In fact, on Robert’s
early visits, it is the Respondent
that suggested to Robert that he might be
travelling or sending the drugs overseas.
(e) In relation to Keith Latimer, the Respondent supplied him with 30 packets of
Actifed per week and made no reasonable enquiries
to satisfy herself as to
purpose or quantity. The Respondent may not have known that Mr Latimer was a
pseudo runner, but she displayed
a remarkable indifference to the ultimate
destination of the Actifed she supplied to Mr Latimer.
(f) The period of time over which the Respondent supplied Mr Hussein, Mr Russ
and Mr Latimer was considerable. Even with Robert,
the police undercover
operative, the period was over a couple of months. This was clearly not isolated
conduct on the part of the
Respondent.
(g) The Respondent only ceased supply when the police became involved. She did
not willingly or of her own volition stop supply.
(h) The seriousness of the Complaint is compounded by the Respondent’s
failure to keep adequate records as required under the
legislation of the S3R
The Board notes the following opinion expressed by Mr Regoli in
his peer review report:
Her sales of Schedule 3 products are not systematically entered in the
computer. Where an entry is made, the information entered is
often incorrect.
Doctors’ names are added when no doctor has requested the supply. The
supply cannot be determined accurately.
There is a very significant discrepancy between the boxes ordered and the
boxes dispensed. Even allowing for the stock on hand, the
vast majority of sales
to the public are not recorded or accurately recorded.
The Respondent was also cross-examined about her records at the hearing. The
Board notes the following extract from the transcript
of the hearing:
Q: You didn’t record all of the products that you supplied to
Hussein, did you?
Q: You are agreeing with me?
Q: And you didn’t record them because you didn’t want there to
be a record of your supplying pseudoephedrine based products
to a pseudo-runner,
is that right?
A: Well, yes.
Q: What you did in relation to that record was added the letters x and the
Q: When did you do that?
A: Well, sometimes when I was – we have to record it. Sometimes he
was buying two packets, so sometimes I got really busy, because
I had other
customers waiting and my pharmacy was not that big, you know, so sometimes when
I didn’t have regular staff, so
one of the reasons was that I didn’t
have time to put through physically twice because he was buying two packets, so
record one packet. That’s why sometimes there is a single record,
but I put two times there because he did get two packets.
I knew sometimes I
didn’t have time to go back and put another label on, or I just print the
label twice instead of recording
Q: When did you put the 2?
A: I don’t remember.
Q: Did you do it before you gave this information to the Pharmaceutical
Services Branch officer?
A: Most likely, I’m not sure. Most likely, yes.
Q: Did you do it because you knew the records were wrong?
A: I didn’t do it because the records were wrong, because I
don’t know, even I put two times the records will be exactly
whatever I bought. It was just a reflection. I don’t know how accurate it
could be, but I put 2 there because that is
most likely how much packs he bought
each time. I knew sometimes I was busy and I didn’t put it in twice.
Sometimes I did,
but mostly I didn’t. It is not there to alter the
records. I’m not sure how accurate the record is. It could be off by
by another 10. I didn’t do it to equal out the records.
In the Board’s view, the Respondent’s evidence in relation to
record keeping is at the very least indicative of the Respondent’s
significant lack of knowledge or indifference as to her obligations to keep
proper records. However, the Board is of the view that
it is more likely that
the Respondent deliberately did not keep proper records in an attempt to hide
the supplies in circumstances
where she knew that she was supplying to persons
who were diverting the drugs for illicit purposes.
(i) Notwithstanding the fact that the Respondent admitted most of the Complaint
and the particulars relating thereto, the Respondent
was less than frank in her
evidence at the hearing. In particular, the Board notes the Respondent’s
explanations as to her
record keeping and inquiries in relation to Keith
Latimer’s claimed pigeon breeding activities were simply not
(j) The Respondent graduated from university with honours, which one would
ordinarily assume would mean a level of superior knowledge
and understanding.
This is another reason that gives the Board doubt that the Respondent’s
conduct was the result of anything
less than a deliberate attempt to profit by
supplying to persons that she knew were diverting the drugs for illicit
(k) In 2004 the Respondent was the fifth highest purchaser of Actifed tablets in
New South Wales in circumstances where the Pharmacy
was a small to medium sized
pharmacy and she was effectively the only pharmacist working, except for holiday
relief and half a day
off on Mondays.
(l) Notwithstanding the passage of time between the making of the Complaint and
the hearing, the Respondent demonstrated no insight
whatsoever as to the gravity
of her conduct or its consequences for others. There was no remorse in relation
to the effect of her
conduct on the profession as a whole or the community more
generally. The only remorse she expressed was in relation to her personal
position and the fact that she was caught and had to appear before the
(m) There was no evidence that the Respondent has done anything to improve her
knowledge or to rehabilitate herself following these
events. The Respondent sold
the Pharmacy in May 2006 and there is no evidence of any continuing education or
other work which could
satisfy the Board that the Respondent has done anything
to improve her knowledge or understanding.
(n) Four character references were tendered in evidence on behalf of the
Respondent. None of those referees appear to have any knowledge
circumstances of the Complaint and as such the Board is not assisted in any way
by the opinions expressed by the referees.
The consequences of misconduct are set out in
Act. In determining the consequences, the Board notes that its jurisdiction is a
protective one which means that protection
of the public is paramount in its
consideration. However, in protecting the public, it is also necessary to
consider the effect of
an order on the profession and to not only deter the
pharmacist in question from such further conduct, but also to deter others who
might be tempted to fall short of the high standards required of them (Law
Society of NSW v Foreman
1994 (34) NSWLR 408).
One of the options available to the Board is to caution or reprimand the
respondent. However, given the seriousness of this complaint
the Board does not
consider that such an order would be appropriate in this case.
Another option available to the Board is to consider placing conditions on
the Respondent’s right to practice. However, the
Respondent has been
registered for about 13 years and was an honour’s graduate. Her
knowledge of her professional obligations
is nonetheless poor and there is no
evidence before the Board that she has any inclination to improve herself.
Accordingly, the Board
is not satisfied that the public would be adequately
protected by the Respondent engaging in further education.
The Board also finds it difficult to envisage other conditions which would
appropriately deal with the Respondent’s conduct,
given not only the
Respondent’s lack of knowledge, but also her demonstrated indifference to
her professional obligations and
continuing lack of remorse and insight into her
As to the imposition of a fine, the Board is of the view that alone would
have no protective purpose whatsoever.
That then leaves suspension or removal of the Respondent’s name from
the register.
As at the time of the hearing the Respondent had not been working for
approximately 15 months. It would be difficult to see how a
period of suspension
would satisfy the need to protect the public, particularly in circumstances
where the Respondent has shown no
inclination to improve herself.
In this case, the Respondent has misconducted herself in 2004 and 2005. At
that time there was significant information available to
pharmacists about how
pseudoephedrine based products were being diverted for illicit use. By the
Respondent’s own admission
she was aware of those dangers and was aware
that she was supplying pseudoephedrine-based products to persons who were
the drugs for illicit purposes. The Respondent, despite the passage of
time since the events in question has demonstrated a remarkable
understanding of her professional obligations, in particular, in relation to
determining the purpose and quantity of the
drug being supplied is in accordance
with recognised therapeutic standards. She also continues to show a remarkable
lack of remorse
or insight into her conduct.
The Respondent was also convicted of an offence under the Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods regulation and fined $500.00.
Section 20(3)
of the Act states:
The Board is not to suspend a person’s registration or remove a
person’s name from the register for having committed an
offence if, having
regard to the nature of the offence or the circumstances under which it was
committed, the Board is of the opinion
that it does not render the person unfit
in the public interest to be registered as a pharmacist.
The issue of fitness to practise was discussed in McBride v Walton NSWCA,
unreported, 15 July 1994 at 12 where the Court of Appeal
To determine whether a finding of proven misconduct should be followed by
a consequential finding that the practitioner is not of
good character in the
context of fitness to practise medicine, one must consider: (a) whether the
misconduct can be satisfactorily
explained as an error of judgment rather than a
defect of character; (b) the intrinsic seriousness of the misconduct qua fitness
to practise medicine; (c) whether the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated
episode and hence atypical or uncharacteristic of
the practitioner’s
normal qualities of character; (d) the motivation which may have given rise to
the proven episode of misconduct;
(e) the underlying qualities of character
shown by previous and other misconduct; and (f) whether the practitioner’s
post the proven episode of misconduct demonstrates that public and
professional confidence may be reposed in him to uphold and observe
standards of moral rectitude required of a medical practitioner
In the Board’s view the nature and circumstances of the offence in
relation to which the Respondent was convicted are sufficiently
render the Respondent unfit in the public interest to be registered and the
circumstances under which it was committed,
that is at the time when the
profession knew about the dangers of supplying pseudoephedrine-based medications
when she did so on
a number of occasions, in an escalating amount, without
making any or any adequate inquiries as to the purpose and/or quantity renders
the Respondent unfit in the public interest to be registered.
Accordingly, the Board finds that having found professional misconduct in
relation to complaint 2, the Respondent’s name should
be removed from the
register. The Board also finds that pursuant to
section 20(3)
of the Act in
relation to complaint 1 that the Respondent is unfit in the public interest to
be registered.
Accordingly, the Board orders that the name of Sung Hye (Denise) Paek be
removed from the register.
The effective date of this Order will be one (1) month from the date of which
Sung Hye (Denise) Paek is notified by registered post
at her address as it
appears on the register.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (539 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter