URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Long v Tyco International Pty Ltd t/as O'Donnell Griffin [2025] NSWPICPD 66; (10 September 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Long v Tyco International Pty Ltd t/as O’Donnell Griffin
NSWPICPD 66
Jamie Francis Long
RESPONDENT:
Tyco International Pty Ltd t/as O’Donnell Griffin
GIO General Limited
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W26868/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Acting Deputy President Michael Perry
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
10 September 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 11 December 2024 is
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – alleged error of law in failing to consider
status of a Medical Assessment Certificate; where medical
dispute referred for
assessment by s 321(4) and Part 7 of the
Workplace Injury Management and
Workers Compensation Act 1998
(as it stood in March 2010) when liability was
still in dispute; whether it followed from referral that liability can be taken
having been admitted with any relevant assessment being taken as conclusively
presumed to be correct once the assessment occurs
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr W Carney, counsel, and Ms P Dulichan, solicitor
PK Simpson & Co
Respondent:
Mr P Barnes, counsel
Rankin & Nathan Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Long v Tyco International Pty Ltd t/as O'Donnell Griffin
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
11 December 2024
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Long (the appellant) was employed by Tyco International Pty Ltd t/as
O’Donnell Griffin (the respondent) between 4 February
and 20 August 1995,
assisting in erection of power poles in the outback around Broken Hill. He says
he sustained injury to his lower
back and hips on or about 14 August 1995 in the
course of that employment. The respondent agrees he sustained a work-related
at that time, but only to the back, not the hips.
9 September 1998, the respondent paid the appellant a lump sum pursuant to s 66
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act)
10% permanent impairment of his back. On 18 July 2007 a further s 66 sum was
awarded with respect to a 10% loss of efficient use
of the right leg at or above
the knee and 30% loss of use of sexual organs.
27 September 2024 the appellant lodged an Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD)
in this Commission claiming medical, hospital
and related expenses pursuant to s
60 of the 1987 Act, including for a total right hip replacement procedure
(THR) proposed by Dr
Robert Din, orthopaedic surgeon. The respondent denied
liability for this claim on the basis that the appellant had not sustained
work-related injury to his right hip.
dispute was determined by the Member in a Certificate of Determination (COD)
dated 11 December 2024. She said the “live
issues” were
“issue estoppel, injury and causation, credibility and possible novus
actus interveniens”, but that
the “ultimate issue” was whether
the appellant had suffered a work-related right hip injury.
the result, the Member determined an award for the respondent. The appellant
appeals that determination and award.
ON THE PAPERS AND THRESHOLD MATTERS
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
provides that the
Commission may exercise functions under that Act without holding any conference
or formal hearing if sufficient
information has been supplied. Both parties have
submitted that the appeal can be dealt with on the papers. Having regard to
Directions PIC2 and WC3; and the documents and submissions, I am
satisfied I have sufficient information to proceed ‘on the
without holding any conference or hearing.
is no dispute that the threshold requirements as to quantum and time pursuant to
ss 352(3) and 352(4) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) have been met.
THE EVIDENCE
evidence comprises the ARD and Reply (with attached documents), otherwise the
evidence can be summarised when summarising the
Member’s reasons. This is
also appropriate given the single ground of appeal, with the appellant’s
submissions being
limited to Dr O’Keefe’s evidence and the status of
the medical assessment certificate (MAC) dated 3 March 2010 (the 2010
Further, neither party has questioned the accuracy of the Member’s
detailed summary of the evidence. In fact, they agree
she “undertook a
detailed examination of the evidence concerning the question of whether the
right hip was injured on 20 August
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
Member summarised the evidence, including the appellant’s (24 September
2024) statement, and forensic reports from orthopaedic
surgeons, Dr Nigel Hope
(dated 10 July 2023) engaged by the appellant, and Dr Robert Breit (dated 31
October 2023), engaged by the
respondent. She said Dr Hope’s report
provided “few particulars” of what he said was a ‘well
described work
related task’ in August 1995, and that it “neglects
to consider the contribution ... of domestic activities, other injuries,
employment or aging over the ensuing three decades ... [nor] provide any real
medical reasoning ... for his conclusion that the need
for hip arthroplasty
arose out of injury with the
respondent”.
Member noted
“There has never been an injury to the hip, [the
appellant] claims that his back has not settled, and he has been awarded
impairment assessments for what was a trivial episode ...
[THR] is not reasonably necessary because it is not related to his work. I
also have doubts as to the true state of symptomatology
in his right hip which
would inevitably require replacement surgery”.
Member stated
that “where the
experts differ, I am required to apply logic and common sense in deciding which
view is to be preferred or
which parts of the evidence are to be accepted
...”. She implicitly preferred Dr Breit’s opinion to Dr Hope’s
particularly given her
“Overall, I find the contemporaneous and qualified medical
evidence establish[es] the [appellant] did not sustain injury to
the right hip
whilst employed by the respondent”.
Member summarised the evidence from the treating medical and physiotherapy
practitioners, starting with Dr Ronald Haig, orthopaedic
surgeon who reported on
14 May 1996 to Dr Gan, the appellant’s then GP. The Member said
“[n]o findings were made with
regards to the right hip” by Dr Haig.
She also referred to a report of a physiotherapist, Mr Lovell dated 31 July
2002, noting
it “is silent on any right hip symptoms”. She also
considered Mr Lovell’s report of 15 November 2002, noting it
“recorded ... right groin and right thigh pain and depression”, and
that he recorded the appellant was “suffering
from chronic groin pain, the
aetiology of which is unclear at present but may be back related”.
Member also referred to a report dated 7 June 2010 from Dr Ron Sekel,
orthopaedic surgeon, noting he wrote (to Dr Nachiappan,
the appellant’s
then GP) that “I doubt that his hip problem is related to any work injury
fifteen years ago”. The
Member also referred to a report from Dr Abraszko,
neurosurgeon, to Dr Nachiappan who recorded complaints from the appellant about
both back and right hip pain and noted that surgery was being considered for the
Member recorded
the clinical notes
of Dr Nachiappan’s practice, which commenced on 10 May 2006 with a
complaint of ongoing back pain said to
arise from a “1995 WC
injury”. She also noted consultations on 12 December 2006, where back pain
was again recorded,
and an MRI had indicated a right hip labral lesion; and on
20 March 2007 when a “right hip MRI indicated advanced OA changes
labral tear”. She then noted the records of the appellant’s
presentations to Dr Nachiappan between 2007 and 24
April 2024 which generally
referred to both back and/or hip symptoms.
Member noted
the Broken Hill
Hospital (BHH) record on 1 April 1996 when the appellant presented with
“Long H/of back pain ... had exacerbation
of pain over the past 1–2
weeks”, and a note of 16 November 1998 recording lower back pain only. She
also referred to
a BHH record in 2008, noting an injury “ten years ago to
right hip and pelvis with chronic lower back pain”, and a report
Richard Crowley, orthopaedic surgeon on 18 November 1998, noting he examined the
appellant but did not record any hip pain
or pathology. A record of an
assessment on 25 May 2006 by Dr Smith, surgeon at BHH, is also noted by the
to involve no report or
record of hip pain.
Member referred
to a report of 25
January 2023 from Dr Din, which said the appellant presented with right hip
problems and that he recommended a
THR. She said this report did “not
provide any history of injury, mechanism of injury, opinion about the
relationship between
the need for surgery and any alleged work injury or matters
external to the subject employment which may have contributed to
pathology”.
Member also considered
“Radiology”, starting with an MRI of the lumbar spine and pelvis on
26 July 2006, where clinical details included
“11 year old injury.
Complaints of persistent right flank and groin pain. Right hip joint effusion
was reported”. She
an x-ray of the hips and
pelvis on 3 June 2010, and an MRI on 28 February 2014 referring to a
“documented labral injury hip
2007 on the right ...”.
Member turned to what she described as the “Litigation history”,
firstly noting a 1996 award in the Compensation Court
of NSW in favour of
the appellant with respect to a 10% permanent impairment of the back, and
another in the Workers Compensation
Commission (WCC) with respect to a 2% loss
of efficient use of the right arm at or above the elbow; 10% loss of
efficient use of
the right leg at or above the knee and 30% loss of use of
sexual organs (relating to a COD on 18 July 2007, ARD, p 469).
Member then addressed the matters which lay at the heart of the dispute
remaining on appeal – a COD on 20 January 2010 by
a WCC Arbitrator (the
2010 COD) and the 2010 MAC provided by Dr O’Keefe, noting consent orders
as follows:
“53. On 20 January 2010, in [WCC] proceedings
matter no 007969/09 a [COD] recorded the following (unedited):
‘Consent orders
[appellant] elects to discontinue the claims for weekly benefits compensation,
for additional lump sum compensation and for section
60 expenses and I dispense
with the need to file a Notice of Discontinuance pursuant to Rule 15.7.
Respondent is to pay the [appellant’s] costs as agreed or
Notation (each emphasis in the Notations below were made
by the Member)
Respondent will continue to pay ... section 60 expenses in accordance with the
Award of the Compensation Court dated 9 September
does not admit
liability for treatment to the right hip
agreement the matter is to be referred by the Registrar to an Approved Medical
Assessor [AMS] for assessment of the degree of [WPI]
for the purposes of
resolution of a threshold dispute for work injury damages. That assessment is to
be made in respect of the lumbar
spine, right upper extremity, and right lower
extremity (including the hip)
but without any admission as to causation of
any condition of the right hip
O’Keefe, [AMS] reported on 23 February 2010 and found a 13% [WPI]. He also
reported (unedited):
‘Whilst in the employ of Tyco
International, this man sustained an injury to his right shoulder on 08.03.1995
consisting of
a fractured right clavicle, and initially what he thought was an
injury to his back in fact has turned out to be an injury to his
hip and back
pain is purely due to muscle spasm from his hip problem. His original hip injury
occurred on 25.08.1995 and by the time
he had had his MRI scans 10 and 11 years
later in 06 and 07 he has developed arthritic changes in his right hip ...
I have read all the other medical reports and most agree that this man did in
fact sustain a hip injury rather than a back injury
at the time and this has
developed into arthritis over the ensuing 10 to 12 years as evidenced on the
most recent MRI scan.’”
Member’s remaining treatment of the MAC and/or Dr O’Keefe’s
opinion mainly appears at [83(g)] of the reasons
where she states, “I
acknowledge that Dr O’Keefe suggested that the right hip injury was
related to workplace events
in 1995, however this opinion is not binding and is
at odds with the evidence summarised above”. She also stated at the
commencement
of paragraph [83] that:
“Overall I find the
contemporaneous and qualified medical evidence establish the [appellant] did not
sustain injury to the right
hip whilst employed by the respondent because ...
(a) ... (g).”
Member also referred
issued in the WCC by Dr Beata M Byok on 25 October 2016, following a claim by
the appellant for further entitlement to lump
sum compensation for injury on 8
March and 20 August 1995. She noted that Dr Byok “found no increase in
impairment from that
previously awarded. In addition, Dr Byok recorded the
[appellant’s] recollection of injury was poor. She did not make any
on the genesis of the hip complaint but diagnosed right hip
osteoarthritis and a labral tear”.
noting the submissions by each party, the Member proceeded to apply authorities
dealing with fundamental principles governing
the finding of an injury within
the meaning of the 1987 Act to the facts of the case, including
Master Builders Association of NSW Pty
Kooragang Cement Pty
Ltd v Bates
Cosmopolitan Homes
that the “key
issue for determination is whether the [appellant] suffered injury as a result
of his employment with the respondent.
To resolve that issue, I need to examine
whether there was a sudden and ascertainable or dramatic physiological change or
disturbance
in the state of the ... right hip. Here the [appellant] says that
issue estoppel relieves me of the burden to make findings in relation
as the respondent has, by its conduct in previous proceedings, accepted that the
[appellant] sustained a hip injury”.
Member then said
“careful review of the [2010 COD] and specifically the notations confirms
the respondent stipulated it was not liable
for treatment to the right hip and
the matter was to be referred without the respondent admitting causation in
relation to the right
hip”. The Member then found there was no
“issue estoppel” in the circumstances, including by
“... matter was referred to an [AMS] for the purposes of
[WPI] assessment for threshold purposes. I find it was not the same
question and
no formal findings were made with regards injury. Further the referral clearly
articulated that treatment with regards
to the hip was in dispute as was
causation. I appreciate that the [appellant] maintains that the matter could not
have been referred
without the injury dispute being determined, however this is
not reflected in the notations of the [COD]. In short, the same issue
been determined and so issue estoppel does not arise”.
Member finally noted it was well-established that cases involving historical
disputes and issues of fact “can distort events
leaving little more than
an impression from which plausible details, often subconsciously are
constructed” and that this occurred
here. She summarised examples,
including inconsistencies between the appellant’s statement and Dr
Crowley’s records.
The Member noted that the foundation of the
appellant’s case were his statements, the first of which was in 2010,
does not specifically express injury to the hip although does refer
to pain down the leg including the hip”. She also noted
to disclose subsequent employment as recently as 2023” and “that he
was certified unfit for work for
one month after suffering an increase in back
and hip symptoms”.
Ultimately,
the Member found that as the “contemporaneous and qualified medical
evidence establish the [appellant] did not sustain
injury to the right hip
whilst employed by the respondent ...”, she did not need to consider the
question of whether the medical
treatment proposed was reasonably
APPELLANT’S GROUND OF APPEAL
appellant’s single ground of appeal is that “[t]he Member made an
error of law by finding the injury that occurred
on 20 August 1995 did not
include injury to the right hip either by way of an injury (s 4) or
consequential condition.”
NATURE OF THE APPEAL
appeal is brought pursuant to s 352(5) of the 1998 Act. This section limits the
appeal to a determination of whether or not the
decision was affected by any
error of fact, law or discretion, and to the correction of any such error. It is
not a review or new
THE APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS
appellant notes the Member set out the medical evidence to find no injury
occurred as a result of injury on 20 August 1995, and
importantly”, she stated (at [83(f)]
read as [83(g)])
I have considered the evidence of Dr O’Keefe ... I do not accept
this opinion and it is not binding
” (appellant’s emphasis). The
appellant then says “This is true as far as the matters contained in the
are not part of the finding of [WPI] is concerned [sic] ... [The]
Member ... has not considered the status of the [WPI] found by
the AMS ...”.
appellant says s 321(4) of the 1998 Act (at the time of the 20 January 2010
referral and 3 March 2010 MAC) stated that the Registrar
may not refer a matter
for assessment of WPI where liability is in dispute, but an assessment for the
purpose of determining WPI
“was referred to the AMS and he then made a
finding of WPI for the right hip which was then recorded in the [MAC]”.
appellant says the operation of s 321(4) means that the respondent
effectively admitted injury,
“... pursuant to the statute ...
when a formal finding of a WPI was published in the MAC [and] any notation in
the [2010] COD
... is of no consequence once a MAC is published. The MAC is
deemed to be correct as to the matter of both injury as a result of
s 321(4) and
the [WPI] see s 326. S 326 clearly states that the MAC is conclusive evidence of
the WPI which arise[s] from an injury
and as a result of the operation of
s 321(4) no assessment of WPI could have been undertaken ... if a dispute
as to liability was
in existence”.
appellant then says the Member erred as a matter of law for not finding injury
to the right hip once the MAC of 3 March 2010 came
into effect for those
THE RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
respondent says it agrees with and adopts paragraphs [1]–[7] of the
appellant’s submissions, (which essentially set
out the background), but
disputes paragraphs [8]–[9] of those submissions, which essentially
contain the appellant’s
submissions that the Member did not consider the
status of the WPI found by Dr O’Keefe in the 2010 MAC.
respondent says the “ultimate issue for determination” was whether
the appellant “suffered an injury to his
right hip whilst employed by the
respondent and if so whether the claimed treatment expenses were reasonably
necessary ...”.
The respondent says the appellant’s claim for
treatment expenses under s 60 was denied by the insurer in a notice of a
under s 78 of the 1998 Act.
respondent noted the appellant’s submission (at [17]) that s 321(4)
provided “either a barring provision or an estoppel
point in relation to
the denial of liability”, but says the 2010 COD contains an express note
that the respondent did “not
admit liability for the treatment to the
right hip”, and that the Registrar referred the matter to an AMS for
assessment “
for the purposes of resolution of a threshold dispute for
work injury damages
but without any admission as to causation of any
condition of the right hip
(respondent’s emphasis).
respondent says the word “
” (not refer a WPI dispute) in s
321(4) of the 1998 Act should be read as indicating “permission or
possibility”
to refer such a dispute and also notes the Member’s
of the following words
in notation 2 of the 2010 COD, “
without any admission as to causation
of any condition of the right hip
respondent says the Member (at reasons [54] and [55]), “engages with the
reports” of Drs O’Keefe and Dr Byok.
The respondent also notes
the Member’s findings as to whether it was “estopped by its conduct
in previous proceedings”,
saying the Member dealt with this at paragraph
[71], and then determined the “injury” issue, considering all the
respondent notes the Member said the foundation of the appellant’s case
was his statements and that the Member made adverse
findings as to his credit
and gave “greater weight to medical evidence at the time of injury and
shortly thereafter”.
The respondent also notes the Member’s
statement (at [81]) that “the significant absence of complaint of hip
injury between
1995 to 2006 causes me to find ... the [appellant] did not suffer
any frank injury or ... aggravation to the hip whilst employed
respondent”.
respondent also says the reference to “consequential condition to the
right hip” referred to in the appeal ground
and at paragraph [22] of his
submissions, should be disregarded.
DIRECTIONS INVITING FURTHER SUBMISSIONS
issued a Direction on 4 July 2025 inviting
further submissions, to be
lodged on or before 11 July 2025, in the following
“(a) As to the appellant’s submissions at
[8]–[9] and [19]–[21], in relation to the Member not having
‘considered
the status of the [WPI] ... for the MAC dated 3 March
2010’, and the WPI finding being ‘conclusive evidence of the
having arisen as a result of an injury, parties are invited to
consider any relevant authority in this respect, including
Haroun v Rail
Corporation NSW & Ors
[2008] NSWCA 192
), and make
any further submission in that respect if they wish.
(b) The Commission is of the preliminary view that the above-mentioned
submission falls within the appeal ground, that is, the Member
allegedly erring
‘by finding the (20 August 1995) injury did not include injury to the
right hip ...’. While the appellant
also summarises its submissions (at
[20]) by putting that the Member erred ‘for not finding injury to the
right hip once the
MAC of 3 March 2010 came into effect
for the reasons given
’ (emphasis added), each party is invited to provide, if they
wish, any further submission contrary to that preliminary view;
and if there be
such submission, also providing submissions as to any prejudice that may exist
if the Commission did so proceed.
(c) [Given that] the respondent’s submissions appear not to engage,
either adequately or at all, with the appellant’s
above-mentioned
submission, the Commission invites each party to make any further submission
with respect to the appellant’s
above-mentioned submission if they
(d) In the context of the wide formulation of the appeal ground, it is the
preliminary view of the Commission that the Member may
not have, adequately or
at all, conducted any analysis of Dr O’Keefe’s evidence except (at
[83]) to ‘acknowledge
that Dr O’Keefe suggested that the right hip
injury was related to workplace events in 1995, however this opinion is not
and is at odds with the evidence summarised above’. As such, the
parties are also invited to make further submissions as to
that preliminary view
and/or the relevance of it”.
9 July 2025, I issued a further Direction to the parties in the following
“Further to the Direction issued on 4 July 2025, and
having regard to the terms of
Personal Injury Commission
the context of putting any submissions in relation to the 4 July 2025 Direction,
the Commission invites the parties to also consider
any relevance of the MAC
issued by Dr Beata M Byok dated 25 October 2016 (particularly at ARD
427–430) when making any further
submissions.”
the afternoon of 15 July 2025, the Commission sent a message to the parties
through its electronic case management system noting
that neither had lodged
submissions that were due on 11 July 2025 with respect to the 4 and 9 July 2025
Directions, and that “We
follow up the parties and enquire whether you
will be lodging submissions”. On 15 July 2025, the respondent sent a
to say it did not intend to put any further submissions. The appellant
sent a similar message on 1 August 2025.
DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS
appellant alleges a failure to consider the “status” of the 2010 MAC
because s 321(4) provided that the Registrar
may not refer a medical
dispute about WPI for assessment where liability is in issue and not determined
by the Commission, and that
as a referral did occur, and findings were made in a
MAC about the right hip WPI, the “operation of s 321(4) means” the
respondent has admitted a work-related right hip injury, and any “notation
in the COD ... is of no consequence”.
It then says the MAC is
conclusive evidence as to injury and WPI. There is no development of this
argument which essentially only
comprises two or three bald assertions.
appellant’s submission can be taken as saying that because a referral did
occur, the operation of s 321(4) means that the
respondent can be taken as
the hip injury. I find this submission is without a basis
and I reject it. There has been no such admission, nor has the appellant
how s 321(4) would operate in such a way. In
Singh v FTW Products Pty
the appellant submitted
that because the matter was referred to an AMS prior to the determination of
liability, the “AMS finding
should be a nullity and should have not been
considered ...”. Roche DP
the “submission that
the MAC should be ‘considered a nullity’ on the basis of procedural
breaches ... is unsupported
by any authority”. He also
that submission was
“without foundation and I have no power to make such a
relevant circumstances in
and the present case are not totally
analogous as the appellant has not attempted to have the MAC assessment found to
be a nullity.
This is unsurprising as to do so would remove his argument
regarding the status of the MAC. Instead, he seeks to cherry-pick one
one notation to the 2010 COD. He seeks to maintain part of notation 2, providing
for the referral to the AMS, but says the
words “but without any admission
as to causation of any condition of the right hip” can be ignored because
admission of injury pursuant to the statute (s 321) was made when
a formal finding of a WPI was published ...”. But the above
statements by
Roche DP in
are still instructive with respect to the
appellant’s point, at least to the extent that he provides no explanation,
authority, as to a rational basis to support this submission, or any
real attempt to engage in an interpretation of s 321. If he
attempted, I find the words of s 321 do not authorise the Commission to
ignore the non-admission words in the 2010 COD. Plainly,
there was no admission,
at least as to causation, in relation to the right hip.
, Roche DP confirmed that “a MAC does not equate to a
determination of the
Milosavljevic v Medina Property Services Pty
Roche DP also
“Whilst a MAC is ‘conclusively presumed to be
correct’ in respect of the matters in section 326(1), it ‘does
equate to a [determination] of the dispute by the Commission’ (
at [27]) as an AMS is not part of the Commission (section 368(1)) and all
liability issues must be determined by a Commission Arbitrator
North Sydney Leagues Club Ltd t/as Seagulls Club
[2005] NSWWCCPD 38
Connor v Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church of the Archdiocese of
[2006] NSWWCCPD 124
Ooi v NEC Business Solutions Limited
[2006] NSWWCCPD 131).
status of a MAC was similarly described by Brereton JA, with White JA and
Simpson AJA agreeing, in
Hochbaum v RSM Building Services Pty Ltd;
Whitton v Technical and Further Education Commission t/as TAFE NSW
“Thus the certificate is not an adjudication, but
merely evidence, albeit conclusive evidence; it is not an award or determination
which of itself operates to establish liability”.
thus reject the appellant’s submission in this respect. This may be
dispositive of the appeal, given the central tenet of
the appellant’s
submissions (at [20]) being that “the Member was in error as a matter of
law for not finding injury to
the right hip once the MAC of 3 March 2010 came
into effect ...”. The point appears to be that a finding of injury
flows from an AMS accepting the fact of injury and/or making a WPI
allowance. Such a proposition is clearly contrary to the established
set out above. Further, for reasons which appear below, the appellant’s
argument also fails because he has not persuaded
me that any assessments in the
2010 MAC has/have a status within the meaning of s 326(1) of the
1998 Act. In other words, any such
assessment is not conclusively presumed
to be correct, although it does have a status pursuant to s 326(2), that is, it
is evidence,
but not conclusive evidence. That point will be also dealt with
submission (at [19]) that the non-admission notation in the 2010 COD is of no
consequence, and the MAC is “deemed to be
correct” as to injury and
conclusive evidence of the WPI
which arise[s] from an
injury”, does not appear, at least clearly, to provide an independent
argument that even though the MAC
assessment is not able to automatically
determine an injury issue, a WPI finding might still be a relevant factor to
take into account
when the Commission considers that issue. If it did so argue,
one would expect to see the development of it, at least with a relevant
proposition. The appellant did refer to s 326, but only in the context of
putting “... s 326 clearly states that the MAC is
conclusive evidence
of the WPI which arise[s] from an injury ...”. There is also no discussion
in the event the assessment certified in
the MAC might not be conclusive under s 326(1).
would make no difference to the result even if I am wrong in believing the
appellant did not present a clearly articulated argument
that the MAC is
conclusive evidence
as to the WPI
, and the Member erred by not
considering “the status of the [WPI]”. This was the first topic
I directed the attention
of the parties to in the 4 July Direction, in
particular, “(a) ... parties are invited to consider
any relevant
authority, ... including
... at [22], and make any further
submission in that respect if they wish”. The underlining is to emphasise
that the consideration
of any authority was not limited to
(at [22]), Handley AJA, McColl JA and McDougall J agreeing, stated that
“[a] MAC which is conclusively presumed to be
correct under s 326(1)
trumps any inconsistent findings by an Arbitrator and such findings are neither
final nor binding on the parties”.
Importantly though, his Honour’s
statement assumes a MAC assessment does have the status of being conclusively
presumed to
be correct under s 326(1), as was the case in
the appellant substantially bases his submission on the “status” of
the MAC, one is entitled to infer that this refers
to s 326 of the 1998 Act
given that the heading of this section is “326 Status of medical
assessments”. However, the
appellant’s only submission in this
context was:
“The MAC is deemed to be correct as to ... both
injury [sic] as a result of s 321(4) and the [WPI] ... S 326 clearly states
that the MAC is conclusive evidence of the WPI which arise[s] from an injury and
as a result of the operation of s 321(4) no assessment
of WPI could have
been undertaken place [sic] if a dispute as to liability was in
existence.”
to the appellant’s submission, the Member did refer to the status of the
MAC assessment when
acknowledging
O’Keefe suggested that the right hip injury was related to workplace
events in 1995,
however this opinion is not binding
and is at odds with
the evidence summarised above” (emphasis added). She did consider it,
however briefly. In the 4 July Direction,
I expressed a preliminary view that
the Member may not have at least adequately analysed Dr O’Keefe’s
evidence, but I
added “except at [83]” and repeated the quote in the
first sentence above. But on a full consideration, despite not being
with further submissions from either party, I find there has been adequate
consideration of that evidence. Further reasons
for that finding follow.
appellant has not clearly articulated an argument that the Member’s
reasons were inadequate – except as referred to
above in relation to the
status of the MAC assessment. Even if he had, it would make no difference and
the result would be the same,
because in all the circumstances I would not find
any error of law in this respect. The extent and scope of the duty to provide
depends on the circumstances of each case, and “reasons need not
be lengthy or elaborate”.
The obligation to give reasons also “has to be considered in the light of
the issues raised for consideration by the
Rescue NSW v S
DP referred to various authorities in relation to the extent of the duty to give
reasons, including
Woolworths v
where it was explained
by Kaye AJA (Tate and Whalan JJA agreeing), that:
adequacy of the reasons must depend upon the issues, and nature of the
proceeding, in any individual case. In an appropriate
case, reasons can be
adequate by a combination of what is expressly stated and the inferences that
necessarily arise from what is
expressly stated. Thus, as Neave JA and Beach AJA
Murray Goulburn Coop Co Ltd v Filliponi
, ‘In some cases,
the path of reasoning which led to the ultimate conclusion is necessarily
implicit in a sufficiently detailed
recitation of the relevant material upon
[which] the decision was based’.”
am not persuaded relevant error was involved in relation to the Member’s
consideration of the status of the 2010 MAC assessment.
In the context of the
limited issues raised in the appeal submissions, and before the Member, this is
a case where there was consideration,
however brief, of the status of the
assessment in the MAC, and is a situation where the ultimate conclusion is also
necessarily implicit
in the Member’s detailed recitation of the relevant
material upon which she based her decision. In other words, her limited
expression “however this opinion is not binding and is at odds with the
evidence summarised above” needs to be read with
the relevant submissions
and evidence put before her. The transcript of the hearing before her shows the
appellant’s counsel
“... there are a number of
medical certificates, medical assessment certificates which have been entered
into in this case and
we say those assessments are important for a number of
reasons, not the least of which is that they create, in effect, an estoppel
injury. ... when one looks at Dr O’Keefe’s report ... [ARD p 435]
... there was a referral [the 2010 COD] ... clearly
refers off the lower right
limb including the right hip ... given that there’s .. (not transcribable
00:16:03) .. determination
to that effect it’s not really possible for a
respondent to deny – to now come along and deny injury without, in effect,
setting aside that [COD].
... Dr O’Keefe’s certificate ... it’s quite clear that the
doctor assessed ... the right hip. ... while the findings
he’s made, of
course, are not binding, the actual content of them – of the MAC upon the
certificate apart from the actual
certificate and the percentages that have been
awarded are not binding Dr O’Keefe refers to the injury to the right leg
the right hip. ... he says:
‘... ‘initially what he thought was an injury to his back was, in
fact, turned out to be injury to his hip and his back
pain is purely due to
muscle spasm from the hip problem. The original hip injury occurred on 25
August, ‘95. By the time he
had the MRI scans 10 or 11 years later in 2006
and 7 he had developed arthritic changes in his right hip.’
... The right extremity is assessed and as part ... of that ... assessment
the hip was assessed ...
So, Member, it’s our submission that given the [2010 COD] ... and the
[WPI] findings in Dr O’Keefe’s report that
the injury [is] not
at this stage able to be questioned ... It’s quite clear that when one
looks at the medical evidence from
Dr Sekel, Dr Hope and Dr O’Keefe
that the labral tear contributed or caused ... the arthritic condition in the
hip which has
given rise to the need for the surgery
above submission about the “findings” being “not binding, the
actual content of them ... apart from the actual
certificate and the percentages
that have been awarded are not binding” is not totally clear. Thus it was
unnecessary for the
Member to give any detailed reasoning, including because her
comment at [83(g)] (“I acknowledge that Dr O’Keefe suggested
the right hip injury was related to workplace events in 1995, however this
opinion is not binding and is at odds with the evidence
summarised above”)
is placed within the judgement immediately below “the evidence summarised
above” (at [83](a)–(f)).
In other words, when placed in the context
of her detailed treatment of the evidence, and read fairly, her brief reasons in
respect are adequate.
Member’s reasons or consideration also needs to be assessed in the context
of s 294(2) of the 1998 Act, which relevantly
provides that: “A brief
statement is to be attached to the certificate setting out the
Commission’s reasons for the determination”.
is also unclear whether or not the Member understood the appellant conceded that
the MAC assessment did not have the status of
being conclusively presumed to be
correct as to the degree of permanent impairment of the appellant as a result
the result of an
respondent’s submissions mainly point to the Member’s broader fact
finding as to the receipt of injury. This is largely
unnecessary as the
appellant does not, except to the limited extent set out in his submissions,
challenge that fact finding. One
exception is the respondent’s implicit
submission that there was no irregularity in the 20 January 2010 COD and/or the
making a WPI referral, including the right hip, given the terms of
s 321(4). It says, “use of the term ‘
expression of a verb indicating permission or possibility ... if the legislature
had contemplated a verb compelling
the referral of a matter for assessment by an
[AMS] it would have been normalised by using the term ‘
connoting an expression of demand or assertion”. I reject this argument.
It is not based on any authority and is contrary
to various authorities as well
as a literal reading of the text of Division 5 Part 7, in particular s 321.
For example, the words
“[a] medical dispute
for assessment” in s 321(1), [t]he parties ...
the [AMS]” in s 321(2), immediately before s 321(3) providing
“[t]he Commission
may not refer
for assessment ...”, clearly
show that “... a matter cannot be referred to an AMS for assessment if
liability is in issue
(section 321(4) of the 1998 Act)
s 321(3) may appear to conflict at least with the terms of s 321(4), closer
inspection shows that the term “may not”
is mandatory and not
discretionary, and the Registrar, pursuant to s 321(4), not the Commission,
should make the referral.
above emphases are mine. Otherwise, the term “may not refer”, if one
takes care to read s 321(4) in context, plainly
refers to the opposite of the
term “may be referred”. In
2 Elizabeth Bay Road Pty Ltd
v The Owners - Strata Plan No.
Leeming JA (Basten
and Barrett JJA agreeing) said:
“It is axiomatic that (a) the
words in a sentence are not building blocks whose meaning is unaffected by the
rest of the sentence,
(b) the sentence is the unit of communication by which
language works, and (c) the significance of individual words is affected by
other words and the syntax of the whole sentence.”
other authorities, apparently not considered by the respondent, support this
interpretation of s 321(4).
submission should not have been put.
respondent does appear to have made a submission regarding the status of the MAC
assessment, implying it is not provided under
s 326(1), allowing for it to be
conclusively presumed to be correct as to the degree of WPI of the worker as a
result of an injury.
I infer this from its following submission (at [13],
quoting the 2010 COD): “... The matter is to be referred by the registrar
to an [AMS] for assessment of the degree of [WPI]
for the purposes of
resolution of a threshold dispute for work injury damages
(respondent’s emphasis).” This has been put unhelpfully, but it is
tolerably clear that the emphasis is intended to
infer that the referral to the
AMS is only for assessment of the degree of WPI for work injury damages
purposes. Further, and however
briefly, the respondent does put (at [2]) that it
disputes the submissions for the appellant at paragraphs [8] and [9] –
relate to the appellant’s essential argument on appeal about the
status of the MAC.
feeds into a further and fundamental reason standing in the way of the appeal
succeeding. There is an unexplained assumption
in the appellant’s
submissions – that the 2010 MAC assessment is conclusively presumed to be
correct within the meaning
of s 326(1). That assumption is incorrect, or at
the least, the appellant has failed to persuade the Commission it is correct.
326 relevantly provides:
“(1) An assessment certified
in a [MAC] pursuant to a medical assessment under this Part is conclusively
presumed to be correct
as to the following matters in any
proceedings
before ... the Commission
with which the certificate is concerned
(a) the degree of permanent impairment of the worker as a result of an injury,
(2) As to any other matter, the assessment certified is evidence (but not
conclusive evidence) in any such proceedings.” (emphasis
2010 COD shows the appellant elected to discontinue proceedings claiming weekly
benefits, additional lump sum compensation and
s 60 expenses, with the
Arbitrator then noting agreement between the parties that the matter was to be
referred to an AMS “for
assessment of the degree of [WPI]
resolution of a
dispute for work
injury damages
...” (emphasis added). The present proceedings relate
to a claim for treatment expenses pursuant to s 60 of the 1987 Act.
JC Equipment Hire Pty Ltd v The Registrar of the Workers Compensation
Commission of NSW
(Campbell and Bell JJA) said:
“... a [MAC] ... is only
conclusively presumed to be correct in any proceedings before a court or the
Commission with which
the certificate is concerned. Where such a certificate is
given with respect to proceedings in the Commission for the determination
lump sum compensation under s 66, it cannot be conclusively presumed to be
correct with respect to proceedings for work injury
damages ... as the
proceedings are clearly different ...
However ... the effect of s 326(1) is that a [MAC] ... is only conclusively
presumed to be correct with respect to the proceedings
for the purpose of which
the certificate has been obtained, namely, for the purpose of a lump sum
compensation claim on the one hand
or a work injury damages claim on the other
Superior Formwork Pty Ltd v
Roche DP referred to
and applied the principles in the above two paragraphs, and
“A MAC issued in earlier proceedings does not bind the
parties in later proceedings unless the Commission has determined the
dispute in the earlier proceeding. Nor does it create an estoppel that is
binding in later proceedings between the same
the present case there was no determination of the issues, at least with respect
to the right hip, nor has it been submitted otherwise.
However, as was pointed
out by Snell DP in
Singh v B & E Poultry Holdings
JC Equipment
predated the insertion of s 322A into the 1998 Act, and in
O’Callaghan v Energy World Corporation
“...it is difficult to see how the [relevant] part of
JC Equipment
... can stand in the light of s 322A. That provision
provides that only one [WPI] assessment may be made (s 322A(1)) and that
MAC given in connection with that assessment is the only MAC ... about the
degree of permanent impairment as a result of the injury
(s 322A(2)).
whether the subsequent or further dispute is in
connection with a claim for permanent impairment compensation, the commutation
a liability for compensation, or a claim for work injury damages
follows that the one MAC must be able to be used, and be binding, for purposes
other than the purpose for which it was obtained.”
words emphasised immediately above faithfully follow those used in s 322A(2).
They were relevant in
O’Callaghan
Poultry Holdings
as each of those cases involved a subsequent or further
dispute in connection with a claim for permanent impairment compensation.
the present proceedings are in connection with a claim for medical, hospital and
related treatment, and thus distinguishable
from those three cases. While the
present case is a “subsequent or further dispute”, it is not a
dispute in connection
with a claim for permanent impairment compensation, or the
commutation of a liability for compensation, or a claim for work injury
Further, s 322A does not impinge upon the issues in the appellant’s case,
nor has it been said by the parties or the
Member to be in any way relevant to
the issues.
the principles (noted at paragraphs [63]–[64] above) in
are applicable in this case. Thus I find the status of the
assessment in the 2010 MAC is not conclusively presumed to be correct.
326(2) still allows for that assessment to be treated as evidence. But the
appellant’s appeal ground and submissions
do not, at least expressly or
clearly, raise an argument that the Member erred in the way she dealt with the
MAC as evidence. The
submissions seem limited to the MAC assessment being
conclusive evidence and “deemed to be correct” as to “both
injury ... and the [WPI]”. Nevertheless, if I am wrong about that, I refer
to paragraphs [51]–[54]
above to support the finding I would make
that the Member’s reasons in this regard, although brief, are adequate in
circumstances.
respondent also submits that the appellant’s reference to the term
“consequential condition to the right hip”
in the ground of appeal
and paragraph [22] of his submissions should be disregarded. I agree the
reference to this term can be disregarded,
but contrary to what the respondent
puts, the appellant did not put it as a submission. All he has done is to
include it as part
of the ground of appeal and the orders sought. The term
played no part in the arbitration and reasons of the Member and should be
disregarded.
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 11 December 2024 is
Michael Perry
ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT
10 September 2025
Appellant’s submissions,
Long v Tyco
International Pty Ltd t/as O'Donnell Griffin
[2024] NSWPIC 690
(2003) 25 NSWCCR
(1994) 35 NSWLR
[2008] NSWCA
At reasons,
[2007] NSWWCCPD 230
, [36], following
Jopa Pty Ltd t/as Tricia’s Clip-n-Snip v
[2004] NSWWCCPD 50
[2008] NSWWCCPD 56
Government Insurance Office
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
Industries Limited v Bell
[2010] NSWCA 162
[2015] NSWWCCPD
[2013] VSCA 22
Transcript of
proceedings 14 November 2024, pp
Northern Sydney Central Coast Area Health Service (Manly Hospital)
NSWWCCPD 35
v Chul Lee Hyuang Ho Shin Jong Lee & Mi Ran t/as Pure and Delicious Healthy
[2009] NSWWCCPD 47
88 NSWLR 488
Favetti Bricklaying
Pty Ltd v Benedek
[2017] NSWSC 417
, [80]–[81] and [89];
Secretary, Department of Education
[2018] NSWWCCPD 1
The Bright Group Pty Ltd v Akdeniz
[2009] NSWWCCPD 113
[2008] NSWCA 43
JC Equipment
NSWWCCPD 158
[2018] NSWWCCPD 52
Poultry Holdings
[2016] NSWWCCPD 1
O’Callaghan
), [99]–[100].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.56 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter