URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2001/305.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles [2001] NSWCA 305 (14 September 2001)
NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL
CITATION: Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
FILE NUMBER(S):
HEARING DATE(S): 20 July 2001
JUDGMENT DATE: 14/09/2001
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd (Appellant)
Vicki Jane Sprowles (Respondent)
JUDGMENT OF: Priestley JA Powell JA Heydon JA
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Supreme Court
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): SC 20841/97
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: James J
Mr J D Hislop QC/Mr P M Morris (Appellant)
Mr L King SC/Mr C P Heazlewood (Respondent)
SOLICITORS:
Moray & Agnew (Appellant)
Shephard & Shephard (Respondent)
CATCHWORDS:
Torts - Negligence - Liability - Slip and Fall - Whether employer failed to
provide a safe means of access between car park and
offices - Whether stairs
slippery - Whether expert evidence on slipperiness of stairs should have been
accepted by trial judge -
Discussion in obiter dicta about credibility of
party-witness - Where employee injured whilst walking between roof-top car park
office - Where lack of previous slipping accidents on stairs
Evidence - Opinion - Expert evidence - Admissibility and use - Discussion of
common law and statutory requirements - Need for expert
witness to reveal
factual and intellectual basis of opinion -
Evidence Act 1995
LEGISLATION CITED:
Evidence Act 1995
Suitors Fund Act 1951
Supreme Court Act 1970
See para 110
THE SUPREME COURT
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
CA 40357/00
SC 20841/97
PRIESTLEY JA
14 September 2001
MAKITA (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD v VICKI JANE SPROWLES
Torts - Negligence - Liability - Slip and Fall - Whether employer failed to
provide a safe means of access between car park and offices
- Whether stairs
slippery - Whether expert evidence on slipperiness of stairs should have been
accepted by trial judge - Discussion
in obiter dicta about credibility of
party-witness - Where employee injured whilst walking between roof-top car park
and office -
Where lack of previous slipping accidents on stairs
Evidence - Opinion - Expert evidence - Admissibility and use - Discussion of
common law and statutory requirements - Need for expert
witness to reveal
factual and intellectual basis of opinion -
Evidence Act 1995
On 30 June 1986 the plaintiff (the respondent to this appeal) fell at her
workplace on stairs leading from a roof top car park to
the office below where
she worked. The plaintiff successfully sued the defendant (the appellant) for
negligence and was awarded $1,153,886
in damages, plus costs. The defendant
Held by Priestley, Powell and Heydon JJA, allowing the appeal:
The trial judge erred in finding that the defendant had breached its duty of
care to the plaintiff.
1. (Per Priestley JA):
The trial judge erred in accepting the opinion of Professor Morton that the
stairs were slippery since there was a lack of evidence
of any other slipping
accidents occurring on the stairs. Considering that the stairs were used daily,
the lack of previous falls
indicates that the stairs were not slippery in any
ordinary meaning of the word.
2. (Per Powell JA):
The trial judge erred in accepting the opinion of Professor Morton that the
stairs were slippery since his evidence revealed internal
inconsistencies and
3. (Per Heydon JA):
a. A critical examination of the conclusions in Professor Morton's
Evidence revealed that they were not convincing. It was preferable to draw an
inference from the history of incident-free use of
the stairs, than from
Professor Morton's conclusions.
i. Despite the fact that Professor Morton's evidence was uncontradicted,
neither the trial judge, nor the Court of Appeal was bound
to accept it,
especially where it was on ultimate issues.
Brodie v Singleton Shire Council
[2001] HCA 29
(2001) 75 ALJR 992
, referred to.
ii. An expert witness must "furnish the trier of fact with criteria which
enable it to evaluate the validity of the expert's conclusions"
(Heydon JA at
[59]). Professor Morton had not done this sufficiently.
Evidence Act
Davie v The Lord Provost, Magistrates and Councillors of the City of
[1999] HCA 2
(1999) 197 CLR 414
b. Non-compliance with the standard in Ordinance 70 does not of itself
establish a breach of duty.
c. The trial judge's conclusion that there was probably grit on the stairs
cannot establish a breach of duty since it was difficult
to support a
conclusion that grit was definitely present, and it was impossible to quantify
the extent to which the grit increased
the slipperiness of the surface.
The appeal is allowed.
The verdict and judgment for the respondent at trial are set
The order of the trial judge that the appellant pay the respondent's
costs of the proceedings is set aside.
The Statement of Claim is dismissed.
The respondent is ordered to pay the appellant's costs of the trial
and of the appeal.
The respondent is to have a certificate under the
Suitors Fund
in relation to the costs of the appeal.
THE SUPREME COURT
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
CA 40357/00
SC 20841/97
PRIESTLEY JA
14 September 2001
MAKITA (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD v
VICKI JANE SPROWLES
1 PRIESTLEY JA
: All the relevant facts and materials
are set out in the reasons of Powell and Heydon JJA. I arrive at the same
conclusion as they
do, but by a shorter way.
2 The plaintiff's description of her fall was brief and
uninformative. As the trial judge said in his reasons: "
In her evidence the
plaintiff merely said that her foot went out from underneath her
3 The trial judge's conclusion that the plaintiff's fall was
because of the slipperiness of a tread on the stairs rather than
because she
simply lost her footing was based on Professor Morton's expert opinion that the
stairs were slippery. It seems clear
that without Professor Morton's opinion,
the trial judge would not have found the plaintiff fell because of the
slipperiness of the
4 In my view the trial judge erred in accepting Professor
Morton's opinion of slipperiness. This opinion contradicted uncontradictable
facts that showed that the stairs were not slippery in any ordinary meaning of
the word. For the stairs (or any single step) to be
slippery in a sense
relevant for the present case, they (or it) must in my opinion have the
characteristic that persons walking on
them (or it) with ordinary care will,
from time to time, slip.
5 The plaintiff began work with the defendant on 16 January
1984. She suffered her fall on 30 June 1986. She walked up and down
every working day. There were more than fourteen steps in the stairway. On the
basis of a five day working week and four
weeks annual holidays this means that
she walked down over the step on which she fell at least 575 times. Absences
may have reduced
this number. Call it 500 and the point still seems to be
irresistible. (Since all the steps seem to have been of the same composition,
the relevant figure is probably at least 7000.) The plaintiff fell once. She
gave no evidence that she had ever slipped. There was
no evidence that any one
else ever slipped. One fall in more than 500 uses of a step (or 7000 uses of
all the steps in a stairway)
is not evidence that the step (or the steps in the
stairway) is (or are) slippery in any relevant use of the word. It is evidence
of the opposite. The only conclusion, in my opinion, is that Professor Morton's
opinion about the slipperiness of the steps in the
stairway was so clearly
wrong that even his impressive qualifications could not rescue it.
6 Once I reach this conclusion, it seems to me to follow that
the judgment in this case should be set aside, and in its place
entered for the defendant.
7 I agree with the orders proposed by Heydon JA.
8 POWELL JA:
I have read in draft the Judgment which
has been prepared by Heydon JA. Since the facts which are said to have given
rise to these
proceedings and which gave rise to this appeal are recorded in
some detail in his Honour's Judgment, it is not necessary that I repeat
9 Reduced to its most simple form, the case which the
Respondent sought to make at trial was that the Appellant had failed to
its duty of care to her in that it failed to take reasonable care to provide a
safe means of access from the roof-top car
park to the office where the
Respondent worked (RAB 72). The manner in which the Respondent set about
attempting to establish that
case was to lead evidence to establish, first,
that the stairs were slippery, and, second, that there were reasonable
practical steps
which the Appellant could have taken to obviate the risk of
injury to its employees arising from that fact, but which steps the Appellant
had not taken.
10 It seems to me, however, that the Respondent faced three,
not inconsiderable, difficulties in her attempts to establish that
a. the evidence of the lay witnesses - including that of the Respondent herself
(Black AB 40) - appeared to demonstrate that, notwithstanding
that those of the
Appellant's staff who drove to work were, on a daily basis, accustomed to park
on the roof-top car park and use
the stairs as a means of access to the
Appellant's premises on the first and ground floors of the building, the only
occasion upon
which any of those employees was said to have slipped when doing
so was that of which the Respondent complained - that occasion being
years after the Respondent commenced to work for the Appellant and almost 9
years before she left its employ - a fact which
cast more than a shadow of
doubt over any assertion that the stairs were slippery and that the Respondent
ought to have taken steps
to obviate the risk of injury to its employees
arising from that fact;
b. neither the Australian Standard for surface friction of floors (AS
3661.1:1993) - which, in any event, had not been adopted at
the time of the
incident of which the Respondent complained - nor the British standard for
steps and stairs (BS 5395) - was tendered
in evidence, so that it is not
possible to know whether what Professor Morton wrote in his report (Blue AB
1-6-107) - upon which
the Respondent relied - as to their contents was either
accurate or complete, and still less is it possible to know whether the
conclusions
as to the slipperiness of the steps which Professor Morton sought
to base upon his tests - which tests, in any event, do not appear
to have been
carried out in accordance with the Australian Standard method (Blue AB 111) -
can be seen to have been validated;
c. far from it being seen that those conclusions have been validated, it seems
to me, for the reasons to which I will now turn,
that the process by which
Professor Morton reached those conclusions reveals internal inconsistencies and
confusion such that his
conclusions are of no real value.
11 In his report, Professor Morton wrote (inter alia) as
follows (Blue AB 106):
3.6 Standards for frictional grip and safety
Until recently there have been no Australian or other national standards for
surface friction of floors or footwear. An Australian
Standard (AS
3661.1:1993) was issued in October 1993. This document sets a minimum value of
0.4 for the dynamic friction, dry or
wet, when tested against a certain
standard simulated shoe sole (4S) hard rubber material for a floor to be
considered as slip-resistant.
It should be noted however that a floor
satisfying this requirement is not necessarily safe, and particularly not for
use by other
Standard (AS 3661.2:1994) dealing with methods of reduction of
slipping hazards
has been issued (February 1994). British Standard BS 5395 for steps and stairs
also indicates that a dynamic coefficient
below 0.4 is unsatisfactory. Whilst
there are no universally agreed standards for floor friction it is usually
accepted that dynamic
friction coefficients below 0.4 are unsafe whereas above
0.5 they are safe."
12 That passage seems to me to invite the following
a. at the time of the incident of which the Respondent complained there was no
Australian Standard for surface friction of floors;
b. if the passage accurately, and completely, records the relevant parts of AS
3661.1:1993, what is there established is a standard
for floors, not a standard
for floors and various types of footwear;
c. that standard is a single standard, which, when met, indicates that the
relevant floor is to be regarded as slip resistant;
d. the test for determining whether or not, in any particular case, the
standard has been met involves the use of a simulated shoe
sole of a standard
(4S) hard rubber material, not the use of a variety of materials;
e. if this be not so, then, given the wide variety of materials of which the
soles of shoes may be composed, it would be virtually
impossible to know
whether, in any particular case, the standard has been met and the floor in
question is to be regarded as slip
13 In his report, Professor Morton also wrote (Blue AB
4.4.2 Measurement methods
I made measurements of coefficients of friction on the treads following
procedures based on the standard of the American Society for
Testing Materials,
method D1894 modified as necessary for testing floors `in the field'. For this
purpose I used a number of test
sliders of typical shoe-sole materials and the
4S rubber material of AS3661.1, for which I have extensive experience and
test data and some of which were used in particular for the
acquisition of the date of Table 1. I also made measurements using Ms
Sprowles' shoes. In these measurements the test weight was concentrated
separately on sole and heel so as to distinguish the properties
of these two
components. Measurements were made with freshly cleaned 50 mm square sliders
under a load of 3.6 kg, and at a speed
of 100 mm/sec for dynamic
coefficients.
I am satisfied that when using the 4S rubber sole material this method gives
results which agree with those of the Australian Standard
method, usually to
within about 10%. However, I prefer the ASTM method for accident
investigations because of its versatility in
allowing the use of various sole
materials and actual footwear, its applicability in confined situations, on
sloping surfaces, or
in the presence of contamination, and the possibility it
provides in some cases to investigate the effects of variations in sliding
speed and vertical load.
Results are given in Table 3 and are discussed below (section 4.4.4)"
14 Table 3 referred to in this part of the report was as
follows (Blue AB 117):
Friction coefficients - Concrete fire stairs
Unit A, 24 College Street, Gladesville
Sliding S D
Surface ======
Old leather .28 .25
Rubber .72 .61
4S rubber .67 .57
Urethane synthetic .50 .33
PVC .48 .44
Steel .17 .14
New leather .22 .17
Sprowle shoe sole .45 .34
Sprowle shoe heel .56 .53"
15 Paragraph 4.4.2 of the report makes it clear that the
testing method adopted by Professor Morton differed - but, in the absence
3661.1:1993 and the ATSM method, in what respects cannot be ascertained - from
that provided for in AS 3661.1:1993, and, further,
would seem to indicate that
the results produced by each test are likely to differ by up to 10%, the test
producing the higher result
not being revealed.
16 In his report, Professor Morton also wrote (Blue AB
4.4.3 Slipperiness of Ms Sprowles' shoes
I understand that Ms. Sprowles was wearing shoes as shown in Figures 8 and
9, which are photographs of the shoe I retained for measurement
purposes. The
shoes are marked as `made by Grosby' and are shown as having synthetic uppers,
linings and soles.
Whilst it is unlikely that the accident would be considered to have been
caused by the unsuitability or dangerous nature of Ms. Sprowles'
footwear, I
considered it desirable to establish that the shoes themselves are not
excessively slippery. I made measurements of the
frictional grip of the sole
and heel of the shoe against a number of typical walking surfaces. Results of
the measurements are given
in Table 3 and are discussed below (section
17 The reference, in paragraph 4.4.3 of the report to "Table
3" appears to me to have been intended as a reference to "Table
4", which was
as follows (Blue AB 177):
Friction coefficients - Ms. Sprowles' sho
Floor Sole Heel
Surface S D S D
===== ===== =====
Unpolished vinyl tiles .46 .42 .58 .54
Smooth glazed ceramic tiles .44 .39 .49 .47
Embossed glazed ceramic tiles .44 .37 .51 .47
Polished wood .41 .34 .48 .44
Smooth concrete .48 .35 .58 .50
Rough concrete .58 .54 .71 .68
`Non-slip' ceramic tiles .55 .51 .69 .68
Loop-pile woollen carpet .61 .58 .80 .75"
18 The differing friction coefficients of the sole and heel
of the Respondent's shoes are - since they were made of the same
(Black AB 121) - odd, a fact which was, in my view, not adequately explained by
Professor Morton in the course of his cross-examination
and re-examination
(Black AB 121-123).
19 Professor Morton's "discussion" of the results of his
testing was as follows:
"4.4.4 Slipperiness of the surfaces and safety
From the results of Table 3 and judged on the basis of the criteria set out
it is clear that for only footwear materials having a fairly high
level of inherent grip are the treads sufficiently slip-resistant
for safe use,
even when dry and free of contamination. Although the treads have adequate
grip for a rubber sole such as that specified
for the requirements of AS3661.1,
for other common synthetic sole materials such as those used in Ms Sprowles'
shoes the treads are
sufficiently slippery to be dangerous and for soles of
modest grip such as ordinary part-worn leather they are very dangerous. For
inherently slippery materials such as hard smooth new leather the steps would
be very dangerously slippery indeed."
20 That "discussion" invites the following comments:
a. notwithstanding that the passing of some 9½ years between the date of
the incident of which the Respondent complained and
the date of Professor
Morton's inspection, the surface of the stairs in question met - by a
significant margin - the standard for
surface friction laid down AS 3661.1:1993
and, seemingly, by BS 5395;
b. that being so, the surface of the stairs was then to be regarded - but not
by Professor Morton - as slip resistant;
c. Professor Morton's view would appear to be that meeting the standard laid
down in AS 3661.1:1993 is not an adequate test of whether
or not the surface of
a floor is slip resistant and that the only way to determine whether or not a
surface is, or is not, to be
regarded as safe is by having regard to the
coefficient of friction of the surface of the floor and the coefficient of
friction of
the type of sole actually, or likely to be, worn by those walking
on the surface;
d. if this is a correct assessment of Professor Morton's view then it is quite
impossible to reconcile that view with the existence
of an Australian Standard,
and Professor Morton, in my opinion, has provided no defensible reason for his
view being preferred to
that standard.
21 My view as to the value which might properly be attributed
to Professor Morton's report leads me to conclude that the Respondent,
trial, failed to make out an essential element - namely, that the stairs were
slippery, and, thus, that the Appellant failed to
take reasonable steps to
secure her safety - in the case that she sought to make at trial, it following
that the proceedings should
have been dismissed.
22 I agree with the orders proposed by Heydon JA.
23 HEYDON JA:
This is an appeal from orders of James J made on 27 April 2000. He entered a
verdict for the plaintiff (respondent) in the sum
of $1,153,886 and ordered the
defendant (appellant) to pay the plaintiff's costs. He did so after a six day
trial, following which
reasons for judgment were delivered on 22 December 1999,
14 April 2000 and 27 April 2000.
24 The Notice of Appeal contains two groups of challenges to
the conclusion that the defendant was liable to the plaintiff, and
challenges to the quantum of damages.
Grounds 1-3 on liability: was the defendant negligent?
25 On 30 June 1986 the plaintiff fell at her place of
employment on stairs leading from a car park on the roof of the building
offices below where she worked. Associate Professor Morton, a physicist who
specialised in the investigation of slipping
accidents, was called as a witness
in her case. After conducting various tests on the shoe which she said she was
wearing on 30
June 1986, he reached the following conclusions about the stairs.
"6.3 The tread surfaces are very smooth and are not provided with a non-slip
finish throughout as is required by Ordinance 70.
Neither are they fitted with
non-skid strips near the edge of the nosings as required by Ordinance 70 as an
alternative provision.
6.4 In the clean, dry condition the treads are adequately slip-resistant for
safety only for footwear of inherently high-grip materials.
6.5 For other common footwear, including the shoes worn by Ms Sprowles the
treads are sufficiently slippery to be dangerous even
when clean and dry and
would be very dangerous when wet, or if contaminated by loose powdery
materials. The latter could well have
been the situation at the subject time,
due to the cracked condition of the stairway structures.
6.6 The dangerous condition of the treads could have been avoided easily and
at low cost by the use of a wood-float or cross-brushed
finish to the concrete
treads, or the application of abrasive non-skid strips to the tread noses. The
use of both provisions would
have been preferable and in my experience would
have been the usual practice in the industry at the time.
6.7 The accident to Ms Sprowles was caused by the dangerously slippery
condition of the stairs provided for her use, in footwear
such as she would
reasonably have been expected to wear in the circumstances.
6.8 Ms Sprowles' accident and consequent injuries resulted from a lack of
proper care for her welfare on the part of those persons
responsible for the
provision of the stairs she used for access to her place of work."
26 The trial judge made the following findings:
"Counsel for the defendant did not dispute that on 30 June 1986 the plaintiff
had fallen on the stairs leading from the car park
on the roof of the building
at Gladesville. Mr Firth said in his evidence that the plaintiff had told him
some time in 1986 that
she had had a fall on the stairs.
It was also not disputed by counsel for the defendant that the defendant owed a
duty to the plaintiff to take reasonable care to
provide a safe means of access
from the car park to the office where the plaintiff worked. Nor was it
disputed that, if the plaintiff
could establish that the stairs were slippery
and that she had fallen because of the slipperiness of the stairs, she was
to a verdict. It was conceded that, if the stairs were slippery,
there was a reasonably foreseeable risk of injury to the defendant's
including the plaintiff and there were reasonably practical steps the defendant
could have taken which would have obviated
the risk, which the defendant had
I am prepared to accept the plaintiff's evidence that the shoe which she
produced to Professor Morton and which Professor Morton
tested and which was
later admitted as an exhibit, was one of the shoes she had been wearing at the
time of the accident. I am also
prepared to accept the plaintiff's evidence
that she had not worn those shoes much after the accident.
If these matters are accepted, then I consider that Professor Morton's
conclusions should be accepted. Professor Morton was not
really shaken in
cross-examination (except at one stage when he fleetingly seemed to suggest
that a coefficient of friction could
depend on the pressure exerted on a
surface) and there was no competing expert for the defendant. Professor Morton
concluded that
the surfaces of the treads of the stairs were very smooth, were
not provided with a non-slip finish throughout or with non-skid strips
edge of the nosings and for common footwear, including shoes of the type worn
by the plaintiff, were sufficiently slippery
to be dangerous, even when the
stairs were clean and dry.
I have reached the conclusion that the stairs were slippery, without resort to
the evidence about there having been loose grit on
the stairs, which, in
Professor Morton's opinion, would, had it been present, have increased the
slipperiness of the stairs. I would
not accept the evidence of either the
plaintiff or Ms Blanch that they observed loose grit on the stairs. However,
it does seem
to me that, more probably than not, there would have been, by
reason of the nature of the walls of the stairway, some grit on the
which would have increased their slipperiness, even though the degree by which
the slipperiness was increased cannot be quantified.
The remaining question on liability is whether the plaintiff slipped because of
the slipperiness of the tread of a step on the stairs
or simply lost her
footing. In her evidence the plaintiff merely said that her foot went out from
underneath her. I find on the
balance of probabilities that the plaintiff fell
because her foot slipped owing to the slippery surface of the stairs. If a
is going down stairs and the stairs are slippery and the person loses
her footing, then it is likely that the slipperiness of the
stairs contributed
to her losing her footing.
I find a verdict for the plaintiff."
27 Grounds 1-3 in the Notice of Appeal were:
"1. His Honour erred in finding that Appellant was negligent.
2. His Honour [erred] in concluding the shoe tendered in evidence was a shoe
worn by the respondent at the time of injury and that
its condition at the time
of trial was indicative of its condition at the time of the fall.
3. His Honour erred in accepting Professor Morton's evidence."
28 The defendant on the appeal advanced two groups of
arguments against the conclusions of the trial judge. One group of arguments
depended on attacking the trial judge's substantial but not complete acceptance
of the plaintiff's credibility. The other group
of arguments turned in large
measure on attacking the trial judge's reliance on Professor Morton.
The defendant's written submissions
29 The defendant's written submissions on these topics took
the following form.
"8. The respondent was not an honest witness. She lied both in and out of
Court, exaggerated in her evidence and attempted to
mould the evidence so as to
advance her case. His Honour so found (RB 68D-J).
9. In these circumstances, principle required His Honour `to carefully assess
the rest of her evidence in order to determine its
honesty and reliability.
Some of her evidence may have been acceptable because it was confirmed by other
independent or objective
evidence. However, where the (respondent's) evidence
was not independently supported it clearly had to be assessed with great care
to determine whether it could properly be accepted as proof of any matter that
was in issue in the proceedings' (
Malco Engineering Pty Ltd v Ferreira
(1994) 10 NSWCCR 117
per Handley JA at 118D-E).
10. His Honour failed to approach the respondent's evidence (other than that
which the appellant had actually shown to be false)
with the necessary caution
or to subject it to appropriate analysis. As a result he accepted evidence
which was not corroborated
adequately or at all and which, on proper analysis,
should have been rejected. This contributed to His Honour reaching erroneous
conclusions as to all major issues in the trial.
11. His Honour concluded the stairs were slippery and that because of this the
respondent had slipped and fallen (RB 72K-73T).
12. As a number of liability aspects were conceded by the appellant (RB
71S-72J) these findings enabled His Honour to find a verdict
for the respondent
which he did (RB 73U).
13. The appellant submits His Honour erred in finding that the stairs were
slippery, that because of this the respondent slipped
and fell and that the
appellant was negligent. There was no evidence to sustain such findings as:
(i) the Australian Standard provides that for a floor to be considered slip
resistant a minimum value of 0.4 for the dynamic friction
when tested against a
certain standard simulated shoe sole (4S) hard rubber material must be obtained
(Professor Morton, Blue Book
106R-T). This test was met (Blue Book 117H).
(ii) It is generally accepted that above a coefficient friction of 0.4 a floor
is safe (Black Book 120W-121C). The red shoes which
the respondent said she
was wearing at the time were not shown to have had a coefficient of friction of
less than 0.4 at the time
of the fall as:
(a) the coefficient of friction of the shoe when measured by
Professor Morton was above 0.4 save for one
measurement of the dynamic friction of the sole (Blue
Book 117P-Q);
(b) Professor Morton's measurements were made in
December, 1995, some 9½ years after the event, by
which time the surface of the stairs had suffered
further wear (Blue Book 110M-O);
(c) the shoes at the time of the fall would have been less
worn than when tested and would have had more tread
on them (Black Book 41H-J);
(d) Professor Morton conceded that the coefficient of friction
may have been affected by the shoe being worn after the
accident, and that it may have been at the time of the
occurrence that the coefficient of friction of the shoe was
well within the parameters of safe walking (Black Book
(iii) The evidence of the respondent was that she had been using
the stairs every day for the period of her employment (Black
Book 7J) without any problems (Black Book 41K-L). Mr
Firth said that he wore leather-soled shoes and never had
trouble negotiating the stairs and did not find them slippery
(Black Book 162J-M). The evidence of Ms Blanch as to the
state of the stairs was expressly rejected by his Honour
(RB 71F-K).
(iv) The respondent's evidence that the shoe tested by Professor
Morton was one that she had been wearing at the time of the
accident and that she had not worn the shoes much after the
accident (RB 72K-Q) should not have been accepted because -
(a) the respondent in a statement dated 26 February, 1992
had said `she had disposed of the shoes since the
accident' (Blue Book 13P-R). When cross-examined
her explanation was unconvincing (40Q-41D) and
uncorroborated;
(b) the respondent's evidence as to the wearing of the shoes
after the fall (8T-X, 40L-O) was inconsistent with the
appearance of the shoe produced by Professor Morton
(photograph Blue B 122) and her own comments as to
the loss of tread (Black Book 41J);
(c) the unsatisfactory and opportunistic nature of the
respondent's evidence (see paragraphs 8, 9 and 10
above). This was further illustrated in respect of the
issue of the alleged grit on the stairs (an issue which
ultimately was not relied upon by respondent's counsel
(RB 19B)). The respondent had not asserted her fall
was the result of grit on the stairs prior to the hearing
(Blue Book 107S-T). She did, however, accompany
Professor Morton on his inspection of the premises and
became aware that in the Professor's opinion grit on the
stairs could cause them to be slippery. When she came
to give evidence she sought to take advantage of this
(Black Book 9B-G, 41N-43H);
(d) His Honour's reasons for believing the respondent on
this issue are unsatisfactory (RB 72K-P)."
30 The particular significance of the attack on the trial
judge's conclusions on credibility was that if the attack as framed
good, considerable doubt would be cast on the plaintiff's evidence that the
shoe tested by Professor Morton was the one
she was wearing at the time of the
accident and also on her evidence that she had not worn the shoe much after the
accident. If
that were cast in doubt, the whole of Professor Morton's testing,
and the conclusions based on it, would cease to have validity.
That in turn
would make the plaintiff's case on liability, which depended heavily on
Professor Morton, extremely fragile. On the
other hand, if the credibility
findings and the testing stood, the plaintiff's position would be improved,
though the defendant did
have numerous specific criticisms of Professor
Morton's conclusions even if the plaintiff's credibility were accepted.
The plaintiff's credibility in general
31 Accordingly it is convenient first to examine the
defendant's arguments on credibility.
32 The trial judge dealt with the plaintiff's credibility in
considerable detail in the following way.
"The extent to which the plaintiff's evidence should be accepted is obviously
crucial to a determination of this case. There was
no witness, other than the
plaintiff, to the alleged fall on 30 June 1986. Professor Morton's conclusions
were based on information
supplied by the plaintiff that the shoes she produced
to him were the shoes she had been wearing at the time of the accident and
she had not worn the shoes much after the accident. There is little or no
orthopaedic evidence to support the plaintiff's complaints
of the symptoms and
disabilities she says she has experienced. There is no evidence from Louise
Adam, who was the first person to
treat the plaintiff after the alleged
accident, except a letter saying that Ms Adam's notes about the plaintiff have
The only medical evidence adduced on behalf of the plaintiff is the
evidence of Dr Wilson, who first saw the plaintiff in January
1994, more than
seven years after the accident. Dr Wilson accepted that the views he had
formed depended on his accepting the plaintiff
as a witness of truth about her
symptoms. If the plaintiff is in fact able to do things which she claimed to
Dr Wilson she could
not do, then Dr Wilson would have to doubt the level of
symptoms claimed by the plaintiff and, ultimately, even his diagnosis of
fibromyalgia. There are other reasons as well why the plaintiff's evidence is
A strong attack was mounted by counsel for the defendant on the credibility of
the plaintiff. Grounds for attacking the plaintiff's
credibility include the
The plaintiff admitted that she had lied in part of her evidence. She
initially denied that there had been any intentional acts
of violence by Mr
Dormer during their relationship. The breaking of her nose by Mr Dormer had
been an accident. Later in the plaintiff's
evidence in chief she admitted that
there had been incidents of violence, both before and after the accident, but
`only a couple'.
In cross-examination the plaintiff admitted that Mr Dormer
had struck her ten to twelve times during the relationship.
The plaintiff admitted that she had told lies out of court, for example, in
complaining in 1984 to a counsellor at the Pre-Term
Foundation that she had
abdominal pain.
The plaintiff gave some evidence which was inconsistent with previous out of
court statements she had made. For example, she said
in her evidence that her
pregnancy had been terminated in 1990 because she was having problems with her
breathing, whereas she had
told a counsellor in 1990 that she felt she could
not cope emotionally and financially with raising a child on her own, after her
relationship with her partner had ended. The plaintiff had not mentioned to
the counsellor any problems with her breathing. Furthermore,
the plaintiff had
said in her affidavit of 20 December 1995 that her problems with her breathing
had started in August 1993. The
plaintiff said in her evidence that there was
grit on the stairs at the time of the accident, whereas she had informed
Morton at the time of their inspection on 11 December 1995 that, so
far as she was aware, there was `no contamination or other adventitious
material on the surface of the stairs'. She said in her evidence that she was
getting worse in 1991 and 1992, which was contrary
to what she had said in her
affidavit of 20 December 1995 and what she had told Dr Wilson.
It was submitted by counsel for the defendant that the plaintiff had
exaggerated in her evidence. A notable example was that the
plaintiff had
exaggerated the difficulty she claimed she had in raising her right arm. In
one of the videos the plaintiff was shown
as extending her right arm vertically
above and behind her head and maintaining that position for many seconds,
without any apparent
difficulty or any apparent discomfort. Dr Shand said in
his last report that some of the results he obtained on his physical
examination
of the plaintiff contrasted significantly with her ability, when
not actually being tested but while still being observed by Dr Shand,
without restriction or signs of discomfort.
It was also submitted that the plaintiff had attempted to mould parts of the
evidence in such a way as to advance her case. An
example was her evidence
submitted that the plaintiff
had given this evidence, because she had been
asked about the subject by Professor Morton at the time of the inspection and
to appreciate that evidence from her that there was grit on the stairs
would assist her case. Another example was her letter written
to the Pre-Term
Foundation in August 1996, seeking, six years after her pregnancy had been
terminated, to supply an ex post facto
reason for the termination which would
assist her case.
Counsel for the defendant pointed to the histories given by the plaintiff to
some of her early carers, in which she had given a
history of some incident or
incidents other than, or as well as, the fall. The plaintiff had given Julie
Chenery a history of having
been the victim of domestic violence. The first
item of history recorded by Mr Goodrich in his report was that the plaintiff
been pushed down on the top of her head. Louise Weavers recorded a history
of a car accident in November 1988, which the plaintiff
in her evidence denied
had ever happened. It was submitted that the plaintiff's attempts to explain
why these histories had been
recorded were unconvincing. Even Mr Firth said
that the plaintiff had said to him that she had had a fall from a horse.
It was submitted that the incident of the pushing down on the plaintiff's head
was particularly important. It was the first item
of history recorded by Mr
Goodrich in his report. Moreover, Mr Goodrich recorded that he had been told
that it had happened two
weeks before the `fall'. When the plaintiff initially
gave evidence about this incident of Mr Dormer pushing down on her head, she
said that it had happened about two weeks before the accident on 30 June 1986.
Then she changed her evidence to saying that it had
happened two weeks before
her birthday on 14 October 1985.
It was also submitted that the plaintiff had fixed ideas and had closed her
mind about her medical condition and what had caused
it. Everything, even
catching glandular fever in 1989, was attributed by the plaintiff to
fibromyalgia resulting from her fall.
Any medical opinion or any medical
advice which did not fit in with her fixed ideas about her condition and its
cause was disregarded
It is clear that the plaintiff did, in one part of her evidence, lie and that
she has lied out of court. I accept that some of
her evidence was inconsistent
with previous out of court statements she had made and I reject those parts of
her evidence. I also
accept that the plaintiff exaggerated in parts of her
evidence, that she made some attempts to mould the evidence in such a way as
advance her case and that the plaintiff has fixed ideas about her condition and
what caused it.
I give weight to the submissions made concerning the histories given by the
plaintiff. However, I note, as against the points made
by counsel for the
defendant, that Mr Goodrich did refer in his report to `a fall' as being part
of the history given to him; that
Louise Weavers said quite explicitly in her
report that, apart from the whiplash injury for which Ms Weavers was treating
the plaintiff,
the plaintiff said she had low back and left leg pain for which
she was being treated by other practitioners, being an osteopath
chiropractor; and that Anne Petrie said in her report `the history given was
onset of symptoms occurred after falling at work
on 30 June 1986'. I do not
give any weight to Mr Firth's rather vague evidence that the plaintiff had said
that her condition `was
something to do with a fall from a horse'. The only
evidence of a fall from a horse is of a fall in about 1971. I accept generally
that it is likely that the plaintiff was asked by those from whom she sought
treatment whether she could remember any incident which
could have contributed
to her condition.
I have concluded that the incident in which Mr Dormer pressed down on the
plaintiff's head did involve more physical force than
the plaintiff conceded in
her evidence.
Despite these well founded criticisms of the plaintiff's credibility, I have
concluded that she was not generally malingering and
I have also concluded that
I should accept most of her evidence, even though rejecting some parts and
discounting some other parts
to some extent as being exaggerated. I have
explicitly referred in this part of my judgment to most parts of the
plaintiff's evidence
which I have decided I should reject.
Objective matters which lend support to the general tenor of the plaintiff's
evidence include that she had worked virtually continuously
from about 1971 up
to June 1986; that she was clearly ambitious to succeed in her career; that
prior to 30 June 1986 she had made
few if any complaints and had sought very
little medical or paramedical attention; that commencing from 10 July 1986 the
constantly over many years and at considerable expense to herself
sought paramedical attention; that the plaintiff continued working
to 1992, although constantly seeking and receiving treatment; that the
plaintiff made a formal claim for compensation
in late 1991, before Mr Weekes
commenced employment with Makita and hence before the sexual harassment
The plaintiff's evidence is corroborated in a number of respects by the
evidence of her mother, Lois Dinuzzo, Georgina Morgan and
Natalie Blanch. I
generally accept the evidence of those witnesses, except that I do not accept
that Ms Dinuzzo had any real recollection
that the telephone call she received
from the plaintiff was `towards the end of 1986' and I do not accept Ms
Blanch's evidence about
the state of the concrete stairs in the building at
Gladesville. Her evidence that she had used the concrete stairs to go from one
floor to another in the building seems to be inconsistent with the evidence of
Mr Firth, whose recollection would be likely to be
accurate, that there were
internal stairs for persons moving from one floor to another within the
building. Of these witnesses I
was particularly impressed by Georgina Morgan,
who, apart from her generally persuasive demeanour, had the advantage of having
with the plaintiff and Mr Dormer from February 1986 to early June 1986,
that is until just before the accident."
33 Counsel for the defendant at numerous stages in his oral
argument pointed to the aspects in respect of which the trial judge
that the plaintiff lacked credibility, and gave further illustrations.
34 Counsel for the defendant appeared to disavow any attempt
to fit the present circumstances into any exception to the general
which the findings of trial judges based on credibility enjoy. This is
understandable. It cannot be said that the trial
judge failed to use or
palpably misused the advantage he had of seeing and hearing the plaintiff, or
that the trial judge relied
on evidence which was inconsistent with facts
incontrovertibly established by the evidence, or that the trial judge acted on
which was glaringly improbable, or that the trial judge fell into some
error of principle, or that the trial judge mistook or misapprehended
facts, or if the effect of the overall evidence was such that it was not
reasonably open to make the findings he did:
Abalos v Australian Postal
[1990] HCA 47
(1990) 171 CLR 167
Devries v Australian National Railways
[1993] HCA 78
(1993) 177 CLR 472
Rosenberg v Percival
[2001] HCA 18
(2001) 75 ALJR
and [92] per McHugh J and Gummow J. Nor can it be said that
the case is one "where in a complex pattern of events incontrovertible
can only be fitted into the pattern if a different view of the credibility of a
witness is taken by the court on appeal":
Agbaba v Witter
at 508 per Jacobs J; approved in
State Rail Authority of New South
Wales v Earthline Constructions Pty Ltd (In Liq)
[1999] HCA 3
(1999) 160 ALR 588
by Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ. The reasons for judgment of the learned trial
judge in all respects appear to be the product of
the most painstaking analysis
of the facts in an extremely unusual and difficult case. His comments are
detailed, well-organised,
careful and balanced. Counsel for the plaintiff
submitted that the trial judge had provided "a model of judgment writing", and
is true. He had excellent opportunities to observe the plaintiff over
long periods she was in the witness box on different parts
of three days. If
it matters, the trial judge has immense experience in presiding over trials,
including trials involving factual
conflicts even more acute than the acute
conflicts involved in this case and trials where much more was at stake than
the large sums
of money involved in this case.
35 Instead, counsel for the defendant contended that the
trial judge had not complied with the passage set out above from Handley
reasons for judgment in
Malco Engineering Pty Ltd v Ferreria
at 118. That contention is not made out. Handley JA did not say
that where a party-witness has lied, the balance of the testimony
can never be
accepted without corroboration. All he said was that the balance of the
testimony in that case called for careful assessment.
What the trial judge
here provided was careful assessment. Counsel for the defendant fell back onto
the contention that while the
trial judge could have accepted parts of the
plaintiff's evidence, he could not do so without "proper reason". He said:
"Just because
they say something, you can't just accept that when you know
they're a liar." But though the trial judge gave no reason for accepting
evidence of the plaintiff about the fact that the shoe Professor Morton tested
was the shoe she wore, and about how much she
wore it after the accident, he
was entitled to accept her evidence on the basis of the overall character of
her testimony, part of
which was to be disbelieved for particular reasons, part
of which was to be believed because it was corroborated, and part of which
though not corroborated, not affected by any particular reason not to accept
it. Finally, counsel for the defendant said that
even if the approach for
which he was contending was not a universal rule, it was appropriate to employ
it in particular cases, and
this was one. The difficulty is that it has not
been shown that the trial judge failed to assess and analyse the totality of
plaintiff's evidence against the background of the other evidence in such a
way as to cast doubt on his conclusions that substantial
parts of her evidence
could be accepted. It is common enough in litigation for witnesses with a
truthful story to succumb to the
temptation of gilding the lily or over-egging
the pudding. The test for the trier of fact is to separate the truthful parts
the rest. While it may be that other triers of fact would have arrived at
conclusions different from those of the trial judge in
this case, the fact is
that the conclusions that he arrived at were not implausible. The weaknesses
of parts of the plaintiff's
evidence here, while troubling, were not so great
as to call for a rejection of all the uncorroborated parts of it.
The plaintiff's credibility about her shoes
36 Counsel for the defendant did not limit himself to the
generalised attack on the trial judge's credibility findings just discussed.
As indicated above, he offered particular arguments critical of the findings
on supposed
inconsistencies within the plaintiff's evidence, and between her evidence and a
photograph of one of the shoes. The
inconsistencies in the plaintiff's
evidence in this respect, if they exist at all, are only slight. The
photograph appearing in
the appeal book does not point strongly towards any
inconsistency between its condition and her evidence, if only because the
of the surfaces of the shoe does not show up clearly. The other
particular argument advanced turned on a statement supplied to an
investigator by the plaintiff on 26 February 1992. In it she said:
"At the time I was wearing a pair of flat red shoes which I have since disposed
On 11 December 1995 the plaintiff gave Professor Morton a pair of shoes which
she told him she was wearing on 30 June 1986, and
he tested them. In chief the
plaintiff gave the following evidence:
"Q. Do you recall now how long you had owned those shoes prior to the
A. Not very long, probably two months.
Q. Had you worn them often during the time you had owned them?
A. Probably once a week.
Q. Subsequent to the accident did you continue to wear the shoes?
A. For a short period of time and then I stopped.
Q. Do you recall how long that was now after the accident that you continued
to wear [the] shoes?
A. I would be guessing.
Q. With what frequency, daily, weekly?
A. I would never wear them more than once a week."
37 In cross-examination the plaintiff gave the following
"Q. You had a pair of shoes which you produced to the court yesterday which
you had for some two months and only wore once a week?
A. I think I had them longer than two months. I always wore them two or three
months after the fall.
Q. I think you said in your evidence yesterday that you had them for two
months and that you wore them for a few months after the
accident as well?
A. Could be right, it was a long time ago.
Q. They were relatively new shoes I take it?
Q. And you have kept them all this time?
A. I put them in [a] box to throw away and thought I had thrown them away but
I found them by accident when I was cleaning out
my shed, I found a box full of
old shoes and I went through the box and thought: Oh there is my red shoes, I
thought I had thrown
Q. When did you find them?
A. I was living at Kellyville at the time so it would have been after October
1990. When it was exactly I don't know.
Q. Some time in the 90's. Is that right?
A. Yes, this was in the 90's.
Q. Was that before or after you had commenced action against your employer?
A. This action?
Q. Why did you keep them? Were you thinking about bringing action at that
A. No, I went through the box and I threw out some of them and those ones I
thought: They are unlucky but maybe I will wear them
in the future.
Q. Did you have other red shoes?
A. Yes, I had a pair of red shoes in the 70's, the old clog style shoes.
Q. There is no doubt in your mind that they were the shoes you were wearing on
This Court was not taken to any passage in which the plaintiff was confronted
with the statement she gave to the insurance investigator
on 26 February 1992
and asked to reconcile it with Professor Morton's evidence and her own
cross-examination. The failure to challenge
her explanation in that way would
have made it easier for the trial judge to accept that explanation. The
written submissions advanced
on behalf of the defendant at the trial do not
appear to have challenged the explanation. Perhaps for that reason, the trial
does not appear to have dealt specifically with the conflict between the
26 February 1992 statement and the plaintiff's sworn evidence.
judge's conclusions involve an implied acceptance of her explanation in
cross-examination. That acceptance is not something
which can be upset on
appeal unless some exception to the
doctrine applies. None has
been pointed to.
38 It follows that the defendant's contention that the
plaintiff's evidence about the identity of the shoe and the degree of
after the accident should not have been accepted fails. That in turn means
that Professor Morton's reasoning can stand on
its merits, because the
assumptions of primary fact underlying it were sufficiently established. One
explicit assumption was the
identity of the shoes, and that was totally
established. Professor Morton said in cross-examination that he assumed that
the relevant
shoe had not been significantly worn after the accident. That
corresponds substantially with the fact, namely that it had not been
Complete precision in proof of facts intended to support the assumptions of an
expert is not called for; it is enough
if the case proved is sufficiently like
the case assumed to render the expert's opinion valuable:
Paric v John
Holland (Constructions) Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 58
(1985) 59 ALJR 844.
The defendant's attack on Professor Morton
39 Counsel for the defendant, however, contended that
Professor Morton's reasoning, even accepting that the assumptions underlying
had been established, was invalid.
40 In order to understand Professor Morton's reasoning and
the defendant's criticism of it, it is necessary to appreciate that
heart were certain tests he conducted. They were conducted in order to assess
compliance of the stairs with certain tests
for friction suggested by standards
described by Professor Morton as follows (para 3.6):
"Until recently there have been no Australian or other national standards for
surface friction of floors or footwear. An Australian
Standard (AS
3661.1:1993) was issued in October 1993. This document sets a minimum value of
0.4 for the dynamic friction, dry or
wet, when tested against a certain
standard simulated shoe sole (4S) hard rubber material for a floor to be
considered as slip-resistant.
It should be noted however that a floor
satisfying this requirement is not necessarily safe, and particularly not for
use by other
Standard (AS 3661.2:1994) dealing with methods of reduction of
slipping hazards
has been issued (February 1994). British Standard BS 5395 for steps and stairs
also indicates that a dynamic coefficient
below 0.4 is unsatisfactory. Whilst
there are no universally agreed standards for floor friction it is usually
accepted that dynamic
friction coefficients below 0.4 are unsafe whereas above
0.5 they are safe."
41 Professor Morton conducted two types of tests.
42 The first type consisted of tests conducted on the stairs
9½ years after the accident using various shoe materials.
The purpose of
these tests was to measure the slipperiness of the stairs. One of the shoe
materials tested on the stairs was the
4S hard rubber material referred to in
the passage quoted above. Two others were the plaintiff's shoe sole and the
plaintiff's shoe
heel. That test revealed that for 4S rubber the static
friction coefficient was 0.67 and the dynamic friction coefficient was 0.57.
Those figures are well above the minimum value of 0.4 set out in AS 3661.1:1993
and the equivalent British standard. That test also
revealed that for the
plaintiff's shoe sole the static friction equivalent was 0.45 and the dynamic
friction coefficient was 0.34.
For the plaintiff's shoe heel the respective
figures were 0.56 and 0.53.
43 The second type of test conducted by Professor Morton had
the purpose of testing the slipperiness, not of the stairs, but
plaintiff's shoe (see para 1). Professor Morton took the plaintiff's shoe sole
and shoe heel and tested them, not against
the actual stairs, but against a
variety of surfaces of which the closest to the stairs was a surface described
as "Smooth concrete".
For the sole the static friction coefficient was 0.48
and the dynamic friction coefficient was 0.35. For the heel the corresponding
figures were 0.58 and 0.50. The significance of the figures for "Smooth
concrete" stems from the following account by Professor
Morton of the materials
used on the stairs (para 4.3.2):
"The stairs are constructed of reinforced cast concrete. The tread surfaces
appear to have received what is generally known as
a wet steel trowel finish.
This involves trowelling the wet partly-set concrete with a smooth steel tool,
often with the addition
of further dry cement to achieve a hard, dense and very
smooth surface. The resultant moderately high shine of the concrete treads
be seen in Figure 7, a photograph taken in ambient light."
He also spoke of "this highly and deliberately smoothed concrete surface" (para
4.3.2) and of "the very smooth concrete stair treads"
(para 5.1).
44 In the first group of tests, the purpose of which was to
measure the slipperiness of the stairs, the measurement of the dynamic
coefficient of 4S rubber was well above both the 0.4 level and the 0.5 level.
Thus the first group of tests placed 4S rubber
well above both the 0.4 level
and the 0.5 level. The first group of tests on the plaintiff's shoe, however,
revealed that her sole
had a dynamic friction coefficient below 0.4. Professor
Morton's conclusion about this group of tests was put thus (para 4.4.4):
"From the results of Table 3 and judged on the basis of the criteria set out in
it is clear that for only footwear materials having a fairly high
level of inherent grip are the treads sufficiently slip-resistant
for safe use,
even when dry and free of contamination. Although the treads have adequate
grip for a rubber sole such as that specific
for the requirements of AS3661.1,
for other common synthetic sole materials such as those used in Ms Sprowles'
shoes the treads are
sufficiently slippery to be dangerous and for soles of
modest grip such as ordinary part-worn leather they are very dangerous. For
inherently slippery materials such as hard smooth new leather the steps would
be very dangerously slippery indeed."
45 The tests in the second group were undertaken to test, not
the slipperiness of the stairs, but the slipperiness of the plaintiff's
(paras 1 and 4.4.3). At para 4.4.3 Professor Morton said:
"Whilst it is unlikely that the accident would be considered to have been
caused by the unsuitability or dangerous nature of Ms
Sprowles' footwear, I
considered it desirable to establish that the shoes themselves are not
excessively slippery. I made measurements
of the frictional grip of the sole
and heel of the shoe against a number of typical walking surfaces. Results of
the measurements
are given in Table 3 and are discussed below (section
These references appear to be erroneous: in fact the results of the
measurements were given in Table 4 and discussed in para 5.1.
Morton's only reference to the results of the second set of tests, set out in
Table 4, is (para 5.1):
"Although not of the highest grip materials there is no reason to consider that
the soles of Ms Sprowles' shoes were excessively
or unusually slippery (see
Table 4). They are in my experience rather better than average in the level of
grip afforded by ladies
Professor Morton offered the following "discussion" of "accident causation":
"It is evident that the accident to Ms Sprowles was caused by the inadequate
frictional grip afforded by the very smooth concrete
stair treads for her
footwear. ... Whilst the interface between Ms Sprowles' shoes and the step
treads should not be classed as
very slippery, the level of grip afforded is
below that needed for a reliable margin of safety. It might be possible for a
to walk on these steps many times without undue incident until one day,
due to random variations in gait pattern, exerting slightly
more lateral force
on the floor contact than usual and consequently slipping and falling."
He then discussed the possible impact of any loose grit on the stairs in a
manner which need not be quoted, since the trial judge
concluded that the
stairs were slippery without reference to that factor, and said that while
there probably was grit on the stairs,
the degree by which it increased their
slipperiness could not be quantified.
46 Professor Morton then offered the following "discussion"
of "foreseeability, avoidability and liability" (para 5.2):
"The generally low slip-resistance of smooth surfaces, especially compared to
the higher grip of roughened surfaces of the same
material is a matter of
common experience which may be readily appreciated without the need for any
special experience or extensive
study of the friction of surfaces. It thus
would or should have been evident to those persons responsible for the
provision of the
subject stairs that they would be likely to be slippery and
dangerous. It should also have been obvious to them that the stairs
likely to be particularly dangerous in the presence of any powdery or other
loose particulate material such as sand or debris
from building cracks.
Although not of direct relevance to Ms Sprowles' accident, to have provided a
smooth surface for fire stairs, in a location where,
foreseeably, they are
likely to become wet in rainy conditions is particularly imprudent. The
extreme and dangerous slipperiness
of wet smooth non-porous surfaces is
well-known.
The evident lack of care for the welfare of users of the stairs exhibited by
the choice of smooth surface as provided is magnified
when it is considered
that the use of a concrete wood-float finish would have greatly reduced the
risks to which users are exposed.
It is ironic that the costs of using such a
finish probably would have been less than that involved in the skilled
trowelling process
used to produce the present smooth shiny concrete surface.
Cross-brushing, which would have been even better, also is a simple and
low-cost process.
Some small extra cost would have been involved in fitting non-skid strips, but
abrasive strips simply surface-applied by adhesive
are widely and readily
available. Even given the slippery nature of the smooth overall tread finish,
reasonable safety could have
been achieved by the application of such strips
even after the stairs were built. Although not providing full slip-resistance,
particularly
on extended areas such as landings these are better than nothing
and would formally satisfy the requirements of Ordinance 70. Had
such strips
been fitted, which in my view is essential to prevent the present treads being
very dangerous when wet, or sandy, they
would also probably have prevented the
accident which occurred to Ms Sprowles.
Hence it appears that in this case the accident to Ms Sprowles was caused by
the dangerously slippery condition of the stairs provided
for her use, in
footwear such as she would reasonably have been expected to wear in the
circumstances. The danger which caused the
accident would or should have been
foreseen and could have been prevented by simple low-cost and readily available
means. The question
of liability of course must ultimately be for the Court to
decide, but it appears that Ms Sprowles' accident and consequent injuries
resulted from a lack of proper care for her welfare on the part of those
persons responsible for the provision of the stairs she
used for access to her
place of work."
Professor Morton then set out the conclusions quoted in [25] above.
47 The principal part of Professor Morton's cross-examination
which is relevant is as follows (Black 120R-122J):
"Q. And ordinarily dry this surface was slip resistant?
A. No, I would not agree with that.
Q. When do you say the coefficient of friction occurs that is dangerous, there
is a defined point, is there not?
A. The defining point depends on many things including the footwear. Someone
wearing high grip gum boots or something of that
sort would be reasonably safe
on these stairs. In dry conditions wearing shoes such as the ones that Ms
Sprowles showed me that
she was wearing would not be reasonably safe. Someone
wearing other shoes would find those stairs dangerous.
Q. In the scenes [sic: scilicet `science'] of slippery surfaces there is a
recognised coefficient of friction below which it is
clearly dangerous?
A. 0.4 is commonly adopted, below which it is generally accepted if there is a
coefficient of friction there is a significant danger
that it is not safe, but
above that it is safe.
Q. And that is the touchstone commonly used in these cases?
Q. That is the upper level, the lower level is 0.3?
A. There are one or two people who suggest that 0.4 is generally accepted and
0.5 is when you can expect you are going to have
a reasonably safe surface.
Q. Does it make a difference whether the tip or sole of her foot touched
A. It does make a difference. In the exceptional circumstances of someone
wearing high heels the toe goes down followed by the
Q. But it may be that she did that?
A. No, I do not accept that. The toe goes down first, unless one is wearing
high heels and then the heel cannot be placed on the
step first.
Q. The heel and the sole of this shoe are the same material?
A. I think not, if it is the shoe that I tested.
Q. (Shown Exhibit B). Are you seeing there is a difference between the sole
and heel of the shoe?
A. The two materials are the same, but the coefficient of frictions are
somewhat different. The sole is somewhat smoother than
the sole [sic;
scilicet `heel'].
Q. Would the smoothness of the sole make some difference?
A. I would not expect a large difference. I will refer back to my notes on
this one. I accept that the difference is larger than
I expected on visual
inspection, but, on the other hand, from experiences one can be deceived from
looking at the surface and depicting
what it is likely to be.
Q. The shoe, I would like you to assume, had been worn after the accident. We
do not know how long but for some period of time.
That may have affected the
coefficient of friction, would it not?
A. Perhaps.
Q. Do you agree they appear to be the same compound material?
Q. Although the texture is different?
Q. And it may have been at the time of this occurrence the coefficient of
friction was well within the parameters of safe walking?
A. Speculation, but yes, it is possible.
Q. It is speculation to assume from the shoe that you see now, when you tested
it, now some time after the event, that the coefficient
of friction that the
shoe was displaying was the same at the time of the accident?
A. The tests were done and my conclusions were reached on the basis of the
assumption that the shoe had not been significantly
worn since the accident.
Q. It is significantly accurate, is it not?
A. That is the information I received.
Q. No doubt you have seen many occasions when people walking downstairs miss
their footing, no problems with the stairs they just
lose their footing?
Q. And that may have happened here if the coefficient of friction was
different at the time of the accident to the time when you
tested the shoe?
A. That is always possible, yes."
48 The defendant made various points about Professor Morton.
They do not, taken separately or together, appear to be decisive
reasons for
rejecting his conclusions.
49 The first point made by the defendant was that in the
first group of tests, the static and dynamic coefficients of friction
rubber were both "well and truly over the 0.4 which was the baseline for a
floor to be considered as slip resistant". Reference
was made to Professor
Morton's evidence in chief and in cross-examination on that point. The problem
is that Professor Morton said
that even if the dynamic coefficient of friction
for 4S rubber exceeded 0.4, "a floor satisfying this requirement is not
necessarily
safe, and particularly not for use by other types of footwear or
under other conditions" (para 3.6).
50 The second point made by the defendant was that in the
first group of tests, the measurements for the plaintiff's shoe had
below 0.4, and in the second group of tests the test of the plaintiff's shoe on
smooth concrete produced only one figure
below 0.4. However, if one accepts
Professor Morton, the former fact alone made the step unsafe, and perhaps the
latter fact alone
51 The third point made by the defendant was that Professor
Morton's tests were carried out 9½ years after the accident,
and in that
period the surface of the stairs had suffered wear and was more slippery than
at the time of the accident. Professor
Morton said that the tread edges had
become polished by wear, and the degree of polish had increased since 1986.
The defendant said
that by parity of reasoning, if the tread edges had become
polished so had the entire surface. However, what Professor Morton said
(para 4.4.1):
"I made spot tests of frictional properties in various positions on the stair
treads. The tread edges have become polished by wear
and although difficult to
measure appeared to be more slippery than the flats of the treads. They thus
might be considered to be
unlikely to prevent a slip of a foot placed too close
to the tread edge. However, this polish is likely to have increased in the
years since the accident, and is in any event relevant only to a foot which has
been significantly misplaced. In my view the degree
of polish of the tread
edges should not be regarded as a significant circumstance of the accident.
Otherwise the preliminary tests
indicated that there were no local variations
in properties sufficient to be of practical importance in regard to safety. I
to make measurements at the front of the third tread down as being the
position at which Ms Sprowles slipped but it is considered
that neither the
particular location chosen for detailed measurements, nor of the alleged
accident itself are of significance for
the conclusions of this report in
regard to slipperiness of the treads."
This appears to indicate that the tread flats were less slippery than the tread
edges. Though it is a natural suspicion that the
tread flats apart from the
tread edges became more slippery over 9½ years, Professor Morton was not
cross-examined as to whether
the "parity of reasoning" relied on was valid
52 The fourth contention of the defendant was that the shoes
at the time of the accident would have been less worn than when
tested. But Professor Morton assumed that this was so only to a small degree,
the evidence of the plaintiff which the
trial judge accepted matched that
assumption, and it is not possible for this Court to substitute a finding that
the shoes were more
heavily worn.
53 Finally, the defendant submitted that if one allowed for
the wear on the steps and the wear on the shoes in the 9½ years
accident, a reading in 1986 would have been 0.4 or better, and that Professor
Morton conceded this. However, in fact all
that Professor Morton conceded was
that that was a possibility. For this type of argument to succeed in a direct
assault on Professor
Morton's reasoning it is necessary to demonstrate, or
point to a concession, that it was a probability, not just a possibility.
Another aspect of Professor Morton's evidence
54 However, the defendant did point to powerful evidence
given by witnesses other than Professor Morton which bears on the issue
liability. That evidence, taken with some other difficulties in Professor
Morton's evidence, indicates that the trial judge erred.
55 The defendant pointed out that the plaintiff had begun to
work with the defendant on 16 January 1984, nearly 2½ years
accident. She took the route from the car park down the stairs to her office
every day. That evidence needs to be taken
with other evidence to which the
defendant did not point: her office was on the first floor; there were 14
steps from the rooftop
doorway to a half landing, and yet further steps before
the first floor was reached (Professor Morton para 4.2); though the defendant
had premises on the ground floor as well, the plaintiff's office was on the
first floor. It follows that in the period of her employment
the plaintiff
could have walked down a substantial number of steps on as many as 600 days.
Since Professor Morton's strictures were
directed not just against the step on
which she fell, but all the steps (para 4.4.1), she had an extremely large
number of opportunities
to slip. Yet, as the defendant pointed out, she gave
evidence that she had never had any problems in using the stairs. The
also pointed out that the plaintiff's immediate superior, Mr Firth,
who was called by the defendant, gave the following evidence
(Black 162G-P):
"Q. When you went to work how did you travel?
A. I drove the car and parked at the roof car parking.
Q. Did you use the stairs that led from the roof into the building on a
regular basis?
A. Yes, yes
Q. What sort of shoes did you wear?
A. They were leather soled, sometimes some had a rubber heel.
Q. Did you ever have trouble negotiating those stairs?
Q. Did you ever find them slippery?
Q. Do you recall in 1986 whether or not there was any extraneous substances on
the stairs regularly?
A. No, not to my knowledge. I never saw it.
Q. By that I mean builder's dust or anything of that nature, do you recall
seeing anything like that?
His office was on the first floor. Mr Firth was not cross-examined on that
evidence. The defendant pointed out that Professor
Morton indicated that
leather was a more slippery material than the material of which the plaintiff's
shoes were composed (see para
4.4.4 and Table 3). Mr Firth's failure to notice
any slipperiness in the stairs is thus significant. To those submissions could
be added the fact that Professor Morton said that from "my observations it is
clear that the present occupants regularly use the
fire stairs for access
between the roof and the two interior floors of the building" (para 4.1). Yet
there is no evidence that any
other persons engaged in the defendant's business
had ever encountered relevant problems on the stairs either before or after the
accident. The plaintiff continued to work there after 30 June 1986 until 7
December 1992, and would have good opportunities to hear
of any problems in
view of her own fall.
56 In these circumstances, were it not for Professor Morton's
report, a conclusion that the stairs were not slippery would have
inevitable.
57 However, Professor Morton said in effect that the
accident-free history of the steps was immaterial (para 5.1):
"Whilst the interface between Ms Sprowles' shoes and the step treads should not
be classed as very slippery, the level of grip afforded
is below that needed
for a reliable margin of safety. It might be possible for a user to walk on
these steps many times without
undue incident until one day, due to random
variations in gait pattern, exerting slightly more lateral force on the floor
than usual and consequently slipping and falling."
58 It is accordingly necessary to examine Professor Morton's
report closely.
59 If Professor Morton's report were to be useful, it was
necessary for it to comply with a prime duty of experts in giving opinion
evidence: to furnish the trier of fact with criteria enabling evaluation of
the validity of the expert's conclusions. In
Davie v The Lord Provost,
Magistrates and Councillors of the City of Edinburgh
Lord President Cooper, in a case concerning liability for damage to dwelling
houses allegedly caused by blasting operations
in the course of constructing a
sewer, said:
"The only difficulty experienced by the Lord Ordinary and developed before us
arose from the scientific evidence regarding explosives
and their effect. This
evidence was given by Mr Teichman, one of the technical staff of the I.C.I.,
with whom a fellow employee,
Mr Sheddan, was taken as concurring. Mr Sheddan
was cross-examined on his qualifications with considerable effect, and the
was taken that Mr Teichman was truly uncorroborated. I do not consider
that in the case of expert opinion evidence formal corroboration
is required in
the same way as it is required for proof of an essential fact, however
desirable it may be in some cases to be able
to rely upon two or more experts
rather than upon one. The value of such evidence depends upon the authority,
experience and qualifications
of the expert and above all upon the extent to
which his evidence carries conviction, and not upon the possibility of
producing a
second person to echo the sentiments of the first, usually by a
formal concurrence. In this instance it would have made no difference
Mr Sheddan had not been adduced. The true question is whether the Lord
Ordinary was entitled to discard Mr Teichman's testimony
and to base his
judgment upon the other evidence in the case.
Founding upon the fact that no counter evidence on the science of explosives
and their effects was adduced for the pursuer, the
defenders went so far as to
maintain that we were bound to accept the conclusions of Mr Teichman. This
view I must firmly reject
as contrary to the principles in accordance with
which expert opinion evidence is admitted. Expert witnesses, however skilled
eminent, can give no more than evidence. They cannot usurp the functions of
the jury or Judge sitting as a jury, any more than a
technical assessor can
substitute his advice for the judgment of the Court ... . Their duty is to
furnish the Judge or jury with
the necessary scientific criteria for testing
the accuracy of their conclusions, so as to enable the Judge or jury to form
own independent judgment by the application of these criteria to the
facts proved in evidence. The scientific opinion evidence,
if intelligible,
convincing and tested, becomes a factor (and often an important factor) for
consideration along with the whole other
evidence in the case, but the decision
is for the Judge or jury. In particular the bare
scientist, however eminent, upon the issue in controversy, will normally carry
little weight, for it cannot be tested by cross-examination
nor independently
appraised, and the parties have invoked the decision of a judicial tribunal and
not an oracular pronouncement by
an expert."
Lord Carmont expressed "complete agreement" with those views. Lord Russell
said at 42:
"The opinion expressed by an expert witness in any branch of technical science
depends for its effect on,
, his qualifications, skill and
experience in that science. If it appears to be based on a sufficiency of
research directed accurately
and relevantly to a particular issue and to be so
supported as to convince a Court of its fundamental soundness and applicability
to the particular issue, a Court is entitled, although not obliged, to accept
it, even if unsupported by any corroborative expert
opinion. Secondly the
defenders argued that in the absence of any counter evidence of expert opinion
in the science professed by
Mr Teichman the Court is bound to take his opinion
as conclusive, and as decisive of the issue. I am clearly of opinion that that
argument must be rejected as being contrary to the principles by which the
rules of evidence are regulated, and as constituting an
unwarrantable
encroachment on the judicial function of the Court. I respectfully agree with
your Lordship's observations on that
topic ... ."
Lord Keith concurred with all the opinions expressed.
case is not to be read as reflecting only a
principle peculiar to Scottish law. Before it was decided, in
ex parte Morrison
[1949] VicLawRp 51
[1949] VLR 277
at 303, Fullagar J said
that an expert witness must "explain the basis of theory or experience" upon
which the conclusions stated
are supposed to rest, for, as Sir Owen Dixon said
in an extra-judicial address quoted by Fullagar J, "Courts cannot be expected
act upon opinions the basis of which is unexplained".
61 Since the decision in
case, the approach of
Lord President Cooper in particular has been adopted by the following: Gordon
J Samuels, "Problems Relating
to the Expert Witness in Personal Injury Cases"
in (ed) Harold H Glass,
Seminars on Evidence
(Law Book Co Limited,
1970), p 141;
Phipson on Evidence
(15th ed, 2000) paras 37-01 and
Lysaght v Police
[1964] NZHC 127
[1965] NZLR 405
Re B (A Minor)
(Care: Expert Witnesses)
[1996] 1 FLR 667 at 670;
O'Kelly Holdings Pty
Ltd v Dalrymple Holdings Pty Ltd
(1993) 45 FCR 145
Spender J, quoted by Sweeney and O'Connor JJ
; Idoport Pty Ltd v National
Australia Bank Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 123
R v Gilfoyle
Cr App R 57
at [25]. In the last case Rose LJ, the Vice President of the Court
of Appeal (Criminal Division), Hallett J and Crane J had under
consideration a
psychologist who was an expert in the systematic analysis of human behaviour
called to give an opinion that a deceased
person whom the appellant had been
convicted of murdering had in fact committed suicide. Rose LJ said that "the
evidence tendered
from him was not expert evidence of a kind properly to be
placed before the court for a number of reasons." One of those reasons
that "his reports identify no criteria by reference to which the court could
test the quality of his opinions". Though Rose
LJ spoke in terms of
admissibility, not weight, the point he made can apply equally to the weight of
evidence, even evidence like
that of Professor Morton, which was admitted
without objection and was not contradicted by an expert called by the
62 Despite these authorities, it might be argued that the
approach adopted in
case is erroneous. The competing view,
which has had some currency in the profession, is that all an expert need do is
that there is a relevant field of specialised knowledge; that he or
she has expertise in a relevant aspect of it; and that he or
opinions relevant to the establishing of one or more of the facts in issue in
the litigation. It has sometimes been said,
for example, that all a valuer
need do is establish valuation expertise, prove that that which is to be valued
has been examined
by the valuer, and give an opinion on what the value is. The
opposing party would then have two choices. The first is to cross-examine
the dark, with the perils which usually face journeys into darkness, to
establish the factual assumptions underlying the valuation,
relationship between the valuer's conclusion and the valuer's expertise as
applied to those assumptions. The second is not
to cross-examine, and run the
risk of the court attaching weight to the opinion, ill-substantiated though it
may be on its face.
63 Whether or not the method of giving expert evidence just
described has ever been widespread or has attracted the approval
courts is hard to say. Bramwell B in
Sheen v Bumpstead
[1862] EngR 774
(1862) 1 H &
[1862] EngR 774
at 926-7, said:
"The mistake, as I think it, seems to me the same as where, on the question
what is the fair price of a piece of land, an inquiry
is proposed as to the
price at which a piece of neighbouring land similarly circumstanced sold, or
where the question is, what is
the fair price of wheat on such a day, and it is
asked at what price. A. then sold such wheat to B. The proper question in
case to the expert is, what is the fair or market price. On
cross-examination he may give, as his reason, because such a piece of
sold at such a price, and because A. sold wheat at such a price to B., and any
other reasons; but he cannot be asked those
particular questions on the
examination in chief."
English Exporters (London) Ltd v Eldonwall Ltd
[1973] Ch 415
Megarry J said: "this ... was an obiter remark in a dissenting judgment ...
and for many years now such evidence has not
been rejected in chief when the
witness has been speaking from his own first-hand knowledge." The correctness
of Bramwell B's view
even at the time is questionable: see
[1837] EngR 1120
(1837) 8 C & P 297
at 306-307;
[1837] EngR 1120
at 507. According to
on Evidence
(15th ed, 2000) paras 37-09 and 37-48:
"It became usual for experts to detail the results of an examination before
being asked as to their opinions founded thereon ...
... In general an expert may give evidence in chief as to the grounds on which
he has reached his opinion, and it may be said that,
without the grounds, the
opinion is valueless."
Indeed, it is clear that the practice of giving only the conclusion in chief is
not only not customary, but is opposed to a line
of authority which, while not
case, has arrived at conclusions consistent with and
supportive of it.
64 The basal principle is that what an expert gives is an
opinion based on facts. Because of that, the expert must either prove
admissible means the facts on which the opinion is based, or state explicitly
the assumptions as to fact on which the opinion
is based. If other admissible
evidence establishes that the matters assumed are "sufficiently like" the
matters established "to
render the opinion of the expert of any value", even
though they may not correspond "with complete precision", the opinion will be
admissible and material: see generally
Paric v John Holland Constructions
[1984] 2 NSWLR 505 at 509-510;
Paric v John Holland
Constructions Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 58
(1985) 59 ALJR 844
at 846. One of the reasons why
the facts proved must correlate to some degree with those assumed is that the
expert's conclusion
must have some rational relationship with the facts proved.
65 Thus one of Dixon J's reasons in
[1949] HCA 59
at 462 for criticising the reception of a motor repairer's evidence
that the speed of a taxi cab when it hit a motor cycle inspected
that it "plainly involved assumptions of fact that were not adverted to by the
witness". Latham CJ said at 456:
"he had not been provided with data which would have been necessary to enable
any person to form even an approximate estimate of
the speed of either vehicle
at the moment of the collision. He was not informed as to the weight of the
taxi-cab or as to the distances,
after the accident, of the two vehicles from
the point of collision."
66 A classic illustration of one type of case in which the
principle applies is
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642.
It shows that
the "assumed" facts need not be itemised in an artificial way, but can be
stated more informally. The High Court
held that it was permissible for a
doctor to narrate the history obtained from a patient as part of the foundation
of the doctor's
opinion on the patient's health, even though the narration was
not admissible to prove the facts of the history unless some exception
hearsay rule were satisfied. In the type of case of which
is an example, the ultimate opinion of the doctor will usually be
based in part on his personal observation of the patient and in
part on what
the patient tells the doctor.
Ramsay v Watson
also contains the opinion
of Dixon CJ, McTiernan, Kitto, Taylor and Windeyer JJ that if the history is
not supported by admissible
evidence, then the opinion "may have little or no
value, for part of the basis of it is gone". In fact, the evidence in
Ramsay v Watson
was not merely of "little or no value", but
inadmissible. The plaintiff sued for damages based on an allegation that
Bright's disease,
from which he suffered, had been caused by lead poisoning
incurred in his employment in the Government Printing Office. The defendant
proved that 21 other employees had worked at the Government Printing Office,
and a government medical officer testified that they
did not have symptoms of
lead poisoning. Counsel for the defendant attempted to elicit further evidence
from the medical officer
concerning what each employee told him of his past
state of health. He made it clear that he did not intend to call the 21 men as
witnesses. The questions were disallowed. The High Court held that the ruling
was proper, "it having been apparent that the men
would not be called".
Underlying the High Court's conclusion must be the proposition that so massive
a disconformity between the
facts to be assumed on the basis of the 21
histories and the total failure to seek to prove them justified total rejection
67 One other important aspect of
Ramsay v Watson
the following statement at 645:
"That some medical witness should go into the box and say only that in his
opinion something is more probable than not does not
conclude the case. A
qualified medical practitioner may, as an expert, express his opinion as to the
nature and cause, or probable
cause, of an ailment. But it is for the jury to
weigh and determine the probabilities. In doing so they may be assisted by the
medical evidence. But they are not simply to transfer their task to the
witnesses. They must ask themselves `Are we on the whole
of the evidence
satisfied on a balance of probabilities of the fact?'. "
The jury cannot weigh and determine the probabilities for themselves if the
expert does not fully expose the reasoning relied on.
68 An example of the importance of distinguishing the history
given to and the opinion formed by a doctor is
Steffen v Ruban
A boy who had allegedly suffered brain damage called a psychiatrist,
who gave evidence of what the boy and his mother told him.
The boy did not
give evidence and the mother's evidence was cut short because of her distressed
state. Jacobs JA (Wallace P and
Asprey JA agreeing) said at 626:
"... the effect of the plaintiff's mother ceasing to give her account of his
behaviour and of the plaintiff not being called, so
that the jury could observe
for themselves his current condition, is to make it important to scan carefully
the medical evidence
in order to make sure that as far as possible it is
limited in its effect on the jury to matters of which the doctor gives direct
evidence from his observations and matters upon which he expresses an opinion
based on his observation. If his evidence is such
that it is impossible to
analyse and determine what are conclusions based on his own observation and
what are conclusions based on
what he has been told, then in such a case as the
present one the danger of a mistrial becomes very great (cf.
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
Evans v Hartigan
[1941] NSWStRp 31
(1941) 41 SR (NSW)
I find Dr Bailey's evidence such a confusion of observation, statement and
opinion given with little precision but much lack of
consistency that in the
particular circumstances of this case, whether or not the amount of
£18,500 is excessive, the verdict
cannot stand. ... I cannot be clear
from Dr Bailey's evidence whether he was expressing conclusions based on his
own observations
or based on what he had been told by the boy's mother. If his
conclusions were mainly based on what he had been told by the boy's
mother then
there is no evidence from her that what she told the doctor was correct, and in
the present case this is of vital importance.
If any part of Dr Bailey's
evidence was sufficiently clearly based on his own observations or tests and
not in whole or in part
contradicted by other portions of his evidence that one
could say that, despite deficiencies in proof of the history of the plaintiff,
nevertheless the medical evidence was clear, there might be no occasion to
interfere with the jury's verdict. However, I find it
quite impossible to say
this on Dr Bailey's evidence."
Underlying these observations is an assumption that the trier of fact must
arrive at an independent assessment of the opinions and
their value, and that
this cannot be done unless their basis is explained.
[1975] QB 834
at 840 Lawton LJ
"Before a court can assess the value of an opinion it must know the facts upon
which it is based. If the expert has been misinformed
taken irrelevant facts into consideration or has omitted to consider relevant
ones, the opinion is likely
to be valueless. In our judgment, counsel calling
an expert should in examination in chief ask his witness to state the facts
which his opinion is based. It is wrong to leave the other side to elicit
the facts by cross-examination."
70 A further illustration of the importance which the law
attaches to the identification, whether formally or informally of the
(1985) 39 SASR 440
at 442. King CJ said:
"It must be kept steadily in mind that the court (the jury in a jury trial) is
the tribunal of fact and that it is no part of the
function of a witness to
decide what version or interpretation of the facts is to be accepted or
rejected. The witness who expresses
an opinion as to the likely or possible
state of mind of the accused at a given time must give his opinion upon an
assumed state
of facts postulated to him or by him for that purpose. Strictly
speaking it is not permissible for him to recount what he has been
distinct from what he assumes as the basis of his opinion, as that would result
in hearsay material coming to the notice
of the Court. The strictness of this
rule is often relaxed in civil proceedings where there is no jury, as the judge
disregard the hearsay as non-probative and discount the opinion if
the assumption of the witness as to the correctness of the hearsay
material is
not substantiated by admissible evidence. But adherence to the rule is of the
utmost importance when the evidence is
given before a jury. The position is
somewhat different where a medical witness who has examined a person is called
to express an
opinion as to his mental or physical condition. In such a
situation the history given by the patient and the very fact that he gives
a history is as much part of the material upon which the opinion is formed as
the physical examination and is invariably allowed
to be given in evidence by
the medical witness. But even in that case what the patient has told the
medical witness is not evidence
of the truth of what is related, except so far
as it may be admissible against the patient as an admission or may be
admissible as
a contemporaneous statement as to his sensations, and the
validity of the opinions expressed will be affected if what is related
substantiated by evidence."
At 443 he said:
"The course which was sought to be adopted in the present case of asking the
opinion of the witness as to the possible mental condition
of the accused at
the time of the alleged crime, based not upon assumed facts, but upon a reading
of the whole of the evidence and
the accused's account of his drug ingestion,
is not acceptable and such evidence cannot be admissible. It involves the
making his own unstated findings of fact and his own interpretation
of them. The jury might arrive at different conclusions of fact
different interpretation of the facts. Clearly a witness cannot be permitted
to express his findings and interpretations of
fact, and there would therefore
be no way by which the jury could know whether the opinion could stand in the
light of the jury's
view of the facts.
If, therefore, evidence of opinion is to be adduced at the new trial as to the
accused's mental condition at the time of the killing
deduced from his
behaviour and ingestion of drugs, it is of the utmost importance that the
assumptions of fact upon which the opinion
is arrived at be clearly stated and
that the evidence be confined to opinions expressed upon those stated assumed
Holtman v Sampson
[1985] 2 Qd R 472
at 474, D M
Campbell, Macrossan and Thomas JJ said:
"... it is a primary tribunal's duty to find ultimate facts, and, so far as it
is reasonably possible to do so, to look not merely
to the expertise of the
expert witness, but to examine the substance of the opinion expressed. But
that is not to say that a tribunal
may not accept the opinion of an expert
witness. In cases where the experts differ, the lay tribunal will apply logic
and commonsense
to the best of its ability in deciding which view is to be
preferred or which parts of the evidence are to be accepted."
Examining the substance of an opinion cannot be carried out without knowing the
essential integers underlying it.
Bell v F S & U Industrial Benefit Society
(unreported, Supreme Court of New South Wales, 9 September 1987),
McLelland J said that the importance of proving the facts underlying
was that the absence of such evidence deprives "the court of an important
opportunity of testing the validity of process
by which the opinion was formed,
and substantially reduces the value and cogency of the opinion evidence."
[1987] NTCCA 3
(1987) 88 FLR 104
at 123-124, Maurice
"Forensic evidence, especially if it goes to a vital issue implicating an
accused person in the commission of an offence, may often
have a prejudicial
effect on the minds of a jury which far outweighs its probative value. The
jury, being people without scientific
training, may often be impressed by an
expert's qualifications, appointments and experience and the confident manner
in which he
expresses his opinions. And yet it ought not be left to such
matters alone to provide a foundation for the jury making an assessment
probative value of forensic evidence, particularly where there are conflicts in
expert testimony, or where it is acknowledged
that other experts of more or
less equal distinction are unlikely to agree.
think that whenever the Crown wishes to rely upon forensic
evidence the prosecutor has a clear duty, not just to his client, the
but to the trial judge and the jury to acquaint them, in ordinary language,
through the evidence he leads, with those aspects
of the expert's discipline
and methods necessary to put them in a position to make some sort of evaluation
of the opinions he expresses.
Where the evidence is of a comparatively novel
kind, the duty resting on the Crown is even higher: it should demonstrate its
reliability. It is not an answer to considerations that dictate
these things to be done to say the defence may draw it out in
cross-examination;
that is an abdication of the Crown's primary function in a
criminal prosecution.
There is a tendency amongst academics, professionals and others who develop
skills in a particular area to mystify their field,
often by the use of what
seems to the outside to be arcane language. It is the role of a prosecutor to
strip forensic evidence of
its mystery so far as is possible; trial by expert
must never be allowed to take the place of trial by jury. The inability to
the principal tenets that need to be understood, to describe in
ordinary language the methods used and the reasons that point to
a particular
conclusion, these are the hallmarks of unreliable science and the
not-so-qualified expert."
These words were applied in
[1992] 2 VR 108
at 116-117 by
Hampel J. Though they were used in the context of criminal cases, they have
application in civil cases as well.
Trade Practices Commission v Arnotts Ltd (No 5)
(1990) 21 FCR 324
at 327 Beaumont J approved the following remarks of
Wigmore on Evidence
, Vol II (Chadbourn revision, 1979), para 672, pp
"1. Testimony in the shape of inferences or conclusions
always rests on
certain premises of fact
. That which has been called observation, serving
as the basis of belief in matters directly cognizable by the senses - as, the
of an affray, a conversation, a trespass, and the like - is here replaced
by what may be called a consideration of the premise.
If the witness has not
considered or had in mind these premises, his inference or opinion is good for
nothing. 2.
These premises
, a consideration of which is essential to
the formation of the conclusion or opinion,
must somehow be supplied to the
jury by testimony
. The same witness may supply both premises or
conclusion; or one witness may supply the premises and another the conclusion.
two are not necessarily connected. 3. If the latter method is chosen, and
a witness is put forward to testify to the conclusion,
the premises
considered by him must be expressly stated, as the basis of his conclusion
otherwise, since his conclusion rests for its validity upon a consideration of
the premises, if those premises are not made to accompany
the conclusion, the
tribunal might be accepting a conclusion for which the witness had considered
premises found by the tribunal
not to be true. 4. Hence, the
premises must
be stated hypothetically in connection with the conclusion
; then, by other
testimony, the material for determining the truth of the assumed premises may
be furnished to the tribunal.
The key to the situation, in short, is that there may be two distinct subjects
of testimony - premises, and inferences or conclusions;
that the latter
involves necessarily a consideration of the former; and that the tribunal must
be furnished with the means of rejecting
the latter if upon consultation they
determine to reject the former, ie of distinguishing conclusions properly
founded from conclusions
improperly founded."
75 Beaumont J also quoted from Gordon J Samuels, "Problems
Relating to the Expert Evidence in Personal Injury Cases" in (ed)
Seminars on Evidence
(Law Book Co Ltd, 1970) p 145:
"Clearly, the facts which the witness is assuming must be made clear to the
jury. They must know upon what premises the conclusion
is based. This is
necessary not only to render the conclusion useful but to impeach it if the
premises be not established. In what
form then may the premises be conveyed to
the witness?
First, may the witness be asked - `Upon all the evidence in the case what is
your opinion as to X'?
A question in this form is, it is suggested, clearly objectionable. First,
because it renders it impossible for a jury to determine
whether the opinion is
based upon facts which have been proved, or indeed to determine at all upon
what facts it is based. Second,
it permits and encourages the witness to
select for himself which of the evidence he accepts and which he rejects. The
of one witness whose testimony is furnished to the expert as part of
his data may itself be internally conflicting, and this apart
discrepancies between the evidence of witnesses called in the same
76 After also referring to authorities including
[1975] QB 834
Paric v John Holland (Constructions) Pty Ltd
[1984] 2 NSWLR 505 at 509-510,
Paric v John Holland (Constructions) Pty
[1985] HCA 58
(1985) 59 ALJR 844
(1985) 39 SASR 440
443, Beaumont J rejected the evidence of an expert who had attended or read the
transcript of the whole hearing and had read all
the exhibits and who then
commented on particular allegations in the Statement of Claim. He said at
"In my opinion, these authorities establish that there is a rule of evidence at
common law that, except in a straight-forward, uncomplicated
case, where the
facts are admitted and readily identified, the opinion of an expert is
admissible only where the premises, that is
to say, the facts, upon which his
or her opinion is based, are expressly stated. It follows that, in a complex
case, where facts
are not readily identifiable, it is not permissible to put
the whole of the transcript and documentary evidence to the witness en
This is complex litigation and the facts in respect of which Dr Williams
purported to express his opinion were not admitted by the
respondents. Indeed,
the facts, and the proper inferences or conclusions to be drawn from the facts
contended for by the Commission,
were vigorously disputed by the respondents
over the many months of this litigation. In those circumstances, it is
impossible for
the court to know what facts Dr Williams had in mind when
expressing his views.
This objection to his evidence is not a mere technicality nor is it only a rule
to be applied in jury trials. True, some of the
authorities refer to the jury,
but the rule is of general application. In complicated litigation, there are
sound reasons of policy
which support a rule that the premises considered by
the expert should be expressly stated rather than left to speculation. It is
preferable that these matters be clarified when the witness is examined in
chief rather than leave room for argument later as to
exactly what matters the
expert had in his mind when expressing his conclusions."
77 An appeal against the rejection of the expert's evidence
failed. On appeal (
Arnotts Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
[1990] FCA 473
the Full Federal Court (Lockhart, Wilcox and Gummow JJ) repeated
various of Beaumont J's citations. They also referred
[1990] FCA 473
(1990) 24 FCR 313
350-351 to Sir Richard Eggleston,
Evidence, Proof and Probability
ed, 1983) pp 147-148:
"Assuming that the matter is one on which only an expert can express an
opinion, what sort of opinion may he give, and on what material
based? It is often said that an expert cannot give an opinion as to the
ultimate fact that the court has to decide. This
is inaccurate, as experts,
especially valuers, often give evidence as to the ultimate fact, and in many
cases the question whether
that fact exists can be answered only by experts ...
What the rule really means is that an expert must not express an opinion if
do so would involve unstated assumptions as to either disputed facts or
propositions of law. Thus an expert who says `In my opinion
this accident was
caused by ... ` in a case where the facts are disputed is assuming the right to
make a decision as to which of
the parties is telling the truth, and is
therefore usurping the function of the tribunal. Similarly, if a valuer is
called in a
case where the `unimproved value' of a property is in issue, and
there is uncertainty as to the meaning of the term as a matter of
expert should not say `In my opinion the unimproved value is ...' without
stating on what interpretation of the term his
opinion is based. In general,
where there is uncertainty of either description, the opinion should be based
on hypothetical facts,
clearly stated.
As to the material on which the expert opinion can be based, just as the
non-expert who is allowed to express an opinion does so
on the basis of
experience, so can the expert base his opinion on his experience, without
having to prove by admissible evidence
all the facts on which the opinion is
based. Accordingly, a valuer can base his opinion on comparable sales of
property, without
having to call witnesses to prove the facts relating to the
sales. An experienced valuer will in the course of a lifetime accumulate
mass of material about sales, from his own practice, from journals, from
newspaper reports, and from discussion with his fellow
practitioners, much of
which he will be unable to recall, but which enables him to express an opinion
more accurately than one who
has examined only the facts regarding the sales in
the area. But if he wishes to cite a particular instance to the court, for
where there is an adjoining property that has recently been sold,
evidence must be given by someone who can swear to the facts relating
The Full Federal Court also quoted from Sir Richard Eggleston's opinions on the
role of the expert as advocate (at p 154):
"This is the area in which experts find themselves in the greatest trouble. It
is of course not permissible for the expert to take
over the role of advocate
from counsel in the case - the law does not allow unqualified people to act as
barristers, except in special
courts like the industrial tribunals or the small
claims courts. But the expert has a legitimate role of advocacy in that,
expounded to the tribunal the rules applicable to the case (these may
not even be in dispute), his evidence may then consist of argument
conclusions that should be drawn from the facts, interpreted in the light of
those rules. The difficulty arises because
the expert often finds it difficult
to distinguish between argument on the assumption that the `facts' put forward
by his side are
the correct ones, and telling the judge or jury which facts
they should accept as true. If he makes his assumption clear, there
objection to his arguing what the consequences of accepting those assumptions
should be; but he is not to do the jury's fact-finding
for it, where this
depends on accepting one or the other set of contradictory witnesses."
(It may be that the legitimate sphere in which the expert can function as
advocate has shrunken to some extent since Sir Richard
Eggleston's days.
Practice Note 104, para 2, provides:
"An expert witness's paramount duty is to assist the court impartially. That
duty overrides the expert witness's obligation to
the engaging party. An
expert witness is not an advocate for a party."
ULV Pty Ltd v Scott
(1990) 19 NSWLR 190
78 The Full Federal Court in
Arnotts Ltd v Trade Practices
[1990] FCA 473
(1990) 24 FCR 313
criticised the expert's evidence for various
reasons. One answer:
"depended upon Dr Williams' evaluation of the whole of the evidence known to
him. He did not identify the particular facts upon
which he based his
opinions, nor his processes of reasoning. It may be assumed that Dr Williams
had regard to the whole of the evidence
given to that stage of the hearing,
because he said that he had heard or read it all. But there was no way of
knowing what parts
of that evidence he accepted as correct or what weight he
gave to particular aspects of it."
The Full Federal Court then said (at 349):
"The events of this case underline the importance of the principle that an
expert witness must identify the facts assumed in his
or her opinion. After Dr
Williams left the witness box, a considerable amount of other material, both
oral and documentary, was
admitted into evidence. Without knowledge of the
basis of Dr Williams' conclusions, the trial judge had no way of knowing
that additional material would have affected Dr Williams' views."
The court said (at 352):
"The fundamental problem about his evidence is that he attempted to act as
advocate without making his assumptions clear. He did
not assume a set of
identified facts, consistent with those contended for by the appellants.
Rather, he told the judge what facts
he should accept."
The court opposed any departure from the rule requiring the disclosure of
expert assumptions on two grounds (at 352):
"The first is the very justification advanced by counsel, the difficulty in
predicting `the permutations and combinations necessary
to cover all possible
findings by the Court'. If an economist were permitted to express opinions
upon the effect of the evidence
given, without identifying the facts which he
or she assumed for the purpose of those opinions, it would be impossible for
to know how to apply that evidence. One of the permutations or
combinations may have rendered the opinion inapplicable, in the expert's
but the Court would never know.
Secondly, as this case indicates, the course urged by counsel would serve only
to prolong trials."
The court described as "illegitimate" the "use of an expert witness to filter
the facts, asking the witness to hear or read all
the evidence and then express
factual conclusions ..."
National Justice Compania Naviera SA v Prudential
Assurance Co Ltd ("The Ikarian Reefer")
[1993] 2 Lloyd's Rep 68
Cresswell J set out a list of duties and responsibilities of expert witnesses
in civil cases as follows:
"1. Expert evidence presented to the Court should be, and should be seen to
be, the independent product of the expert uninfluenced
as to form or content by
the exigencies of litigation ... .
2. An expert witness should provide independent assistance to the Court by way
of objective unbiased opinion in relation to matters
within his expertise ... .
An expert witness in the High Court should never assume the role of an
3. An expert witness should state the facts or assumption upon which his
opinion is based. He should not omit to consider material
facts which could
detract from his concluded opinion.
4. An expert witness should make it clear when a particular question or issue
falls outside his expertise.
5. If an expert's opinion is not properly researched because he considers that
insufficient data is available, then this must be
stated with an indication
that the opinion is no more than a provisional one ... . In cases where an
expert witness who has prepared
a report could not assert that the report
contained the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth without some
qualification,
that qualification should be stated in the report ... .
6. If, after exchange of reports, an expert witness changes his view on a
material matter having read the other side's expert's
report or for any other
reason, such change of view should be communicated (through legal
representatives) to the other side without
delay and when appropriate to the
7. Where expert evidence refers to photographs, plans, calculations, analyses,
measurements, survey reports or other similar documents,
these must be provided
to the opposite party at the same time as the exchange of reports ... ."
While some of these matters have an ethical dimension, taken together they
point to the need for the trier of fact to be fully informed
of the reasoning
process deployed in arriving at the expert's opinions. Cresswell J's list has
been influential both in causing
rules of court to be devised in this and other
v Tameside and Glossop Health Authority
at 977 Bracewell J said:
"It is only by proper and full disclosure to all parties, that an expert's
opinion can be tested in court: in order to ascertain
whether all appropriate
information was supplied and how the expert dealt with it. It is not for one
party to keep their cards face
down on the table so that the other party does
not know the full extent of information supplied."
This implies that not only must the appropriate information be supplied, but
that the expert must reveal the whole of the manner
in which it was dealt with
in arriving at the formation of the expert's conclusions.
Pownall v Conlan Management Pty Ltd
at 389-90 Anderson J said:
"It goes without saying that in order to furnish an opinion about the
profitability or net cash flow of the project, it is necessary
assumptions about the cost of operations, including the mine operating costs,
the cost of crushing and screening, the cost
of transportation, the cost of
ship loading and so on. In order for the opinion to be admissible in evidence,
it is necessary that
the assumptions made about such matters be satisfactorily
proved by admissible evidence. ...
These were critical elements of the opinion, the excision of which would leave
the opinion without sufficient content. Putting
that another way, it is
apparent from the report as a whole that if the objectionable material was
excluded from it Mr Adam could
not have come to a rationally based opinion
Mr Adam gave oral testimony and attempts were made to lead from him evidence
that would show that he had personally verified the
data relied on for his
estimates or had direct knowledge of the matters relied on. In my opinion, his
evidence did not go that far.
If anything it underlined the fact that he truly
had relied on a range of material reported to him or provided by others. No
he treated the data he was given with appropriate circumspection and
accorded to it more or less reliability according to his own
views about the
quality of it and of its provenance and no doubt in doing so, he called upon
his own personal experience. Whilst
in one sense this constitutes bringing his
own judgment to bear on the task of valuation, I do not think it overcomes the
fundamental
difficulty. Expert opinion is to be judged like any other
evidence. It must be comprehensible and reach conclusions that are rationally
based. The process of inference that leads to the conclusions must be stated
or revealed in a way that enables the conclusions to
be tested and a judgment
made about the reliability of them. This requirement is not satisfied by
evidence from an expert which
says, in effect: `I have examined the costings
and estimates made by others and on the strength of my own expertise and
in the field I believe them to be reasonable.'
Such a forensic device overlooks the most important rule that it is for the
court to judge the reliability of evidence given in
support of the case. If an
opinion relies on facts that must be proved or assumptions that must be
verified, it is to the court
that they must be proved and verified, not to the
expert witness."
Ipp J (Malcolm CJ concurring), after referring in particular to
[1975] QB 834
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
Steffen v Ruban
[1966] 2 NSWR 622
, reached similar conclusions.
Bollock v Wellington
(1996) 15 WAR 1
Anderson J said:
"Before an expert medical opinion can be of any value the facts upon which it
is founded must be proved by admissible evidence and
the opinion must actually
be founded upon those facts ..."
He then said at 3-4, citing
Steffen v Ruban
"As with any other evidence, expert opinion must be comprehensible and the
conclusions reached must be rationally based. A court
ought not to act on an
opinion, the basis for which is not explained by the witness expressing it
None of these requirements is satisfied, when all that the medical expert says
is `I have examined this patient and from what I
know about plant operation I
think he can drive a D10 bulldozer on production work'."
He also said at 4, citing
Pownall v Conlan Management Pty Ltd
"Unless the process of inference by which an opinion is reached is expressed in
a manner which permits the conclusions to be scrutinised
and a judgment made as
to its reliability, the opinion can carry no weight ... ."
R v Kotzmann
[1999] VSCA 27
[1999] 2 VR 123
at 135 Callaway JA
said that it was desirable for juries to be directed that "expert evidence is
no better than the facts on which
it is based, that it is for the jury to be
satisfied of the facts in issue at the trial and that ultimately it is their
opinion that
counts". At 156 Batt JA said that even where the expertise of the
witnesses is not questioned, and even where their evidence is
contradicted or
substantially contested, there should as well be a direction that "the weight
to be given to the opinions of experts
is to be assessed in the same way as the
weight to be given to the evidence of other witnesses". This cannot be done
intellectual basis of the opinion is laid out.
83 The English and Australian authorities so far referred to
analysed the decisions at common law. Expert evidence in this State
primarily regulated by the
Evidence Act
(NSW). The relevant
provisions are in
"76. Evidence of an opinion is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact
77. The opinion rule [i.e.,
does not apply to evidence of an opinion
that is admitted because it is relevant for a purpose other than proof of the
of a fact about the existence of which the opinion was expressed.
78. The opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion expressed by a
(a) the opinion is based on what the person saw, heard or otherwise perceived
(b) evidence of the opinion is necessary to obtain an adequate account or
understanding of the person's perception of the matter
79. If a person has specialised knowledge based on the person's training,
study or experience, the opinion rule does not apply
to evidence of an opinion
of that person that is wholly or substantially based on that knowledge.
80. Evidence of an opinion is not inadmissible only because it is about:
(a) a fact in issue or an ultimate issue; or
(b) a matter of common knowledge."
[1999] HCA 2
(1999) 197 CLR 414
CJ construed these provisions as enacting some of the central elements of the
common law just discussed.
"[39] An expert whose opinion is sought to be tendered should differentiate
between the assumed facts upon which the opinion is
based, and the opinion in
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
Arnotts Ltd v Trade
Practices Commission
[1990] FCA 473
(1990) 24 FCR 313
at 347-348]. Argument in this Court
proceeded upon the basis that it was possible to identify from Mr McCombie's
written report
some facts which he either observed or accepted, and which could
be distinguished from his expressions of expert opinion. Even so,
provisions of
will often have the practical effect of emphasising the need
for attention to requirements of form. By directing attention to whether
opinion is wholly or substantially based on specialised knowledge based on
training, study or experience, the section requires
that the opinion is
presented in a form which makes it possible to answer that question.
[40] Mr McCombie's report referred to a number of matters he took into account
in reaching the conclusions he expressed: things
he was told by the
complainant, by her mother, and by the general practitioner who referred the
complainant for assessment; his
training as a psychologist; his experience in
counselling victims of sexual abuse; and his knowledge of patterns of
behaviour of
disturbed children. It is not in dispute that psychology is a
field of specialised knowledge, and that a psychologist may be in
a position to
express an opinion based on his or her specialised knowledge as a psychologist.
However, the witness had to identify
the expertise he could bring to bear, and
Clark v Ryan
[1960] HCA 42
103 CLR 486]
illustrates, his opinions had to be
related to his expertise.
[41] If all that Mr McCombie had said was that, based on his study, training
and experience, he considered that the behaviour of
the complainant during 1992
and 1993, as recounted to him by others, appeared to be inconsistent with her
having been sexually abused
during that time ... , then that might have been
one thing. It would have required identification of the facts he was assuming
be true, so that they could be measured against the evidence; and it would
have required or invited demonstration or examination
of the scientific basis
of the conclusion. ... What defence counsel wanted was evidence of his opinion
that, although the complainant
had been abused, the abuse had occurred back in
1987 when, for a period of a month, she was in the custody of her father, and
it was the father who was the abuser. That opinion was not shown to have
been based, either wholly or substantially, on Mr McCombie's
specialised
knowledge as a psychologist. On the contrary, a reading of his report, and his
evidence at the committal, reveals that
it was based on a combination of
speculation, inference, personal and second-hand views as to the credibility of
the complainant,
and a process of reasoning which went well beyond the field of
expertise of a psychologist. He did not put to the complainant, for
comment, the suggestion that she had been abused by her father; the
complainant told him she could not remember her father.
He does not appear to
have considered or investigated the possibility of abuse by some third party.
He appears to have inferred,
for no apparent reason, that the words `stop it
daddy', attributed to the complainant by her mother, referred to sexual as
from some other form of abuse.
[42] Logically, there were a number of competing possibilities. The
complainant may have been sexually abused by nobody; she may
have been abused
as she claimed, by the appellant; she may have been abused by her father; she
may have been abused by both her
father and the appellant; she may have been
abused by some person or persons unknown. It was not demonstrated, and it is
that it is within the field of expertise of a psychologist to form
and express an opinion as to which of those alternatives was to
[43] To paraphrase what was said by Dixon CJ in
Clark v Ryan
[1960] HCA 42
at 492] about the expert witness in that case, the evidence the defence
sought to lead from Mr McCombie really amounted to putting
from the witness box
the inferences and hypotheses on which the defence case wished to rely.
[44] This was not a trial by jury, but in trials before judges alone, as well
as in trials by jury, it is important that the opinions
of expert witnesses be
confined, in accordance with
, to opinions which are wholly or
substantially based on their specialised knowledge. Experts who venture
`opinions' (sometimes merely
their own inference of fact), outside their field
of specialised knowledge may invest those opinions with a spurious appearance
authority, and legitimate processes of fact-finding may be subverted. The
opinions which Mr McCombie was to be invited to express
appear to provide a
good example of the mischief which is to be avoided."
85 In short, if evidence tendered as expert opinion evidence
is to be admissible, it must be agreed or demonstrated that there
is a field of
"specialised knowledge"; there must be an identified aspect of that field in
which the witness demonstrates that by
reason of specified training, study or
experience, the witness has become an expert; the opinion proffered must be
"wholly or substantially
based on the witness's expert knowledge"; so far as
the opinion is based on facts "observed" by the expert, they must be identified
and admissibly proved by the expert, and so far as the opinion is based on
"assumed" or "accepted" facts, they must be identified
and proved in some other
way; it must be established that the facts on which the opinion is based form
a proper foundation for it;
and the opinion of an expert requires
demonstration or examination of the scientific or other intellectual basis of
the conclusions
reached: that is, the expert's evidence must explain how the
field of "specialised knowledge" in which the witness is expert by
"training, study or experience", and on which the opinion is "wholly or
substantially based", applies to the facts assumed
or observed so as to produce
the opinion propounded. If all these matters are not made explicit, it is not
possible to be sure whether
the opinion is based wholly or substantially on the
expert's specialised knowledge. If the court cannot be sure of that, the
is strictly speaking not admissible, and, so far as it is admissible,
of diminished weight. And an attempt to make the basis of
the opinion explicit
may reveal that it is not based on specialised expert knowledge, but, to use
Gleeson CJ's characterisation of
the evidence in
[1999] HCA 2
(1999) 197 CLR
, on "a combination of speculation, inference, personal and second-hand
views as to the credibility of the complainant, and a process
of reasoning
which went well beyond the field of expertise" (at [41]).
86 That statement of the law corresponds with the views of
Black CJ, Cooper J and Emmett J in
Ocean Marine Mutual Insurance Association
(Europe) OV v Jetopay Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1463
"[21] The primary judge considered that it was permissible to examine the
reports and draw inferences from the form and contents
of them. His Honour
considered that it was permissible to take into account:
· the factual context in which a report was produced;
· the description and designation of the person making the report;
· the contents and language of the report and the nature of the assertions
made in it;
· the form of the report;
· the expressed qualifications of the person making it as set out in the
[22] However, it is not permissible to conclude from those matters alone that
an author of a report has any specialised knowledge,
except to the extent that
the report states (or it otherwise appears from admissible evidence) what that
knowledge is. Nor is it
permissible, by reason of those matters alone, to
conclude that any specialised knowledge that the author of a report has is
on any training, study or experience of the author. Thus, it is not
permissible to conclude, simply because a person expresses an
opinion on a
particular subject, referring to particular technology, that that person has
any specialised knowledge in relation to
that subject. There must be specific
evidence as to specialised knowledge of the person in relation to that subject
and as to the
training, study or experience upon which that specialised
knowledge is based.
[23] The further requirement that an opinion be
specialised
knowledge would normally be satisfied by the person who expresses the opinion
demonstrating the reasoning process by which
the opinion was reached. Thus, a
report in which an opinion is recorded should expose the reasoning of its
author in a way that
would demonstrate that the opinion is based on particular
specialised knowledge. Similarly, opinion evidence given orally should
shown, by exposure of the reasoning process, to be based on relevant
specialised knowledge."
The last quoted paragraph was applied by Einstein J in
Idoport Pty Ltd v
National Australia Bank Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 123
. Evidence not
complying with the principles described in it might be inadmissible as
, as not complying with
, or on discretionary grounds
However, no objection was taken to Professor Morton's evidence, so
the only issue for this Court is its weight.
87 There is no doubt about Professor Morton's authority,
experience, qualifications and skill. It is also the case that Professor
Morton's report is quite lengthy and detailed. But, given that the court is
not obliged to take the opinion of an expert as conclusive
even though no other
expert is called to contradict it, can it be said that Professor Morton's
report goes beyond a series of oracular
pronouncements? Does it usurp the
function of the trier of fact? More vitally, did it furnish the trial judge
with the necessary
scientific criteria for testing the accuracy of its
conclusions? Did it enable him to form his own independent judgment by
the criteria furnished to the facts proved? Was it intelligible,
convincing and tested? Did it go beyond a bare
contain within itself materials which could have convinced the trial judge of
its fundamental soundness?
88 It is significant that the trial judge himself did not
identify any scientific criteria within the report for testing the
accuracy of
its conclusions. The trial judge summarised Professor Morton's evidence
([125]-[134]) and accepted his conclusions ([203]-[204]).
But he did not
analyse Professor Morton's conclusions. Perhaps he did not feel the need to do
so, in view of the fact that no expert
was called in opposition to Professor
Morton, and in view of the fact that the cross-examination of Professor Morton
was not lengthy.
However, it remains the case that the trial judge did no more
than accept the conclusions as they were stated.
89 In the course of argument on the appeal, attention tended
to be directed to particular aspects of Professor Morton's evidence
isolation. Though Professor Morton's views often go to ultimate issues, they
are not on that ground inadmissible:
Evidence Act
However, even though Professor Morton's evidence was uncontradicted, the trial
judge was not bound to accept it, and nor is this
Court, particularly where it
was on ultimate issues:
Brodie v Singleton Shire Council
[2001] HCA 29
(2001) 75 ALJR
per Callinan J. Counsel for the plaintiff correctly said that an
assessment of the merits of Professor Morton's evidence called
consideration of it in detail and as a whole.
90 The first problem in Professor Morton's evidence is that
it is difficult to gather, either from Professor Morton's report
or from his
cross-examination, what significance the coefficients of friction had in his
thinking. He said that a minimum value
of 0.4 for the dynamic coefficient of
friction of a surface when tested with 4S rubber was set as a minimum value by
AS3661.1:1993.
He did not annex or exhibit that standard, and the standard is
not in evidence on any basis, so that it is not possible to assess
the context
of that item of information passed on by Professor Morton or the reasoning
underlying it. It is possible for one expert
to adopt statements made in
scientific works as part of his or her own testimony, but bare references to
particular propositions
carry no weight unless their basis is explained.
91 Professor Morton then said that "a floor satisfying this
requirement is not necessarily safe, and particularly not for use
select 0.4 as a standard for determining when
a floor is slip-resistant?
92 Professor Morton said that the same position prevailed for
BS5395 as for AS3661.1:1993, but that standard is not in evidence
that its context and reasoning cannot be assessed.
93 Professor Morton then said: "Whilst there are no
universally agreed standards for floor friction it is usually accepted that
dynamic friction coefficients below 0.4 are unsafe whereas above 0.5 they are
safe." He did not say who the persons were who shared
this usual acceptance.
He did not say why they, or he, had these views. Nor did he offer
enlightenment as to the shadow land occupied
by dynamic friction coefficients
between 0.4 and 0.5. Further, this evidence appeared to be somewhat qualified
in cross-examination.
There Professor Morton said: "0.4 is commonly adopted",
and "above that it is safe". He appeared to ascribe the figure of 0.5
reasonably safe surface to only "one or two people" and not to the larger
number implicit in the phrase "usually accepted".
94 The essential difficulty is that the significance of
differences between 0.34, 0.35, 0.4 and 0.5 as coefficients of dynamic
were never explained. On one view of Professor Morton's evidence, there would
be liability if the result of 0.39 were achieved,
but not if 0.4 were achieved.
The difference between 0.34 and 0.4 is not great mathematically, but whether it
was crucial must depend
on scientific issues of which the trial judge was told
95 A second difficulty in Professor Morton's evidence is that
he appeared to say that if a person descending stairs were not
wearing high
heels, the heel of that person would be placed on each step first. His
evidence was:
"Q. Does it make a difference whether the tip or sole of her foot touched
A. It does make a difference. In the exceptional circumstances of someone
wearing high heels the toe goes down followed by the
Q. But it may be that she did that?
A. No, I do not accept that. The toe goes down, first, unless one is wearing
high heels and then the heel cannot be placed on
the step first."
(In saying this he appeared to be doing what Cussen J in
[1912] VicLawRp 32
[1912] VLR 152
at 159 and Dixon J in
Clark v Ryan
[1960] HCA 42
(1960) 103 CLR 486
491 reprobated in experts, namely, attempts "to formulate their empirical
knowledge as a universal law".) The plaintiff's shoes
did not have high heels.
Professor Morton rejected the cross-examiner's proposition that the plaintiff
put her toe down, "followed
by the heel". Hence his view seems to have been
that her heel was placed on the stairs first. Professor Morton also said that
heel of the shoe in question was less smooth than the sole. Professor
Morton did not offer an opinion as to whether, if the plaintiff
slipped, it was
her heel which slipped, or her sole, or both. Yet the dynamic coefficient of
the heel recorded in Table 3 is 0.53,
well above both 0.4 and 0.5, and not far
short of the dynamic coefficient of 0.57 for 4S rubber, which AS3661.1:1993
selects as the
touchstone for safety provided the value is greater than 0.4.
Further, the dynamic coefficient of the heel on smooth concrete recorded
Table 4 is 0.5. Professor Morton did not explain how these circumstances
fitted in with Professor Morton's conclusions about
slipperiness. In
particular, he did not explain what the relevance is of a dynamic coefficient
of friction of the plaintiff's sole
on the stairs of 0.34 when, according to
Professor Morton, the heel, with a figure of 0.53, landed first. If the 0.34
the sole in some way negates the safety implicit in the heel figure
of 0.53, how it does was not explained. If the operation of
the two parts of
the shoe in combination is different from the operation of each part
separately, that operation was not explained,
and if that operation depends on
separate testing, there is no evidence that that separate testing was carried
out. Similar queries
arise in relation to the figures for the frictional
coefficients of the shoes on smooth concrete recorded in Table 4.
96 A third difficulty arose in the following way. At the end
of Professor Morton's re-examination the trial judge asked Professor
some questions about Table 3 as follows:
"Q. I have had a look at the shoe and you have different figures for the sole
and the heel of the shoe. I am a lay person of course
in regard to this. I
can only look at the shoe as it now is, but as it now is the heel seems to have
a ridge pattern, a pattern
of ridges across it?
A. That's right.
Q. Whereas the sole appears to be smoother?
Q. I take it that that has something to do with the different results you have
A. That would be one contributory fact. But the two surfaces are quite
different in area so the pressure exerted on the heel would
be greater per unit
area on the sole. I think most have contributed. You note in Table 4 there
are differences between the sole
and heel and on every surface --
Q. The greater weight on the heel less tendency?
A. There is a greater pressure, that is, the force is concentrated over a
smaller area and that may have had an effect as well
but the difference of the
sole and heel carries through to all pedestrian surfaces that I test.
Q. The heel is less likely to slip?
FURTHER CROSS-EXAMINATION
CRANITCH: Q. I may be at a misapprehension here. The coefficient of friction
is not dependent on the surface?
A. Normally not.
Q. The smaller diameter of the heel thereby increasing coefficient of friction
really does not hold water, does it?
A. As I say, that statement you just made independent of area is usually the
case but not invariably so.
Q. Why is the case here?
A. I don't have an answer. All I can point to is the observed fact."
The trial judge said of this evidence:
"Professor Morton was not really shaken in cross-examination (except at one
stage when he fleetingly seemed to suggest that a coefficient
of friction could
depend on the pressure exerted on a surface) ...."
To the lay mind, the "pressure exerted on a surface" might be thought to be a
product of the factors of weight applied and the area
to which it is applied.
In paragraph 2 of his report Professor Morton said:
"The usual measure of `slipperiness' is its inverse, the coefficient of
friction. This is the sideways force needed to cause an
object to slide on a
surface, expressed as a ratio to its weight - heavier objects naturally need
more force. The usefulness of
the coefficient is that it does not normally
depend on the weight of the object and is thus a genuine measure of the surface
properties."
The relationship between the proposition that "heavier objects ... need more
force" and the proposition that the coefficient does
not "normally depend on
the weight of the object" is not explained. Nor is the relationship between
the proposition that the coefficient
of friction is the ratio between sideways
force and weight and the proposition that the coefficient does not "normally
the weight of the object". Nor is the relationship between the
statement in paragraph 4.4.2 that the particular method of testing
selected by
Professor Morton is preferred by him because of the possibility it provides for
investigating "variations in ... vertical
load" and the proposition that the
coefficient does not "normally depend on the weight of the object". In
relation to the trial
judge's comment on the evidence, it is not the case that
Professor Morton "fleetingly seemed to suggest that a coefficient of friction
could depend on the pressure exerted on a surface": first, he did not seem to
suggest it, he did suggest that it "may have had
an effect"; and, secondly,
the suggestion was not fleeting, but rather was adhered to at least in some
cases in the second last
answer quoted above. As is the case with other parts
of the transcript of Professor Morton's evidence, there is some doubt as to
whether the questions and answers were all fully and accurately recorded, but
the passages of evidence set out in this paragraph
create further difficulties
in understanding the scientific basis of Professor Morton's opinions. In
short, Professor Morton did
not expect the smoothness of the sole compared to
the ridge pattern on the heel to make a large difference which would explain
different coefficients observed; he pointed out that those differences
existed for every surface in Table 4 as well as on the fire
stairs used in
Table 3; he said a possible reason was the greater pressure coming from the
heel; he adhered to that as an exception
to what "is usually the case"; the
trial judge found this suggestion to be an instance where Professor Morton was
"shaken", albeit
fleetingly; neither the evidence nor the trial judge
explained Professor Morton's position intelligibly.
97 Despite the length of Professor Morton's report (21
pages), the heart of it consists of the figures in Table 3 for the plaintiff's
shoes, as analysed in paragraph 4.4.4; in particular, the assertion in
paragraph 4.4.4: "for ... common synthetic sole materials
such as those used
in Ms Sprowles' shoes the treads are sufficiently slippery to be dangerous ...
." That in turn leads to the observation
in paragraph 5 that "the level of
grip afforded is below that needed for a reliable margin of safety". The
reason why the treads
were regarded by Professor Morton as dangerous and the
level of grip below a reliable margin of safety is said to rest on the figure
of 0.4 set out in AS3661.1:1993 and BS5395 referred to in paragraph 3.6. The
significance of the figure of 0.4 is not explained.
Paragraph 3.6 concludes
with the statement:
"Frictional properties of floors are highly dependent on the nature of the
footwear used and the extent and nature of contamination
which may be present.
Grip requirements may depend also on the actions being undertaken on the
surface in question (dancing, running,
descending stairs etc.). Reliance
therefore has to be placed on the opinion of suitably qualified individuals in
the assessment
of the adequacy of frictional grip of surfaces, given the
circumstances applying to any particular situation. I believe that as
of my extensive experience and qualifications in this field I am well equipped
to provide a reliable opinion as to the safety
of the stair treads in the
present case."
That observation may well be correct. But what propositions in the laws of
physics and what aspects of Professor Morton's experience
underpin the figure
of 0.4 in paragraph 3.6 and the conclusions just quoted from paragraphs 4.4.4
and 5.1 are not revealed at any
98 In short, the report turns on a syllogism:
(a) all surfaces having a dynamic coefficient of friction of less than 0.4 (or
perhaps 0.5) are unsafe;
(b) these stairs had a dynamic coefficient of friction of 0.34 for the
plaintiff's shoe sole;
(c) therefore these stairs were unsafe.
The basis of step (a) was not exposed. And the reason why step (b) existed
when a figure of 0.53 for the shoe heel was recorded
was not explained clearly.
At the trial the defendant did not explicitly challenge Professor Morton's
reasoning in the manner set
out above. So far as step (a) is concerned, the
cross-examiner did, though, raise doubt as to whether the figure was 0.3, 0.4
0.5. So far as step (b) is concerned, the trial judge and the
cross-examiner between them exposed the unclarity in Professor Morton's
explanation. While the line of attack which the defendant employed in
cross-examination of Professor Morton and the line of argument
the defendant
employed in final address below do not correspond with the criticisms of
Professor Morton just made, it is open to
this Court not to accept his
conclusions. Neither the acceptance of those conclusions by the trial judge
nor their rejection on
appeal turn on any issue of credibility. The basis of
Professor Morton's reasoning was sufficiently challenged at trial to permit
trial judge's conclusion that the defendant was in breach of duty to be
reversed. The defendant did not advance on appeal the
arguments against
acceptance of Professor Morton's conclusions set out above. However, in the
course of interchanges during oral
submissions the possibility was made plain
that the court would not accept expert evidence, including the expert evidence
of Professor
Morton, even if the parts which depended on acceptance of the
plaintiff's evidence stood (transcript pages 23 line 58-24 line 10,
43-50 and 30 lines 6-29). Counsel for the plaintiff said in oral address:
"when the court reads Professor Morton's report
and his oral evidence ..., the
case is made out because he formed the view that these stairs were slippery".
Implicit in the invitation
to read Professor Morton's evidence and to arrive at
that conclusion is an acceptance of the possibility that the court might read
the evidence and reject his conclusion.
99 At the trial there was in effect a collision between two
bodies of evidence called before the trial judge. One was Professor
report. The other was the lay evidence that no problems had been experienced
by the plaintiff, Mr Firth or apparently anyone
else in relation to the stairs
apart from the plaintiff's fall. The latter evidence was stressed by the
defendant on appeal, though
it was not referred to in the defendant's written
submissions at the trial. The trial judge did not seek expressly to resolve
collision. Resolution of it would depend on satisfaction about the
validity of Professor Morton's approach. The trial judge dealt
with attacks on
Professor Morton's evidence based on the unreliability of the plaintiff's
evidence. Independently of those attacks,
however, there were difficulties
with Professor Morton's evidence, particularly in the light of the lay evidence
The trial judge was not taken to any of these difficulties
except for Professor Morton's evidence about the extent to which the
coefficient of friction depended on pressure. That is no doubt the explanation
for why, in a case presenting innumerable other difficulties,
he did not deal
with the difficulties in Professor Morton's evidence.
100 The hearing before this Court is a re-hearing:
Supreme Court Act
Section 75A(6)(b)
"The Court shall have the powers and duties of the court ... from whom the
appeal is brought, including powers and duties concerning
(b) the drawing of inferences and the making of findings of fact ..."
There are limitations on the exercise of those powers and the performance of
those duties. One limitation relates to interference
with credit-based
findings; there is no issue about Professor Morton's credibility in the sense
of sincerity, and the trial judge's
findings are not based on it. Two other
limitations relate to the taking of fresh points on appeal which might have
been met by
further evidence at the trial, and to matters which should have
been put in cross-examination: the issue of whether Professor Morton's
evidence proves the plaintiff's case is not in either category. Another
limitation relates to points of which one party on appeal
lacked notice: the
plaintiff on appeal accepted that it was for this Court to read Professor
Morton's evidence and make up its own
mind. Yet another limitation concerns
discretionary judgments: but the acceptance or rejection of an expert's
opinion is not a
discretionary matter.
101 In principle, even if none of these limitations apply,
the plaintiff commenced the appeal with an advantage. The burden
plaintiff at trial is not borne afresh from the start of an appeal against a
verdict for that plaintiff. Here the plaintiff
did not start the appeal with
the onus of proving her case all over again. It is the defendant who bears the
burden of persuading
this Court that there was error and convincing it that its
powers in relation to fact finding should be exercised, and its duties
relation to fact finding should be carried out, in its favour.
102 The conclusions in Professor Morton's report ought not to
be accepted uncritically. On examination it is difficult to be
convinced by
them. The lay history of incident-free use of the stairs suggests that they
were not slippery. That inference from
that history is preferable to Professor
Morton's conclusions. If the stairs were not slippery, the defendant was not
in breach of
its duty of care as occupier and employer. The appeal should be
allowed on that ground.
103 There are two other aspects of Professor Morton's report
to be dealt with. First, the fact that there was, according to
Morton, non-compliance with Ordinance 70 does not of itself establish a breach
of a duty of care. Secondly, the trial
judge's conclusion that there was
probably grit on the stairs cannot establish a breach of a duty of care if that
breach is not otherwise
established, because the trial judge said it was
impossible to quantify the extent to which the grit increased the slipperiness
the surface. In any event it is difficult to support a conclusion that grit
was present in view of the plaintiff's lie about it
and Mr Firth's denial that
there was any grit.
Remaining ground of appeal on liability: causation
104 In view of the conclusion reached in relation to Grounds
1-3, it is not necessary to consider the remainder of the Notice
of Appeal or
the Cross Appeal. However, in deference to the submissions advanced, the
issues will be considered briefly.
105 Ground 5 of the Notice of Appeal was that the trial judge
erred in finding that the injuries and disabilities which she complained
were caused by the fall. The trial judge accepted large parts, though not all,
of the plaintiff's evidence about her symptoms
(at [207]). He accepted Dr
Wilson's diagnosis of fibromyalgia (at [208]-[211]) or in the alternative Dr
Shand's diagnosis of a psychiatric
disorder (at [212]). He also accepted Dr
Wilson's opinion that there was a causal link between the fall and her
condition (at [219]-[230]).
Dr Wilson explained the medical basis of his
diagnosis. In large measure there is concordance between various parts of the
plaintiff's
evidence about her symptoms and experience, being evidence accepted
by the trial judge, and the assumptions that underlay Dr Wilson's
The entire case excites suspicion, but Dr Wilson did give fairly clear evidence
indicating the relationship between what
can cause fibromyalgia and what he
understood the plaintiff to be complaining of. The trial judge found that
those complaints were
in large measure genuine. Though other causes may have
worsened the plaintiff's condition, it is not possible for this Court in
case to reject the trial judge's acceptance of Dr Wilson's evidence.
Other grounds of appeal
106 The balance of the grounds of appeal were supported by
submissions that the plaintiff's complaints were exaggerated, or in
alternative that only some of them were related to the fall. These contentions
must fail for the reasons given in relation to
Cross Appeal
107 The plaintiff cross-appealed on damages. In the end only
two categories of matter were pressed.
108 The first was that the trial judge erred in finding that
the plaintiff had a residual capacity to earn. The defendant demonstrated
at the trial in final address it had been conceded on the plaintiff's behalf
that the court might consider that she had some
future earning capacity and
that that equated to $200 net per week. The trial judge preferred that to a
higher figure propounded
by the defendant. The plaintiff's complaint on this
point is baseless.
109 The second matter, which was the subject of an
application to amend the Notice of Cross Appeal, was that the trial judge
failed to provide any amount for future pharmaceutical costs. These costs
consisted of $19 per week for medication and two massage
treatments at $50 per
week. As to an allowance for medication, the defendant pointed out that the
plaintiff itemised claims at the
trial for "Future medical and rehabilitation
expenses" totalling $76,860, including travel expenses of $6,121. The trial
judge allowed
the whole claim except for the travel expenses, which claim was
not pressed. In later submissions, between the first and second
reasons for judgment, the plaintiff did not complain of, and indeed accepted,
what the trial judge had done. Accordingly
the claim now made for future
pharmaceutical expenses should not be permitted because it goes beyond the case
fought at the trial.
As for the massage treatments, no claim for them was made
below, and for that reason no claim should be permitted now. The application
for leave to add the new ground of appeal is granted, but, if it became
necessary to consider that ground of cross appeal, it ought
to be rejected.
110 The following orders are proposed. They follow from the
reasons set out above. However, since the reasoning above in relation
Professor Morton's report was in large measure not advanced by the appellant,
it is not entitled to an order that the respondent
pay the costs of the
1. The appeal is allowed.
2. The verdict and judgment for the respondent at trial are set aside.
3. The order of the trial judge that the appellant pay the respondent's costs
of the proceedings is set aside.
4. The Statement of Claim is dismissed.
5. The respondent is ordered to pay the appellant's costs of the trial and of
the appeal.
6. The respondent is to have a certificate under the
Suitors Fund Act
relation to the costs of the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (280 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter