URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/141.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Liszt (No 2) [2025] NSWCATOD 141; (3 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Health Care Complaints Commission v Liszt (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 141
Hearing Date(s):
26 September 2025
Date of Orders:
3 November 2025
Decision Date:
3 November 2025
Occupational Division
A Starke, Senior Member
E Chiarella, Senior Member
T Coombs, Senior
J Eagleton, General Member
(1) Pursuant to s 149C(1)(b) of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW), the practitioner’s registration as
practitioner is cancelled, with a non-review period of twelve months pursuant to
s 149C(7) of the National Law.
(2) Pursuant to s
149C(5) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW), the
practitioner is prohibited from providing
health services as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(NSW) for a period of twelve
(3) Pursuant to clause 13 of Schedule 5D
to the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW), the practitioner is to
Commission’s costs as agreed or assessed in accordance with the
applicable costs legislation.
Catchwords:
OCCUPATION – Nursing – Application for disciplinary orders
where practitioner found guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within
the meaning of s 139B(1)(c)(i) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (NSW) in that the practitioner contravened
a condition to which the
practitioner’s registration is subject – practitioner found guilty
of professional misconduct
under s 139E of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) in that the practitioner engaged in more than one instance
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Legislation Cited:
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
Cases Cited:
Chen v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2017] NSWCA 186
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Brush
[2015] NSWCATOD 120
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Collins
[2021] NSWCATOD 132
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2020] NSWCATOD 72
Health Care Complaints Commission v Elshaimy
[2019] NSWCATOD 17
Health Care Complaints Commission v Liszt
[2025] NSWCATOD
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) NSWSC 297
Care Complaints Commission v Menz (No 2)
[2017] NSWCATOD 172
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Reid
[2018] NSWCATOD 162
Lee v Health Care Complaints
[2012] NSWCA 80
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA
Shelley v Nurses & Midwives Tribunal of NSW & Anor
[2007] NSWSC
Texts Cited:
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia, Code of Conduct for Nurses
(issued March 2018 and updated June 2022)
Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia and the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency, Registered
Nurse Standards for
Practice (June 2016)
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Adam Mitchel Liszt
(Respondent)
Representation:
E Bayley (Applicant)
Health Care
Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Respondent (Self-represented)
File Number(s):
2024/00383862
Publication Restriction:
Not applicable
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
matter concerns an application by the Health Care Complaints Commission
Commission”) under the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
(NSW) (“the
National Law”) for
disciplinary orders following the Tribunal’s findings in Stage 1
proceedings with respect to a complaint
(“Complaint”) against Adam
Mitchel Liszt, a registered nurse (“the
practitioner”).
decision is to be read in conjunction with the Tribunal’s findings and
decision in the Stage 1 hearing held on 31 July
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Liszt
[2025] NSWCATOD 99
Tribunal was satisfied that the practitioner contravened a condition imposed on
his registration (Condition 2) that required him
to attend a health assessment
with a Neuropsychologist. This amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct
under s 139B(1)(c) of
the National Law. The Tribunal was also satisfied that the
practitioner deliberately contravened the condition on two occasions without
reasonable excuse, in full knowledge of the seriousness and consequences of such
contravention. As a result, the Tribunal was satisfied
practitioner’s conduct reached the threshold of professional misconduct
under s 139E of the National Law.
Commission submitted that, since the subject matter of the Complaint was found
proven, the Tribunal should exercise its disciplinary
powers under s 149 of the
National Law to make protective orders. The Commission sought:
(1) cancellation of the practitioner’s registration, with a non-review
period of twelve months; and
(2) a prohibition order prohibiting the practitioner from providing a health
service as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(“the HCC Act”) for twelve months.
practitioner was self-represented and did not make written submissions. His
opening oral submissions reiterated some of the arguments
he had raised in the
Stage 1 proceedings. The Senior Member presiding explained the purpose of the
Stage 2 proceedings and asked
the practitioner to address the Tribunal’s
discretion to make disciplinary orders and, in particular, the orders sought by
the Commission.
the hearing the practitioner did not advance arguments to address what
disciplinary orders he considered may be appropriate,
having regard to the
Tribunal’s findings in the Stage 1 Decision. He neither directly advocated
for, nor opposed, a particular
course of action. However, his views on
supervision and his return to work options (not necessarily as a registered
nurse) were to
some extent disclosed during his cross-examination.
Tribunal considered whether the orders sought by the Commission were appropriate
in the interests of protecting the health and
safety of the public, being the
paramount consideration. Additionally, the Tribunal considered what orders would
serve to maintain
professional standards and uphold public confidence in the
standards of the profession, as well as deter the practitioner and other
practitioners from contravening conditions that may be imposed on their
registrations in the future.
Tribunal evaluated the seriousness of the practitioner’s repeated refusal
to have a neuropsychological assessment, and the
risk posed to the public if he
returned to nursing. In assessing the risk, the relevant evidence included his
performance assessment
results, his medical history, the opinion of Dr Anthony
Samuels (Consultant Psychiatrist) and his failure to meet both the mandatory
registration requirements of continuing professional development
(“CPD”) and recency of practice (“RoP”).
decided to cancel the practitioner’s registration, with a non-review
period of twelve months, and to make an order prohibiting
him from providing a
health service as defined in s 4 of the HCC Act for twelve months. We also
ordered the practitioner to pay the
Commission’s costs, as agreed or
Material relevant to the proceedings
support of its application for disciplinary orders filed on 8 May 2024, the
Commission relied upon:
(1) the material and evidence before the Tribunal in the Stage 1 proceeding;
(2) disclosures made by the practitioner in relation to renewal of his
registration in 2024 and 2025 (marked for identification as
(3) written submissions dated 28 August 2025 (not marked).
noted above, the practitioner did not file any material for consideration in the
Stage 2 hearing, but made short oral submissions.
He also gave oral testimony
and was cross-examined.
The hearing
the absence of written, and substantive oral, submissions from the practitioner,
we rely heavily upon statements made by him during
his cross-examination in
order to understand his position on a number of matters.
practitioner sought to ventilate some of the matters he had raised in the Stage
1 proceedings. In particular, he continued to
criticise the Council for not
referring him to an Impaired Registrants Panel (“IRP”)
requiring him to attend a health assessment. It was evident that the
practitioner refused to accept the Tribunal’s findings
in Stage 1, that
the sequence of events for referring a matter to an IRP requires a practitioner
to be medically assessed before
the IRP is convened. We note the exchange
between the Council and the practitioner during the s 150 hearing about the
sequence of
actions associated with referring him through the health pathway and
enable him to get back to work, as referred to in the Stage
1 Decision at
[358]-[359] and [361]-[362].
any event, to be clear, the Commission’s Complaint did not concern
impairment. Indeed, Dr Samuels had concluded that he did
not have sufficient
information available to provide a definitive opinion on impairment. The
Commission’s Complaint was concerned
solely with the issue as to whether
the practitioner had a reasonable excuse for not attending (on two occasions)
the health examination
as directed under Condition 2 of his registration.
asked whether he still maintained that he had a reasonable excuse for not
attending the assessments, the practitioner said that
at the time he did believe
he had a reasonable excuse but, in light of the Stage 1 Decision, he
acknowledged that his belief may
have been misconceived. He added that he
understood that it was still possible to appeal the Tribunal’s decision
and that he
had not excluded this as an option.
asked whether he thought there was something in the Stage 1 Decision that he
believed is not right, the practitioner said that
he believed he had a right to
understand the precise nature of the conduct that led to the s150 hearing
following the performance
assessment. We address this under
“Consideration” in these Reasons.
practitioner was asked whether he agreed with paragraph 378 in the Stage 1
Decision (extracted below) and whether he believed
he had a choice about
complying with the conditions imposed under s 150:
“We are satisfied that the practitioner was fully aware of the conditions
imposed on his registration, and the reasons given
by the Council as to why they
were imposed. We are also satisfied that he understood that contravention of
conditions is a serious
matter and could be regarded as professional misconduct.
Finally, we are also satisfied that the practitioner was fully aware of
consequences of failing to comply with the conditions, which is why the
Commission’s application for disciplinary findings
and orders is before
the Tribunal.”
evidence was that he was not aware that failure to comply could amount to
professional misconduct, and thought that it would be
regarded as unsatisfactory
professional conduct. However, he conceded that two occasions of failing to
comply could be regarded as
professional misconduct.
practitioner was referred to the following paragraph (under a heading
“Conclusion”) on page 21 of the Performance
Assessment Report dated
5 February 2021 and was asked whether he still had an issue with concentration
or whether this had been resolved:
“The assessors were also concerned at Mr Liszt’ lack of attention to
detail, disorganisation, distractability, and poor
short-term memory which were
evident throughout the assessment. The assessors feel a duty of care to raise
the possibility that an
underlying health issue may be impacting Mr
Liszt’s ability to acquire, retain and apply new knowledge in order to
consistently
perform his duties to the required standard.”
agreed that they were serious concerns, but suggested that they were possibly
due to his poor eyesight at the time which has since
been surgically corrected.
He said that he had not been given specific information about what the
assessors’ conclusion referred
to. He could not recall whether he had
discussed with the assessors his long-standing Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder (“ADHD”)
and treatment, and asserted that if he had been
referred to an IRP there would have been more information available, including
his vision. He said that he did not deny that he had the issues as
described in the Performance Assessment Report, but denied that
impairment affecting his practice.
practitioner was referred to the assessors’ recommendations that he
complete further education in the following areas of
practice (as noted on page
22 of their report):
administration
Pharmacology
Documentation
and ISBAR framework
General care of
the deteriorating patient
The national
COVID 19 clinical evidence taskforce guidelines
assessment, including mental state assessment, A-G assessment
Therapeutic
Planning and
evaluating care
aggression/de-escalation
practitioner acknowledged that it had been a long time since he had undertaken
any CPD education and that he would need a large
amount of time before he was
ready to return to nursing. His last nursing shift was on 9 June 2019, more than
six years ago. He said
he thought he would need 300 hours of clinical practice,
and that he had only undertaken one subject in 2023 in connection with his
Diploma of Mental Health. He acknowledged that he had not done any CPD relating
to the areas of practice identified in the assessors’
asked whether he thought it was a good idea to look for information on the
specified areas of practice for his further education,
the practitioner said
that it was obviously needed but that it had not been ordered.
for the Commission asked the practitioner whether he had looked into what was
needed to satisfy RoP requirements. He said
that he had not. He added that he
would need his clinical hours updated and whilst he conceded he did not know the
specific number
of hours of clinical practice that were required, he understood
that possibly 300 or 200 hours were necessary. He indicated that
he deferred to
the knowledge of the subject matter experts on the Tribunal panel for
confirmation.
asked whether his diagnosis of ADHD affects his capacity to practise, the
practitioner denied having an impairment (as defined
in the National Law), but
acknowledged that he had a condition. He said that given the long-standing
nature of the condition for
more than 20 years, it has been managed with
medication and he has only worked limited shifts which gave him control over his
agreed with a suggestion by Counsel for the Commission that an assessment by a
psychiatrist would be helpful to determine his capacity
to practise, and then
lapsed into a somewhat confusing analysis that there needed to be a complaint
for the matter to go to an IRP
hearing. He again postulated that his eyesight
could have been the cause for some of the concerns.
practitioner was referred to the disclosures he made with respect to the renewal
of his registration with the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency
(“Ahpra”) on 19 March 2024 and 26 June 2025. In both renewals, he
answered “yes”
to the question: “Do you meet the NMBA’s
recency of practice requirements?”. He also answered “Yes”
the question: “During your preceding period of registration, have you met
the NMBA’s continuing professional development
(CPD) requirements?”
He answered “No” to the question: “Do you have an impairment
that detrimentally affects,
or is likely to detrimentally affect, your capacity
to practise the profession?”
practitioner conceded that there may have been some errors in his renewal
declarations. When asked whether he had talked with
his treating doctors about
the assessment of his performance before completing the declarations, the
practitioner said that he did
not believe he has an impairment that
detrimentally affects his practice. He said that his treating psychiatrist was
generally aware
that there was some criticism of him in the performance
assessment, and made no further comment.
asked about his plans to return to nursing, the practitioner said that he had
only ever worked in mental health, his area of
expertise, and that he would not
seek to return to general nursing.
asked whether he would need a supervisor if he returned as a registered nurse,
he said that he usually worked as part of a team
on various wards in mental
health, and that the nurses supervise each other on a day-to-day basis. He said
that he would not need
a one-on-one supervisor in mental health.
terms of whether he would work in public or private health care, the
practitioner said that he was not well regarded in the public
environment and
that he would not be able to obtain a reference from his previous employer.
practitioner said that he had given some consideration to working as an
Assistant in Nursing or support worker with a non-government
organisation and
possibly not technically in a nursing role. Several years ago, he had been
offered a role working in an injecting
centre and he has considered the
possibility of working in a non-registered role, such as working with the
for the Commission asked the practitioner if he found it difficult to have trust
in the Council. His response was that he
had lost faith in the Council because
it had received a wrong complaint which had been left unresolved for five years.
It was suggested
that he had lost faith in the Council and the Commission, to
which he said that he had lost trust that the errors had occurred and
frustrated that the original complaint was superseded by continuing complaints
that had followed him through all the processes.
for the Commission noted that the practitioner had not made submissions for the
Stage 2 hearing and asked whether he had lost
trust in the Tribunal process. He
answered that he would not be in the hearing if he had lost trust in the
Tribunal process.
practitioner was asked whether he disputed the transcript of the Council’s
s 150 proceedings. The audio recording had been
provided to him, due to his
statement at the Stage 1 proceedings that the transcript was incorrect. However,
the practitioner said
that he had not listened to it, asserting that it is not
difficult to falsify audio recordings. The practitioner was asked whether
satisfied himself that email correspondence between himself and the Council was
accurate, to which he replied that they were
incomplete and therefore
inaccurate.
if he would need help to return to work as a registered nurse, the practitioner
said that he would need clinical supervision.
Asked if he would find it
difficult to deal with the Council regarding supervision, he said that it was a
big organisation and asserted
that he would not be concerned.
if he was ready to go back as a registered nurse conditional upon a health
assessment, the practitioner said that if the health
assessment relates to a
complaint, and an assessment was recommended, he would agree to
Relevant statutory provisions and legal principles
governing the exercise of disciplinary powers
Stage 1 Decision
at [192]-[205] set out the powers of the Tribunal if a
complaint is proved or admitted and the Tribunal’s powers to suspend
cancel a practitioner’s registration under s 149C(1) of the National Law.
also set out the principles governing the
Tribunal’s exercise of its disciplinary powers. We therefore only briefly
those principles in these Stage 2 Reasons.
and foremost, the Tribunal’s exercise of its disciplinary powers is
subject to the paramount consideration under s 3A
of the National Law, namely,
the protection of the health and safety of the public.
Tribunal’s discretion to make protective orders must be exercised in a way
that achieves the protective purpose.
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is primarily protective, and not punitive:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) NSWSC 30
is unavoidable that protective orders may be incidentally punitive:
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
and [31]. We
acknowledge that the orders may have adverse consequences for the
practitioner’s financial circumstances because,
if his registration is
cancelled, he will be unable to work as a registered nurse. However, those
consequences are a secondary consideration
to the paramount consideration, being
the health and safety of the public.
order should be made which has more serious consequences for the practitioner
than is reasonably necessary to promote the protective
purpose: s 3A(c) of the
National Law.
is a well-established principle that compliance with conditions imposed on a
practitioner’s registration must be “scrupulously
Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
Practitioners in many instances are able to retain their registration only
because a Council is satisfied that conditions
imposed ameliorate risk to the
public and/or maintain a practitioner’s health and well-being:
Care Complaints Commission v Reid
[2018] NSWCATOD 162
wilful breaches of conditions are treated by the Medical Tribunal as a most
serious finding against a practitioner, “containing
as it does a grave
criticism of the standard of the practitioner’s conduct”:
v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
orders serve to:
(1) maintain the standards of the profession;
(2) preserve public confidence in the profession;
(3) preserve public confidence in the protection of the public;
(4) prevent repeat behaviour by the practitioner;
(5) denounce the practitioner’s conduct and deter others from engaging in
similar conduct and encourage other practitioners
to recognise the importance of
complying with professional standards and complying with conditions imposed upon
their registration.
Evaluative process to determine the outcome of each case
number of comparable cases may be said to have achieved outcomes that assist the
Tribunal in deciding what protective orders are
appropriate. However, when
determining the outcome for a health practitioner, each case before the Tribunal
must be considered on
its own merits and this involves an evaluative judgment to
be made, having regard to the nature and seriousness of the conduct. This
confirmed by the Court of Appeal in
Chen v Health Care Complaints
[2017] NSWCA 186
per Basten JA at [20] (with whom
Leeming JA agreed):
“There is no category of unsatisfactory professional conduct which is not
capable, depending on the circumstances, of giving
rise to professional
misconduct and hence engaging the power of either suspension or cancellation of
registration. The only requirement
is that it be ‘sufficiently
serious’ to justify such an order, a characterisation which must depend
upon an evaluative
judgment made by the Tribunal. Some, perhaps all, categories
include conduct which may reveal a defect of character as to which the
may conclude that the person should not be allowed to practise his or her
profession unless at some future date the practitioner
is able to satisfy the
Tribunal that the defect has been overcome. Incompetence or inadequate care may
in some circumstances be remediable
by specific steps; in other circumstances
the Tribunal may be concerned that the carelessness, for example, is such as to
on the suitability of the person to practise medicine. Each of the
criteria for cancellation or suspension may be analysed in this
way. Each case
will depend upon an evaluative judgment to be made by the Tribunal as to the
nature and seriousness of the conduct.”
Decision to cancel registration is not dependent upon finding the
practitioner to be permanently unfit
is not necessary for the Tribunal to make a finding that the practitioner is
probably permanently unfit to practise before registration
can be cancelled:
per Payne JA at [67]-[71]. In particular, we note the analysis at
“A requirement of probably permanent unfitness is also inconsistent with
the statute’s contemplation that a practitioner
is able to re-apply for
registration under s 149C(7). That sub-section contemplates that a practitioner
may apply to have the question
of whether he or she lacks fitness to practise
re-visited. The emphasis in such an application is on the practitioner’s
fitness to practise, rather than an assessment of “probable
permanent unfitness”.”
Deciding any non-review period if registration is cancelled
explained in the
Stage 1 Decision
at [203]-[205], the Tribunal has
discretion to cancel a practitioner’s registration and decide the length
of any non-review
period: s 149C(7) of the National Law.
non-review period is not determined through an arithmetical process, but through
a process of instinctive synthesis using the
specialised experience and
knowledge of the Tribunal:
Shelley v Nurses & Midwives Tribunal of NSW
[2007] NSWSC 1240
Awarding costs
against the practitioner
Stage 1 Decision
at [206]-[208] identified the relevant provisions in the
National Law under which the Tribunal has power to order the practitioner
the Commission’s costs of proceedings.
Health Care Complaints Commission v Elshaimy
[2019] NSWCATOD 17
the Tribunal confirmed that, as a general rule, the successful party is entitled
to receive payment for their costs and mere impecuniosity
on the part of another
party does not justify a departure from that rule. The rule is only displaced
where there has been some disentitling
conduct by the successful party:
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
has been applied by the Tribunal in several decisions (noted in the
Consideration
The issues to be determined
view of our findings in the
Stage 1 Decision
, we are satisfied that it is
appropriate to exercise the Tribunal’s disciplinary powers under Part 8,
Division 3, Subdivision
6 of the Law.
the Tribunal found the practitioner guilty of professional misconduct, it has
discretion to suspend or cancel his registration,
with the protection of the
health and safety of the public being the paramount consideration: s 3A of the
National Law.
issues to be determined are:
(1) whether to:
(a) do any one or more of the actions set out in s 149A of the National Law such
as to caution or reprimand the practitioner, or
impose conditions considered to
be appropriate on his registration, or order him to complete educational
courses; or
(b) impose a fine on the practitioner under s 149B of the National Law; or
(c) suspend his registration for a specified period or cancel his registration
under s 149C(1) of the National Law; and/or
(d) make an order under s 149C(7) of the National Law to provide that an
application for review of an order may not be made until
after a specified
(e) make an order under s 149C(5) of the National Law prohibiting him from
providing a health service as defined in
Health Care Complaints
(2) whether to order the practitioner to pay the Commission’s costs
pursuant to Sch 5D, cl 13 of the National Law.
Two important matters to consider: Risk and qualifications to
of the key objectives of the national registration and accreditation scheme
established under the National Law, is to ensure that
only health practitioners
who are “suitably trained and qualified to practise in a competent and
ethical manner are registered”:
of the National Law.
(the paramount consideration) and
of the National Law
(training and qualifications), there are two important matters to consider in
this case. First, are there any
risks to the public associated with Mr Liszt
practising as a nurse? Second, is the practitioner
trained and qualified to practise, satisfying a key objective of the National
Assessment of the practitioner’s risk to the public
and current qualifications to practise
a result of the matters disclosed by the practitioner in his performance
interview, the interviewers held concerns that he had
not maintained
contemporaneous practice during his 20 years of working on the basis of casual
shifts (sometimes only one shift per
week) and he had failed to complete the
mandatory CPD requirements. Additionally, his performance had not been formally
in 20 years. As a result, the interviewers recommended that the
practitioner undertake a performance assessment in order to evaluate
whether his
clinical skills and decision-making abilities were at the standard expected of a
registered nurse with his years of experience.
practitioner’s performance assessment demonstrated that he had deficits in
communication, general patient assessment, medication
administration, infection
control, comprehensive mental health and risk assessment, and nursing
documentation processes. He appeared
to have trouble with concentration, focus,
memory and organisation. The assessors expressed concern at the
practitioner’s lack
of attention to detail, distractibility and poor
short-term memory. They felt a duty of care to raise the possibility that an
health issue may be impacting the practitioner’s ability to
acquire, retain and apply new knowledge in order to consistently
perform his
duties to the required standard.
assessors recommended that the practitioner attend an independent health
assessment to determine whether any modifiable barriers
existed to his
acquisition, retention and application of new knowledge, to inform the level and
order to achieve independent practice. As we
know, an appointment was made for the practitioner to attend an appointment with
Breen pursuant to s 152B(1) of the National Law (noting this was an
appointment made prior to the Council convening a hearing under
s 150 of the
National Law). However, the practitioner failed to attend that appointment.
address the practitioner’s oral evidence in this Stage 2 proceeding that
he did not understand the precise nature of the
conduct that led to the
Council’s s150 hearing. At the time of convening the hearing, the Council
had the performance assessment
results and the practitioner had failed to attend
the appointment with Dr Breen. Drawing from the
Stage 1 Decision
paragraph [345]:
“As a consequence, under s 152B(4) of the National Law, his failure to
comply with the notice to attend the examination was
that he did
not have sufficient physical or mental capacity to practise and, accordingly,
the Council was entitled to consider whether
it was appropriate to exercise its
power under s 150 for the protection of the public.”
Stage 1 Decision
explains, the Council imposed Condition 2 upon his
registration, for the protection of the health and safety of the public,
him to have a health assessment. The practitioner failed to attend a
health assessment on two occasions, in breach of Condition 2
(the subject of the
Commission’s Complaint). When subsequently referred to Dr Samuels, another
assessment which he failed to
attend (although this was not required pursuant to
Condition 2 but in order to explore whether the practitioner had an impairment),
Dr Samuels opined that the practitioner had limited insight into his performance
and functioning. Indeed, the practitioner erroneously
believed that he had
complied with mandatory CPD requirements and that his performance assessment had
Samuels said that he did not have sufficient information available to provide a
definitive opinion as to whether the practitioner
suffers from an impairment,
but made the following assessment of his risk to the public:
“There clearly are serious concerns about Mr Liszt’s clinical
abilities and capacity to safely practise as a Registered
Nurse. Until he is
willing to undertake a neuropsychological assessment and is prepared to be
reviewed by a Council appointed psychiatrist,
it will be difficult to get a
clear understanding of any mental health impairments that might be contributing
to his performance
difficulties. Until he is willing to comply with Council
processes and a comprehensive evaluation can be completed, he should not,
view, return to a nursing role as he may well represent a risk to the
practitioner disclosed to the Council in the s 150 hearing that he had been
diagnosed with ADHD for which he had been treated
for 20 years. He maintains
that he does not have an impairment as defined in the National Law, but that he
has a condition which
is managed and which does not negatively affect his
performance.
the National Law, impairment with respect to a registered health practitioner is
as follows:
, in relation to a person, means the person has a physical or
mental impairment, disability, condition or disorder (including substance
or dependence) that detrimentally affects or is likely to detrimentally
(a) for a registered health practitioner or an applicant for registration in a
health profession, the person’s capacity to
practise the profession;
the medical evidence available to the Tribunal, the practitioner’s
treating psychiatrist (Dr Michael O’Shea) noted
in July 2018 the
practitioner’s ADHD symptoms including that he had “difficulty
sustaining attention and concentration”
as well as “organisation
issues”. In June 2019, the psychiatrist noted that the practitioner was
easily distracted from
his thoughts.
September 2019, the psychiatrist provided a medical certificate (apparently to
enable the practitioner to continue to receive benefits
through Centrelink) that
he was unfit for work for 3 months. The certificate noted ADHD as a condition
which impacts upon the practitioner’s
capacity to work, as well as
attention and concentration problems. The practitioner appears to have responded
to the psychiatrist’s
issue of the certificate, by asking for a
“report” to be given to Centrelink. In his correspondence with Dr
the practitioner stated: “Your “report” could
mention my deceased ability to work because of the medication trials
in the last
year or so.” We have no further information on the “medication
trials” but note the practitioner’s
own assessment of his ability to
work as being “deceased” (or possibly meaning
“decreased”).
Whether to caution or reprimand or fine
the practitioner
acknowledge that cautioning or reprimanding or fining the practitioner may serve
to deter him from repeating his conduct, although
we have a concern that his
pattern of non-compliant behaviour may indicate that this is an entrenched
characteristic, which is unlikely
to change without therapeutic intervention. It
is more likely to have the effect of deterring
practitioners from
breaching conditions that may be imposed on their registration. We hold the view
that issuing a caution or a reprimand
or a fine indirectly supports the
protective purpose, but does little to ameliorate any risk to the health and
safety of the public.
Whether to impose conditions on the
practitioner’s registration
practitioner has demonstrated strong and consistent non-compliant behaviour.
This is evidenced in his refusal to comply with directions
to have a health
assessment before Condition 2 was imposed, as well as his refusal to comply with
Condition 2. He is also non-compliant
with respect to CPD requirements. We
accept the submissions put forward by the Commission that all health
practitioners are expected
to scrupulously comply with conditions placed on
their registration and that the public is entitled to expect that registered
will comply with conditions imposed on their registration.
we have no confidence that this practitioner will comply with conditions if they
were imposed in the future, particularly
given his oral evidence that his
willingness to have a health assessment was conditional upon there being a
complaint, and in light
of his expressed lack of trust in the Council processes.
The practitioner appears to still be obsessed with what he believes is a
requirement to be referred to an IRP before having an assessment. He appears to
still have a confused misunderstanding about how
the National Law operates and
the processes associated with referring a practitioner through the health
are mindful of Dr Samuels’ assessment (at paragraphs 213 to 216 of his
report) that the practitioner is oppositional and
uncooperative, with rigid
aspects to his personality:
“It is evident that he has an oppositional and conflictual personality
style, instead of acceding to his employer’s request
for completion of
mandatory training, he opted to litigate, he refused to conciliate in the
hearings and ultimately the Commissioner
dismissed the matter. Mr Liszt has
interacted with the Council and the HCCC in much the same manner, he has refused
to comply with
the assessment process which led to a ‘not to
practise’ condition being placed on his registration.
The tone of his interpersonal interactions with regulatory bodies, his
communication style, suspiciousness, concerns about deceit,
documents being
tampered with and information being withheld from him suggests the possibility
of a significant underlying Personality
Disorder with paranoid features.
He is grandiose including as evidenced by his seemingly authoritative,
legalistic communications. Despite his limited legal training
he provides
quasi-legal opinions to the regulatory authorities, outlining his interpretation
of various Acts and what he believes
they can and cannot do.
He exhibits a sense of entitlement and disregard for the processes of the Health
regulatory authorities. These factors suggest the
present of narcissistic
personality traits.
There also appear to be quite rigid aspects to his personality characterised by
his unwellness to back down, or to comply with regulatory
processes, pursuing a
legal rather than a conciliatory approach, appears to have led to a situation
that has become unnecessarily
complicated both with his employer and the health
regulatory authorities. His ongoing unwillingness to comply with directives to
have a health assessment including not attending to see me today seems to be
further evidence of a significant Personality Disorder
or possibly even an
emerging psychotic illness...”
Whether to suspend the practitioner’s registration
suspension is made conditional, the practitioner’s registration will occur
automatically at the end of the period of
suspension. In the case before us, it
would clearly be necessary to impose a condition that Mr Liszt be examined by a
Neuropsychologist,
and that he demonstrates he has satisfied the mandatory CPD
and RoP requirements before he could be re-registered. It may also be
to impose conditions for him to be supervised and/or mentored for an appropriate
period of time upon re-registration, until
he can demonstrate that he is capable
of practising safely and independently. Clearly, these are necessary and
practical considerations
for the Tribunal. We find the comments in
per Basten JA at [21], which compare suspension with cancellation, to be
particularly instructive:
Finally, in determining whether to suspend the
practitioner’s registration or cancel it, it is entirely appropriate for
Tribunal to take into account the consequences of the order being
considered. Unless a period of suspension is made conditional,
renewal of the
practitioner’s registration will occur automatically on completion of the
period of suspension. By contrast,
an order of cancellation will require the
practitioner to justify re-registration. Uncertainty as to the future may lead
the Tribunal
to cancel a registration rather than suspend it.”
concerns about the practitioner’s health are supported by the performance
assessors’ stated observations, the Council’s
statements to the
practitioner during the s 150 hearing and Dr Samuels’ opinion, all of
which we find to be very persuasive.
We are not satisfied that the
practitioner’s underlying medical issues and treatment for a long-standing
condition render him
currently safe to practise. He acknowledged to his treating
psychiatrist that concentration and his tendency to become easily distracted
have been issues to deal with for a very long period of time.
are not at all persuaded that his vision was entirely, or even partly,
responsible for his poor performance in the simulated assessment
exercises. It
may have been a small contributing factor in reading and calculating the correct
administration of medications. We
say this because he did not raise his impaired
vision at the time of the assessment, and only introduced it as a potential
(without substantiating evidence) in his line of arguments during the
Stage 1 hearing.
respect to the second aspect concerning his qualifications to practise, his oral
evidence in the Stage 2 hearing disclosed three
matters that we regard as
matters causing concern:
(1) First, he has not demonstrated any motivation to undertake, or even search
for, courses to enable him to satisfy the recommended
CPD requirements;
(2) Second, he appears to hold the view that he will only need to complete
further education if ordered to do so. This demonstrates
a lack of intrinsic
motivation on his part to meet the mandatory qualifications. It also highlights
the futility of making orders
with which the practitioner may refuse to comply,
having regard to his past behaviour and his current expressed disposition of
faith in the Council processes. In the Stage 2 hearing, he continued to
criticise the Council for not resolving the issue of the
original anonymous
complaint, a matter that had no relevance to the Commission’s prosecution
of its Complaint. He remains combative
and oppositional about that irrelevant
issue. His relationship with the Council, if supervision were to be a condition
of his registration,
would be fraught with difficulty because of the
practitioner’s tendency to be oppositional and to doubt the integrity and
of documents and objective assessments;
(3) Third, he has a lack of insight into his level of knowledge/expertise and
his practical performance, as demonstrated by his false
declarations when
renewing his registration with Ahpra in 2024 and 2025.
note that, in order to satisfy the current RoP requirements, it is necessary to
have a minimum of 450 hours of practice over the
past five years. The practice
hours include both clinical and non-clinical hours and they do not need to be
continuous in that they
can be accumulated over the five-year period. Mr Liszt
has not worked as a registered nurse since June 2019, more than five years
accept the Commission’s submissions that the practitioner’s
concentration difficulties may affect his practice as a
registered nurse if he
were permitted to return to practice after a suspension. Nurses have a
responsibility to maintain their physical
and mental health to practise safely
and effectively: Principle 7 (Health and wellbeing) in the Code of Conduct for
Nurses issued
by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
(“NMBA”), issued in March 2018 and updated in June 2022. Nurses are
responsible
and accountable for ensuring they are safe, and have the capability,
to practise: Standard 3 (Maintains the capability for practice)
Registered Nurse Standards for Practice issued by the NMBA and Ahpra in June
2016. Those Standards require nurses to complete
tasks which require full
concentration (such as accurately conducting comprehensive and systematic
assessments, being responsible
for the planning and communication of nursing
practice and using a variety of thinking strategies and the best available
in making decisions and providing safe, quality nursing practice).
the same reasons given above with respect to the futility of imposing conditions
on the practitioner, we have no confidence that
Mr Liszt will comply with
conditions attaching to the consequences of suspension coming to an end.
Therefore, we do not believe that
suspending his registration for a specified
period will address the fundamental underlying concerns we have about his
health and his current qualifications to practise. We do not believe
that suspension, with such uncertainty as to the future, assists
in ameliorating
the fundamental and paramount consideration, namely, protection of the health
and safety of the public. Suspension,
in our view, would be inadequate to
protect the public.
Whether to cancel the practitioner’s
registration
light of the above concerns about the practitioner’s concentration and
distractability difficulties, the assessment of his
performance, his CPD and RoP
deficits, it is appropriate and proportionate to cancel his registration, in the
interests of protecting
the health and safety of the public.
acknowledge that the consequences of cancellation impact upon his capacity to
earn an income as a registered nurse and that he
may require a formal re-entry
program approved by the NMBA after not having practised after such a long period
as already noted, the objectives of the national registration scheme provide for
the protection of the public by “ensuring
that only health practitioners
who are suitably trained and qualified to practise in a competent and ethical
manner are registered”:
of the National Law. We have no
confidence that the practitioner is currently competent to communicate with
patients, colleagues,
and patient’s treating doctors. We have no
confidence that he is currently competent to accurately calculate medications
administration to patients. These are simply two practical issues that we
identify, arising from the assessors’ evaluation
of Mr Liszt’s
competency. Dr Samuels held serious concerns about Mr Liszt’s clinical
abilities and capacity to safely
practise as a registered nurse.
have no confidence that Mr Liszt understands the requirement to have his health
assessed, in light of his long-standing ADHD diagnosis
and the matters opined by
Dr Samuels in his report and during the Stage 1 hearing. Accordingly, while Mr
Liszt continues to refuse
to attend a health assessment, we cannot be confident
that he currently has the capacity to practise safely.
Tribunal has the power and discretion to set a non-review period with respect to
an order cancelling a practitioner’s registration:
s 149C(7) of the
National Law. The purpose of setting a non-review period is to protect the
health and safety of the public. The
effect of setting a non-review period is
that a practitioner may not make an application for review of the cancellation
order during
the non-review period: s 163A(3) of the National Law.
the end of the non-review period, the practitioner will be entitled to make an
application to the Tribunal for reinstatement: s
163A(1) of the National
duration of the non-review period indicates the minimum period within which the
Tribunal considers the practitioner should not
be able to practise his
profession by sending a clear message of denouncement of the offending conduct
to the practitioner, other
practitioners, and the public about the importance of
complying with registration conditions and professional standards to be
maintained.
practitioner acknowledged that it was a long time since he had undertaken any
CPD and that he would need a large amount of time
before he was ready to return
to nursing. His last nursing shift was on 9 June 2019, more than six years
are of the view that the non-review period will allow the practitioner time
(1) complete further education on the topics identified by the performance
assessors and regarding current nursing skills and practice;
(2) complete further reading regarding current applicable codes and
(3) engage with a psychiatrist to have his current diagnosis and medication
re-evaluated to understand any mental health issues that
may be contributing to
his performance difficulties;
(4) engage with an appropriately qualified neuropsychologist to assess whether
he has any concentration difficulties or inability
to think and function without
being easily distracted, and to undergo therapy if necessary;
(5) reflect upon his oppositional and combative character traits with the
assistance of a qualified neuropsychologist, with a view
to demonstrating his
willingness to comply with reasonable directions and his worthiness to hold
registration in the event that he
seeks to apply to be registered in the future.
balance, for the reasons set out above, we consider that a non-review period of
twelve months is appropriate in the circumstances
Whether to prohibit the practitioner from providing a
health service
Commission also sought a prohibition order against the practitioner under s
149C(5) of the National Law, arguing that he could
seek to use his nursing
training and experience to work as an unregistered health practitioner.
circumstances when the Tribunal cancels a practitioner’s registration, and
is satisfied the person poses a substantial risk
to the health of members of the
public, it may exercise its discretion to make an order prohibiting the person
from providing health
services. The phrase “substantial risk to the health
of members of the public” is not defined in the National Law. It
however, been considered by the Tribunal to be a risk that is material and real
or apparent on the evidence. It is not a risk
that is without substance and is
not merely speculative:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Brush
NSWCATOD 120
and more recently in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[2021] NSWCATOD 132
question of whether a person poses a substantial risk to the health of the
public is assessed by evaluating the risk posed to
the public if the person were
to be involved in the provision of health services:
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Menz (No 2)
[2017] NSWCATOD 172
Health Care
Complaints Commission v De Lore
[2020] NSWCATOD 72
our view, if the practitioner was permitted to provide health services as an
unregistered practitioner during the period when his
registration is cancelled,
it would undermine the protective purpose of the cancellation order. This is a
matter of concern where
we hold a concern about his concentration and
distractability difficulties, which could pose a risk to patients and the
general public.
The performance assessors stated they held concerns about the
practitioner’s health and the possibility that an underlying
health issue
may be impacting his ability to acquire, retain and apply new knowledge in order
to consistently perform his duties
to the required standard. This holds true for
the nature of work that the practitioner said he had contemplated, such as in an
centre, where vulnerable people who suffer drug addiction rely upon
professional, accurate advice and supervision. On the evidence
before us, the
risk to patient health and safety is not speculative, but is material and
Accordingly,
we consider that a prohibition order under s 149C(5) of the National Law, for a
period of twelve months, is reasonable
and appropriate in the
circumstances.
Awarding costs
cannot see that there has been any disentitling conduct by the Commission to
warrant a departure from the general rule regarding
Accordingly,
we have decided to order the practitioner to pay the Commission’s costs as
agreed or assessed in accordance with
the applicable costs
legislation.
make the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to s 149C(1)(b) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW), the practitioner’s registration as a
health practitioner is
cancelled, with a non-review period of twelve months pursuant to s 149C(7) of
the National Law.
(2) Pursuant to s 149C(5) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW), the practitioner is prohibited from providing
health services as defined
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(NSW) for a period of twelve
(3) Pursuant to clause 13 of Schedule 5D to the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW), the practitioner is to pay the
Commission’s costs as
agreed or assessed in accordance with the applicable costs legislation.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (326 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter