URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jakovljevic v South Western Sydney Area Health Service [2003] NSWCC 17 (23 July 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Jakovljevic v South
Western Sydney Area Health Service [2003] NSWCC 17
Bilijana Jakovljevic
South Western Sydney Area Health Service t/as
Liverpool Health Service
CASE NUMBER: 57268 of 1999 of
CATCH WORDS: Statutes & Delegated
Legislation
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Armitage
DATES OF HEARING: 23rd July 2003
EX TEMPORE DATE:
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT: Mr Adamo
instructed by Stojanovic Solicitors.
FOR RESPONDENT: Mr Hargraves (sol)
instructed by PricewaterhouseCoopers Legal.
1. This is a motion by Bilijana Jakovljevic against South Western Sydney Area
Health Service. The motion, which was filed on 4 July
2003, seeks orders that
the matter be restored to the list and others that need not detain me now. It
is supported by two affidavits.
The first is of the claimant’s solicitor,
Chris Brennan. After swearing that affidavit on 3 July 2003, Mr Brennan filed
this Court a Notice of Change of Solicitor on 14 July 2003, indicating that
he is now the solicitor for the claimant. Mr Brennan’s
relevantly reads:
3. I was instructed on 6 May 2003 to act on behalf of the applicant to
have this matter restored to the list.
4. On examining the file and contacting the Workers Compensation Court
was informed that the matter had been struck out on 14 May
5. I was instructed that my client was unable to attend the hearing date
on 8 February 2001 due to illness and that whilst her matter
was struck out the
applicant was granted leave to have the matter restored to the list.
6. I was further instructed that my client was not made aware as to why
the matter was not re-listed or why an application to have
the matter restored
to the list was not put before the Court.
7. After examining the file I can indicate to the Court that the applicant
was advised of the orders made on 8 February 2001. However,
there does not
appear to be any further advice given to the applicant as to what has occurred
subsequent to that date.
2. The second affidavit supporting the motion is from the claimant herself,
and relevantly it reads:
3. The matter was last listed before the Court on 14 May 2001. I advise
that I was unable to attend Court as I aggravated my back
pain early in the
morning while moving around the kitchen. I went to the doctor at the Macquarie
Street Medical Centre, Liverpool.
He organised an x-ray and upon returning to
the doctor with the x-ray he told me to go home and rest my back.
4. I rang my solicitor before 9 am and told his solicitor that I had to go
to the doctor’s because of my back problem.
5. On contacting my solicitors the next day I discovered that my matter
had been struck out.
6. I then attended my solicitor’s office and signed an affidavit
explaining my absence and I gave him a medical certificate
from my general
practitioner. Attached and marked annexure "A" is Dr R. Bright’s medical
certificate dated 14 May 2001.
Attached and marked annexure "B" is x-ray
referral dated 14 May 2001.
7. Although I have contacted my solicitors by phone on numerous occasions
and wrote to him on two occasions thereafter I have not
been advised what
further action I needed to take in order to have my matter re-listed for
8. I rang WorkCover between the middle and the end of 2002 and it was then
that I took steps to instruct another solicitor.
3. The medical certificate annexed indicates that on 14 May 2001, the date on
the certificate, the claimant was suffering from back
pain and was unable to
work from the date of the certificate until 14 August 2001. The x-ray referral
annexed to the affidavit simply
refers to the carrying out of an x-ray on the
claimant’s thoracic spine on 14 May 2001 by a Dr Cohen on referral from Dr
4. On 14 May 2001 I struck the application out on the respondent’s
application, reserving liberty to the applicant to apply
to restore the matter
on her affidavit, giving a reasonable explanation for her absence that day. I
noted that the applicant had
not attended for a second time (referring to her
attendance at Court), no medical certificate having been provided, she having
her solicitors indicating she was ill. I indicated that she had not
attended for the second time because I was told by the parties
that it was
agreed that this was the state of affairs when the matter was earlier adjourned
before Commissioner Wright of this Court
on 8 February 2001.
5. The current motion came before Quirk J on 15 July last when her Honour
made orders regarding the conduct of the current motion
which do not require
attention as the parties do not suggest they were not complied with, and her
Honour then adjourned the matter
for hearing before me today.
6. Mr Hargraves, solicitor for the respondent on the motion, submits that the
matter is caught by the combined operation of
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
") and reg 93 of the
Workers Compensation (General) Regulation 1995
("Regulation 93"). He points
which reads:
Subject to this
, the Commission [the Workers’ Compensation
Commission] has exclusive jurisdiction to examine, hear and determine all
arising under this
and the 1987
7. He refers then to subs (3) which relevantly reads:
The Commission does not have jurisdiction in respect of matters that the
Compensation Court has jurisdiction to examine, hear and
determine ...
and says that this refers one to subs (4), which relevantly reads:
Subject to this
Compensation Court Act 1984
, the Compensation
Court has exclusive jurisdiction to examine, hear and determine all existing
claim matters...
8. He points also to subs (5) which reads:
Compensation Court Act 1984
, the Compensation Court
does not have jurisdiction to reconsider a matter, or to rescind, alter or amend
any decision previously
made or given by the Court in relation to a matter, once
the matter has become a new claim matter.
9. He takes me to reg 93 which relevantly reads:
(1) On and from 1 April 2002, each existing claim in respect of which
there is no pending application for determination by the Compensation
to be treated as a new claim for the purposes of the Workers Compensation Acts
(under Sch 6
cl 5 to the 1987
(2) An existing claim in respect of which an application for determination
by the Compensation Court is pending on 1 April 2002 is
to be treated as a new
claim for the purposes of the Workers Compensation Acts (under Sch 6
to the 1987
(a) On the day on which the Compensation Court makes a final award or
order determining the claim (including a consent award or
(b) On the day on which the claim is resolved by an agreement between the
parties being registered under
A of the 1987
whichever occurs first.
10. Mr Hargraves submits simply that because the Application for
Determination in the present matter, which was originally filed on
(an amended Application for Determination having been filed on 28 November 2000)
was struck out by me on 14 May 2001,
this was a "
Regulation 93(2)
and the application thus is not an
"existing claim
within the meaning of
and is caught by
Regulation 93(1)
quoted above, and thus by
, so that the Commission has exclusive
"Existing claim matter"
is defined in
“any matter arising under the Workers Compensation Acts in
respect of an existing claim”,
"existing claim"
in the same
sub-section is defined as:
A claim for compensation that is made before the commencement of this
section or a related claim that is made or entitled to be made
(whether before
or after the commencement of this section).
11. Mr Hargraves points to the decision of Neilson J in
Farris v C B
Richard Ellis (C) Pty Limited
[2002] NSWCC 12
(2002) 23 NSWCCR 394
, followed by his Honour
Harder v Waterford Wedgewood Australia Limited
[2002] NSWCC 31
(2002) 23 NSWCCR 551.
In those cases his Honour decided that where a matter was
"deemed struck
by the operation of CCR
r 4(1) as at 1 April 2002, it was then
Regulation 93
and hence this Court had no
Honour referred to the
decision of the Court of Appeal in
[2000] NSWCA 60
(2000) 48 NSWLR 598
distinguished it in both cases. In
Central Tablelands County Council v
[2002] NSWCC 24
(2002) 23 NSWCCR 442
Haynes v Haynes
[2002] NSWCC 28
(2002) 23 NSWCCR 472
his Honour found exceptions to the operation of
Regulation 93
on grounds not
occurring in the present case, and the claimant here does not contend that
has any application in this case.
12. Bishop J in a decision to which I drew the parties’ attention,
Fraser v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(2002) 23 NSWCCR 745
exception to
and distinguished
proceedings were deemed struck out, if I may so put it, under
the Compensation Court Rules, because the application there had not been
"deemed struck out"
until after 1 April 2002, the date from which s 105
and Regulation 93 operate, and his Honour therefore held that the proceedings
as at that date and therefore involved an
claim matter"
That is not the situation here because the proceedings were
struck out by me on 14 May 2001. His Honour further observed in that
749[19] that:
Any motion to restore a matter to the list, say, in 2003 would, it seems
to me in the light of the Parliament’s clearly expressed
direction, face a
huge discretionary hurdle in the shape of delay.
13. His Honour did not think the delay in that case fatal, but those are
observations which ought guide me in the current case, it
seems to me.
14. Mr Adamo for the claimant seeks to avoid the operation of s 105 as
interpreted in
on the following basis. He
points out that in the present case I reserved liberty to apply to have the
matter restored to the list,
notwithstanding my order striking it out, and says
that this means the proceedings were
as at 1 April 2002 within
the meaning of Regulation 93. He says this is because of what was said by the
Court of Appeal in
Ku-Ring-Gai
Municipal Council v Bonnici
where in relation to reservation of liberty to apply, Meagher JA
quoted with approval at [18] from what was said by McLelland J in
(1990) 20 NSWLR 206
at 209-210 where his Honour said this:
The question whether any particular application could properly be made in
existing proceedings is a matter to be determined according
to general law
principles as modified by any relevant statutory provision. One such provision
of the general law is that when proceedings
have been disposed of by a final
order which has been entered, the proceedings are at an end and cannot be
revived: see generally
Bailey v Marinoff
[1971] HCA 49
(1971) 125 CLR 529
Nominal Defendant
[1977] HCA 7
(1977) 136 CLR 145
FAI General Insurance Co
Limited v Southern Cross Exploration NL
[1988] HCA 13
(1988) 165 CLR 268.
There are a
number of exceptions and qualifications to this principle but none has any
relevance to the present application, unless
it be that subsequent to a final
order application may be made for the purpose of dealing with a matter involved
in, or arising in
the course of, working out that order; for example, by making
more specific provision for its implementation or by modifying its
operation to
take account of some subsequent change of circumstance or by enforcing it. This
exception or qualification does not,
however, extend to an application made for
the purpose of giving substantive relief not sought in the statement of claim
is substantially different to that given by the final order.
15. Authorities are given for the latter proposition in the quotation.
16. That quotation, says Mr Adamo, means that by my reservation of liberty to
apply, power was reserved to deal with the current motion,
and that because the
Court could have made an order pursuant to that liberty to apply, had it been
asked to do so, before 1 April
2002, the present proceedings were
as at that date within the meaning of Regulation 93,
final order
" having been made, and that therefore s 105 does not have
application so as to deny this Court jurisdiction.
17. Mr Hargraves replies to that submission by pointing to the qualification
in the quotation set out above where McLelland J referred
"general law
principles as modified by any relevant statutory provision"
and says that s
105 is one such provision, and means that the doctrine expressed in the above
quotation has no application here.
18. I do not agree. It seems to me that Mr Adamo’s submission is well
founded, because my order was not a "
final order
" determining the claim
(something Mr Hargraves did not press in argument) and because the specific
reservation of liberty to apply
by me, giving the applicant an opportunity to
explain her absence due to illness on the day I struck the matter out, seems to
to fall within the principles enunciated in
Phillips v Walsh
because the present application is, within the principle in
as cited in
made for the purpose of
dealing with a matter involved in or arising in the course of, working out that
order". by modifying its operation
to take account of some subsequent change of
circumstance
", here the existence of an explanation for the
applicant’s failure to appear, something I specifically contemplated when
liberty to apply as set out above. It is not contested by Mr
Hargraves that at any time before 1 April 2002 I could have made orders
to that liberty to apply, had I been asked to do so. The matter was therefore
in that sense within Regulation 93 as at that date, it seems to
me, and therefore I have jurisdiction to entertain the current motion.
19. However, unfortunately for the claimant I do not think it should succeed.
The discretionary factors referred to by Bishop J in
seem to me to
be insurmountable here. I have some sympathy for the claimant because she left
the matter in the hands of her current
solicitors and relied on them - as Mr
Adamo urges - to do what they could and should have done to have the matter
restored to the
list. However, at some point the actions of a party’s
solicitors must be attributed to that party. The claimant contented
after the advice given to her by them on the day after the hearing, 14 May 2001
that the matter had been struck out, with
telephone calls to them on numerous
occasions, together with a call to the WorkCover Authority between the middle
and end of 2002,
according to her affidavit. She says it was then that she took
steps to instruct another solicitor, but the fact is that Mr Brennan
affidavit says that he was not instructed until 6 May 2003 to act on behalf of
the claimant to have this matter restored to
the list, demonstrates the
inaccuracy of the claimant’s assertion that she took steps to instruct
another solicitor between
the middle and end of 2002 after her telephone call to
the WorkCover Authority.
20. It being now the middle of 2003, it seems to me that the claimant has not
satisfactorily explained her long delay between her
telephone call to the
WorkCover Authority - in which her affidavit implies that she discovered for the
first time what she could
do about having the matter restored to the list - and
her instructions to her current solicitors earlier this month to mount this
application. It is to be kept in mind, as Neilson J repeatedly pointed out in
that the claimant’s rights do not come
to an end because of the striking out of an Application for Determination made
in this Court; she simply must then have recourse to the Workers
Compensation Commission. That, in my opinion, is her proper remedy
case. Despite my determination that I have jurisdiction to entertain the
current motion, I do not think, as I have said,
that it should succeed as a
matter of discretion for the reasons set out above.
21. The motion must be dismissed. No order for costs against the claimant is
sought and it does not seem to me in any event that one
could have been made
within the rather limited provisions in the
in that regard,
although very properly I was not asked by Mr Hargraves to consider the operation
of that provision.
22. The motion is dismissed, no order as to costs.
Mr Adamo instructed by
Stojanovic Solicitors appeared for the applicant.
Mr Hargraves (sol)
PricewaterhouseCoopers Legal appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (27.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter