URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/265.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EHG v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force [2025] NSWCATAD 265; (28 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
EHG v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 265
Hearing Date(s):
22 September 2025
Date of Orders:
28 October 2025
Decision Date:
28 October 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
A Christie, Senior Member
(1) The Respondent’s decision that there was no breach of any IPPs
or, if there was, that the Respondent is exempt from complying
with the IPPs
under s 27 PPIP Act is set aside under s 63(3)(c) ADR Act. In substitution for
that decision, I find that the correct
and preferable decision is that the
Respondent breached
(NSW) (IPP 9) and that the conduct in question is not exempt under
PPIP Act in this case.
(2) Within fourteen (14) days of the date of
these Reasons for Decision, the Respondent is to provide to the Applicant an
formal written apology signed by the Commissioner of Police
addressing and apologising for: (a) the Respondent's contravention of
identified in these Reasons for Decision; and (b) any harm and distress suffered
by the Applicant caused by the Respondent’s
contravention of IPP
(3) Within thirty (30) days of the date of these Reasons for
Decision, the Respondent is to annotate all of the Applicant’s
information referred to in these Reasons for Decision as the “Applicant PI
1” wherever such is held by the Respondent,
including in the “2007
Rae Report” and the “2023 MB Report” (both of which are as
defined in these Reasons
for Decision) to note this Order and that before using
this information in the future all of the requirements of IPP 9 must be complied
with by the Respondent, unless an exemption or exception in the
Personal Information Protection Act 1998
or other law which is applicable in the
circumstances.
(4) Within sixty (60) days of the date of these
Reasons for Decision, the Respondent is to ensure the performance of IPP 9 in
to all future uses of the “Applicant PI 1”, the “2007
Rae Report” and the “2023 MB Report” (all
as defined in these
Reasons for Decision) wherever such are held by the Respondent, including by
implementing such:
(a) training, awareness raising and safeguards; and
(b) administrative measures,
necessary to ensure that, in accordance with
IPP 9, the Respondent will take reasonable steps in the circumstances to ensure
information is all of relevant, accurate, up to date, complete and not
misleading having regard to the purpose for which it is proposed
to be used,
subject to the valid exercise by the Respondent of any exemption or exception in
or other law which is
applicable in the circumstances.
(5) Within seven (7) days of fully
complying with Order (3) above the Respondent must notify the Applicant in
writing that it has
fully complied with that Order.
seven (7) days of fully complying with Order (4) above the Respondent must
notify the Applicant in writing that it has
fully complied with that
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW –
(NSW) – whether
PPIP Act applies to exempt the respondent from
complying with the IPPs - whether reasonable steps were taken under IPP 9 in
to the use of personal information - whether sharing personal
information critical of an employee with that employee was an unauthorised
under IPP 10 – if there were systemic issues to be addressed
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal 2013 (NSW)
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2001
Cases Cited:
BKM v Sydney Local Health District
[2015] NSWCATAD 87
Commissioner of
Police v Ritson (“DUT”) (No2)
[2023] NSWSC 854
DED v Randwick
City Council
[2017] NSWCATAD 327
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
(1979) 46 FLR 409
DTN v Commissioner of Police
[2022] NSW CATAD
EMF v Cessnock City Council
[2021] NSWCATAD 219
FM v Macquarie
[2003] NSWADT 78
Insurance and Care NSW v EEH
[2021] NSWCATAP
KT v Sydney Local Health Network
[2011] NSWADT 171
ZR v Department of
Education and Training (GD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 75
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
EHG (Applicant)
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
(Respondent)
Representation:
Solicitors:
Applicant (Self-Represented)
Crown Solicitor
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00104062
Publication Restriction:
The publication or broadcast of the name of the Applicant is prohibited
under s 64(1)(a)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an application under
Protection Act
(NSW) ("PPIP Act") made by the Applicant on 17 March
2025 for administrative review of the conduct of the Respondent which the
alleges was in contravention of the Information Protection Principles
("IPPs") of the
("External Review Application").
the heart of the External Review Application is the alleged conduct of the
Respondent by using certain of the Applicant's personal
information: (a) in
order for the Respondent to prepare a ‘Ministerial Briefing’ report
for the Minister of Police and
Counter Terrorism dated 14 June 2023 (“2023
MB Report”) in relation to an
payment request the
Respondent received from the Applicant in early 2023 (“Payment
Request”); and (b) by sharing within
the Respondent an email of the
Applicant dated 2 September 2024 sent to the Respondent ("Conduct of Concern").
The Applicant alleges
that the Conduct of Concern breaches the
Applicant submits that their personal information used, shared or disclosed is:
(a) false, misleading and irrelevant personal
information about the Applicant
relating to a Respondent employee’s view of the Applicant’s then
motives and a statement
attributed to the Applicant in an internal report of the
Respondent dated 14 February 2007 (“2007 Rae Report”) relating
meeting held on 7 February 2007 with that employee, two others from the
Respondent and the Applicant (“Applicant PI 1”);
and (b) information
critical of an individual at the Respondent with whom the Applicant had been
dealing in relation to the Payment
Request, after the Minister had rejected the
Payment Request, in an email from the Applicant dated 2 September 2024
(“Applicant
PI 2”). Applicant PI 1 was included in the 2023 MB
Report and Applicant PI 2 was shared with the individual who was criticised
relation to the Respondent’s processing of a subsequent
Information (Public Access) Act
(NSW) (“GIPA Act”) access
request of the Applicant.
existence of the 2007 Rae Report, the Applicant PI 1 and the related Conduct of
Concern became apparent to the Applicant around
2 August 2024 from documents
provided by the Respondent as the result of a GIPA Act access application made
by the Applicant. The
Conduct of Concern related to Applicant PI 2 became
apparent to the Applicant from correspondence form the Respondent employee in
question to the Applicant around 15 October 2024 as the result of a further GIPA
Act access application made by the Applicant.
2 December 2024 the Applicant requested by email an internal review by the
Respondent of the Conduct of Concern relating to the
Applicant PI 1 and the
Applicant PI 2 ("Internal Review Application"). The Applicant did not use the
IPC internal review application
form to request an internal review but did note
in their Internal Review Application, in summary and most relevantly,
(1) in relation to Applicant PI 2, the Applicant was shocked that their email
including this personal information critical of the
Deputy Commissioner with
whom they had been dealing and which was sent to the Commissioner in confidence
was ‘disclosed’
to the Deputy Commissioner. The Applicant alleges
that this conduct was a contravention of IPP 11, s 18PPIP Act (“Complaint
(2) in relation to Applicant PI 1, the 2023 MB Report contains personal
information that is incorrect, irrelevant and misleading
and the Applicant
alleges this was a contravention of IPP 4, s 11
(“Complaint
(3) although the Applicant specifically refers to alleged contraventions of IPPs
11 and 18, the internal review of the Respondent
should not be limited to these
IPPs alone.
decision of the Respondent in relation to the Internal Review Application,
prepared by the Crown Solicitor’s Office on behalf
of the Respondent, one
was provided to the Applicant around 17 February 2025 (“Internal Review
Decision”).
findings of the Internal Review Decision, in summary and most relevantly, are
(1) Complaint 1 is not made out because sharing of the Applicant PI 2 within the
Police Force, including with the Deputy Commissioner
in question, is not a
“disclosure” for the purposes of the
(2) Complaint 1 might also be understood as relating to
If sharing the Applicant PI 2 with the Deputy Commissioner is a
“use” then it was used for the purpose for
which it was collected,
being to investigate matters further at the Applicant’s request;
(3) Complaint 2 is not made out because the Respondent did not, at the time of
preparing the 2023 MB Report, “collect”
the Applicant PI 2 and, if
it did, any internal review application of the Applicant in respect of this
would be out of time;
(4) Complaint 2 might also be understood as relating to
If so, the Respondent took reasonable steps to check the accuracy of the
Applicant PI 2 before using it; and
(5) even if there was a breach of any IPPs, the Respondent is exempt from
compliance with the IPPs under
as the Conduct of Concern is not in
connection with the exercise of the Respondent’s ‘administrative
functions’.
External Review Application seeks a review by the Tribunal based on the
Internal Review Decision finding that: (a) there were
no breaches IPPs 10 or 11,
; (b) there were no breaches of IPPs 4 or 9,
; and (c) even if any breaches of such were found, the Respondent is
exempt under
from complying with them. The Applicant states in the
External Review Application that they are seeking a review of the Internal
Review Decision under
because they ‘disagree’ with the
findings of the Internal Review Decision.
Submissions of the
the reasons that follow, based on the material before the Tribunal I have
decided to set aside the Internal Review Decision and,
in substitution for it, I
find that the Conduct of Concern and thus the Respondent contravened IPP 9,
summary and most relevantly, the Applicant submitted in its written and oral
submissions that:
(1) As regards Complaint 1, the Applicant's email to the Commissioner dated 2
September 2024 including the Applicant PI 2 was shared
other than for a purpose
for which it was provided and was not something that the Applicant was
reasonably likely to be aware of
(2) The 2 September 2024 email was provided to the Commissioner in
confidence.
(3) The use of Applicant PI 2 for the purpose of briefing the Deputy
Commissioner was not consistent with the original purpose of
its collection by
the Respondent and was therefore in breach of
(4) As regards Complaint 2, the 2023 MB Report contained personal information
misleading, unbalanced,
irrelevant and omitted key facts.
(5) One of the misleading and irrelevant uses of the Applicant PI 1 was
including in the 2023 MB Report that the Applicant had had
the intent to
‘cause as much trouble’ for the Respondent as possible by releasing
internal information to the media based
on an the alleged statement of the
Applicant recorded in a the 2007 Rae Report in relation to the February 2007
meeting including
the Applicant and employees of the Respondent.
(6) The various characterisations of the Applicant in 2023 from and in relation
to a 2007 meeting, including that noted in (5) above,
are wholly inaccurate,
unfounded and omit critical information in 2023 and the heavy reliance on and
use of an internal note authored
in and an alleged statement of the Applicant
made in February 2007 is both misleading and irrelevant as regards the 2023 MB
and the Applicant’s motives for the Payment Request in 2023. This
alleged statement and the contents of the 2007 Rae Report
were over 16 years old
when used in 2023, have not been the subject of any procedural fairness and the
Applicant was not given the
opportunity for ‘rebuttal’ and they
remained unseen by the Applicant until recently (see [4] above).
(7) The 2023 MB Report omitted key facts, including the recent conciliatory
behaviour of the Applicant, failed to note ongoing efforts
to support the
reconciliation process and the expression of thanks and respectful conduct
towards senior officers. The inclusion
of the Applicant PI 1 from 2007 in the
2023 MB Report was misleading and did not represent what had happened leading up
to the Payment
Request in 2023.
(8) The preparation and provision of an
payment brief to the
Minister (i.e. 2023 MB Report) about a former employee is plainly an
administrative function. It is not related
to the core policing, law enforcement
or operational matters of the Respondent. As such, the Respondent is required to
comply with
the IPPs in the handling, use and disclosure of the Applicant PI 1
and Applicant PI 2.
payment request process involved a non-statutory
discretionary financial recommendation involving senior executive review,
legal drafting and Ministerial submission, all of which fall squarely
within an ‘administrative context’. The 2023 MB
Report was the
centrepiece of this process and was therefore administrative in nature and part
of the Respondent’s administrative
the exact phrasing of the orders sought by the Applicant from the Tribunal
varied across the Applicant’s various submissions,
in the initial written
submissions made by the Applicant dated 27 March 2025 the Applicant requested,
in summary and most relevantly,
the following orders be made by the
(1) to declare that the Respondent contravened one or more of
(2) to require the Respondent to formally apologise to the Applicant for all of
its breaches of the IPPs;
(3) to require the Respondent to add a notation to the 2023 MB Report reflecting
the Applicant’s ‘rebuttal’;
(4) to require the Respondent to take steps to ensure compliance with the IPPs
in the future handling of personal information in
relation to administrative
reports; and
(5) to award costs to the Applicant, if appropriate under the circumstances.
Applicant’s position is that Applicant PI 1 and Applicant PI 2 are the
Applicant’s personal information under the
Respondent’s disclosure and/or use of Applicant PI 1 in the 2023 MB Report
and by providing Applicant PI 2 to the Deputy
Commissioner are contraventions of
and the IPPs.
Submissions of the Respondent
Respondent does not dispute in its submissions that Applicant PI 1 and Applicant
PI 2 are the personal information of the Applicant
and that they were
‘used’ by the Respondent in the manner noted by the Applicant. That
is, the Respondent agrees that
the Conduct of Concern occurred but does not
agree that such resulted in the contravention of any IPPs or the
Respondent and, if it did, the Respondent is exempt under
Respondent’s position is, as set out in its written submissions and
repeated in its oral submissions, that:
“[21] It is generally accepted that
does not limit the sharing of
personal information within an agency. The sharing of the correspondence with
Deputy Commissioner...
was clearly internal to the NSWPF and did not constitute
a disclosure for the purpose of the
[22] The internal review also concluded that, even if the sharing of [the
Applicant's] information with Deputy Commissioner... was
a disclosure, the
exception in
would apply. ...
[27] The email [in question [2 September 2024] was not marked as being
confidential. Nothing in the text of the email indicated that
it was intended to
be confidential.
[28] Nor does the fact that the email was critical of Deputy Commissioner...
imply that it was confidential. ...
[33] The email sent by the applicant was not solicited and so it may be doubted
that the information was "collected" by the respondents.
If the information was
"collected" and if the sharing of the information with Deputy Commissioner...
involved a "use" of information,
the purpose of the collection and use was the
same, being to investigate the applicant's complaint. It is difficult to see how
respondent could have investigated the applicant's complaints without
discussing them with the Deputy Commissioner..., given that
the complaints
related to their complaints about Deputy Commissioner...’s conduct. ...
[35] The respondent could not address the applicant’s complaint about
Deputy Commissioner... without putting the complaint
to Deputy Commissioner...
The applicant provides no explanation about how the respondent could have done
so and provides no elaboration
of the alleged breach of
[39] It is well established that
does not apply to the
internal movement of personal information about an individual within an agency.
Similarly, where an employee
of an agency reduces to writing an opinion which he
or she holds mentally (including an opinion about another person that amounts
"personal information" of that person), that does not constitute "collection" of
personal information.
[40] The information in the ministerial brief was therefore not "collected" such
that the NSWPF did not breach
[42] Unlike
applies to information which an agency "holds" and uses,
rather than information which it has "collected". The respondent accepts
NSWPF held the applicant’s personal information and that it used it for
the purpose of preparing the ministerial brief,
in particular making the
recommendation that the Minister consider the application for an ex-gratia
payment. ...
turns on whether an agency has taken reasonable
steps to ensure the accuracy of information before using it, not on whether the
information
is actually accurate. ...
[49] The applicant complains that the document is outdated and criticises both
the respondent and the CSO's use of it. To the contrary,
the document is
contemporaneous with the meeting which it describes. There is no reason to doubt
the accuracy of a contemporaneous
record of the meeting. ...
does not refer to the information being complete,
section must be read as a whole
requires is that an agency "take
such steps as are reasonable in the circumstances to ensure that, having regard
to the purpose for
which the information is to be used, the information is
complete...". The information was used to brief the Minister in relation
application for an ex-gratia payment. The respondent took reasonable steps to
ensure that the information was complete for
that purpose. [emphasis added]
[65] The Tribunal has held that "administrative functions" are those relating to
the internal administration of an agency, including
"corporate services areas
performing functions such as personnel, budget, and information
technology”.
[66] Plainly, the making of an ex-gratia payment to the applicant does not
relate to the internal administration of the NSWPF given
that the applicant does
not work for the NSWPF. Nor is it an issue of corporate services. If granted,
the ex-gratia payment would
have involved expenditure of money, but that alone
does not mean that something is a budgetary or administrative function. ...
[69] If the Tribunal finds that the respondent has breached the
that the NSWPF is not exempt from compliance with the
, the respondent
accepts that the relief sought in [26(a)] [2(c)6] [being items (1), (2) and (3)
of paragraph 11 above] would be appropriate.”
Respondent submitted that the correct and preferable decision is that the
Respondent did not engage in conduct that contravened
(i.e. the Conduct of
Concern did not contravene) the
and requests the Tribunal to determine
to take no further action under
The Hearing and
hearing by the Tribunal of the External Review Application occurred on 22
September 2025 (“Hearing”) at which the
Applicant appearing by AVL
and the Respondent, through its solicitor appearing in person made oral
submissions, answered the questions
of the Tribunal and the Applicant themselves
and the Respondent’s witness, Mr Condon, were cross-examined at the
Applicant relies on their written submissions dated 27 March 2025, written
submissions in reply dated 4 July 2025 and the ‘Statement
Applicant’ dated 10 August 2025.
Respondent relies on its written submissions lodged with the Tribunal on 20 June
2025. It also relies on:
(1) a bundle of documents lodged on 22 April 2025 pursuant to
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW) (“ADR Act”)
(“Section 58 Documents”); and
(2) an affidavit Mr Christopher Condon lodged with the Tribunal on 2 September
2025. Mr Condon is currently the Director of the Tort
and Compensation Law Unit
at the Respondent and was previously a Staff Officer at the Office of General
Counsel of Respondent.
Condon was cross-examined at length by the Applicant during the Hearing and also
answered the questions of the Tribunal.
Applicant, having submitted a statement, was cross-examined by the Respondent
during the Hearing and also answered the questions
of the Tribunal.
Applicant and the Respondent made oral submissions during the Hearing and
answered the Tribunal’s questions.
Tribunal’s administrative review jurisdiction
circumstances in which the Tribunal has administrative review jurisdiction over
a ‘decision’ of an administrator is
detailed in the ADR Act and
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (“CAT
9(1) ADR Act provides that the Tribunal has administrative review jurisdiction
over a ‘decision’ or class of ‘decisions’
‘administrator’ if the ‘enabling legislation’ provides
that applications may be made to the Tribunal
for an administrative review under
the ADR Act. The term ‘enabling legislation’ is defined in s 4(1)
ADR Act to mean
legislation, other than the ADR Act, that provides for
applications to be made to the Tribunal. In this case the enabling legislation
. The word ‘administrator’ is defined in
There is no dispute in this case that the Respondent is an administrator
makes provision for review of certain ‘conduct’ of
a public sector agency.
Section 52(1)(a)
sets out the
‘conduct’ to which the Part applies and includes
‘conduct’ that contravenes, or is alleged to
contravene, an IPP that
applies to the public sector agency. The IPPs relate to the collection
, IPPs 1-4), retention and security
, IPP 5), access
, IPPs 6-7), alteration
, IPP 8), accuracy
, IPP 9), use
, IPP 10) and disclosure
, IPPs 11-12) to/of personal information by a public sector agency.
to the application of
in this case, which is dealt with as
Preliminary Issue 1 below at [38] to [40], it is not in dispute that the IPPs
may apply to the Respondent and, if so, that the Respondent
must generally comply with them.
makes provision for internal review by the agency of conduct falling
within the circumstances set out in
. After completion of the
internal review under
the administrator, the reviewer of the
Respondent in this case, may do any one or more of the following:
(1) take no further action;
(2) make a formal apology;
(3) take such remedial action it thinks appropriate, including the payment of
monetary compensation;
(4) provide undertakings that the conduct will not occur again; and/or
(5) implement administrative measures to ensure that the conduct will not occur
makes provision for a person to apply to the Tribunal for
administrative review of that conduct if the person has made an application
internal review under
ADR Act and is not satisfied with the findings of the
review or the action taken by the agency in relation to that application for
30(2)(b) CAT Act confirms that the Tribunal may exercise the functions that are
conferred or imposed on it by the CAT Act,
the ADR Act and the enabling
legislation (i.e. the
in this case) in connection with the conduct and
resolution of these proceedings.
ADR Act the Tribunal’s role in determining an application for the
administrative review of an administratively reviewable decision
External Review Application in this case) is to decide what is the correct and
preferable decision having regard to the
material before it, including any
relevant factual material and any applicable written or unwritten law. For this
purpose, under
s 63(2) ADR Act the Tribunal may exercise all of the functions
that are conferred or imposed by any relevant legislation on the administrator
who made the internal review decision.
s 63(3) ADR Act the Tribunal may also decide, in addition to the actions
available under s 53(7)
, to: (a) affirm the reviewable decision; (b)
vary the reviewable decision; (c) set aside the reviewable decision and make a
in substitution for the reviewable decision that was set aside; or (d)
set aside the reviewable decision and remit the matter for
reconsideration by
the administrator in accordance with any directions or recommendations of the
reviewing the conduct of the relevant agency, in addition to the options
available to the Tribunal noted at [26] and [30] above,
the Tribunal may decide
not to take any action on the matter
), take any of the actions
as available to the administrator or it may make one
or more of the orders described in
. Subject to certain
exceptions these include, under
, an order requiring the
agency “to pay to the applicant damages not exceeding $40,000 by way of
compensation for any loss or
damage suffered because of the conduct”.
Tribunal's role is to review the conduct of concern in issue (in this case the
Conduct of Concern) and to consider whether such
contravenes any of the IPPs (in
this case) and, if so, determine what action(s), if any, should be taken by the
Respondent (in this
case). The Tribunal's role is not to review the findings of
the internal review decision as detailed in the Internal Review Decision
this case):
DED v Randwick City Council
[2017] NSWCATAD 327
the internal review decision of an agency can assist the Tribunal’s
considerations. However, the Tribunal must consider
the Conduct of Concern (in
this case) afresh, based on the evidence and material before it at the time of
the hearing:
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
KT v Sydney Local Health Network
[2011] NSWADT 171.
is also important to note the role of the parties in proceedings before the
Tribunal and of the Tribunal in practice in such administrative
proceedings. As noted by the Appeal Panel in
Insurance and Care NSW v EEH
[2021] NSWCATAP 350:
“[22] ... The Tribunal at first instance was conducting an administration
review. It was entitled to assume that the agency,
which was under an obligation
to cooperate with the Tribunal to give effect to the guiding principle of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
that the just, quick and cheap
resolution of real issues in the proceedings be facilitated, had placed all
relevant material before
[61] ...Parties, particularly agencies, should come to the hearing of a matter
prepared to adduce all of their evidence and make
all of their submissions in
relation to the matters in issue in the proceedings.”
note that submissions were made by both the Applicant and Respondent in writing
and orally on
and on all of the IPPs in question and evidence was
adduced in support of their respective positions.
Preliminary
issues for consideration and determination
on the written submissions of the parties and their oral submissions and the
discussion during the Hearing, the following three
preliminary issues arise for
consideration by the Tribunal:
(1) whether
applies to exempt the Respondent from its obligations
under the IPPs and the
in these circumstances or if, pursuant to
, the Conduct of Concern is in this case administrative in nature
and thus carved out from the
exemption and therefore the
Respondent is required to comply with the IPPs (“Preliminary Issue
(2) whether
(IPP 4) is appropriate in the circumstances of the use
in 2023 of the Applicant PI 1, which it had collected by the Respondent in
by including it in the 2023 MB Report (“Preliminary Issue 2”);
(3) whether
(IPP 11) is applicable to the sharing of the Applicant
PI 2 to a person within/employed by the Respondent (“Preliminary Issue
Preliminary Issue 1 is determined in favour of the Respondent then there is no
need to look any further as all of the Conduct of
Concern will be exempt from
and the Respondent in this case will not be subject to the relevant IPPs. If the
IPPs do apply to the
Respondent in this case then, if Preliminary Issues 2
and/or 3 are resolved in the negative, this will reduce the need for the
detailed consideration in respect of these IPPs, reducing the
scope of the Tribunal’s enquiries. I will therefore first briefly
each of these preliminary issues.
Preliminary Issue 1
noted by the Privacy Commissioner in a 2004 Submission to the Review of the
at page 72:
“Specially,
aims to protect [the NSWPF] from any barriers that
the information protection principles might otherwise pose to their operational
and investigative activities.”
sentiment was reinforced by the Supreme Court in
Commissioner of Police v
Ritson (“DVT”) (No2)
[2023] NSWSC 854
“The purpose behind
is obvious. Clearly, there is an
interest in the information held by law enforcement agencies such as the NSWPF
relating to their
investigative functions being protected ... hence the general
exemption in the
with the carve-out for information held in the
agency’s administrative and educative functions.”
pointed out by the Respondent, there has been a long history of often contrary
decisions of the Tribunal on the interpretation
and application of
. In this case and despite the best efforts of the Respondent to convince the
Tribunal otherwise, I find the Applicant’s submissions
and evidence on
this issue compelling. Based on the material before me I am satisfied that the
processing of a request for a discretionary
payment by a former
employee and the related work in preparing the 2023 MB report for the Minister
to decide on whether or not such
a payment should be made is an administrative
function of the Respondent as contemplated (and carved-out) by
As a result of this, the Conduct of Concern is subject to the IPPs and the
Conduct of Concern is not exempt from the
Preliminary
I do not entirely agree with or accept the submissions of the Respondent on this
issue, I note that the obligations under IPP
4 apply at the time of the
collection of the personal information in question. I do not agree with the
Respondent’s phrasing
used in its submissions, perhaps loosely rather than
intentionally, around the Applicant PI 1 not having been ‘collected’
by the Respondent and the Applicant being out of time to challenge the
collection under this IPP, impliedly because it was originally
collected by the
Respondent in 2007. It is important to note that the Applicant only became aware
of Applicant PI 1 in August 2024
after a successful GIPA Act application.
on the material before the Tribunal, I am satisfied that IPP 4 is not applicable
to the Conduct of Concern related to Applicant
PI 1 and the use of it in the
2023 MB Report by the Respondent as this is a use of personal information
already held by the Respondent,
not a new collection of that personal
information.
Preliminary Issue 3
certain circumstances, where an agency is large or there are different and
discrete functions within an agency, for example, there
‘disclosure’ within an agency for the purposes of IPP 11. In most
cases, however, the sharing of personal information
such as Applicant PI 2
within an agency is usually a ‘use’ to be dealt with under IPP 10,
rather than a ‘disclosure’
to be dealt with under IPP 11.
on the material before the Tribunal, I am satisfied that the sharing of
Applicant PI 2 with the Deputy Commissioner in relation
to a GIPA Act access
request of the Applicant is a use of personal information under IPP 10 not a
disclosure subject to IPP 11. Therefore
IPP 11 (s 18
) is not applicable
to the Conduct of Concern in this case.
Relevant IPPs
on the above and the material before me, I therefore conclude that the Conduct
of Concern is subject to the IPPs and the real
issues for consideration by the
Tribunal in this proceeding relate to IPPs 9 and 10 (“Relevant
IPPs”) and whether the
Conduct of Concern is a contravention by the
Respondent of either or both of IPPs 9 and/or 10..
information is defined in
to mean, subject only to certain
exclusions, “information or an opinion (including information or an
opinion forming part of
a database and whether or not recorded in a material
form) about an individual whose identity is apparent or can reasonably be
ascertained
from the information or opinion”. It is not in dispute that
the Applicant PI 1 and Applicant PI 2 is the Applicant’s
information.
on the decision in relation to the Preliminary Issues 1, 2 and 3, see [45]
above, below I focus only on the Relevant IPPs.
Accuracy at the time of use
(IPP 9) requires that:
“A public sector agency that holds personal information must not use the
information without taking such steps as are reasonable
in the circumstances to
ensure that,
having regard to the purpose for which the information is
proposed to be used
, the information is
relevant, accurate, up to date,
complete and not misleading
.” [emphasis added]
Applicant bears the burden of adducing some evidence to suggest that appropriate
steps as required by IPP 9 were needed or not
taken to ensure that their
personal information used is relevant, accurate, up to date, complete and not
misleading for the proposed
use. However, this burden is not high because the
knowledge of what steps were taken is primarily known by the Respondent. Common
sense dictates that the party which has relevant information in their possession
should put that information before the Tribunal.
Further, if the facts are
mostly within the knowledge of one party to an issue, a failure by that party to
produce evidence as to
those facts may lead to an unfavourable inference being
drawn by the Tribunal.
can be seen by the emphasis added in [48] above, IPP 9 requires that every use
of the Applicant PI 1 by the Respondent (in this
case) requires reasonable
(1) to ensure each of:
(a) its relevance;
(b) its accuracy;
(c) that it is up to date;
(d) its completeness; and
(e) that it is not misleading;
(2) in the circumstances; and
(3) for the purpose for which it is proposed to be used.
‘Reasonable
steps’ are not defined in the
, However, the obligation in IPP 9
has generally been interpreted and applied by the Tribunal to require agencies
to implement a combination
of administrative or organisational and technical
measures to ensure that, before any and each use of personal information, the
and its staff consider whether that information is relevant, accurate, up
to date, complete and not misleading for that proposed
(IPP 10) provides, most relevantly:
“Limits on use of personal information
A public sector agency that holds personal information must not use the
information for a purpose other than that for which it was
collected unless
the individual to whom the information relates has consented to the use of the
information for that other purpose, or
the other purpose for which the information is used is directly related to the
purpose for which the information was collected, or
not specifically raised or addressed by the Respondent, it is also important to
note the exemption from IPP 10 under
which provides, most
relevantly:
“A public sector agency is not required to comply with Section...17... if
(b) non-compliance is otherwise permitted/or is necessarily implied or
reasonably contemplated under an Act or any other law...”
“use” is to employ the personal information for a purpose within the
Respondent. As noted in
FM v Macquarie University
[2003] NSWADT 78
“The plain an ordinary meaning of the word use in this context is
‘to avail oneself’ of; apply to one’s purposes;
(the Macquarie
Dictionary, 3rd edition, the Macquarie Library).”
is also important to note that even unsolicited personal information will be
subject to IPP 10 where such is subsequently retained,
used or disclosed by the
agency. As the Appeal Panel found in
ZR v Department of Education and
Training (GD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 75
as regards the unsolicited
information exemption (which principle was subsequently also applied in
Cessnock City Council
[2021] NSWCATAD 219
“ .. [it] ought not be applied to the entirety of the information handling
cycle. Information that was unsolicited at origin,
once taken under the control
of the agency for one of its administrative purposes should be treated as
‘collected’ and
no longer retaining the character of
‘unsolicited information’.”
Considerations
IPP 9: Accuracy on Use
Applicant submitted, the evidence establishes and the Respondent agrees that the
Applicant PI 1 was personal information relevant
to a February 2007 meeting
recorded by the Respondent later in February 2007 in a report prepared by a
Respondent employee (i.e.
the 2007 Rae Report) and held since then in the
Respondent’s records. The fact, agreed by the Respondent, that this 2007
PI 1 was used by the Respondent in the 2023 MB Report is enough, of
itself, to meet the Applicant’s burden detailed in [49]
above. That is,
any use of old (in this case over 16 years old) personal information of the
Applicant raises a legitimate concern
as to what reasonable steps the Respondent
took before that proposed use to ensure its relevance, accuracy, currency (i.e.
is up to date) and completeness of that information and that its use is
not misleading in light of that proposed use in 2023.
noted in [48] and [50] above and agreed in the Respondent’s submissions
(see the Respondent’s paragraph [54] quoted
in [14] above), s 16
(IPP 9) “must be read as a whole” and thus IPP 9 requires that the
Respondent must take reasonable steps in the circumstances
to ensure the
personal information in question is all of relevant, accurate, up to date,
complete and not misleading, having regard
to the purpose for which the
information is to be used. That is, not just that at the time of its original
collection (in this case,
in 2007) reasonable steps were taken to ensure it was
accurate but that at the time of its use in 2023 reasonable steps were taken
ensure it was relevant, up to date, complete and not misleading for that
this case, as forcefully submitted by the Respondent, the Applicant PI 1 and the
2007 Rae Report may be an accurate contemporaneous
record of the Respondent
employee’s opinion as to the Applicant’s motives and his
recollection of a statement allegedly
made by the Applicant in the February 2007
meeting to which the 2007 Rae Report relates. However, the issues in this case
if the Applicant PI 1 is an accurate record of a 2007 meeting but are
primarily: (a) what steps the Respondent took in 2003 to ensure
the relevance,
currency and completeness of Applicant PI 1 and that it was not misleading for
its proposed use in the 2023 MB Report
in relation to the 2023 Payment Request;
and (b) if those steps were reasonable in the circumstances: see
Commissioner of Police
[2022] NSW CATAD 134
Respondent’s submissions and Mr Condon’s evidence focus almost
exclusively on the ‘accuracy’ of the Applicant
contemporaneous record of the February 2007 meeting and the Respondent
employee’s recollection of what was said in
the February 2007 meeting with
the Applicant and the employee’s opinion as to the Applicant’s
motives at that time.
do not need to decide, in this case, whether reasonable steps were taken to
ensure the 2007 Rae Report is an accurate record of
the statements made at the 7
February 2007 meeting and the employee’s opinions of the Applicant.
However, I note that the Respondent
did make compelling submissions that, as a
contemporaneous record signed by other attendees of that February 2007 meeting
weeks of that meeting and it being an unaltered record, reasonable steps
were taken on collection of the Applicant PI 1 in 2007 to
‘accuracy’ of the record of the employee’s opinion and
recollection of what was said when recorded in
February 2007 in the 2007 Rae
even if this is established, the relevant issues under IPP 9 in the current
circumstances where the Respondent used of the
2007 Applicant PI 1 in the 2023
MB Report for the purposes of the 2023 Payment Request (e.g. the Conduct of
Concern) is what steps
were taken by the Respondent to ensure that the 2007
Applicant PI 1 was relevant, up to date, complete and not misleading
(collectively
“Relevant”) in relation to its use for the 2023 MB
Report and the Payment Request in 2023. Once the steps (if any) taken
established, the Tribunal must then determine if those steps (if any) were
reasonable in the circumstances.
the Respondent submitted, the Tribunal’s role under IPP 9 is not to
determine if the Respondent’s use of the Applicant
PI 1 was actually
relevant or if it was up to date, complete and not misleading or if a different
decision was likely to have been
made by the Minister if the Minister was
presented with it was different information. Rather, the Tribunal’s role
is to determine
if reasonable steps were taken by the Respondent in the
circumstances to ensure that the Applicant PI 1 was Relevant for the proposed
use in 2023: see
Insurance and Care NSW v EEH
[2021] NSW CATAP 350.
evidence of Mr Condon is that, in preparing a draft of the 2023 MB Report in
relation to the Payment Request in 2023 for review
by the General Counsel of the
Respondent:
[16] When reviewing the [2007] Rae Report in 2015, I noted that it had been
prepared by..., a senior officer of the NSWPF. As a NSWPF
employee, he is
required to comply with NSWPF Statement of Values and the NSWPF Code of Conduct
and Ethics, which includes requirements
to ‘behave honestly’ and
‘act with care and diligence when on duty’ that extend to the
preparation of reports.
[17] I considered whether Detective Inspector Rae had any reason to lie about
the Contents of the [2007] Rae Report and concluded
that he did not.
[18] I noted that the [2007] Rae Report had progressed through the chain of
command to the Deputy Commissioner of Field Operations
and it had been forwarded
to the Commissioner of Police. The chain of command which had reviewed the
[2007] Rae Report included Assistant
Commissioner Burn, who was then [in 2007]
the Commander of the Professional Standards Command and had been present at the
meeting described in the [2007] Rae Report. I considered that Assistant
Commissioner Burn would have included a comment if she had
a different
recollection of the meeting to which had been recorded by Deceive Rae.
[19] I also note that the [2007] Rae Report was contained on an official records
keeping system for the NSWPF.
[20] I also considered that the comment set out [in the 2007 Rae Report] was
consistent with my own [2015] experience of responding
Applicant’s] correspondence.”
Condon’s evidence, consistent with the Respondent’s submissions, is
relevant as to whether the 2007 Rae Report and
thus whether reasonable steps
were taken at the time of collection to ensure that the Applicant PI 1 is an
accurate contemporaneous
record of the relevant 2007 meeting. Even through the
Applicant’s evidence was that there were numerous discussions with the
Deputy Commissioner and Commissioner leading up to the Payment Request in 2023,
there was little evidence from Mr Condon or submissions
of the Respondent on the
steps taken by the Respondent in 2023 to ensure the Applicant PI 1 was Relevant
for use in the 2023 MB Report
in relation to the 2023 Payment Request in
questioned about the steps he took to confirm if the Applicant PI 1 was Relevant
for use in the 2023 MB Report regarding the
Payment Request, Mr Condon noted
that he believed that the Applicant’s attitude recorded in the 2007 Rae
Report was relevant.
However, neither Mr Condon nor the submissions of the
Respondent set out in any detail what steps were taken to come to that decision.
That is, there was no detail as to what steps were taken in 2023 to ensure that
the 2007 Applicant PI 1 was Relevant for the purposes
of the 2023 MB Report and
the Payment Request in 2023 and why these steps were reasonable in the
circumstances. This is despite the
Applicant’s undisputed evidence and
submissions that there were numerous positive and reconciliatory discussions
between the
Applicant and the Deputy Commissioner and Commissioner leading up to
the Payment Request in 2023 and the elapsing of some 16 years
since 2007.
on the material before the Tribunal, I am satisfied that the Respondent did not
take reasonable steps in the circumstances to
ensure the Applicant PI 1 from
2007 was Relevant for use in the 2023 MB Report for the Payment Request in 2023.
As a result, the
Conduct of Concern and thus the Respondent contravened IPP
IPP 10: Use
the Respondent’s submissions that the Applicant PI 2 was used for the
purposes for which it was collected, “to
investigate the Applicant’s
complaint” [paragraph 33] of the Respondent’s written submissions
dated 20 June 2025),
as noted in paragraph [16] of those written submissions in
relation to Complaint 1, quoting the Internal Review Application which
quoted the Deputy Commissioner:
“...the GIPA stuff you put through, there’s an email in there that
they have sent to me, because I’ve obviously
contributed to it, but
there’s an email in there from you to Karen bluing about me...”
is, the Applicant PI 2 was used by the Respondent by sharing it with the Deputy
Commissioner related to the Applicant’s
GIPA Act application, not as part
of an investigation of the Deputy Commissioner’s behaviour.
am satisfied based on the material before the Tribunal that there was no
indication that the 2 September 2024 email or the Applicant
confidential and not to be disclosed to the Deputy Commissioner.
addition, although not subject to any detailed submissions of the Respondent,
from the Applicant’s submissions the Tribunal
understands that the Deputy
Commissioner was likely shown the 2 September 2024 email and the Applicant PI 2
under s 54 GIPA Act to
determine if he had any objections to releasing it to the
Applicant as it contained his personal information. I note that under s
this use is permitted (if not required) by
on the analysis above and the material before the Tribunal, I am satisfied that
use of the Applicant PI 2 by the Respondent
by sharing it with the Deputy
Commissioner in relation to the Applicant’s GIPA Act application is
exempted by s 25
from being a contravention of IPP 10. However, the
Respondent should take care in future proceedings that its submissions reflect
and are made in respect of the facts of each specific case. This is both to
ensure that it presents its best case to protect its
interests and because it is
also part of its legal obligations as a party to proceedings before the
Tribunal. I remind the Respondent
and all Australian legal practitioners
representing a party to proceedings before the Tribunal that they have
obligations to the
Tribunal under
CAT Act, see [34]
Systemic issues
Applicant has raised, by the orders requested from the Tribunal (see 11(4)
above), that the Tribunal consider and make orders
in relation to issues wider
than in relation to the Applicant PI 1 and Applicant PI 2 or similar personal
information of the Applicant.
That is, to consider and address more systemic
Tribunal’s role is to review certain conduct (in this case the Conduct of
Concern) rather than merely determining, generally,
whether there has been a
contravention of the
or IPPs by the agency (in this case the
Respondent). However, the Tribunal may look at systemic issues concerning
compliance with
, the IPPs and an agency’s culture with
respect to privacy issues in considering the context in which the Conduct of
concluded in
BKM v Sydney Local Health District
[2015] NSWCATAD 87
(“BKM Decision”) at [45] it is clear that, where the evidence
indicates a need for it, the Tribunal can examine systemic
issues when
considering what actions to take generally under
enliven aspects of
(2) (c) and (e) of the
systemic issues which contribute to a finding of conduct in contravention of the
IPPs is a relevant factor for the Tribunal
when considering what orders should
be made under
the BKM Decision at [44] the Tribunal noted “many dozens of
instances” in which the Tribunal has, following a privacy
review, made
orders “concerning the systemic nature of an information practice/system
or in respect of administrative practices
relating to privacy policies,
training, practices and procedures, and general education of staff within the
this case, given there is no evidence that the Respondent’s behaviour goes
beyond the Applicant PI 1 personal information
and the related Conduct of
Concern, I am not satisfied that there are systemic privacy compliance issues
within the Respondent exposed
by the Conduct of Concern and my finding that the
Respondent contravened IPP 9 in relation to the Applicant PI 1.
a contravention of IPP 9 by the Respondent in relation to the Applicant PI 1 and
the related Conduct of Concern has been
found by the Tribunal. There is also a
possibility of potential further or continuing contraventions of IPP 9 by the
Respondent in
similar circumstances in relation to the Applicant and the use of
the Applicant PI 1, especially if another
payment request is
made by the Applicant. Therefore, appropriate orders in respect of the
Applicant, the Applicant PI 1 and potential
future similar conduct of the
Respondent in relation to that personal information should be made by the
Tribunal to address the potential
ongoing contravention of IPP 9 by the
Respondent in respect of the Applicant and the Applicant PI
The Orders requested by the Applicant
have considered all of the Applicant’s requested orders. I have addressed
the requested orders (1) to (3) noted in paragraph
[11] above in the
Tribunal’s Orders. However, for the reason briefly noted below, based on
the materials before the Tribunal
I do not believe that the requested orders
noted in (4) and (5) of paragraph [11] are appropriate in the
circumstances:
(4) orders made specific to the Applicant PI 1 and the Respondent’s
contravention of IPP 9 are, in my view, sufficient to address
the harm in this
case and, in the absence of any evidence of systematic issues (see [77]), this
order generally in relation to all
IPPs and all personal information in
administrative reports for all individuals would be excessive in the
circumstances, especially
given the operation of
(5) I do not believe that an Order for costs is appropriate in the circumstances
as no special circumstances under
CAT Act has been established and also
because the Applicant is self-represented.
the reasons noted above and based on the material before the Tribunal, I have
decided to set aside the Internal Review Decision
that found no contraventions
of any IPPs and, in the alternative, that s 27
applied to exempt the
Respondent from complying with the IPPs in this case. In substitution for the
Internal Review Decision under
ADR Act, I have decided that, in this
does not exempt the Respondent from the IPPs, IPPs 9 and 10
apply to the Conduct of Concern and that the Respondent has contravened
(IPP 9) and I make the following Orders.
(1) The Respondent’s decision that there was no breach of any IPPs or,
if there was, that the Respondent is exempt from complying
with the IPPs under
is set aside under
ADR Act. In substitution for that
decision, I find that the correct and preferable decision is that the Respondent
(NSW) (IPP 9) and that the conduct in question is not exempt under
in this case.
(2) Within fourteen (14) days of the date of these Reasons for Decision, the
Respondent is to provide to the Applicant an unreserved
formal written apology
signed by the Commissioner of Police addressing and apologising for: (a) the
Respondent's contravention of
IPP 9 identified in these Reasons for Decision;
and (b) any harm and distress suffered by the Applicant caused by the
Respondent’s
contravention of IPP 9.
(3) Within thirty (30) days of the date of these Reasons for Decision, the
Respondent is to annotate all of the Applicant’s
personal information
referred to in these Reasons for Decision as the “Applicant PI 1”
wherever such is held by the Respondent,
including in the “2007 Rae
Report” and the “2023 MB Report” (both of which are as defined
in these Reasons
for Decision) to note this Order and that before using this
information in the future all of the requirements of IPP 9 must be complied
by the Respondent, unless an exemption or exception in the
Information Protection Act 1998
or other law which is applicable in the
circumstances.
(4) Within sixty (60) days of the date of these Reasons for Decision, the
Respondent is to ensure the performance of IPP 9 in relation
to all future uses
of the “Applicant PI 1”, the “2007 Rae Report” and the
“2023 MB Report” (all
as defined in these Reasons for Decision)
wherever such are held by the Respondent, including by implementing such:
(i) training, awareness raising and safeguards; and
(ii) administrative measures,
necessary to ensure that, in accordance with IPP 9, the Respondent will take
reasonable steps in the circumstances to ensure that
information is all of
relevant, accurate, up to date, complete and not misleading having regard to the
purpose for which it is proposed
to be used, subject to the valid exercise by
the Respondent of any exemption or exception in the
Information Protection Act
or other law which is applicable in the
circumstances.
(5) Within seven (7) days of fully complying with Order (3) above the
Respondent must notify the Applicant in writing that it has
fully complied with
that Order.
(6) Within seven (7) days of fully complying with Order (4) above the
Respondent must notify the Applicant in writing that it has
fully complied with
that Order.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (335 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter