URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/661.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Shurapey v Mycar Auto Sales (Motor Vehicle) [2013] NSWCTTT 661 (31 December 2013)
Shurapey v Mycar Auto Sales (Motor Vehicle)
[2013] NSWCTTT 661
(31 December
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY
Motor Vehicles Division
APPLICATION NO:
MV 12/52073
Vitaliy Shurapey
RESPONDENTS:
Freestone Auto Sales Pty Ltd t/as Mycar Auto Sales
APPLICATION:
Refund of purchase price of motor vehicle
16 July 2013 and 12 September 2013
APPEARANCES:
Applicant: In person
Respondent: Mr S Freestone
LEGISLATION:
Consumer Claims Act 1998
Fair Trading Act 1987
Australian Consumer Law
Motor vehicles, representations, defects
respondent is to pay the applicant the sum of $30,000.00 on or before 1 February
applicant shall make available the motor vehicle to be collected by the
respondent within 7 days from the date the respondent
pays the sum in accordance
with order 1. The respondent is to bear the cost of collecting the motor vehicle
from the applicant.
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATION
applicant lodged an application with the Tribunal on 9 November 2011 seeking
orders that the respondent refund to him the cost
of the motor vehicle he
purchased from the respondent in August 2011 and an order for compensation in
the amount of $2,540.00.
matter was listed for a hearing, having been remitted back from the District
matter was listed for hearing on 16 July 2013 and 12 September 2013.
applicant appeared in person. The respondent was represented by Mr Freestone, a
Director of the respondent company.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine the matter pursuant to the
Claims Act 1998
relevant law is contained within the provisions of the Australian Consumer Law
which are imported into the law of this state by
virtue of s 28 of the
Trading Act 1987(NSW)
Australian Consumer Law
provided consumers with certain guarantees
regarding the provision of goods and services. In relation to this matter, the
most relevant
guarantee is that relating to acceptable quality pursuant to s 54
of the Australian Consumer Law. It states as follows:
54 Guarantee as to acceptable
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by auction;
guarantee that the goods are of acceptable quality.
(2) Goods are of
acceptable quality if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly
supplied; and
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods), would
regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the
purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer
of the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the
(a) goods supplied to a consumer are not of acceptable quality; and
(b) the only reason or reasons why they are not of acceptable quality were
specifically drawn to the consumer's attention before the
consumer agreed to the
the goods are taken to be of acceptable quality.
(a) goods are displayed for sale or hire; and
(b) the goods would not be of acceptable quality if they were supplied to a
the reason or reasons why they are not of acceptable quality are taken, for
the purposes of subsection (4), to have been specifically
drawn to a consumer's
attention if those reasons were disclosed on a written notice that was displayed
with the goods and that was
transparent.
(6) Goods do not fail to be of acceptable quality if:
(a) the consumer to whom they are supplied causes them to become of
unacceptable quality, or fails to take reasonable steps to prevent
becoming of unacceptable quality; and
(b) they are damaged by abnormal use.
(7) Goods do not fail to be of acceptable quality if:
(a) the consumer acquiring the goods examines them before the consumer agrees
to the supply of the goods; and
(b) the examination ought reasonably to have revealed that the goods were not
of acceptable quality.
ONUS AND STANDARD OF PROOF
applicant bears the onus of proving his case on the balance of probabilities.
APPLICANT’S EVIDENCE
The applicant
applicant gave sworn evidence in relation to the matter and also relied upon a
large number of documents tendered in support of
crux of the applicant’s case is that he purchased a Subaru Forester car
from the respondent on 6 August 2011.
applicant has provided a copy of the tax invoice for the purchase of the car,
which indicates it was sold to the applicant on
01 August 2011 for an amount of
$27,950.00. (Refer Exhibit A). The tax invoice was endorsed with the following
‘front bar will
be repaired, rear bar protective cover and rear cargo tray
will be supplied’.
applicant requested a vehicle condition report from the respondent in relation
to the car. The respondent emailed a copy of the
report to the applicant on 3
August 2011 at 3.07pm. The report included the following information: the year
and model number; the
build date; the compliance date; the VIN / chassis number;
transmission type; registration number and expiry date; number of kilometres
travelled; and colour. The comments section of the report stated:
“Vehicle looks to be in near new condition with only minor paint and
enamel issues to the front and rear bars. No signs of previous
major impact
damage. Tyres have 80% tread left, Road test: No problems detected. Additional
Notes: Vehicle has just been serviced
and has floor mats”.
applicant obtained a car history report which includes a V Check and a REVS
certificate. The information provided indicated that
there were no encumbrances
on the car, no restrictions report and no odometer discrepancies reported. The
information provided also
stated ‘No Vcheck Written Off incidents
reported’. There was also no stolen status recorded for the vehicle. The
information
did not include any information regarding the warranty expiry date
in the relevant entry area for that information. (Refer Exhibit
contract for the sale of the car was also provided by the applicant. The
contract sale date was 06 August 2011. The contract was
also endorsed with a
handwritten notation stating ‘The above vehicle will be covered by Mycar
Auto Sales [being the respondent’s
trading name] against any electrical
issues, and confirms that there are no signs that the vehicle was affected by
floor damage’.
Mr Freestone signed the endorsement on behalf of the
respondent. (Refer Exhibit A)
applicant states that he also made an explicit enquiry prior to the purchase as
to whether he ought to purchase an additional
years warranty in relation to the
car. The applicant states he relied upon the respondent’s representations
regarding the reliability
of Subaru cars in making a determination that he would
not purchase the additional warranty.
applicant stated that the manufacturer’s warranty was not provided to him
in writing. The applicant states that Mr Freestone
advised him that the
manufacturer’s warranty was still in force at the time of sale.
applicant also provided a copy of the warranty applicable to the car at the time
of sale. The warranty was a Form 4 warranty,
which was for whatever occurred
first of either a period of 3 months or 5000 kilometres. That document states
‘The information
has been checked with the Register of Encumbered Vehicles
(REVS)’ and
“THIS VEHICLE IS NOT LISTED ON REVS AS BEING, OR
HAVING BEEN A WRITTEN OFF OR WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLE”
. (Refer Exhibit
applicant provided a print out from Subaru which states that the car is a
written off vehicle and notes that it was written off
by Europcar as per email
10 December 2010. There is no further information regarding why the car was
written off. (Refer Exhibit
applicant first noticed problems with the car a few days prior to 19 September
2011. When the applicant took the car to a Subaru
dealer for repair work to be
undertaken he was advised that the car was a written off car according to the
vehicle manufacturer.
The applicant was advised the car was written off in
December 2010.
applicant advised that he was not told at the time he purchased the car that it
was a written off vehicle. The documentary evidence
provided by the applicant
supports this contention.
car was towed to Tynans on 22 September 2011 as the engine overheated. At that
time the odometer reading was 10162, indicating
that vehicle had travelled
1175kms. The car was towed back to the applicant’s premises on that day
and has not been used since.
The applicant purchased another motor vehicle on 10
December 2011.
applicant advised that he specifically asked Mr Freestone, the Director of the
respondent company, about the history of the car
and why it was being sold. Mr
Freestone advised him that the car had no damage and was being sold for
financial reasons. The applicant
also specifically asked Mr Freestone regarding
whether the car had the manufacturer’s warranty. Mr Freestone advised him
the warranty had a further two years duration before it expired.
applicant gave sworn evidence in which he denied ever damaging the car or being
in an accident. He specifically denied that he
had driven the car outside of
Sydney or on anything other than a normal road. The applicant denied driving the
car through water
or over a gutter. The applicant advised that he had
comprehensive insurance and he would have lodged a claim against that had he
been involved in an accident.
applicant gave sworn evidence that, as he was not a mechanic, he relied upon the
representations made by the respondent in relation
to the condition and quality
of the vehicle.
Mr Garry Black - Fair Trading Automotive Inspector
was called from Mr Garry Black, a Fair Trading Automotive Inspector. Mr Black
provided a report dated 23 April 2013 in relation
to the matter. (Exhibit
Black states that the photographic images provided to him by the Tynan’s
service department ‘show major damage/impact
to rear suspension components
and secondary rust/corrosion consistent with high level water immersion’.
Black states that the original owner of the car advised him that the car had a
radiator fan go through the radiator and overheated
the engine. The original
owner further advised him that the engine was badly damaged and as it was not
economical to repair, the
car was sold through Manheim Auctions.
Black also states that the photographic evidence provided by Tynans shows an
‘incorrect radiator fitted and wiring modifications
have been carried out
previous to sale to facilitate a same capacity but different model engine
installed’.
Black’s report concludes that the respondent sold a car, possibly without
knowing, that had been written off by the manufacturer.
Mr Black further opines
“The evidence is totally clear that the secondary rust is a result of
water submersion for a period of time. The secondary rust
on the damaged and
bent components in the rear suspension and the under body in all probability did
not occur in the period of consumer
ownership...”.
Black gave sworn evidence in relation to the matter on 16 July 2013. Mr Black
advised he had 36 years’ experience and was
a licenced automotive
inspector and trades qualified motor mechanic. He has undertaken numerous
courses in relation to motor vehicles,
some of which related specifically to
Subaru motor vehicles.
Black gave evidence that it should have been apparent to an appropriately
qualified mechanic that the radiator in the car was not
the correct model for
that car. The engine in the car was not the original engine, although that may
not be readily apparent. At
least some of the rust damage at the bottom of the
car existed at the time of the sale. There was rust damage on the bottom of the
car consistent with it being caused prior to the sale. Mr Black had obtained a
history from the original owner of the car, who advised
him that the car was
involved in a water crossing in which the fan was pushed into the radiator,
causing the radiator to be destroyed.
Mr Black stated that some of the damage, as depicted in photo 8 attached to his
report, was fresh damage. The damage was consistent
with the incorrect use of a
hoist or coming off a gutter. There was no rust or corrosion damage, indicating
that the damage was fresh.
In his opinion the damage was not consistent with
damage caused by incorrect towing, as there was no hook or chain damage. The
was consistent with contact with a sharp metal object and/or sandstone.
The damage was not consistent with driving over a rough surface.
Black also gave evidence that the water damage was greater than would be
expected for a 12 month old car. It was more likely to
have been caused by
exposure to salt water and a failure to wash it down afterwards.
relation to the issue of the wheel being out of alignment due to the damaged
control arm, as depicted in photograph 34 attached
to his report, Mr Black
stated that it would have made a noise and the car would have felt unstable and
apparent when being driven.
Mr Black also stated that the damage was not able to
be caused by a tow truck or car hoist.
Black gave evidence that it was not the usual practice for a motor dealer to
confirm the existence of the manufacturer’s
warranty with the manufacturer
prior to selling the car.
Mr Black agreed that a competent mechanic would have noticed the radiator was
not original and that as a result of that it should
have raised an alarm
regarding the manufacturer’s warranty.
RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE
respondent company was represented by Mr Shaun Freestone, a Director. Mr
Freestone gave sworn evidence in relation to the matter
and also relied upon
documents in support of the respondent’s case. The documentary material
comprises the following bundles:
Exhibit 1 (submitted on 18 April 2013); Exhibit
2 (submitted of 15 July 2013; and Exhibit 3 (Submitted on 09 August 2013).
of that material has been taken into account in determining the matter, even if
it has not been specifically referred to in these
respondent stated that the car was purchased from a public auction in Queensland
with what Mr Freestone describes as
“clear title and no WOVR [written
off vehicle register] status”.
The respondent relies upon the car
passing the blue slip inspection and the lack of any listing on the relevant
car was a written off vehicle. Those databases included V
Check and REVS.
respondent advised that he disclosed to the applicant that the car had been
purchased at auction in Queensland after the Brisbane
floods. The respondent
endorsed the contract with sale stating that the vehicle would be ‘covered
by My Car Auto sales against
any electrical issues and confirms that there are
no signs that the vehicle was affected by flood damage’.
respondent specifically denies making any representation to the applicant in
relation to the status of the manufacturer’s
warranty. The respondent
states that the
“only warranty I provided to the applicant is the
warranty set out on the Form 4 of the contract”.
The respondent
conceded that the applicant may have referred to the manufacturer’s
warranty, however the respondent states
he did not make any enquiries regarding
the manufacturer’s warranty. The respondent specifically denies that it
was a pre-condition
of the sale, or an inducement in relation to the sale, that
the manufacturer’s warranty was valid. The respondent stated that
case, he would have endorsed the contract of sale in the same manner he endorsed
it regarding liability for repairing electrical
Freestone also states that from the information he possessed at the time, he had
no reason to doubt that the manufacturer’s
warranty was still in force. He
stated that he had no need to investigate this prior to the sale.
respondent asserts that the failure by the applicant to return the car to the
respondent for repairs within the Form 4 warranty
period leads to an inference
that the applicant ‘abused’ the car in some manner and was therefore
aware that the Form
4 warranty would not be enforceable. Mr Freestone states
that he has no history regarding what occurred in relation to the car after
was sold to the applicant.
Freestone was asked by the applicant why he did not advise the applicant that
the car’s engine had been replaced. Mr Freestone
replied that he could not
confirm if the engine was replaced or not, as he has 150 cars at the car yard.
Mr Freestone stated that
he conducted a general inspection of the car and
arranged for some minor repair work to be done. That repair work included having
the rear bumper bar repainted.
respondent also obtained a report from Mr Brian Martin dated 6 August 2013.
(Refer Exhibit 3) Mr Martin is a corrosion engineer
with a Bachelor of Science
in applied chemistry. He has considerable experience in the corrosion control
industry and is a member
of a number of professional bodies in that field.
Martin has reviewed the photographs provided to him by the respondent. The
respondent provided him with 8 photographs in relation
to the matter. It is to
be noted that this is significantly less than the 34 photographs Mr Black was
given to review. The photographs
were allocated the same numbers as those
attached to Mr Black’s report (Exhibit F).
Martin’s opinion is that the rust on the bent suspension arm, as depicted
in photographs 1 and 2 is thin and therefore recent,
as compared to the
substantial rusting on other parts of the underbody, and “could have
occurred over a period of less than
six weeks”. [Refer [k]). Mr Martin
states that the rust depicted in photographs 3, 4 and 16 show rust that
to be significantly thicker and darker, indicating that it
occurred over a significantly longer period of time’.
Martin further states that the rust depicted in photographs 15, 17 and 18 is
also more substantial “as would be expected
from the higher operating
temperature over the longer period of time”.
Freestone has also provided a statutory declaration to the effect that he has
been advised that the engine in the car was an appropriate
engine for that make
and model car. It is to be noted that this is hearsay evidence.
Freestone summarised the respondent’s argument as follows: the damage must
have been caused during the period the car was
in the possession of the
applicant, as it was not noted during the blue slip inspection; the rust which
was present was thin and
therefore recent; the misaligned wheel was something
which ought to have been apparent on both a visual inspection and also when
car was being driven. The car was of acceptable quality at the time he sold it
to the applicant. Any damage to the car was caused
by the applicant after he
took possession of the car.
am satisfied that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine the matter for the
reasons stated above.
am satisfied of the following matters, on the balance of
probabilities:
the car was not of acceptable quality, in accordance with the Australian
Consumer Law, at the time it was sold to the applicant.
That is, the car was not
free from defects at the time it was sold.
defects present in the car at the time of sale included the presence of
substantial rust and the incorrect radiator being installed.
applicant relied upon the representations made to him by the respondent, namely
Mr Freestone, who is a director of the respondent
company in relation the
condition of the vehicle at the time of sale and the validity of the
manufacturer’s warranty
coming to that determination I have found the evidence given by the applicant
and Mr Black particularly persuasive.
found the applicant to be a witness of truth and credit. Where his evidence
differs from that of the respondent, I prefer his evidence.
He gave a detailed
and careful recollection of the circumstances surrounding the purchase of the
car. He made careful and specific
enquiries concerning the history of the car
and the reasons the original owner sold the car. His evidence is supported by
the contents
of the endorsement on the contract of sale regarding the
respondent’s specific denial of flood damage, in circumstances where
the respondent’s own expert states that there was substantial rust on the
underbody of the car which occurred over a significant
period of time. Further,
Mr Martin gives an opinion only that the newer rust
“could have
occurred over a period of less than six weeks”,
not that it did.
applicant’s denial that he damaged the car, or that his wife damaged the
car, is also accepted, for the reasons stated above.
The applicant’s
evidence that the car has not been driven since 21 September 2012 is also
am not satisfied on the available evidence that any determination can be made as
to how the fresh damage to the control arm occurred
as there is no direct
evidence other than the denial of the applicant that it occurred whilst the car
was in his possession.
respondent’s contention that the applicant took the car to an authorised
Subaru dealer, rather than return the car to the
respondent for fixing, leads to
an inference that the applicant must have damaged the car is rejected. The
applicant’s evidence
that he took the car to an authorised dealer is
supportive of the applicant’s evidence that the respondent represented to
that the manufacturer’s warranty was still in force. Further, having
any repair work undertaken by an authorised mechanic may
have had ramifications
for the manufacturer’s warranty.
applicant’s evidence that he specifically asked the respondent about the
existence of the manufacturer’s warranty
is also accepted, again for the
reasons stated above regarding the applicant’s credibility.
coming to the view that there was substantial rust in the car I have been
particularly persuaded by the evidence of Mr Black and
also Mr Martin. I am
satisfied that a person viewing the under carriage of the car would have been
able to see the substantial rust
present, as depicted in the photographs
attached to Exhibit F. I reject the account of the respondent that as the car
blue slip inspection that rust was not present. I have also had
regard to the lack of any evidence provided from the author of the
blue slip in
coming to that determination and Mr Freestone’s lack of any expertise in
the area of motor vehicle mechanics or
am satisfied also that the incorrect radiator was installed in the car. Again, I
have accepted the evidence of Mr Black in that
regard, as his is the only
independent expert evidence in the relevant subject area before me. I also
accept the evidence of Mr Black
that an appropriately qualified mechanic ought
to have known this. This evidence has been taken into account in assessing the
of the blue slip, as the author of the blue slip did not ascertain this
was the case.
Mr Freestone denies that there was any damage to the car at the time of the
sale, that evidence is rejected as he is not
a qualified mechanic. Further, Mr
Freestone was also unable to recollect whether something as important as a new
engine had been
installed in the car. However, Mr Freestone was able to
recollect that the rear bumper bar had been repainted. That evidence has
taken into account in assessing Mr Freestone’s credibility overall as a
evidence provided by Mr Freestone in his statutory declaration dated 08 August
2013 has been given limited weight as it is hearsay
Freestone also made a written representation regarding the condition of the car
at the time of sale, by way of a vehicle condition
report. He held the car out
to be “in near new condition” in circumstances where there was
significant rust damage, the
engine may have been replaced and the incorrect
radiator was installed. On the objective evidence that was clearly not the case.
applicant relied upon the representations made to him by the respondent in
relation to the condition of the vehicle.
vehicle was not of acceptable quality as it had substantial rust present, in
addition to an incorrect radiator fitted.
am satisfied that the defects constitute a major defect and therefore the
applicant is entitled to a refund for the purchase price
of the car.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has discharged the onus placed upon
him and he is entitled to a refund of
the purchase price of
$27,950.00.
applicant is also entitled to an order for any consequential damage which is not
too remote. I determine that the applicant is
entitled to an order for the cost
of the registration, stamp duty and comprehensive insurance. The applicant only
had the use of
the vehicle for 6 weeks. Those three items total
Tribunal has a jurisdictional limited of $30,000.00 in total for a claim in
relation to a second hand motor vehicle.
other claims are dismissed.
Consumer, Trader & Tenancy Tribunal
31 December 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (170 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter