URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDT/2013/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v SUNDA [2013] NSWDT 1 (18 February 2013)
Dental Tribunal of New South Wales
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
HCCC v Sunda [2013] NSWDT 1
Complainant: Health Care Complaints Commission
Respondent: Dr Ray Sunda
Tribunal: Mr Oscar Shub (chairperson)
Prof Em. Keith Lester (dentist member)
Dr Kavita Lobo (dentist member)
Ms Jacqueline Milne (lay member)
Date and Place of Hearing: 25, 26 September 2012, Sydney
Date of Decision: 18 February 2013
Decision summary: The Tribunal finds Complaint 1 and all its Particulars and
Complaint 2 established. The Tribunal finds the Respondent
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct.
Appearances: Complainant: Ms P Dwyer, Counsel, with Ms R Lewis, Solicitor,
Complainant.
Respondent: Mr A Saxton, Solicitor, for the Respondent.
Catchwords:
Dentist-unsatisfactory professional conduct-professional
misconduct- inappropriate dentist patient relationship-professional
boundaries.
Legislation Cited:
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
sections 32(2)
Health Practitioners Regulation National Law of NSW section
145(A), 139(B),
139(E), 149(A) and (C).
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA34
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
HCCC v Dr Small
[2012] NSW MT18
HCCC v Moore
[2008] NSW PST 2
HCCC v Dr Anne Amigo
[2012] NSW MT13
HCCC v Dr Elizabeth Mary Monage
HCCC v Bosanquet
[2012] NSW DT2
HCCC v Jarrold
[2011] NSW DT1
HCCC v Dr Mehta
[2002] NSW MT
The Medical Practice Act
Dr Stewart Anderson
(2004) NSW MT3
HCCC v Robert Sims
(2010) NSW MT17
HCCC v Dr Simring
(2010) NSW MT
HCCC v Mackavoe
(2000) NSW MT
HCCC v Dr Surreal
(1990) NSW MT
HCCC v Sunjic
[2008] NSW MT at paragraphs 14-16
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
(1997) 22 FAM LR 592
at 599, 602-603
Hammond Bros Pty Ltd v Insurance Australia Group
[2004] NSWCA 366
Page v McKensey & Others
[2004] NSWCA 437
Meat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1991] 100 ALR
Luxton v Vines
[1952] 85 CLR 353
Westbus Pty Ltd v Ishak
[2006] NSWCA 198
Richard Evans & Co v Astley
[1911] AC 674
Complaints and Particulars of Complaints
Health Care Complaints Commission
of Level 13, 323
Castlereagh Street, Sydney NSW, having consulted with the
Dental Council of
New South Wales
in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) ("the National Law").
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Dr Ray Sunda ("the practitioner") of 4 Charlotte St, Ashfield, NSW, 2131
being a dentist registered under the National Law,
COMPLAINT ONE
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B of
the National
Law in that the practitioner has:
(i) engaged in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in
the practice of dentistry
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training
or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to
the practice or purported practice of dentistry.
Background to Complaint One
At all relevant times the practitioner conducted practice as a registered
Ashfield in the state of New South Wales.
Patient A first attended on the practitioner for treatment on 20 March 2006.
She attended for treatment on: a further seven (7) occasions
in 2006; five (5)
occasions in 2007; one (1) occasion on 2008; one (1) occasion in 2010; one (1)
occasion on a date in late January
or early February 2011; and one (1) occasion
on 17 February 2011.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
1. Between May and July 2007, the practitioner failed to observe proper
professional boundaries in that he engaged in a personal
and sexual relationship
with Patient A.
2. On 17 February 2011, the practitioner failed to observe
proper professional boundaries in that he engaged in
sexual activity
with Patient A in which the practitioner:
2.1. hugged Patient A; and/or
2.2. touched Patient A on the buttocks; and/or
2.3. removed the bra straps and the top of the dress of Patient A;
2.4. opened his shirt and pants; and/or
2.5. sat on Patient A's legs with his knees on either side of her
2.6. exposed Patient A's breasts; and/or
2.7. touched Patient A's breasts; and/or
2.7 attempted to kiss Patient A; and/or
2.8. placed Patient A's hand inside his underwear and on his
2.9. verbally suggested that Patient A perform oral sex on him;
2.10. pushed Patient A's head towards his penis until Patient A licked
COMPLAINT TWO
is guilty of professional misconduct under section 139E of the National Law
in that the practitioner has:
(i) engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation
practitioner's registration; or
(ii) engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct that, when the instances are considered together,
amount to conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify the suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner's registration.
Background to Complaint Two
As for Complaint One.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Notification was made to the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency by
a mental health nurse employed by Sydney Local
Health District. The
Notification arose from a report made by Patient A to the nurse.
Patient A had been seeing the mental
health nurse as part of ongoing treatment
for psychological issues. The Notification was referred to the Dental Council of
Respondent graduated from the University of Sydney in 1996 with a
degree of Bachelor of Dental Surgery. He was employed
initially in NSW as a
dentist. He moved to the south coast where he built up a dental practice over a
period of 12 months. He
subsequently bought a suburban practice in Ashfield
NSW. He purchased a property which he renovated, to include five surgeries. At
one point in time, there were four dentists on site, and six support staff.
Subsequently the practice changed and he worked with
one other dentist until one
year ago. He commenced as a sole practitioner in 2011 and continues in that
Complaints (pages 2 and 3) were referred to this Tribunal by the Health Care
Complaints Commission and the Respondent gave evidence
before it. His statement
to the HCCC dated 23 June 2011 was in evidence.
Current conditions on the Registration status of the
4. The Respondent is currently subject to an order made by the Dental Council
New South Wales effective from 2 September 2011 in terms of
“1. The dentist is to undertake a health assessment by a medical
practitioner as appointed by the Dental Council, within the
The health assessment is to be at the cost of the dentist.
dentist is not to practice dentistry on female patients unless an adult member
of staff is present when the dentist is treating
female patients. The adult
member of staff is to be approved by the Council on receipt of a Statutory
Declaration informing the
Council that that member of staff has the
knowledge of the conditions before the Council. The member of staff must also
on the Statutory Declaration that they have no prior criminal history
and that they are aware of the conditions placed on the dentist's
(Letter 9 September 2011 at Tab 6)
Evidence of the Complainant
Complainant relied on the statement of Patient A, the almost
contemporaneous complaint that she made which is
outlined in the statement of
the mental health nurse, the evidence of the psychiatrist Dr Jonathan
Phillips, the evidence
of the Peer Reviewer, and the admissions made by the
Respondent.
Statement of Patient A
Complainant provided a statement by Patient A which was to the following
(i) In approximately March 2006, Patient A was seeking a
dental practitioner and located the Respondent in the
Yellow Pages.
(ii) Patient A separated from her husband in May 2007.
(iii) After Patient A had been seeing the Respondent as a patient for
several months, she asked him whether he was in a position
to view a CV of hers
and to give her some advice on that CV. He suggested that they should meet at
his residence in order to do
so. She met him at his work and he drove her to
his apartment. While they were looking at the CV and were talking,
thing led to another and I ended up seeing him for three weeks or so"
3, page 1, paragraph 5)
(iv) After approximately three weeks, the Respondent c l a i m e d
that he did not believe that Patient A was separated
and he did not want her to
cheat on her husband. The relationship was terminated at that time.
(v) In approximately 2009, Patient A's daughter required orthodontic
treatment and Patient A took her daughter to the Respondent,
attending with her
daughter on each occasion when the daughter required a visit.
(vi) Following a referral from a medical practitioner for dental
treatment, Patient A returned to the Respondent in late
January 2011. He cleaned
her teeth and sent her away for an x-ray. He advised her that he would provide
her with orthodontic treatment
and outlined what he was going to do. When he
finished, he asked her to give him a hug for old time's sake.
(vii) In February 2011, Patient A returned for a second consultation. The
Respondent took x-rays and impressions of her teeth.
On both occasions that
Patient A visited the Respondent, the dentist's chair was already in a recline
position, not in the sitting
(viii) After conducting his examination and dental work on Patient A in
February 2011, the Respondent instructed Patient A to brush
her teeth. The
assistant was about to come into the room but the Respondent asked her
if they could have some privacy.
The Respondent then invited Patient A
to go upstairs and have a look at the apartment. Patient A says that
as he had also told her that he had made some changes
(ix) They proceeded to the apartment and upon arrival Patient A noted
that the curtains were closed. They went out on the
balcony to smoke and
had discussions about various matters. While on the balcony, the Respondent
asked for a hug which
seemed to Patient A to be acceptable
after talking about various depressing matters. On this occasion
hand went straight onto my buttocks"
(Tab 3, page 3, paragraph 25). They
returned to the room and he asked Patient A to shut the curtains which she
(x) When she closed the curtains, he slipped the straps down on her
dress, and slipped the top of her dress and bra straps
down. He stood in
front of her and said
"I haven’t seen these puppies for a long time"
(Tab 3, page 4, paragraph 27). He was touching her breasts while he said
this and Patient A said
"Ray, we really can't do this"
(Tab 3, page
4, paragraph 27). Patient A pulled her straps back up and he said
"yeah all right then, ok let's just sit down and have a chat"
4, paragraph 27).
(xi) She sat down on the lounge with her bag next to her. He then
stood in front of her, undid his shirt and pants.
are you doing?"
(Tab 3, page 4, paragraph 29) and he said
"Oh come on"
3, page 4, paragraph 29). He sat on her legs with his knees on either side
of her thighs. He put his weight on her legs and he
put his left hand on the
wall to support himself. Patient A stated that she could not move because his
weight was on her.
He then pulled her straps down again with his right
hand so that her breasts were exposed. He started to try to kiss her on
mouth and she kept saying
"Ray, you can't do this, I'm seeing someone, I
don’t want to do this"
and he kept saying
"Oh come on"
(Tab 3, page 4, paragraph 29).
(xii) He then grabbed her right arm and put her hand in his
underpants so that she could get hold of his penis. She
h a d h e r h a n d i
n his underpants holding on to his penis and she could feel that
"his penis was very erect, like he was highly excited already"
page 4, paragraph 30). She indicated that she did not want to do
this but she could not push away. He
then took her head and pushed
her head further down towards his penis and said
"Come on, do you want to
suck on it,"
to which she said
(Tab 3, page 4, paragraph 31).
There was then considerable discussion about whether she would suck on it or not
but she refused to
do so. He did however push her head back down and he made
her lick his penis.
(xiii) He kept trying to kiss her and she kept trying to turn her head side
to side to stop him from doing so.
(xiv) At some point in time, the Respondent ejaculated and after
some further discussion on the balcony they returned downstairs.
Statement of Mental Health Nurse
Complainant provided a statement by the mental health nurse who was
treating Patient A and had been doing so since 11
June 2010 when Patient A
attended the community mental health service for counselling. The statement is
to the following effect.
(i) Patient A has a number of issues that require treatment and a
diagnosis of a borderline personality disorder. According
to the mental
health nurse, Patient A's mental health problems are fundamentally due to
childhood trauma and she has a diagnosis
of major depression.
(ii) Patient A had a previous history of being dangerously
suicidal. The most recent time was in April 2009 when she
overdosed on heart
medication. Patient A had a hospital admission in April 2008 for her suicidal
feelings. She also overdosed in
July 2007 involving multiple heart and pain
medications.
(iii) In the statement, the mental health nurse confirmed that on 23
2011, Patient A disclosed an incident involving her dentist. She had
cancelled the previous session with the mental health
nurse on 21
February 2011 via a message at the front desk. Patient A subsequently advised
the mental health nurse that she had
cancelled this
appointment because she was so ashamed and felt awful about what had
happened with her dentist, and that
she was avoiding a situation where she felt
she would have to talk about it in a session.
(iv) It was at this time that Patient A disclosed details of the incident
to the mental health nurse. Patient A mentioned that
the incident involved
the health professional that she had had a consensual affair with a few years
before and therefore the mental
health nurse knew it was her dentist. The mental
health nurse's notes were entirely consistent with the statement made by
Statement by Dr Jonathan Phillips
accordance with the conditions imposed by the Dental Council of New
South Wales effective from 2 September 2011,
following its Section 150
enquiry, the Respondent was seen by a psychiatrist, Dr Phillips. On
16 November 2011,
Dr Phillips provided a report to the Dental Council. That
report was made available to the Tribunal (Tab 20).
Phillips’ statement is to the following effect.
(i) In the history provided by the Respondent, the Respondent said he
was facing penalties in relation to an alleged sexual
impropriety involving a
female patient and indicated that this was the only complaint of this
(ii) The Respondent confirmed to Dr Phillips that he met with Patient
A outside of his surgery and that a situation of intimacy
began in 2007 (in his
report referred to as 2004). He confirmed there were several sexual
encounters, principally with Patient
A performing oral sex on him.
(iii) In dealing with the February 2011 events the Respondent advised Dr
Phillips that Patient A returned for a dental check-up in February
(iv) At the time of the second consultation in February 2011,
the Respondent stated that Patient A was dressed
skimpy outfit"
(Tab 20, page 4, paragraph 10). He thought this was
different to her usual presentation and he came to believe that she
wanted a further sexual encounter"
(Tab 20, page 4, paragraph 10).
(v) Following the consultation, the Respondent took Patient A upstairs
to see the private section of his dental surgery where
they spoke about personal
matters including problems with their respective marriages.
(vi) The Respondent informed Dr Phillips that he undid Patient
A ’ s clothing with the aim of sexual conduct,
that Patient A did not
push him away and that he did not force himself on her. He stated that
Patient A stopped him when
he wanted oral sex and they later went
downstairs.
9. In providing his report, Dr Phillips expressed the following
"Dr R . Sunda is a 43 year old dental surgeon who violated the trust of
Patient A by having a sexual relationship with her.
It should be noted that Dr Sunda was a frightened and somewhat
reluctant historian, particularly when it came to speaking
which had been operating in his life at/around the time of the sexualised
relationship with Patient A. He gave
comparatively little information about
what appears to have been a strained relationship with his wife, and
he came into with a health fund (withdrawal of rights of
electronic billing). He noted also that his professional practice was now
smaller than it had been, but he was not keen to provide details about this
On the history there appear to have been two periods of sexualised
interaction with Patient A. Assuming Dr Sunda's history
is correct,
Patient A contributed to, or partly initiated, their non-professional
vitae, he thought with intention to get a job with him.
She advised, in her
HCCC statement during 2007, that she accidentally sent him a text message
stating that she would like
to sleep with him. Whilst I do not doubt
that she did as she said, it is harder to believe that the message
in accident to him.
Whatever the case, Dr Sunda entered an opportunistic relatively brief
sexual relationship with Patient A. The liaison lasted several
weeks only.
Whilst it can be argued that there can never be a consensual sexual
relationship between a professional person
and a client, the available evidence
suggests that Patient A had no objection to their initial
The second and arguably more significant period of
sexualised interaction began in January 2011, at a time when Patient
as a client to Dr Sunda's professional practice. The details of the incident
have been mentioned in the body of this report.
Suffice it to state that
following a dental procedure, Dr Sunda asked Patient A to come to his quarters
(above the surgery). He
then forced her into sexualised contact with him (but
without penetration as far as I know). She objected several times to his
but could do nothing to stop him. The interaction was inappropriate,
demeaning and threatening from her point of view.
I accept Dr Sunda's comments that there had been stresses in his life
during the periods of sexualised interaction with
He appears to have been in a less than satisfactory marriage for a number of
years and there were periods of separation.
He had his rights of electronic
billing withdrawn by a health fund, with significant adverse effect on his
professional practice.
His professional practice is now much reduced in size.
Whilst I note that stressors can lead to a professional person breaking normally
accepted ethical boundaries, this can only mitigate matters to a small
Dr Sunda knows that his sexualised interaction with Patient A
was wrong and ethically improper. He has, to some extent,
tried to justify what
occurred on the basis of then existing stressors, but this is only marginally
case. He exhibits a degree of contrition, but on
his history and presentation is probably lacking full insight into the
devastation
he brought to Patient A (at least in January (
Assuming Patient A's recollection of events is correct (see HCCC documents), she
felt pressured by him to offer him sexual
relief. She did not want sexualised
There is no convincing evidence that Dr Sunda has any current recognisable
or diagnosable psychiatric disorder. He may have experienced
adjustment problems
in the recent past, and possibly could have suffered from an adjustment
disorder with depressed mood,
least in January (
) 2011. However, he was a rather poor
historian and I do not have sufficient evidence to make a retrospective
It is important also to consider matters of character. Whilst I am not
able to conclude that Dr Sunda has any recognisable or diagnosable
personality
disorder, he appears to have flaws in his personality structure which
allowed him to break professional barriers
understood by him. I do not think
that he currently understands the full significance of this.
Obviously, it is for Council to make recommendations about Dr Sunda's
future career, particularly whether he is able to continue in
dental practice.
My own assessment is that he has learnt a hard lesson and is unlikely to
offend again. However, assuming
Dr Sunda were to be allowed to continue
in professional practice, Council might like to consider a number of
safeguards,
at least in the foreseeable future. The following may be
Dr Sunda should make arrangements to attend a psychiatrist or
clinical psychologist of his choice in order to review
actions and to come to recognise his flaws of character, and to learn
how to avoid repetitious behaviour
at times of future stress.
He needs to have a general practitioner with whom he can have
ready access for evaluation of both physical and psychological
He should have a chaperone with him during dental procedures, at least in
the next 6 months. This should not prove to be difficult,
given that the
usual dentist is assisted by a technician during procedures.
He should be reviewed by a Council appointed psychiatrist in 6
months, and then at regular intervals until Council is satisfied
longer presents any threats to his clients.
If Dr Sunda was a medical practitioner, I would favour him working within
a group practice, noting that unethical behaviour tends
to occur more commonly
where a practitioner works in isolation. I do not know Council's view on this
(Tab 20 page 10 paragraphs 46-55)
Peer Review Evidence
Complainant also provided evidence by way of various letters and reports
provided by the Peer Review Expert. This material
was made available
to the Tribunal by agreement between the parties.
the report the expert stated:
"Trust is the foundation of a successful patient-Dentist relationship.
It is important for a Dentist to remember that in professional
dealings, it is
necessary to separate personal and professional relationships.
Entering into a personal and sexual
relationship with a patient creates an
ethical dilemma for the Dentist. If a Dentist feels the need to enter into a
personal relationship
with a patient it would be prudent to first terminate the
responsibility for the patient's dental care.”
(Tab 13 page 2)
12. The expert proceeded to point out that:
"In May/June 2007, there was no legislated prohibition of a Dentist
entering into a personal/sexual relationship with a patient.
The then NSW
Dental Act and Regulations (under which Dr Sunda would have been practicing)
did not specifically mention this
breaking any law at this time by having what appears to be a consensual
relationship with
Patient A. At this time, there was also no mention of
this type of situation in the Australian Dental Association's Code
(At this time, the American Dental Association's Principles of Ethics and Code
of Professional Conduct stated: "Dentists
should avoid interpersonal
relationships that could impair their professional judgment or risk the
possibility of exploiting the
confidence placed in them by the
It is my opinion that Dr Sunda exploited the trust that Patient A placed
in him as her Dentist by contacting her (as he
states) "with the
intention of being flirtatious" and then entering into a sexual
relationship with her.”
(Tab 13 page 2)
13. The expert then proceeded to deal with the circumstances of the
2011 incident and stated:
"By this time, the Code of Conduct for registered health practitioners had
been introduced (from July 1 2010). Section 8.2 of the
Code "Professional
boundaries" specifically mentions that good practice involves:
b). never using a professional position to establish or pursue a sexual,
exploitive or otherwise inappropriate relationship with anybody
practitioner's care...
c). recognising that sexual relationships with people who
have previously been a practitioner's patients are often
inappropriate...
Dr Sunda's behaviour on the 17 February 2011 was inappropriate not only as
defined by the Code of Conduct but also it was inappropriate
as defined by
normal human behaviour."
(Tab 13 page 2)
and concluded:
"Dr Sunda's actions on the 17
February were
unethical and immoral. Patient A was not a willing participant in the events
that occurred. Despite the stress
in Dr Sunda's life at the time
11 of his statement), his behaviour cannot be condoned in any
(Tab 13 page 3)
response to a question raised by the Complainant following the report by the
expert, the expert stated:
"Whilst it is not usual for a Dentist to enter into a sexual relationship
with a patient, there are some Dentists who have "dated"
one of their patients.
This relationship then develops and may become a sexual relationship. If this
to continue, it is my opinion that the ethical
course of conduct would be to arrange for the patient to be treated by another
In the case of Dr Sunda and Patient A in May/June 2007, it appears that
the sexual relationship was consensual between the two parties.
However, I am of
the opinion that Dr Sunda's conduct was below the standard expected of a
professional of the same training or experience
because he should have ceased
providing dental treatment to Patient A if the relationship was to
(Tab 15 page 1)
respect of the relationship which existed in May/June 2007, the expert
"In relation to the events that occurred in May/June 2007, I
have stated that it is hard to establish what the standard
was at that time
because there was no Australian Codes of Conduct or no legislated prohibition
of a Dentist entering into a
sexual relationship with a patient.
Although I am of the opinion that Dr Sunda's conduct was below the standard
expected of
a health professional, it is difficult for me to confirm that the
conduct was significantly below the standard because there was
no standard at
the time. It is my opinion that the ethical course of conduct would have been to
arrange for Patient A to be treated
by another dentist during the period
that Dr Sunda and Patient A had the sexual relationship.”
(Tab 15A pages 2 and 3)
Evidence of the Respondent
evidence of the Respondent is contained in his statement to the Health Care
Complaints Commission dated 23 June 2011 and his
oral evidence given at the
hearing. The Respondent also gave evidence at a hearing before the Dental
Council of New South Wales
on Friday 2 September 2011 and a copy of the
transcript was made available to this Tribunal. (Tab 6)
May 2007 sexual relationship
his statement of 23 June 2011, the Respondent stated that in May of 2007 he
called Patient A on her mobile telephone with
the intention of being
flirtatious. He stated that at that time he had separated from his wife and he
chose to call Patient
A as he had the impression from her consultations with him
that she would welcome a flirtatious call from him.
Respondent had denied that he had sexual intercourse with Patient A
between May 2007 and February 2011. However, on
a question asked by the
chairperson in the Dental Council of New South Wales hearing of 2
2011 the Respondent stated that was
incorrect (transcript page 22 line 29).
the Tribunal, the Respondent agreed that on two occasions between May
and July of 2007, he had sexual intercourse
with Patient A. He agreed that the
relationship could have lasted for approximately three weeks. A number of
questions were put
to the Respondent regarding the
"flirtatious call"
that he made to Patient A which led to their meeting and the
subsequent relationship. The practitioner appeared
to deny the fact that the
call was in fact
"flirtatious"
in the sense normally used for
"flirtatious"
(transcript page 54 line 44 – page 55 line
February 2011 incident
cross-examination and in response to questioning by the Tribunal regarding the
February 2011 encounter, the Respondent confirmed
that following an appointment
on 17 February 2011 the Respondent and Patient A went upstairs and they
commenced some sexual activity.
The Respondent stated that there was no
sexual intercourse but admitted the elements of sexual behaviour which
are alleged
to have occurred in Particulars 2.1, 2.2, 2.4, 2.7, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9 of
Complaint 1.
was considerable cross-examination by Counsel for the Complainant to the
question of knowledge by the Respondent of the mental
condition and
vulnerability of Patient A. In particular there was cross-examination
as to whether at the time of the February
2011 incident the Respondent was
aware of the fact that Patient A was diagnosed as severely depressed and that
she had made several
attempts at suicide.
Respondent stated that until he received the Complaint he was unaware of Patient
A’s mental condition or of her suicide
attempts (transcript page
32 line 14, page 33 line 10 – line 14, page 46 line 10 - line 30, page 51
line 43 - line
Respondent was questioned on the effect the sexual encounter in February 2011
would have had on Patient A. He conceded that he
appreciated that it would have
had an impact on Patient A (transcript page 52 line 1 – line 3). However,
in his evidence he
refused to concede that Patient A would have felt violated
(transcript page 50 line 10 – line 23).
Respondent was asked questions regarding the power imbalance between a dentist
and a patient. The Respondent had difficulty
conceding that there was such a
power imbalance (transcript page 29 line 47, page 31 line 19,
32 line 10) but after considerable questioning said:
"There'd have to be – it would have to be reasonable, all right, to
consider refusing a patient"
(transcript page 30 line 21 – line
Admissions by the Respondent
submissions made on his behalf, the Respondent admitted to a number of the
Particulars of Complaint in whole and to one Particular
in part. The Respondent
also did not admit some of the Particulars. The position which the Respondent
adopted in respect of the
Particulars is as follows:
2.1 Hugged Patient A – admitted.
2.2 Touched Patient A on the buttocks – admitted.
2.3 Removed the bra straps and the top of the dress of Patient A - not
2.4 Opened his shirt and pants – admitted.
2.5 Sat on Patient A's legs with his knees on either side of her legs
– not admitted.
2.6 Exposed Patient A's breasts – not admitted.
2.7 Touched Patient A's breasts – admitted.
2.7 Attempted to kiss Patient A – admitted.
2.8 Placed Patient A's hand inside his underwear and on his penis
– admitted.
2.9 Verbally suggested that Patient A perform oral sex on him –
2.10 Pushed Patient A's head towards his penis until Patient A
licked his penis – not admitted.
Submissions by the Complainant
A copy of the Complainant’s written submissions is attached as annexure
the submissions by the Complainant, the Complainant made a number of general
points of law and referred the Tribunal to the recent
case of HCCC v
Sunjic [2008] NSWMT (26 June 2008) at paragraphs 14-16 (page 1 annexure
Complainant recognized that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is protective, not
punitive (Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
186 and Sunjic Ibid at paragraph 22) but pointed out
that in the Complainant's view, although the primary role of the Tribunal
protective, it also has a role in maintaining public confidence in
the profession and maintaining the reputation
of the profession. Counsel
submitted that orders of the Tribunal may operate to have a deterrent effect for
other members of the
profession.
referred the Tribunal to the various admissions made by the
Respondent and in light of the admissions made
and the evidence before the
Tribunal, submitted that the Tribunal should find that the events of 2007
2011 occurred in the manner set out in the statement of Patient
acknowledged that the Tribunal had heard from the Respondent and not from
Patient A and that the Respondent denies aspects
of the Complaint made by
Patient A, but turned to each of the events and submitted that the Tribunal
should make findings that the
events occurred in the way in which they are
stated by Patient A. The basis for this submission is set out clearly in the
Complainant's
written submissions (annexure A) at pages 5 and 6, at paragraphs 1
30. Counsel then addressed the question of whether the Respondent's conduct
2007 amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct and submitted that the
Complainant had discharged the onus of proving that Complaints
1 and 2 were made
out and therefore that the Tribunal should find that the events of 2007 amounted
to unsatisfactory professional
conduct. (See annexure A pages 6 and
7, at paragraphs 3 and 4.)
turned to the events of 2011 and submitted that either alone or taken together
with the 2007 incident, the Tribunal should
find the Respondent's behaviour
amounted to professional misconduct. (See annexure A pages 7 and
at paragraph 5.)
the circumstances, the Complainant sought orders for deregistration of the
Respondent but failing deregistration then orders for
suspension for an
appropriate period or conditions to be imposed on his
registration.
Submissions by the Respondent
A copy of the Respondent’s written submissions is attached as annexure
33. Counsel for the Respondent raised various issues for consideration by
reiterated the fact that the onus of proof in respect of Complaints 1 and 2
rests with the Complainant and set out
the various matters for the
Tribunal to consider in regard to whether the Complainant has
discharged that onus (annexure B page 2 paragraphs 9 – 14). In
particular, Counsel submitted that the Tribunal must be comfortably
satisfied that the individual particulars
of the Complaint are
proven (annexure B page 2 paragraph 15).
his submissions, Counsel admitted that the Respondent failed to
observe proper professional boundaries both in
2007 and in 2011, and is guilty
of unsatisfactory professional conduct under Section 139(B) of the National
Counsel stated that the Respondent denies that he is guilty of
professional misconduct within the meaning
of Section 139(E) of the
National Law and submitted that the Respondent's conduct does not give
rise to a finding
of professional misconduct.
submitted that the Complainant relies on the report of the
Peer Review Expert but argued that the Peer Review
Expert has not provided a
balanced objective and considered opinion, that he commented on matters
outside of his area of
expertise, and that he does not record the facts that he
was asked to assume (annexure B page 4 paragraph 29).
took the Tribunal through the reports of the Peer Review Expert in
some detail and submitted that the
Peer Review Expert report
is adversarial and that his acceptance of Patient A's
allegations are
necessarily conjecture and speculative on his part. The
details of the Peer Review Expert report are fully set out in the
B, page 4 at paragraphs
for the Respondent then addressed the report of Dr Phillips
and sought to rely on the fact that Dr
Phillips assessed the
Respondent and concluded that
"he has learnt a hard lesson and is unlikely to
offend again"
(tab 20 page 11 paragraph 54).
turned to the conditions placed on the Respondent by the
Dental Council of New South Wales and submitted
that the Respondent had complied
fully with the conditions imposed on him save for the two instances
of failing to keep
proper records of his compliance at all times.
Counsel submitted that the Respondent had confirmed to the Tribunal
he would strictly comply with any audit conditions imposed upon him
(annexure B page 7 paragraphs 45 to 51).
Counsel reminded the Tribunal that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is
protective and not punitive.
The role of the Tribunal
Tribunal accepts that its role is to provide for the protection of
the public by ensuring that only health
practitioners who are
suitably trained and qualified to practice in a competent and ethical
manner are registered
The standard of proof and the onus of proof
standard of proof required is the civil standard, namely on the balance of
probabilities. Before the Tribunal may make an order,
it has to be satisfied
on the balance of probabilities by the evidence before it, that the onus of
proof has been discharged by
the Complainant. However, having regard to
the decision in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, the Tribunal
must be comfortably satisfied that the Particulars of the Complaint have been
established.
Reasons for Decision
large part the Respondent admitted the allegations made in the Complaint and the
Particulars related thereto but failed to admit
Particulars 2.3, 2.5, 2.6 and
2.10. In respect of Particular 2.10, the Respondent made a partial admission
that Patient A licked
determining whether the Complainant had discharged its onus of proof in respect
of the Particulars of Complaint that were not
admitted, the Tribunal considered
the evidence of Patient A in conjunction with the statement made by the mental
health nurse and
the notes which the mental health nurse made available to the
Tribunal. Notwithstanding the fact that Patient A did not
appear to give
oral evidence before the Tribunal, the Tribunal formed a view that it was more
likely than not that the events referred
to in the Particulars of Complaint
occurred in the manner described in Patient A’s statement, which was
entirely consistent
with the report she made to the mental health nurse
within days of the event occurring.
Tribunal also had regard to the report of Dr Jonathan Phillips dated 16 November
2011, where Dr Phillips deals with his consultation
with the Respondent and
in particular records a conversation he had with the Respondent
in a section titled:
Sexualised Events in February 2011
(Tab 20 page 4). Of particular relevance is a sentence which
he began to undo her clothing with the aim of sexual contact. He
said that the woman did not push him away and that he did not force
Dr Phillips notes, however, that Patient A stopped the Respondent when he
wanted oral sex. The Respondent and Patient
A later went
downstairs. This is of significance because the Respondent in his evidence has
refused to admit to the Tribunal
that on that occasion he interfered
with Patient A's clothing (Tab 20, page 4, paragraph 12). In
addition Dr Phillips
reported that the Respondent informed him that two
investigators came to his surgery in
December 2011 to advise him of the accusations made by Patient A. Dr
Phillips records that the Respondent advised him that:
“he believes that a statement made by the woman was correct”
(Tab 20, page 4, paragraph 15).
contradistinction to the above considerations the Tribunal notes that both in
written submissions and in his direct oral evidence,
the Respondent denied that
he undid Patient A’s clothing; and refused to admit removing her bra
straps and the top of
Respondent also denied sitting on Patient A’s legs and pushing her head
towards his penis.
Respondent maintained that this was the only occasion in his practising history
when he had had a sexual encounter with
a patient. On cross-
examination however the Respondent confirmed that there had been occasions when
he had socialised
with female patients in a one-on-one
situation (transcript page 52 line 9 – line 19). On questioning,
he confirmed that he would not do that now (transcript page 52 line 21
– page 53 line 5).
Respondent was also questioned regarding his compliance with the
conditions imposed upon him pursuant to the order
made by the Dental
Council of New South Wales on 2 September 2011. The Complainant
tendered reports by Dr Dalton
of the Dental Council of New South
Wales dated 3 February 2012 and 20 August (sic) 2012. The reports indicate
that on both
occasions the records were incomplete (transcript page 13 line 14
– page 14 line 36).
Respondent was asked to explain the incompleteness of the records
(transcript page 20 line 45 to page 22 line 29).
He sought to explain this as
purely administrative and stated that he had since put in place a
system to ensure that the
records were at all times up to date (transcript page
22 line 13-29).
considering the credibility of the Respondent in respect of his denial
of those Particulars which he did not admit,
the Tribunal had regard
to the following matters.
(i) The Respondent consistently denied that he had knowledge of Patient
A’s vulnerability and fragility. Having regard
to the length of time that
the Respondent had been treating Patient A and particularly having
regard to the personal and
sexual relationship that had developed, that the
Respondent could have been unaware of Patient A’s ongoing mental
and emotional issues is in the Tribunal's view, highly unlikely.
(ii) The Tribunal notes that the Respondent claims that he
stopped the sexual encounter in February 2011 as soon as
requested by Patient
A. Any credit to the Respondent in this is severely diminished by the fact
that he had already ejaculated by the time the encounter
ceased, as stated by Patient A, corroborated in Dr Phillips'
report (Tab 20,
page 9, paragraph 43) and not challenged by the Respondent.
(iii) In addition, the Tribunal found the Respondent to be a
reluctant witness and found him to be evasive in
his responses to
questions which might in any way reflect on him badly or incriminate him. The
Tribunal also noted that Dr
Phillips in his assessment found the
Respondent to be:
“a frightened and somewhat reluctant historian, particularly when
it came to speaking about the stressors.....
around the time of
the sexualised relationship with Patient A”.
(iv) The Tribunal also notes that in his evidence to the section 150
inquiry conducted by the Dental Council of New South Wales,
the Respondent
denied providing treatment to Patient A under her Medicare referral
(Tab 6, page 14, line 40). The Respondent
said this was because he did
not want to charge her. However, in his evidence to the Tribunal, the
Respondent first denied
and then, under questioning, agreed to having
provided treatment to Patient A, and to having charged her, under
Medicare referral (transcript 25 September 2012, page 58, line 22 on).
With the incomplete records provided by the Respondent
the Tribunal is unable to
establish the truth, but cannot find, in any way, in favour of the
Respondent.
light of the above matters, and other inconsistencies and variations in the
Respondent’s testimony as outlined above,
the Tribunal is
comfortably satisfied that Patient A’s account of the events of 11
February 2011 is correct and accepts
that account over the account of the
Respondent.
Tribunal is therefore comfortably satisfied that the Complainant has
discharged its onus of proof in respect of the Particulars
2.1 to 2.10 of the Particulars of Complaint 1, and
incorporated by reference into Complaint 2. Accordingly the Tribunal finds
both of the Complaints and the Particulars of the Complaints proven.
Tribunal, as it is obliged to do, considered the need to protect the public and
to uphold and enhance the integrity and dignity
Profession.
doing that, the Tribunal considered the conduct outlined in the Complaint,
conduct from which the public should be protected. The
Tribunal noted that Dr
Phillips was of the opinion that the Respondent had:
“learnt a hard lesson and is unlikely to offend
Nevertheless,
the Tribunal had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of the Respondent, the
cross-examination of him and the responses
to questions put to him by the
Tribunal, and the transcript of Evidence before the Dental Council of New South
Wales on 5 September
2011. The Tribunal considered a variety
of factors including the manner in which the Respondent dealt with various
instances of non-compliance with obligations which
he had to the
Dental Council of New South Wales and to this Tribunal. These instances were as
(i) The Respondent failed to comply strictly with the chaperone
order made by the Dental Council of New South Wales.
The Respondent gave
evidence that a chaperone had been present at all times when he treated a
female patient, but he failed
to ensure that full and proper records
of all appointments with female patients were kept. In oral evidence, he sought
this as a purely administrative error on the part of his assistant.
While the Tribunal may have found this explanation satisfactory
first visit by an inspector from the Dental Council of New South Wales,
the explanation is unsatisfactory
when it occurred on the next
(ii) The Complainant issued a Notice to Produce, in respect of
Patient A, requiring the Respondent to deliver all of
Respondent’s clinical records, including but not limited to all
reports and correspondence related to advice,
treatment, care and counselling,
all handwritten and computerised clinical records, all pathology reports and
test results and copies
of prescriptions. It became evident to the Tribunal
during the oral evidence that the records provided by the Respondent
were not full and complete. On questioning by the Tribunal, the only
explanation that the Respondent could give for
the failure to comply
with the notice to produce was that he had those documents in his
rooms. The Tribunal notes
that it was made clear to the Respondent in the
Notice to Produce that a failure to properly comply without reasonable
excuse could incur a penalty and may in itself constitute unprofessional
conduct, yet without reasonable excuse he failed
(iii) Whilst neither psychiatric nor psychological treatment was made
an order by the Dental Council of New South Wales, Dr
Phillips made
recommendations clearly designed to assist the Respondent in dealing
with this situation. Amongst his
recommendations was the need to attend
a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist to review his recent
actions and
come to recognise his flaws of character and learn how to avoid
repetitious behaviour in times of stress. The Respondent failed to
that process and in answer to questions as to why he had not done so, he
indicated that he believed that he could deal
with the issues himself. This
further reinforced the view reached by the Tribunal that the Respondent lacks
the insight necessary
to assess or deal with his behaviour.
(iv) The Tribunal notes, but does not comment on a 2005 recording of
unsatisfactory professional conduct on the Respondent's Certificate
Registration Status issued by the Dental Council of New South Wales (Tab 1
(v) The Tribunal also notes that the Respondent did not offer himself as a
witness, but was called as a witness by the Tribunal.
Respondent admitted that his behaviour was wrong, that it should never
have happened and that it would never happen again.
However the Tribunal found
that his response to questions relating to his insight into the damage
associated with his behaviour,
and the power imbalance between a dentist and a
patient led the Tribunal to believe that there is a need for the public
to be protected. T h i s s h o u l d b e a t least until such time as the
Respondent has a full understanding of the effect
of his behaviour and his
ethical responsibilities as a dentist. There were also instances on questioning
where he denied his awareness
of Patient A's emotional and financial
vulnerability, a fact of which the Tribunal believes he should have been
59. The Tribunal had regard to the report of Dr Phillips and in
particular:
“he exhibits a degree of contrition, but on his history and
presentation is probably lacking full insight into
the devastation he
brought to Patient A (at least in January 2011)”
(Tab 20, page 11,
paragraph 54)
"whilst I am not able to conclude that the Respondent has any recognisable
or diagnosable personality disorder, he appears to have
flaws in his personality
structure which allowed him to break professional barriers understood by him. I
do not think that he currently
understands the full significance of this"
(Tab 21, page 10, paragraph 54).
Tribunal could have been made more comfortable in relation to
the protection of the public if the Respondent
had taken account of
the advice of Dr Phillips and had attended a psychiatrist or a
clinical psychologist. This
would have indicated to the
Tribunal that the Respondent had some insight into his own issues and
was serious
T r i buna l accordingly is comfortably satisfied that the public
requires protection at least until the Respondent has
dealt with the issues
arising out of the sexual activity itself, the lack of insight into the effects
of his behaviour and the failure
to understand the nature of his professional
ethical obligations.
62. The Tribunal finds that the Respondent:
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B of
National Law
in that he has:
(i) engaged in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner
in the practice of
dentistry is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience;
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice
or purported practice of dentistry;
is guilty of professional misconduct under section 139E of the
in that he has:
(i) engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation
practitioner's registration; or
(ii) engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory
professional conduct that, when the instances are considered
together, amount to
conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify the suspension or
cancellation of the practitioner's registration.
63. The Tribunal makes the following orders.
(i) The Tribunal suspends the registration of the Respondent for a
period of 18 months subject to the conditions referred
to in paragraphs
(ii)-(v) below.
(ii) The Respondent shall not be entitled to seek a
review of the suspension for a minimum period of 12
(iii) The Respondent is to attend for treatment by a
psychiatrist or clinical psychologist of his choice and
approved by the Dental
Council of New South Wales at his own cost and at a
frequency determined by the
treating psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist. The Respondent is to seek approval from the Dental Council of
New South Wales
of the acceptability of the treating psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist within 2 weeks and to commence consultations within 2
receipt by him of the approval by the Dental Council of New South Wales or such
extended time as may be required by the
treating psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist. The Respondent is to authorise the treating psychiatrist or
clinical psychologist
to inform the Dental Council of New South Wales of
the commencement of and any subsequent failure to attend for treatment
termination of treatment.
(iv) The Respondent is during the period of his suspension to authorise
the treating psychiatrist or clinical psychologist to provide
to the Council
within 6 months and subsequently as directed by the Council, a
report by the treating psychiatrist
or clinical
psychologist.
(v) The Respondent is to attend a face-to-face course on the
Ethics of the Dental Profession at an institution
acceptable to the
Dental Council of New South Wales, at his own cost.
Tribunal orders that the Respondent pay the costs of the Complainant as agreed
between the parties or if agreement cannot be reached,
either party may have the
matter listed before the Tribunal to assess the
Keith Lester
Date: 18 February 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.87 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter