URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2019/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Roads and Maritime Services v United Petroleum Pty Ltd [2019] NSWCA 41 (6 March 2019)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Roads and Maritime Services v United Petroleum Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2019] NSWCA 41
Hearing Date(s):
30 November 2018
Date of Orders:
6 March 2019
Decision Date:
6 March 2019
Basten JA at [1];
Macfarlan JA at [72];
Payne JA at
Sackville AJA at [79];
Preston CJ of LEC at [124]
(1) Allow the
(2) Set aside the judgment in the Land and
Environment Court, and orders (1), (2) and (3) made and entered on 27 April
(3) In place thereof, order that the
application brought by United Petroleum Pty Ltd in the Land and Environment
Court be dismissed.
(4) Order that the respondent
pay the appellant’s costs of the appeal.
Catchwords:
LAND LAW – compulsory acquisition – compensation –
interest in land acquired terminable on one month’s notice
for loss attributable to disturbance – termination of business –
claim for loss of ongoing profits of business
– Health Administration
Corporation v George D Angus Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 352
LAND LAW – compulsory acquisition –
compensation – loss attributable to disturbance – claim for
rental paid to acquiring authority for period between compulsory
acquisition and vacant possession
COSTS – compulsory
acquisition – claim for compensation – claimant successful at trial
– claim rejected on
appeal – claim not unreasonable –
exception to general rule that costs follow the event – Dillon v Gosford
[2011] NSWCA 328
184 LGERA 179
Legislation Cited:
Conveyancing Act 1919
Land Acquisition (Just Terms
Compensation) Act 1991
Cases Cited:
2 Elizabeth Bay Road Pty Ltd v The Owners – Strata Plan No 73943
(2014) 88 NSWLR 488
[2014] NSWCA 409
Almona Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic
Authority (NSW)
[2008] NSWLEC 112
160 LGERA 375
Blacktown Council v
Fitzpatrick Investments Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWCA 259
Dillon v Gosford City
[2011] NSWCA 328
284 ALR 619
184 LGERA 179
El Boustani v Minister
Administering the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
[2012] NSWLEC
El Boustani v Minister for Administering
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Act 1979
[2014] NSWCA 33
199 LGERA 198
Elmon Pty Ltd v Roads and
Maritime Services
[2016] NSWLEC 168
Geita Sebea v The Territory of Papua
(1941) 67 CLR 544
[1941] HCA 37
George D Angus Pty Ltd v Health
Administration Corporation
[2013] NSWLEC 212
205 LGERA 357
Administration Corporation v George D Angus Pty Ltd
(2014) 88 NSWLR 752
Leichhardt Council v Roads and Traffic Authority (NSW)
[2006] NSWCA
149 LGERA 439
Marshall v Director-General, Department of Transport
(2001) 205 CLR 603
(2001) HCA 37
McDonald v Roads and Traffic Authority of
New South Wales
[2009] NSWLEC 105
169 LGERA 352
Melino v Roads and Maritime
[2018] NSWCA 251
Minister for Public Works v Thistlethwayte
Mir Bros Unit Constructions Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic Authority of
New South Wales
[2006] NSWCA 314
Moloney v Roads and Maritime Services
Peter Croke Holdings Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic Authority of NSW
(1998) 101 LGERA 30
Roads and Maritime Services v Allandale Blue Metal Pty
[2016] NSWCA 7
212 LGERA 307
Roads and Traffic Authority (NSW) v Peak
[2007] NSWCA 66
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales v McDonald
(2010) 79 NSWLR 155
[2010] NSWCA 236
Smalley v Motor Accident Authority of
New South Wales
(2013) 85 NSWLR 580
[2013] NSWCA 318
South Western
Sydney Local Health District v Gould
[2018] NSWCA 69
Spencer v The
Commonwealth (1907) 5 CLR 418;
[1907] HCA 82
Sydney Water Corporation v
[2009] NSWCA 391
170 LGERA 298
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
91 ALJR 936
The Minister v The New South
Wales Aerated Water and Confectionery Company Limited
(1916) 22 CLR 56
Thiess v Collector of Customs
(2014) 250 CLR 664
Tolson v Roads and Maritime Services
[2014] NSWCA 161
Walker Corporation Pty Ltd v Sydney Harbour Foreshore Authority
233 CLR 259
[2008] HCA 5
Woolworths Ltd v Pallas Newco Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWCA 422
Texts Cited:
Law Reform Commission, Lands Acquisition and Compensation, ALRC 14,
New South Wales, Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly,
11 April 1991
Principal judgment
Roads and Maritime Services (Appellant)
United Petroleum Pty Ltd
(Respondent)
Representation:
Mr R P Lancaster SC/Mr M J Astill (Appellant)
Mr I Hemmings
SC/Ms J McKelvey (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Corrs Chambers
Westgarth (Appellant)
Thomson Geer (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2018/159409
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Land and Environment Court
[2018] NSWLEC 35
[2018] NSWLEC 64
Date of Decision:
27 April 2018
File Number(s):
2016/160710
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The respondent operated a service station and restaurant business on a parcel
of land on the Pacific Highway between Woolgoolga and
Ballina. The land was
owned by related parties which had an oral lease with the respondent, terminable
on one month’s notice.
The appellant compulsorily acquired the land in
August 2015. The respondent was unable to relocate its business.
The respondent sought compensation in the Land and Environment Court for loss
attributable to disturbance under
Land Acquisition (Just Terms
Compensation) Act 1991
(NSW) (“Just Terms Act”). On 27 April
2018, the respondent was awarded (a) $2 million as the capitalised sum for the
of the business and (b) $83,000 for the additional rental paid to the
acquiring authority for continuing possession in the period
between compulsory
acquisition and vacant possession, being rent additional to that previously paid
to the lessors.
The key issues on appeal were:
(1) whether the respondent was entitled under s 59(f) to
compensation for its loss of ongoing business profits;
(2) whether the respondent was entitled under s 59(f) to
compensation for the increased rental paid to the appellant; and
(3) the appropriate costs orders.
(Basten JA, Macfarlan JA, Payne JA, Sackville AJA, and
Preston CJ of LEC)
allowed the appeal and held:
In relation to question (1)
(per curiam):
1. The scope of any loss attributable to disturbance,
compensable under s 59(f), is limited to a direct and natural consequence
acquisition and does not cover loss of the kind addressed
under other
paragraphs of s 59, but not
otherwise claimable: [13]-[14], [72], [73],
[96], [160].
2. Loss of future income from a business carried on under a
lease terminable on one month’s notice is not a loss attributable
disturbance because it is not reasonably incurred as a direct and natural
consequence of the acquisition, but of the tenure held
by the respondent: [22],
[26], [72], [73], [116]-[118], [161].
Minister for Public Works v Thistlethwayte
[1954] AC 475
Sebea v The Territory of Papua
[1941] HCA 37
(1941) 67 CLR 544
[1941] HCA 37
considered.
(Basten JA, Macfarlan JA, Payne JA and Sackville AJA):
3. Whether the term “any other financial costs”
in s 59(f) extends to the loss of future income or profits from a business
be doubted: [17], [37], [72], [76], [96].
El Boustani v Minister for Administering the
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Act 1979
[2014] NSWCA 33
199 LGERA 198
(Preston CJ of LEC):
The term “any other financial costs” in
is capable of
extending to financial losses, such as loss of income or profits: [138], [142],
(Basten JA, Macfarlan JA and Payne JA):
4. The claim for loss of business in circumstances where the
respondent’s interest in the land was of no value was an attempt
re-characterise loss that was previously recognised in the assessment of the
market value of the land: [21]-[27], [49], [72],
The Minister v The New South Wales Aerated Water and Confectionery Company
(1916) 22 CLR 56
[1916] HCA 48
Spencer v The Commonwealth
(1907) 5 CLR 418;
[1907] HCA 82
Sydney Water Corporation v Caruso
[2009] NSWCA 391
170 LGERA 298
Moloney v Roads and Maritime Services
[2018] NSWCA 252
Mir Bros Unit
Constructions Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales
[2006] NSWCA 314
, considered;
Health Administration Corporation v George D Angus Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 352
, not followed.
In relation to question (2)
(per curiam):
5. Compensation for an increase in rental during the period
between compulsory acquisition and vacant possession under
should not be
awarded, as the loss is not a direct and natural consequence of the acquisition
and such recovery would be inconsistent
of the Act: [63], [72], [73],
[79], [167].
Roads and Traffic Authority of NSW v McDonald
[2010] NSWCA 236
, distinguished.
In relation to question (3)
(Basten JA, Macfarlan JA, Payne JA, Sackville AJA and Preston CJ of LEC)
6. As a claimant for compensation acting reasonably would
ordinarily be entitled to costs, the respondent should retain the costs
trial. The costs should follow the event of the appeal: [67]-[70], [72], [73],
[122]-[123], [166].
Dillon v Gosford City Council
[2011] NSWCA 328
184 LGERA 179
: In August 2015 the appellant, Roads and Maritime Services, compulsorily
acquired a parcel of land for the purposes of the Pacific
Highway upgrade
between Woolgoolga and Ballina. The land was owned by two special purpose
companies and leased to a third, related
company, which operated a service
station and restaurant business known as the Harwood Roadhouse.
owners of the fee simple estate were offered (and accepted) compensation in an
amount in excess of $3 million.
present appeal involves an assessment of the compensation payable to the
company, United Petroleum Pty Ltd (“United”),
which operated the
Roadhouse. United accepted that it had no claim for compensation for the market
value of its interest in the land,
which was a tenancy terminable on one
month’s notice. Rather, it claimed compensation for “loss
attributable to disturbance”,
due to the loss of its business calculated
as a capital sum based on maintainable earnings for an indefinite period. That
accepted by the primary judge, Robson J, in the Land and Environment
Court. As calculated from the date of vacant possession, the
amount awarded was
a little under $2 million. The first issue on the appeal was a challenge to the
award of compensation for disturbance.
second issue concerned an award of some $83,000, being the difference between
the rent which United would have paid to the owners
of the land, but for the
acquisition, and the higher sum paid to the appellant for continued occupation
of the land from the date
of the compulsory acquisition to the date on which the
appellant obtained vacant possession.
the reasons set out below, the appellant should succeed with respect to both
issues. Accordingly, the orders made in the Land
and Environment Court on
27 April 2018 should be set aside and the claim by United for compensation
should be dismissed.
Statutory scheme
the Land and Environment Court, Robson J upheld United’s claim for
compensation for disturbance based on a construction of
Land Acquisition
(Just Terms Compensation) Act 1991
(NSW) (“Just Terms Act”),
s 59(f), which the judge considered himself bound to adopt based on the
reasoning of this Court
Health Administration Corporation v George D Angus
The appellant’s
primary contention was that the decision in
George D Angus
require that outcome. In the alternative, the appellant submitted that
was wrong and should not be followed. In anticipation of the latter
submission, a five judge bench was constituted. It is convenient
to consider
first the proper construction of the Just Terms Act, before turning to
relevant provisions are contained within Pt 3, Div 4 of the Just Terms Act.
Three sections are of primary importance. Section
54 creates an entitlement to
just compensation; s 55 identifies six matters to which regard must be had
in determining the amount
of compensation to which a person is entitled with
respect to an acquisition of land, those being the exclusive matters to which
regard may be had. Sections 54 and 55 provide the basis for the calculation of
compensation: as in force in August 2015 (the date
of the compulsory
acquisition) they relevantly
54 Entitlement to just compensation
(1) The amount of compensation to which a person is entitled
under this Part is such amount as, having regard to all relevant matters
this Part, will justly compensate the person for the acquisition of the
55 Relevant matters to be considered in determining amount
of compensation
In determining the amount of compensation to which a person is entitled, regard
must be had to the following matters only (as assessed
in accordance with this
(a) the market value of the land on the date of its
acquisition,
(b) any special value of the land to the person on the date of
its acquisition,
(c) any loss attributable to severance,
(d) any loss attributable to disturbance,
(e) solatium,
(f) any increase or decrease in the value of any other land of
the person at the date of acquisition which adjoins or is severed
acquired land by reason of the carrying out of, or the proposal to carry out,
the public purpose for which the land was
first five matters identified in s 55 are the subject of further definition
in ss 56-60 respectively. Because the claims by United
were based solely on
par (d), it is sufficient to turn to the further definition of that matter in
s 59 which, in August 2015, read
Loss attributable to disturbance
In this Act:
loss attributable to disturbance
of land means any of the
(a) legal costs reasonably incurred by the persons entitled to
compensation in connection with the compulsory acquisition of the
(b) valuation fees reasonably incurred by those persons in
connection with the compulsory acquisition of the land,
(c) financial costs reasonably incurred in connection with the
relocation of those persons (including legal costs but not including
or mortgage costs),
(d) stamp duty costs reasonably incurred (or that might
reasonably be incurred) by those persons in connection with the purchase
for relocation (but not exceeding the amount that would be incurred for the
purchase of land of equivalent value to the land
compulsorily acquired),
(e) financial costs reasonably incurred (or that might
reasonably be incurred) by those persons in connection with the discharge
mortgage and the execution of a new mortgage resulting from the relocation (but
not exceeding the amount that would be incurred
if the new mortgage secured the
repayment of the balance owing in respect of the discharged mortgage),
(f) any other financial costs reasonably incurred (or that
might reasonably be incurred), relating to the actual use of the land,
direct and natural consequence of the acquisition.
drafting of this provision is economical, without the use of internal defined
terms. Thus, par (a) speaks of legal costs incurred
by “the persons
entitled to compensation in connection with the compulsory acquisition of the
land”. Paragraphs (b)–(e)
simply refer to “those
persons”, but the reference is to those persons more fully described in
par (a). Each paragraph
speaks of costs or fees “reasonably
incurred” and, except par (f), the party incurring the costs or fees is
by reference to “those persons” as described in par (a).
The first question of construction is whether the class of persons
incurring the
“other financial costs” referred to in par (f) includes persons
other than those entitled to compensation
in connection with the acquisition of
the land. The existence of such a broader class is unlikely given the breadth of
the definition
of “owner” and the definition of
“interest” in land. The term “interest” in land extends
legal or equitable estate or interest in the land or any easement, right,
charge, power or privilege over, or in connection with,
It is not in doubt that
United had a relevant interest in land which was acquired. However,
United’s claim for compensation
extended to its inability to use the land
for its business operations over a period beyond its terminable interest in the
the date of the compulsory acquisition.
is a further respect in which par (f) differs from each of the preceding
paragraphs. Thus, each of pars (a)-(e) refers to specifically
identified costs
or fees; by contrast, par (f) involves no such element of precision, referring
rather to “any other financial
costs”. As will be seen shortly,
there has been a tendency in the discussion of the scope of this paragraph to
read that phrase
in isolation and give it the broadest possible interpretation
consistent with dictionary definitions of the individual words. That
disregards four different forms of constraint imposed by the context and
structure of the section.
first constraint has already been noted, namely the possibility that there is a
temporal element involved, fixed by the extent
of the interest in land which is
disturbed by the compulsory acquisition.
second constraint may be found in the need to identify financial costs
“relating to the actual use of the land”, namely
that use to which
the land was put at the date of the compulsory acquisition. Residential,
agricultural or commercial uses are common
examples of actual uses of land and
suggest that in this sense the term “land” refers to an area of the
earth, rather
than a bundle of legal rights.
third constraint arises from the need to identify a cost flowing as “a
direct and natural consequence” of the acquisition.
This phrase, although
coming at the end of the paragraph, clearly qualifies, not the actual use of the
land, but rather the incurring
of the financial costs. The qualifier will be
significant in some cases (though not in the present case) because it is to be
distinguished
from loss caused by the carrying out of the public purpose for
which the land is acquired.
fourth form of constraint derives from the use of the phrase “any
other” to identify the relevant financial costs.
The proper construction
of this phrase turns on the structure of the section. Thus, it is significant
that the section does not commence
by referring to “any financial costs,
including those identified in pars (a)-(e)”; rather, it is an exclusive
which commences with five specific categories and concludes with a
general category. It would be erroneous to construe par (f) as
including any
financial cost
specified in pars (a)-(e); to adopt that approach
would be to disregard the careful limitations imposed by the specific
provisions.
For example, pars (c)-(e) envisage that financial costs may be
incurred in the relocation of the persons entitled to compensation,
example, they resided on the property on the date of the compulsory acquisition.
It may be reasonable for those persons to
acquire an alternative place to live,
but one which will cost more than the market value of the land compulsorily
acquired. Obtaining
the alternative accommodation may involve legal fees,
mortgage costs and stamp duty payments, all of which may vary depending on
value of the land to be purchased. The effect of pars (c)-(e) is to permit the
recovery of financial costs if reasonably incurred,
even though the purchase
price may exceed the amount awarded by way of compensation for the market value
of the land compulsorily
acquired. However, compensable stamp duty is limited to
that which would have been incurred on the purchase of land of equivalent
to the land compulsorily acquired: s 59(d). Similarly, the compensable cost
of obtaining a fresh mortgage will be limited to
that which would have been
incurred in connection with the execution of a new mortgage to secure the
repayment of the balance owing
in respect of the discharged mortgage:
s 59(e). It would subvert the purpose of those carefully crafted provisions
to allow additional
amounts to be paid by way of stamp duty or mortgage fees
simply because they fell within the language of par (f), read in isolation
the earlier paragraphs.
order to be sure that a construction of par (f) does not subvert the limitations
contained within the earlier paragraphs, it may
be necessary to identify those
limitations with a degree of precision. For example, par (f) should not be
understood as permitting
recovery of financial costs of relocating persons
beyond those recoverable pursuant to par (c). The costs of relocating persons
for example, in the case of residential premises, include the costs of
furniture removal and storage whilst alternative premises
are acquired, and
other incidental costs of relocation. There is no apparent reason for limiting
“the relocation of those persons”
to the relocation of the
individuals concerned, or their immediate belongings; the phrase is apt to
include the relocation of business
operations conducted on the acquired land. A
question then arises as to whether the interruption to the operation of the
resulting in reduced revenue, whether temporarily or permanently,
constitutes a financial cost reasonably incurred in connection
relocation of the business operated on the acquired land by the person entitled
to compensation. However, such amounts as
may be recovered under par (c), would
not be recoverable under par (f).
Compensation for continuing
operation of business
primary judge found that the compulsory acquisition terminated the business
operation conducted by United on the land acquired.
There was no relocation.
Accordingly, the question for determination was whether United could be
compensated under s 59(f) for the
loss of an opportunity to continue to
operate its business on the land which had been acquired. There are three
reasons why that
question should not be answered favourably to United.
the ordinary meaning of “financial costs reasonably incurred ... relating
to the actual use of the land”, is not
apt to describe the loss of an
opportunity to continue to use the land. While there may be financial costs
incurred in terminating
a business operation, the loss of the opportunity to
continue the business operation is not aptly described as a “financial
cost” relating to the actual use of the land at the date of
acquisition.
the direct and natural consequence of the acquisition of the interest in the
land was to prevent the continuation of the
business on that land; the
acquisition did not cause the owner to “reasonably incur” the
termination of the business;
rather, in ordinary parlance, the acquisition
caused the owner to suffer a loss of revenue. The loss of revenue may have
business owner to take other steps, but the loss of revenue itself
was not aptly described as a “financial cost”; however,
the cost of
taking other steps, such as the cost of relocating the business, readily fell
within the language of par (f).
and by way of expansion of the last point, the kinds of financial costs covered
by pars (a)-(e) are all costs incidental
to the loss of the land; they assume
the loss of the land for which market value will have been paid pursuant to
other provisions
in s 55, assuming that the owner’s interest in the
land had a compensable value.
reasoning may be supported by reference to the history of the language used in
dealing with claims for compensation following
compulsory acquisition of land.
As has been noted on a number of occasions, care must be taken in seeking to
apply earlier case law
to a new statutory
Nevertheless, the Just
Terms Act adopts language which was familiar in the earlier case law to describe
certain kinds of compensation.
Minister for Public Works v
Thistlethwayte
Lord Tucker
identified the assessment of compensation as involving the determination of the
value of the land, “to which must
be added in appropriate cases further
sums for disturbance, severance, special value to the owner and the
point of distinction between disturbance and market value may be readily
explained, both in relation to land used and operated
for commercial purposes by
the owner and land the subject of a lease where the lessee uses the land for
commercial purposes. Assuming
in each case that the actual use is the best
economic use available, the market value of the land may be calculated by
capitalising
annual maintainable earnings at an appropriate discount rate. (This
was the exercise undertaken by the valuers in the present case.)
Where the land
is put to a commercial use by a lessee, “the lessee would be entitled to
an amount to represent the value of
the lease to him for the balance of the term
... as his share of the full value of the land,” as explained by Williams
Geita Sebea v The Territory of
In that case, the lessee
was the government and hence the value of the lease was deducted from the
compensation payable by the acquiring
authority to the owner.
was no authority relied upon by United which involved compensation for the
acquisition of land used for commercial purposes
in which some additional amount
had been allowed on account of “disturbance” to reflect the loss of
a commercial business
operation being conducted on the land. Rather, the
capacity of the land to support a profitable commercial operation has always
understood to be reflected in the market value of the land, which is
compensable as such. Furthermore, the market value of an interest
limited to the value of the legal interest vested in the claimant which was
terminated by the compulsory acquisition.
The Minister v The New
South Wales Aerated Water and Confectionery Company Limited
the High Court
rejected the proposition that a lessee could recover more than the value
ascertainable by reference to the existing
lease based on a hope or expectation
of the lease being extended or
An expectation of
renewal based on the relationship between the parties involved a personal matter
which was to be excluded from
the valuation of the interest. As explained by
Isaacs J, “[t]he exclusion must be because, being personal, it
necessarily is
not inherent in or bound up with the interest taken so as to run
with it in the hands of a
purchaser”.
did not seek to deny the proposition that its leasehold, terminable at will by
the lessor, had no market value. Rather, it
sought to avoid the conclusion that
the land had no commercial value for it by claiming the full commercial value of
the business
operation undertaken by it on the land. However, as a matter of
principle that which may be described as the basis of calculation
value of an interest in land cannot be recharacterised as a form of
consequential loss, known as disturbance, so as to
be fully recoverable, in
circumstances where the interest in land is so attenuated as not to enjoy any
relevant market value.
respondent contended that
Aerated Water
had no relevance, for two broad
reasons. First, it was concerned with the value of the lessee’s interest
in the land and was
not concerned with a claim for disturbance. Secondly, it
concerned land resumed under the
Public Works Act 1900
(NSW) which
provided a different regime for compensation from that now available under the
Just Terms Act.
points of distinction may be accepted; nevertheless, the case remains a
statement of principles which continue to operate under
the current legislative
regime. Those principles are threefold. First,
Aerated Water
in relation to the valuation of a leasehold interest, the principles for
valuation of a fee simple estate established
Spencer v The
Commonwealth
It is not in
doubt that the principle for the assessment of the market value of the land, now
contained in ss 55(a) and 56 of the
Just Terms Act, reflects the approach
Spencer v The Commonwealth
. Further, it is not in doubt that
the assessment of market value applies to each interest in land which is
compensable under the
Aerated Water
established the principle that what is to be valued depends
upon the nature and circumstances of the interest in question and the
the interest. As explained by Griffith
“All matters which would be so taken into consideration by an intending
purchaser, and which relate solely to the situation
and condition of the land
and the improvements upon it, and the right of ownership and enjoyment which the
purchaser would acquire
in respect of them, are, in my opinion, elements to be
taken into consideration in estimating the value of the tenant’s actual
interest. The element of hope or expectation of non-disturbance arising from the
physical condition of the land is not a hope of
a separate and distinct interest
to accrue after the expiration of the term, but an element in the value of the
actual term itself.”
Thus, the personal relationship
between the tenant and the lessor, which might have provided a basis for a
renewal of the lease at
the expiration of the term, was not a factor to which
regard could be had in assessing the value of the current interest of the
On the other hand, the possibility of renewal was a factor which could
be taken into account, based on the circumstances of the lease
and the land,
which might in any event allow a “sitting tenant” to obtain a price
for the remainder of a lease beyond
a simple calculation of the potential
profits over the remainder of the term.
third principle is that it would be inconsistent with the reasoning in
Aerated Water
to allow the tenant compensation for disturbance based on
the assumption that the interest in land had value beyond the termination
lease, being a value not reflected in the market value of the lease. What would
then be compensated would not be disturbance
of the tenant’s interest in
land but disturbance of the continued operation of the business, unsupported by
an interest in
land. That would not fit the description of “loss
attributable to disturbance of land”, as defined in s 59.
Furthermore,
there would be an inconsistency between an assessment of the market value of the
land based on capitalisation of earnings
and the separate capitalisation of
those earnings as an element of disturbance. Whilst disturbance is a separate
head of compensation
from compensation for the market value of the land
acquired, it is a form of compensation for a distinct loss, not for the same
recharacterised.
Prior authority under the Just Terms
reasons which will be explained, the reasoning set out above is not consistent
with that adopted by this Court in
George D Angus
. However, the primary
submission for the appellant was that
George D Angus
was distinguishable.
In the alternative, the appellant submitted that
George D Angus
wrongly decided and ought not be followed. To address these contentions it is
necessary to give some brief details of the claim
George D Angus
Dr Angus provided gynaecological and obstetric services at two hospitals in
Wagga Wagga. He did so from premises at Yabtree Street,
Wagga Wagga, the land
being owned by a company of which the sole director and shareholder was
Dr Angus’ wife. The services
were provided through a separate service
company (George D Angus Pty Ltd) which held an interest in the land by way of a
tenancy pursuant to
Conveyancing Act 1919
(NSW), being an interest determinable at will by either party upon giving
one month’s notice in writing.
land (that is, the interests of the owner of the fee simple and those of the
tenant) was acquired by the Health Administration
Corporation. A claim for the
market value of the fee simple was made by the registered proprietor and
settled. The service company
made no claim for market value but claimed the
costs of relocation to separate premises at Peter Street, Wagga Wagga, from
it provided gynaecological services only through Dr Angus. It made a
claim for loss of profits due to the fact that Dr Angus considered
necessary to cease providing obstetric services from the Peter Street location,
which was more distant from the hospitals. His
service company claimed
compensation for the resulting loss of income over the period of a little under
two years during which the
company operated from the Peter Street address. At
the end of that period, Dr Angus relocated to Newcastle. Further claims
with respect
to his practice in Newcastle were rejected and were not the subject
of the appeal to this Court. An amount of some $16,000 was allowed
for the costs
of relocation from Yabtree Street to Peter Street.
dispute concerned the claim for some $1.5 million with respect to the loss of
profits incurred during the period the company provided
services from the Peter
Street property. The claim was not brought as a financial cost in connection
with the relocation of the business
pursuant to s 59(c) of the Just Terms
Act, but rather as “any other” financial cost relating to the actual
land, pursuant to s 59(f). That claim was upheld in the Land and
Environment Court.
An appeal by
the acquiring authority was dismissed.
present appellant sought to distinguish
George D Angus
on two bases. It
submitted first, that the loss of profits was an ascertainable sum, as distinct
from a loss calculated by reference
to capitalised maintainable earnings.
However, the method of determining the amount of the loss has no bearing on the
point of statutory
construction. The second point of distinction was that
George D Angus
involved the relocation of the business of the
service company, whereas the present case involved the termination of the
However, that distinction is unacceptable for two reasons. The first
reason is that the claim in
George D Angus
was for the loss due to
the termination of the obstetric services formerly provided by Dr Angus
from the compulsorily acquired premises;
that business was not relocated to the
new Peter Street premises. Secondly, the claim was not a claim for the financial
relocation, but rather a claim under s 59(f).
the other hand, the interest of the claimant in each case is identical, namely a
claim based on the actual use of the premises
which were compulsorily acquired
even though the interest in the land, being terminable at will, had no market
value. Neither the
reasoning, nor the result, in
George D Angus
consistent with the construction of the Just Terms Act adopted above. It is
necessary, therefore, to explain why the reasoning
upheld in this Court in
George D Angus
should not be
first and fourth steps in the reasoning were related. The first step involved
the rejection of a submission that compensation
for lost or foregone profits
might be available as “a special value of the land” to the owner of
the relevant interest
in the land at the date of acquisition, pursuant to
s 55(b) of the Act.
reasoning, which may be accepted, was that the Just Terms Act distinguished
between the market value of the land (including
its special value for the
dispossessed owner) and separate heads of compensation which included loss
attributable to disturbance
of land. However, the significance of that finding
was that unless loss of profits could be recovered as a form of
“disturbance”
they appeared to be unrecoverable under the Just Terms
Act. Thus, the fourth step in the reasoning in
George D Angus
the following proposition:
“[63] ... Given that the pre-Just Terms Act authorities
relied upon by the appellant permitted the recovery of disturbance
losses such
as loss of trade or production during the period of relocation, it would be odd
in the extreme if such losses could no
longer be recovered because no
expenditure was involved.”
will be necessary to return to the question of the pre-Act authorities, but it
may be noted that, to the extent that they refer
to loss of trade or production
“during the period of relocation” they did not apply in relation to
the facts of
George D Angus
, unless, consistently with the
appellant’s first point of distinction in the present case, the
“period of relocation”
extended for more than 18 months, whilst the
claimant provided services from the Peter Street premises in Wagga Wagga.
second step in the reasoning in
George D Angus
addressed a semantic issue
which, indeed, appeared to be the primary focus of the dispute in that case both
in the Land and Environment
Court and in this Court. The issue was whether the
phrase “financial costs” in s 59(f) was apt to include loss of
or was limited to sums of expenditure.
basis for treating the term “other financial costs” as apt to
include loss of profits was not entirely persuasive,
but it is sufficient for
present purposes to accept the conclusion. The reasoning is unpersuasive because
it focused on a dictionary
definition of the term “cost” and a
reference to “financial loss” in s 61(b) of the Act. As this
remarked on many occasions, the use of dictionary definitions is
rarely determinative of the meaning of a term in a statute where
there is doubt
as to its scope, the particular word having, as is usually the case, a range of
possible meanings.
Usually the
statutory context will provide better guidance. In particular, to understand the
scope and operation of s 59(f) what
has to be construed is the composite
expression, “any other financial costs reasonably incurred ... relating to
use of the land”. As noted above, the “other”
indicates that “financial costs” must be addressed by
reference to
the context provided by the earlier paragraphs of the definition.
argument based on s 61 requires consideration of the terms of that
61 Special provision relating to market value assessed on
potential of land
If the market value of land is assessed on the basis that the land had potential
to be used for a purpose other than that for which
it is currently used,
compensation is not payable in respect of:
(a) any financial advantage that would necessarily have been
forgone in realising that potential, and
(b) any financial loss that would necessarily have been
incurred in realising that potential.
has been held in a number of cases that the element of potential compensation
which is excluded by s 61 falls within “any
loss attributable to
disturbance” under s 55(d) and thus within s 59. In other words,
where the compensation paid under s 55(a)
for the market value of the land
is assessed on the basis of a higher value than that reflected by its current
use, loss attributable
to disturbance will not be payable in addition to the
higher market value.
In order to
align these provisions, the phrase “any financial loss” in
s 61(b) has been treated as equivalent to “financial
s 59 and, in particular, in s 59(f). That approach was adopted by this
Sydney Water Corporation v
preferable reading is that “loss” in s 61 picks up the
references to “loss” in (relevantly) s 55(d), being
loss attributable to disturbance”. What is covered by “loss
attributable to disturbance” is defined
in the paragraphs of s 59,
and not by reference to the language of s 61(b), which neither expands,
restricts, nor illuminates the
scope of s 59. This approach does not
require the inference that there is some inconsistency in the terminology, as
between s 59
and s 61, which needs to be resolved. (Adopting this approach would
have made no difference to the dispositive reasoning or the result
attention to the actual language of the various provisions suggests that neither
dictionary definitions nor s 61(b) provide
relevant assistance to the
meaning of s 59(f).
third step in the reasoning in
George D Angus
appeared in the
following passage:
“[62] Finally, contrary to the submission of the
appellant, the primary judge’s construction of s 59(f) does
involve compensating an owner for business losses or forgone profits by
capitalising them. That is not how the primary judge
assessed the
respondent’s losses under this head and it would have been inappropriate
for him to have assessed them otherwise
than in the manner he adopted by
estimating income and subtracting estimated expenditure for the relevant
was not necessary to assess the lost profits by capitalising them in
circumstances where they accrued over a closed period which
had been completed.
However, it is by no means clear that the Court was saying that no compensation
could be awarded otherwise than
for a closed period which had been completed. In
any event, that step in the reasoning was not based on any particular
understanding
of the operation of s 59(f).
remains to consider one aspect of the fourth step in the reasoning, namely the
proposition that “pre-Just Terms Act authorities”
permitted recovery
of disturbance for loss of trade or production during the period of relocation.
That may well be so, although
it assumes, as the appellant noted, that
relocation occurred. However, the Court’s attention was not drawn to any
case in which
an amount was awarded for loss of profits with respect to the
operation of a business beyond the period of the owner’s interest
land. For reasons already expressed, that approach would be inconsistent with
the approach to compensation for the compulsory
acquisition of land as explained
Aerated Water
. That issue was separately addressed in
as the second issue.
reasoning in
Aerated Waters
was distinguished in
George D Angus
on the basis that it dealt with a lease which was to expire at the end of a
fixed term, as compared with a tenancy at will, being
the interest in land at
George D Angus
. However, a lease which is to expire at a
fixed time is not relevantly different in kind from a tenancy at will, for at
termination
it becomes a tenancy at will, unless possession is recovered. In
fact, the tenancy in
Aerated Water
was more secure (for the balance of
the term) than that in
George D Angus
: they were not distinguishable
on this basis.
second basis upon which
Aerated Water
was distinguished may be found in
the following passage in
George D Angus
The appellant’s argument proceeds on
the assumption that the terms and limitations of the respondent’s interest
Yabtree Street land govern, as a matter of law, the question of whether
the respondent reasonably incurred a loss of income and/or
profits as a direct
and natural consequence of the acquisition. Herein lies the fallacy of its
contention. Those terms and limitations
were relevant to the assessment of the
market value of the interest acquired but not to the assessment of any loss
attributable to
post-acquisition disturbance.”
error in this passage lies in reading “any other financial costs ...
relating to the actual use of the land” as equivalent
to the loss of any
profit which might flow from the continued operation of the business on the
basis that the business would have
continued for an indeterminate period
regardless of the absence of any secure interest in land. That approach was
justified on the
ground that the interest in land was irrelevant – it
“mattered not for the purpose of
because “the fact that it [the interest in land] was compulsorily acquired
thereby converted the relevant interest
into an entitlement to claim
compensation in accordance with, relevantly, Pt 3, Div 4 of the Just Terms
Act: see s 37.”
the final limb of the definition of “loss attributable to disturbance of
land” was identified as giving rise to
a right of compensation divorced
from the interest in land which had been acquired.
approach was erroneous because it sought to read the relevant words in par (f)
out of their statutory context. As already noted,
adopting a purposive or
contextual approach supports the conclusion that the costs associated with the
termination of the actual
use of the land are properly limited to such costs as
those of relocation of the business to other premises.
logical consequences of the alternative approach were not addressed in
, but should not be overlooked. In most, if not all, cases of
compulsory acquisition of interests in land, the compulsory acquisition
terminate the actual use of the land by the prior owner. If that owner’s
use was private, for example residential, alternative
accommodation would need
to be obtained, at a financial cost. The cost of new premises, whether purchased
or rented, is not reimbursed
as a loss for disturbance of the acquired land or
otherwise: it is covered to the extent of compensation for the market value of
the compulsorily acquired land. If, on the other hand, the prior use was
commercial, the prior owner’s interest is again compensated
by receiving
the market value of its interest in the land. There is no additional
compensation for termination of the cash flow from
the prior use. Rather, the
best available financial return for the commercial use of the land will form the
basis of its market value.
It will be compensable as such. As explained in
Moloney v Roads and Maritime
“[t]he market
value of the acquired land included the capacity of that land to generate a
profit in the future, whether by
growing sugar cane or doing anything
is a danger in treating the different matters identified in s 55 as capable of
giving rise to “overlapping claims”.
This is not a necessary
construction of the legislation. The better view may be that each provision
provides an independent basis
for a relevant award of compensation, but should
be read as exclusive in its terms and not as overlapping with other bases of
This may be important in order to avoid misapplication of limitations on
compensation. Thus, it would be inconsistent with the statutory
scheme if a
particular head of loss could be recoverable as market value of the land or
under another head in s 55. If that were
possible, the limitation on the
compensation payable for market value set out in s 56(2) might be capable
of avoidance by manipulation
of the heads of claim.
Spigelman CJ
Mir Bros Unit Constructions Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic Authority
of New South Wales
would not “approach the interpretation of s 55 on the assumption that
each of the component parts and specifically
s 55(c), was intended to
operate to the exclusion of each other.” That caution may be accepted;
nevertheless, on careful consideration
the assumption may be justified and allow
a coherent and straightforward operation to the statute. That is not to deny
that valuation
methodology (including use of a “before and after”
comparison) may not roll more than one head of compensable loss into
calculation.
is also possible that a claim may be capable of characterisation under more than
one provision, depending upon the circumstances.
However, it would not be
consistent with the evident purpose of the legislation for the full market value
of commercial land to be
assessed by reference to its potential commercial
profitability where there was a single owner of the fee simple estate, but for
the same compensation to be awarded twice in circumstances where there was a
division of legal interests between a landlord and a
tenant, where the tenant
carried on the relevant business by way of actual use of the land. That is not
to say that the tenant will
not obtain separate compensation for the acquisition
of its interest in the land; it is, however, to say that the tenant will only
compensated for the loss of its interest in the land and not for the loss of its
future business expectations which would depend
upon an interest it did not hold
at the date of the compulsory acquisition.
approach is also consistent with the carefully calibrated paragraphs of
s 59. For example, it would not be consistent with the
statutory scheme to
allow a prior owner which had relocated its business to nearby premises to
recover limited costs of relocation,
but to allow a prior owner which had been
unable to find alternative premises to recover the lost profits of the business
terminated in circumstances where its interest in land had no market
approach adopted above depends upon reading s 59 as a whole and having
regard to its statutory context and its apparent purpose.
To the extent that
George D Angus
involved reading the words in s 59(f) in
isolation from its statutory context it reached an erroneous result. It should
not be followed.
The primary judge was therefore in error in allowing any amount
for the termination of the business.
Claim for adjustment of
pursuant to s 20(1) of the Just Terms Act, the relevant interests in land
vested in the authority upon publication of the
acquisition notice, the Act
nevertheless provides for the former owner to remain in occupation in certain
circumstances:
34 Former owner’s right to occupy land until
compensation paid etc
(1) A person who was in lawful occupation of land immediately
before it was compulsorily acquired under this Act and to whom compensation
payable under this Act is entitled to remain in occupation until:
(a) the compensation is duly paid to the person, ...
(2) Any such person is entitled to remain in occupation
of any building that is the person’s principal place of residence,
person’s place of business, for 3 months after it is compulsorily
acquired, even though the person has ceased to be
entitled to remain in
occupation under subsection (1). ....
(3) The terms on which a person remains in occupation of land
that has been compulsorily acquired under this Act are, in the absence
agreement, such reasonable terms as are determined by the authority of the State
(including terms as to the rental to be paid
and the restrictions on the use of
the land). The
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
does not apply to that
continued occupation.
(4) Any such unpaid rent or other money due to the authority of
the State may be set off against the compensation payable under
respondent was permitted to stay in occupation of the premises on the acquired
land for a period of 223 days. Continued occupation
was permitted on the basis
that an occupation fee was paid to the appellant. The fee exceeded the rent
which had been paid by the
respondent to its landlords by an amount of $372 per
day. The total payment to the authority therefore exceeded the rent which would
have been payable under its former lease by $82,956. The trial judge awarded
compensation to be paid by the authority to the respondent
in that amount. The
head of compensation was loss for disturbance of land, within s 59(f).
appellant challenged that finding on the basis that the payment to the authority
was not the direct and natural consequence of
the acquisition of the terminable
interest in the land, but rather the consequence of the decision of the
respondent to remain in
occupation at the agreed fee. The appellant further
contended that s 34 was inconsistent with such a conclusion, in that it
permitted continued occupation by a person to whom compensation was payable
under the Act and further provided that unpaid rent or
occupation fees could be
set off against the compensation payable: s 34(1) and (4). A coherent
construction of the legislation therefore
prevented recovery of the amount of
the occupation fee as compensation for the compulsory acquisition.
each of the reasons given by the appellant, together with the construction of
s 59(f) set out above, the authority’s argument
should be accepted
and the decision of the primary judge on this issue set aside.
approach adopted by the primary judge, namely that the additional rent payable
by way of occupation fee was recoverable as compensation,
relied on the
reasoning of this Court in
Roads and Traffic Authority of NSW v
did not support its application in the present case.
The RTA had acquired part of a rural property owned by Ms McDonald, on
stood her residence and a shed. She had remained in her residence for a
period of months, paying an occupation fee pursuant to s
34 of the Just
Terms Act. She intended, reasonably, to relocate her residence to the residue
land after the works on the acquired
land were completed. She was therefore
required to leave the land for a period of some months whilst the construction
undertaken. Her claim for disturbance relevantly related to the rent
she incurred
vacating her residence; it did not relate to the
occupation fee paid to the RTA.
, the primary judge had found that the rental payments were not
recoverable pursuant to either s 59(c) or 59(f). The primary basis
claim was that, pursuant to s 59(c), the rental payments were financial
costs reasonably incurred in connection with the “relocation”
person entitled to compensation. The relevant passages in the reasoning in this
Court were as follows:
“[112] At [120] of his reasons, the primary judge appears
to have disallowed the claim for rental on three grounds. The first
claim for rent for the period after the respondent had vacated the acquired land
did not fall within either s 59(c) or
(f). The second was that the terms of
s 34(3) indicated an intention that post-acquisition rental was not
compensable. The third
was that it would be unreasonable to allow the costs
attributable to the payment of rent for the reasons referred to by Talbot J
Horton v Wyong Shire Council (No 2)
[2005] NSWLEC 45
respondent challenged the correctness of each of these grounds.
[113] In its submissions, the RTA did not seek to uphold the
first of the grounds apparently relied upon by the primary judge in
the rental claim. Talbot J in
accepted (at [18]) that such a
claim fell within s 59(c), although ultimately he rejected it on the basis that
it was not reasonable
that the claimants in that case be reimbursed for the
rental payments that they were required to make after they vacated the acquired
land and pending the acquisition by them of an alternative residence.
[114] In my view there may be some question as to whether in
truth the financial costs representing rental paid or payable pending
from one residence to a new residence is a cost incurred in connection with that
relocation within the meaning of s 59(c).
But even if it does not fall within
that provision, in my view it clearly falls within the terms of s 59(f) as being
a cost incurred
as a direct and natural consequence of the acquisition and which
related to the actual use of the land, namely, for the purpose of
a residence.
Accordingly, I would reject the first ground upon which his Honour relied to
deny the respondent’s rental claim.
[116] Section 34(3) falls within Part 2 of the
which is headed “
Acquisition of land by compulsory
”. In contrast, s 59 falls within Part 3, which is headed
Compensation for acquisition of land
”. Further, s 34(3)
empowers the relevant authority of the State to charge a rental where the
dispossessed owner remains in
occupation of the land that has been compulsorily
acquired under the Act. It neither deals nor purports to deal with the
of compensation, which is confined to Part 3 of the
[117] Quite clearly, rental paid pursuant to s 34(3) would not
be recoverable under s 59(c) as that provision proceeds on the basis
dispossessed owner remains in occupation of the acquired land with the
consequence that that person has yet to relocate.
It is no doubt for that reason
that in the present case the respondent only sought to claim rent paid or
payable by her subsequent
to her vacating the residence upon the acquired land.
I would therefore reject the second ground apparently relied upon by the primary
judge in rejecting the rental claim.”
was, relevantly for present purposes, authority for the proposition that
s 34(3) did not indicate a statutory intention that post-acquisition
was not compensable, in circumstances where it was paid to a third party, rather
than the acquiring authority. That may be
so, but it does not speak to this
case, where the only payments for which compensation was sought were payments
under s 34 by way
of occupation fee to the acquiring authority. In short,
the very claim which is relied upon in the present case was eschewed by the
claimant in
There is at least an inference that such a payment
cannot be the subject of a compensation claim because, if unpaid, it may be set
off against the compensation payable.
is not necessary to consider whether
was correctly decided on
its facts; it is sufficient to note that it provides no authority for the
proposition that an occupation
fee payable under s 34 is recoverable as
loss attributable to the disturbance of the land, pursuant to s 59(f). It
is true that the
fees paid by United related to the actual use of the land at
the date of acquisition, in that they were a condition of the tenant
that use. However, the cost to United was the direct and natural consequence of
the acquisition, not of the tenant’s
interest, but of the fee simple
estate. Section 59(f) should be understood to refer to costs incurred as a
direct and natural consequence
of the acquisition of the claimant’s
interest in land. Furthermore, even if the provision covered consequences to a
of the acquisition of its landlord’s interests in the land, the
cost, although causally related to that event, was a direct
and natural
consequence of the decision of the tenant to stay in occupation for the agreed
occupation fee. This conclusion is consistent
with the inference to be drawn
from s 34(4).
follows that the appellant’s submissions in this regard should be
accepted. The appeal with respect to the award of compensation
for the rental
payments must be allowed and the award set aside.
remains a question as to the costs of the proceedings, both in the Land and
Environment Court and in this Court.
trial judge awarded costs in favour of United in relation to the proceedings in
the Land and Environment Court. The appellant
submitted that if it were
successful on the appeal, United, having now failed on all the claims litigated
below, should pay the appellant’s
costs of the trial. United submitted
that, even if it failed to uphold the judgment below in its favour, its conduct
in seeking compensation
in excess of that offered by the appellant had been
reasonable and accordingly it should retain its costs order below.
far as the principles governing costs in the Land and Environment Court in
proceedings under the Just Terms Act were concerned,
the parties were in
agreement that the Court had an unfettered discretion, which was properly
exercised in accordance with the approach
Dillon v Gosford City
Accordingly, and as
a general principle, “a claimant for compensation in respect of a
compulsory acquisition should usually
be entitled to recover the costs of the
proceedings, having acted reasonably in pursuing the proceedings and not having
them in a manner which gives rise to unnecessary delay or
Nevertheless,
the final outcome remains a relevant consideration, particularly where a
claimant has raised a number of issues capable
of substantially affecting the
compensation awarded, but has failed on all the major points. On the other hand,
it is also a relevant
consideration that the appellant was successful at trial
on two major aspects of its claim, based on principles derived from decisions
this Court. In these circumstances, the appellant’s claim for costs of the
trial should be rejected. United, although having
ultimately been entirely
unsuccessful, should retain its costs of the trial, having acted reasonably in
pursuing the proceedings
at that stage. Order (4) in the Land and Environment
Court (awarding costs to United) should stand:
[2018] NSWLEC 64
respect to the costs of the appeal, in the event that it was successful, the
appellant sought costs. Whilst acknowledging the
general principle that costs
follow the event in this Court, United nevertheless submitted that it was
entitled to an order for costs
regardless of the outcome. The justification for
United’s position was that if the appellant were successful, it would have
achieved an outcome on an issue of principle which was important to the
operation of its public functions, a result which was of
no interest to United,
beyond the present case.
is not uncommon for a public authority which stands to benefit on an appeal from
the resolution of a principle having general application,
and which requires
leave to appeal, to be required as a condition of leave to pay the costs of the
other party in any event. However,
in the present case, leave was not required
and it was not open to impose such a condition. Further, the respondent was an
a large business operation pursuing its commercial interests, with access
to appropriate legal advice. There is no sufficient reason
why the usual
principle should not apply, namely that costs follow the event.
respondent should pay the appellant’s costs in this
Court should make the following orders:
(1) Allow the
(2) Set aside
the judgment in the Land and Environment Court, and orders (1), (2) and (3) made
and entered on 27 April 2018.
(3) In place
thereof, order that the application brought by United Petroleum Pty Ltd in the
Land and Environment Court be dismissed.
(4) Order that
the respondent pay the appellant’s costs of the appeal.
: I agree with Basten JA.
: I have read the decision of Basten JA in draft. I agree with the orders
his Honour proposes and, subject to one possible qualification,
Honour’s reasons.
possible qualification arises in relation to the question of whether the
different matters in s 55 of the
Just Terms Act
are capable of giving
rise to “overlapping claims”, which is dealt with by Basten JA at
[50]. On that topic, I adhere
to what I said in
Melino v Roads and Maritime
[2018] NSWCA 251
and [75]-[76]. The practical
difference in the approach I there set out with what Basten JA suggests at
[52]-[53], with which I agree,
may only be semantic; the essence of the point I
was making in
was that a claim may be capable of characterisation
under more than one provision in s 55, depending on the circumstances.
have also read the decision of Sackville AJA in draft. I also agree with his
Honour’s separate reasons and, for reasons which
I will briefly explain, I
do not perceive any inconsistency between those reasons and those of Basten
Sackville AJA
significant doubts about whether “financial costs” within the
meaning of s 59(c) and “other financial
costs” within the meaning of
s 59(f) extend to the loss of income or profits. In joining with his
Honour’s conclusion
on this topic, I emphasise the remarks at [96].
may be that the approach to s 59 in earlier cases, especially
El Boustani
(CA), was the result of inadequate attention being paid to identifying the
market value of the acquired land in that case. What was
relevantly in issue in
El Boustani
was a claim by the landowners for lost profits for four years
into the future from the operation of an existing market garden on
the acquired
land, styled as a “disturbance” claim. It will be recalled that the
highest and best use of the acquired
land in that case was “its existing
use of intensive horticulture”: at [12]. Assuming that what was being
the highest and best use of the acquired land, I fail to see as a
matter of principle why the market value of the acquired land,
identified, would not include the capacity of that land to generate a profit in
the future, including by conducting a market
garden. That is, the right to
potential profits from market gardening after the date of the acquisition would
be encapsulated in
the market value of the acquired land. As I explained in
Moloney v Roads and Maritime Services
[2018] NSWCA 252
those circumstances there is no room for any separate “disturbance”
agree with Sackville AJA that resolution of these issues should await a case
El Boustani
is directly challenged.
: I agree with the orders proposed by Basten JA. I agree with his
Honour’s reasons for setting aside the award of compensation
payments. I prefer to state my own reasons on other
Grounds of appeal
primary Judge awarded compensation to the respondent (
United Petroleum
for loss attributable to disturbance pursuant to
Land Acquisition (Just Terms Compensation) Act 1991
Just Terms Act
). The loss came about, on the primary Judge’s
findings, because United Petroleum’s interest in the land was compulsorily
acquired by the appellant (
). By reason of the acquisition United
Petroleum had to terminate the business which it conducted on the land. United
Petroleum could
not relocate the business to another
and thus lost (so his
Honour found) the stream of profits it would otherwise have derived from the
primary Judge awarded compensation to United Petroleum for its loss of future
profits. His Honour assessed the compensation by
reference to the capitalised
value of a perpetual stream of profits without regard to the fact that United
Petroleum had only a “weak
Petroleum’s interest in the land was limited to a tenancy at will
terminable on one month’s
1 and 2 of United Petroleum’s Notice of Appeal are as
“1 The primary judge erred on a question of law in
finding that ‘
lost profits can, and in the circumstances do, constitute
costs reasonably incurred
' within the meaning of [the Just Terms Act] (see,
in particular, [Primary Judgment] at [230] and [327] and Order 1(a) made on
April 2018).
2 The primary judge should have found that:
(a) United Petroleum's claim for
alleged lost or foregone future profits did not constitute a compensable claim
for loss attributable
to disturbance as ‘
any other financial costs
reasonably incurred (or that might reasonably be incurred)
’ within the
meaning of section 59(1)(f) of the Just Terms Act;
or further or in the alternative:
(b) having regard to the nature of United Petroleum's interest
in land (being an oral lease for a tenancy terminable on one month's
compensation for loss attributable to disturbance under section 59(1)(f) was
limited to lost or foregone future profits for
a period of one month after the
date of acquisition.”
1 made by the primary Judge, referred to in Ground 1 of the Notice of Appeal,
determined compensation under the Just Terms Act
in the sum of $2,050,360,
“(a) $1,967,404 for lost profits from the date of vacant
possession pursuant to s 59(1)(f).”
JA has set out the relevant provisions of the Just Terms Act. I repeat the terms
of the legislation only so far as necessary
to explain my reasoning.
owner of an interest in land extinguished by an acquisition notice is entitled
to be paid compensation in accordance with Part
3 of the Just Terms Act
(s 37). The amount of compensation to which the person is entitled
“such amount as having regard to all relevant matters under this Part,
will justly compensate the person for the acquisition
of the land” (s
determining the amount of compensation regard must be had exclusively to the six
matters specified in s 55.
matters include “any loss attributable to disturbance” (s 55(d)).
That expression is defined to mean any of the
six matters listed in s
including the
“(c) financial costs reasonably incurred in connection
with the relocation of those persons (including legal costs but not
stamp duty or mortgage costs),
(f) any other financial costs reasonably incurred (or that
might reasonably be incurred), relating to the actual use of the land,
direct and natural consequence of the acquisition.”
order to satisfy s 59(f) United Petroleum had to show that there were
“other financial costs”:
(i) that had
been reasonably incurred (or might be reasonably incurred);
(ii) that related to “the actual use of the
(iii) that had been incurred (or might be reasonably
incurred) “as a direct and natural consequence of the
acquisition”.
of the matters which the Just Terms Act specifies must be taken into account in
assessing the amount of compensation payable
to a person whose land has been
compulsorily acquired have nothing to do with the market value of the land. This
reflects the legislative
purpose of providing compensation in accordance with
specific statutory criteria that do not depend on the value of the interest
land compulsorily acquired (although in particular cases there can be some
In the present case,
for example, there is no dispute that the market value of United
Petroleum’s tenancy at will at the date
of acquisition was nil. But the
fact that United Petroleum’s interest in the land was valueless did not
prevent it claiming
compensation for “loss attributable to
disturbance” (s 55(d)), provided that it could satisfy one of the
categories of
loss identified in s 59. For example, United Petroleum was not
precluded from claiming legal costs pursuant to ss 55(d) and 59(a)
of the Just
if it could show that
it had reasonably incurred legal costs in connection with the compulsory
acquisition of the land.
Similarly, it is common ground that United Petroleum was not precluded by the
limited nature of its interest in the land from claiming
“other financial
costs” pursuant to s 59(f) provided that it could satisfy the requirements
set out in that paragraph.
Construction of s 59(f)
accepted that the business carried on by United Petroleum was an “actual
use of the land” and that its business was
extinguished as a “direct
and natural consequence of the acquisition”. The dispute, as framed by RMS
in its submissions,
is whether unrealised projected profits in perpetuity are
financial costs reasonably incurred (or might reasonably be incurred),
purposes of s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act.
Section 59(f) read in
written submissions concentrated on what was said to be the inconsistency
between the conclusions of the primary Judge
and the decision of the High Court
Minister v New South Wales Aerated Water and Confectionary Company
). However Mr Lancaster SC, who appeared with Mr Astill for RMS, also
submitted that the expression “other financial costs”
in s 59(f) of
the Just Terms Act is limited to “actual expenses”. On this
argument, compensation is only available under
s 59(f) where the relevant
person has incurred or might incur a liability to pay money (or the equivalent)
to another person as a
direct and natural consequence of the acquisition. If
accepted, the argument would be an answer to United Petroleum’s claim
under s 59(f) to be compensated for the loss of profits due to the forced
closure of the business it conducted on the land.
Payne JA observed in
Just Terms Act
should be approached on the basis that the
[claimant’s] right to compensation should not be subject to limitations or
qualifications
not found in the terms of the statute”.
determine whether a claimant is entitled to a particular form of compensation
requires close attention to the “natural and
ordinary meaning of the words
of the legislation”.
definition of “loss attributable to disturbance” in s 59 of the Just
Terms Act identifies five categories of “costs”
“fees”. Of the five categories preceding s 59(f), four clearly
refer to and are limited to actual outgoings
or liabilities incurred or to be
incurred by the relevant person. Thus s 59(a), (b) and (d) identify,
respectively, “legal
costs”, “valuation fees” and
“stamp duty costs” as categories of compensable loss. Section 59(e)
to “financial costs” but is limited to costs incurred in
relation to the discharge or execution of mortgages resulting
relocation”. Such costs are clearly outgoings or liabilities incurred or
to be incurred by the relevant person
as a result of the need to relocate.
59(c) of the Just Terms Act is expressed more generally than s 59(e) in that the
former allows compensation to be paid for
“financial costs reasonably
incurred in connection with the relocation of those persons”. Despite the
wider language,
when s 59(c) is construed in context there is considerable force
in the argument that it allows compensation only for liabilities
or outgoings
incurred by the person entitled to compensation. The argument receives support
from the example of “financial
costs” given in parentheses, namely
“legal costs but not including stamp duty or mortgage costs”. This
also aligns the meaning of “financial costs” in s 59(c) with
its clear meaning in s 59(e).
construction of s 59(c) of the Just Terms Act has a strong bearing on the
interpretation of s 59(f). There is little doubt that
if s 59(f) is read in
isolation it is capable of a wide application. The loss of a stream of profits
from a business forced to close
down because the land on which the business is
conducted has been compulsorily acquired can plausibly be described as a
cost”. As Preston CJ of the LEC noted in
Angus Pty Ltd v Health Administration
Corporation
upheld by this Court,
“costs” is not necessarily restricted to actual expenditure or
liabilities but can include unrealised losses
and loss of profits. Similarly as
a matter of English usage a person suffering such losses can be said to have
s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act is not to be read in isolation. As the High Court
has pointed out, the starting point for the
ascertainment of the meaning of a
statutory provision is the text of the statute, but regard must be had to the
provision’s
context and purpose. If considerations of context and purpose
suggest that the ordinary meaning of the provision is not consistent
statutory purpose, that meaning must be
Thus s 59(f) must be
construed in the context of the legislation as a whole and, in particular,
having regard to the definition of
“loss attributable to
disturbance” in s 59, of which s 59(f) forms part.
on its proper construction s 59(c) of the Just Terms Act provides compensation
only for actual outgoings or liabilities incurred
by the relevant person, it
follows that none of the five paragraphs in s 59 preceding s 59(f) contemplates
compensation for loss
of income or profits derived from the acquired land. In
construing s 59(f) it is necessary to bear in mind that Parliament is unlikely
to have intended the same expression (“financial costs”) to be given
a different meaning in different paragraphs of the
one section. Therefore if s
59(c) is limited to outgoings or liabilities incurred or to be incurred by the
person entitled to compensation,
it would seem that s 59(f) cannot be construed
to provide compensation for loss of income or profits. That conclusion (assuming
interpretation of s 59(c) referred to above) is reinforced by the reference
in s 59(f) to “
financial costs”, which clearly
envisages costs of a similar kind to those in s
The words “any
other” provide a very powerful indication that s 59(f) is intended to be
subject to the same limitations
as to subject matter as s 59(c) and (e): that is
s 59(f) is intended to be confined to actual outgoings or liabilities
incurred or
to be incurred as a direct and natural consequence of the compulsory
acquisition.
the assumption I have made as to the meaning of s 59(c) and (e), the reference
in s 61(b) to “any financial loss” does
not detract from a
construction of s 59(f) that limits its scope to actual outgoings or liabilities
incurred by the person entitled
to compensation. Section 61 is directed to the
specific case where the market value of land is assessed on the basis that the
had potential to be used for a purpose other than for which it was used at
the date of acquisition. Section 61 is designed to prevent
overcompensation
where the value of the land reflects a potential for redevelopment or a higher
and better use, but realisation of
the potential would require the owner to
incur “financial loss”. Contrary to what may be implied in an
observation in
Sydney Water Corporation v
with which I
expressed agreement,
the expression “financial loss” in s 61, whatever its meaning, does
not control the interpretation of s 59
(c) or (f).
any event I agree with Basten JA that “financial loss” in s 61(b) of
the Just Terms Act should be understood as referring
to “loss attributable
to disturbance” as defined in s 59. If, as was suggested in
precludes only compensation for the costs identified in s 59, interpreting
“financial loss” in s 61(b) to mean
“loss attributable to
disturbance” as defined in s 59 achieves harmony between the two
provisions.
A difficulty
there is a strong textual basis for limiting s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act to
losses in the nature of liabilities or outgoings,
this construction encounters a
difficulty that was not fully addressed in argument in the present case. It has
long been accepted
that the compensation payable to a person whose land has been
compulsorily acquired may include compensation for loss of an income
profits resulting from the relocation of a business conducted on the acquired
land. Prior to the enactment of the Just
Terms Act, loss attributable to
disturbance was not a separate head of compensation in New South Wales. But a
long line of authority
interpreted “value” for the purposes of the
law of compulsory acquisition to mean “value to the owner”. This
formulation was a “unifying concept” that encompassed, among other
things, loss attributable to
disturbance.
By this means the
“loss of trade or production” occasioned by a relocation or
termination of a business came within the
concept of special value to the owner
and thus could be
compensable.
appears to have been accepted after the enactment of the Just Terms Act that
loss of income or profits due to the relocation of
a business continues to be
compensable. In
El Boustani (LEC)
the trial Judge awarded the claimant
compensation for loss attributable to disturbance calculated by reference to the
profits lost
over the three year period required to relocate and re-establish a
market garden previously conducted on the acquired land. The trial
the award pursuant to s 59(c) of the Just Terms
but held that if, contrary
to her view, s 59(c) was not applicable, s 59(f) would support the
On the appeal this Court
recorded that it was not controversial that compensation for loss of profits was
payable and that the dispute
was merely as to the period of time for which lost
profits should be allowed.
George D Angus (CA)
, Tobias AJA expressed the view
“Given that it was the clear intent of the Just Terms Act that disturbance
losses should be recoverable as a separate head
of compensation ... it cannot be
the case that disturbance losses which under the prior law were recoverable as
special value should
no longer be recoverable because of a narrow construction
of the expression “financial costs” in s
His Honour considered that the decision in
Boustani (CA)
mandated rejection of the proposition that loss of income or
profits due to disturbance can be compensated as part of “special
value”, now separately defined in s 57 of the Just Terms
It followed, so his Honour
held, that if lost income or profits are to be compensated in compulsory
acquisition cases, this can only
come about if the loss falls within s
did not submit that
El Boustani (CA)
George D Angus (CA)
incorrect insofar as they held that loss of income or profits by reason of the
forced relocation of a business cannot be claimed
as an element of
“special value of land to the person on the date of its acquisition”
within the meaning of ss 55(b)
and 57 of the Just Terms
Nor did RMS submit that
this Court in
El Boustani (CA)
was incorrect to proceed on the assumption
that s 59(c) of the Just Terms Act permits compensation to be claimed for loss
or profits incurred in connection with relocation.
the present case United Petroleum cannot rely on s 59(c) of the Just Terms Act
because it does not seek compensation for loss of
profits incurred in connection
with relocation of its business. It therefore must rely on s 59(f) which is not
confined to financial
costs arising from relocation of a business. The language
of s 59(f) is capable of covering financial costs incurred by reason of
closure of a business previously conducted on the acquired land, where the
evidence shows that relocation of the business was
not feasible.
the absence of an attack by RMS on the reasoning in
El Boustani (CA)
George D Angus
referred to above, the construction of s 59(f)
of the Just Terms Act should be approached on the basis that the expression
costs” in s 59(c) extends to the loss of income or
profits resulting from the forced relocation of a business conducted on
acquired land. On that basis, there is nothing incongruous in construing the
expression “other financial costs” in
s 59(f) to extend to the
loss of income or profits where a business conducted on the acquired land is
forced to close and cannot
be relocated.
reaching this conclusion I do not foreclose the possibility that in a future
case the construction of s 59(c) of the Just Terms
Act assumed in
El Boustani (CA)
and of s 59(f) adopted in
might have to be reconsidered. That may involve
reconsideration of the nature and source of the entitlement of a person whose
has been compulsorily acquired to compensation for lost income or profits
resulting from the forced relocation or closure of a business
conducted on the
acquired land.
Quantum of compensation
these reasons, I approach Ground 2(b) in the Notice of Appeal on the basis that
s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act allows compensation
for lost profits where a
business conducted on the acquired land is forced to close by reason of the
compulsory acquisition. The
question is then whether the compensation awarded to
United Petroleum should have been limited to foregone profits for a period no
longer than one month.
contended, in effect, that the answer to this question depends on a
straightforward application of the decision in
Aerated Water
. However the
High Court in that case addressed a different issue than that presented by
United Petroleum’s claim to be compensated
for profits lost by reason of
the closure of the business it conducted on the acquired land.
Aerated Water
the Government of New South Wales compulsorily acquired a
leasehold interest that had two years to run at the date of acquisition.
question was whether, in calculating the value of the lessee’s interest in
the land, regard should be paid to the likelihood
that the freeholder (who had
an interest in the lessee company) would renew the lease. The answer was that in
assessing the value
of the leasehold to the lessee “personal
matters” such as the relationship between lessor and lessee could not be
into account.
therefore not open to the jury to add to the value of the lease the
“estimated value of the expectancy” of obtaining
present case is not concerned with the value of United Petroleum’s tenancy
at will. As has been explained, the tenancy at
will had no value at the date of
acquisition because it was terminable on one month’s notice. The present
appeal turns on the
interpretation of a statutory provision that allows
compensation for certain financial costs incurred by United Petroleum. That
is to be undertaken independently of the valuation of United
Petroleum’s interest in the land and must be conducted by reference
statutory language.
point of difference is that the lease in
Aerated Water
was for a fixed
term. The lessee had no legal entitlement at the date of acquisition to remain
on the land beyond the date its lease
expired. By contrast, United Petroleum was
entitled to remain in occupation of the land until the lessor elected to give
required to terminate the tenancy at will. United Petroleum could
therefore remain in possession indefinitely subject to the lessor’s
to terminate the tenancy. The exercise of that right required the lessor to take
affirmative action by giving notice to United
the decision in
Aerated Water
cannot be applied directly to a claim for
disturbance attributable to loss pursuant to s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act, the
is nonetheless significant for the present case. The analysis in
Aerated Water
suggests that, subject to any applicable legislation, the
interest compulsorily acquired is the legal or equitable estate held by
person entitled to compensation. Any advantages a lessee might enjoy by reason
of “personal matters”, such as a co-operative
lessor, are to be
the present case the interest acquired by RMS was United Petroleum’s
tenancy at will terminable on one month’s notice.
The fact that United
Petroleum’s lessor was unlikely in the foreseeable future to give notice
terminating the lease is to be
ignored for the purposes of assessing
compensation, unless legislation provides otherwise.
59(f) of the Just Terms Act relevantly provides for compensation for financial
costs reasonably incurred “as a direct
and natural result of the
acquisition”. “Acquisition” is defined in s 4(1) to mean
“an acquisition of land
or of any interest in land”. Thus
compensation for lost profits or income by reason of the closure of a business
in the acquired
land can only be awarded if
is a direct and
natural consequence of the acquisition of United Petroleum’s tenancy at
As a matter of law the
lessor was entitled at any time to give the one month’s notice required to
terminate the tenancy.
drafting of s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act appears to owe something to the
Australian Law Reform Commission’s report on
Land Acquisition and
Compensation
The Commission
noted that the case law recognised that loss had to result
“directly” from the acquisition to be the subject
of compensation
for disturbance.
It recommended
that the matters to be taken into account should
“disturbance, that is any loss or damage suffered or cost incurred by the
person as a
natural and reasonable consequence
of ... the acquisition by
the Commonwealth of the land ...” (Emphasis added.)
reasons that are not entirely clear the Commission thought it better not to use
the word “direct”, and preferred the
formula “natural and
reasonable consequence of the ...
acquisition”.
Despite the
Commission’s preference, s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act incorporates the
word “direct”, but as part
of the compound expression “direct
and natural consequence of the acquisition”. This rather open-ended
language is clearly
intended to operate as a limitation on what would otherwise
be the scope of s 59(f).
Petroleum’s interest at the date of the acquisition was terminable on one
month’s notice. The lessor was entitled
to give that notice at any time.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that United Petroleum’s
long-term loss of profits
by reason of the closure of its business is a
“direct and natural consequence” of the acquisition of its interest
the land on which the business was conducted.
is one thing to say (as RMS conceded) that the closure of the business was a
direct and natural consequence of the compulsory acquisition.
It is quite
another to say that United Petroleum’s loss of profits from the business
was a direct and natural consequence of
the compulsory acquisition. The
principal cause of United Petroleum’s loss of profits was its decision to
conduct a business
intended to operate in the long term under a lease which
could be terminated at any time on very short notice. No doubt United Petroleum
took into account in conducting and investing in the business the likelihood
that the lessor, a related company, would choose not
to terminate the lease, at
least in the short term. But that likelihood is irrelevant to the question of
whether United Petroleum’s
loss was a direct and natural consequence of
RMS’ acquisition of the tenancy at will.
one month’s notice was required to terminate the tenancy at will, it is
only the loss of one month’s profits can
fairly be said to be the
“direct and natural consequence of the acquisition”. I do not
consider that the loss of profits
in respect of a longer period satisfies the
requirements of s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act.
Lancaster submitted that
George D Angus (CA)
is distinguishable insofar
as it held that the tenant at will in that case could receive compensation for
the loss of profits that
would have been earned from the business conducted on
the acquired land over a two year
In my view, however, the
conclusion I have reached is inconsistent with the reasoning in
. The essential point of difference is that I consider that it is
the “financial costs” that must be incurred as a direct
and natural
result of the acquisition of the tenancy at will. The fact that the tenant at
will would not have incurred the losses
had the acquisition not taken place does
not establish that the claimed losses were a direct and natural consequence of
the acquisition.
The inquiry needs to go further.
my respectful opinion this aspect of the reasoning in
George D Angus
is plainly wrong and should not be followed. The error lies in the
assumption that because the closure of the business was triggered
compulsory acquisition of the lessee’s interest the loss of profits was
the direct and natural consequence of the acquisition.
Further analysis is
required before that conclusion can be reached.
note that the conclusion I have reached limits the opportunities for related
companies to order their affairs so that each is entitled
to claim compensation
for what is essentially the same economic detriment. It may be accepted that a
loss sustained by two different
entities as a consequence of the acquisition of
their respective interests in the land must be assessed separately for the
of determining compensation, even if the entities are
But if United
Petroleum’s argument is correct, in a case such as the present the
interest of a lessor may be valued taking
into account its entitlement to
terminate the tenancy at will on one month’s notice (for example, by
assessing the value of
the fee simple estate by reference to the stream of
profits from a business similar to that conducted by tenant at will). Yet the
tenant at will’s interest is to be valued without reference to the
fragility of that interest.
the appeal is to be allowed and the judgment in favour of United Petroleum set
aside, its claim has been unsuccessful. However
in my opinion the primary
Judge’s award of costs in favour of United Petroleum should stand on the
principles discussed in
Dillon v Gosford City
reasonably in pursing the proceedings, particularly having regard to the
authorities relating to a claim for lost
I see no reason why the ordinary principle that costs follow the event should
not apply to the appeal. RMS has succeeded in
setting aside the judgment of the
Land and Environment Court. It is true that RMS’s primary position was
George D Angus (CA)
was distinguishable, but it did contend that the
reasoning was incorrect insofar as it supported an award of substantial
compensation
for lost profits said to result from the compulsory acquisition of
a tenancy at will. United Petroleum’s reliance on
George D Angus
is sufficiently recognised by allowing it to retain the costs order
made by the primary Judge.
The appellant (“RMS”) raises four appeal grounds,
which fall into two categories. The first category (appeal grounds 1
concerns the primary judge’s award of compensation to the respondent
(“United”) for the forgone profits
in perpetuity of the business
previously conducted on the land acquired by RMS. The primary judge awarded this
compensation on the
basis that it was a loss attributable to disturbance under
Land Acquisition (Just Terms Compensation) Act 1991
(“Just Terms Act”). United incurred a financial loss by being unable
to continue to operate its business on the acquired
land. The second category
(appeal grounds 3 and 4) concerns the primary judge’s award of
compensation, also as a loss attributable
to disturbance under s 59(f) of the
Just Terms Act, for the difference between the rent which United would have paid
to the owners
of the land, if the land had not been compulsorily acquired, and
the higher sum paid to the acquiring authority, RMS, under s 34
of the Just
Terms Act while United remained in occupation after the acquisition until RMS
obtained vacant possession.
grounds of appeal raise the issue of the proper construction of s 59(f) of
the Just Terms Act. The primary judge applied
the construction of s 59(f)
that had been given by this Court in
Health Administration Corporation v
George D Angus Pty Ltd
(2014) 88 NSWLR 752
[2014] NSWCA 352
(CA)) in awarding compensation, as loss attributable to disturbance,
for the forgone future profits of the business of United previously
conducted on
the acquired land. The primary judge relied on this Court’s decision in
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales v McDonald
(2010) 79 NSWLR
[2010] NSWCA 236
to award compensation, also as loss attributable to
disturbance, for the difference between the rent which United would have paid
the owners of the land, if the land had not been compulsorily acquired, and the
higher sum paid to the acquiring authority, RMS,
for continued occupation of the
land after the acquisition under s 34 of the Just Terms Act.
submitted on the appeal that the decision in
George D Angus
distinguishable but alternatively that the construction of s 59(f) given in the
decision was wrong and should not be followed.
RMS submitted that the decision
was distinguishable and did not support the primary
Judge’s decision. RMS submitted that the primary judge erred on questions
of law in awarding United compensation for these two types of losses
attributable to disturbance.
will structure my reasons by the two categories of appeal grounds concerning,
first, the award of compensation for the financial
loss occasioned by being
unable to continue to operate the business on the acquired land in perpetuity
and, secondly, the award of
compensation for the difference between the rent
that would have been paid and the occupation fee that was
Compensation for continuing operation of business
award of compensation for the loss of the opportunity to continue to operate the
business on the acquired land depended on applying
the construction of s 59(f)
of the Just Terms Act given in
George D Angus
(CA). I agree with the
other Judges that the construction of s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act should be
revisited and revised. In so
far as I offered a construction of s 59(f) in
George D Angus Pty Limited v Health Administration Corporation
[2013] NSWLEC 212
, which decision was upheld in
(CA), I now consider that a different construction is to be preferred.
Adopting Mason P’s palinode in
Woolworths Ltd v Pallas Newco Pty Ltd
(2004) 61 NSWLR 707
[2004] NSWCA 422
, “the matter does not
appear to me now as it appears to have appeared to me then”. Applying the
revised construction
of s 59(f), the primary judge’s award of compensation
for the loss of the opportunity to continue operating the business on
acquired land in perpetuity is in error.
are four requirements in order for costs to fall within s 59(f):
other financial costs”
(2) “reasonably
incurred (or that might reasonably be incurred)”
(3) “relating
to the actual use of the land”
direct and natural consequence of the acquisition.”
phrases are not to be read in isolation, but rather together as a composite
clause. The meaning of one phrase is influenced
by the other phrases. The
breadth of the phrase “any other financial costs” is limited by the
requirements in the subsequent
phrases that the financial costs be reasonably
incurred, relate to the actual use of the land and be incurred as a direct and
consequence of the acquisition. The limitations in these later phrases
curtail the loss attributable to disturbance that can be awarded
s 59(f). Although it is necessary to read s 59(f) as a composite
clause, an understanding of the meaning of the clause is assisted
by examining
each of the constituent phrases in the clause.
financial costs”
the heart of the case before the primary judge and the appeal before this Court
is the concept of “financial costs”
in s 59(f). The RMS argued on
appeal that “financial costs” in s 59(f) are limited to
“actual expenses” and
cannot include “financial losses”.
United’s claim for loss attributable to disturbance for forgone profits of
extinguished business was dependent on s 59(f) allowing compensation for
financial losses in the form of the forgone profits resulting
from the forced
closure of its business on the acquired land.
amount of compensation to which a person is entitled under the Just Terms Act is
such amount as, having regard to all relevant
matters under Part 3 of the Just
Terms Act, would justly compensate the person for the acquisition of the land (s
54(1)). In determining
the amount of compensation to which a person is entitled,
regard must be had only to the matters specified in s 55, as assessed in
accordance with Div 4 of Part 3 of the Just Terms Act. One of the specified
matters is “(d) any loss attributable to disturbance”.
Compensation
for “loss attributable to disturbance” is defined in, and is to be
assessed in accordance with, s 59 of
the Just Terms Act. Section 59 as at August
2015 provided:
“In this Act:
loss attributable to disturbance
of land means any of the
(a) legal costs reasonably incurred by the persons entitled to
compensation in connection with the compulsory acquisition of the
(b) valuation fees reasonably incurred by those persons in
connection with the compulsory acquisition of the land,
(c) financial costs reasonably incurred in connection with the
relocation of those persons (including legal costs but not including
or mortgage costs),
(d) stamp duty costs reasonably incurred (or that might
reasonably be incurred) by those persons in connection with the purchase
for relocation (but not exceeding the amount that would be incurred for the
purchase of land of equivalent value to the land
compulsorily acquired),
(e) financial costs reasonably incurred (or that might
reasonably be incurred) by those persons in connection with the discharge
mortgage and the execution of a new mortgage resulting from the relocation (but
not exceeding the amount that would be incurred
if the new mortgage secured the
repayment of the balance owing in respect of the discharged mortgage),
(f) any other financial costs reasonably incurred (or that
might reasonably be incurred), relating to the actual use of the land,
direct and natural consequence of the acquisition.”
categories of loss attributable to disturbance in s 59 exhaustively define the
compensation to which a person is entitled for
“loss attributable to
disturbance”.
of these categories of loss attributable to disturbance assume the acquisition
of the land. The acquisition of the land is a
necessary cause of the disturbance
of the person’s occupation and use of the land and of the person incurring
any of the specified
categories of loss attributable to disturbance. Although
acquisition of the land is a necessary cause of incurring loss attributable
disturbance, it is insufficient by itself to establish entitlement to
compensation for loss attributable to disturbance. This
is because the specified
categories of loss attributable to disturbance in s 59 require further matters
to be established. For example,
as I will explain further below, s 59(f)
requires that the “other financial costs” incurred relate to
“the actual
use of the land”, not a potential future use, and be a
“direct and natural consequence of the acquisition”, not
state of affairs, such as a closure of a business conducted on the land, be a
direct and natural consequence of the acquisition.
concept of “financial costs” in s 59(f), read alone, is capable of
bearing a wide meaning. Financial costs can include
not only expenditures
(outgoings) but also forgone benefits and advantages, such as a forgone stream
of income or profit (forgone
ingoings). However, the words “financial
costs” in s 59(f) need to be read in context, both the specific
context of s
59(f) as well as the general context of the other categories of
loss attributable to disturbance in s 59.
word “costs” is used in five of the six categories of loss
attributable to disturbance in s 59 and the word “fees”
the remaining category. The particular meaning of “costs” and
“fees” in these categories is influenced
by the specific context in
which the word is used, including the adjective qualifying the noun and the
requirements of the particular
paragraph specifying the loss attributable to
disturbance. In paragraph (a), the costs are “legal costs” incurred
connection with the compulsory acquisition of the land. In paragraph (d), the
costs are “stamp duty costs” incurred in
connection with the
purchase of land for relocation. In paragraph (e), the costs are
“financial costs” incurred in connection
with the discharge of a
mortgage and the execution of a new mortgage resulting from the relocation. All
of these legal costs, stamp
duty costs and mortgage costs can only be
expenditures or outgoings. They cannot include forgone benefits. Paragraph (b),
referring to “fees” rather than “costs”,
specifies “valuation fees” incurred in connection with
acquisition of the land. Such valuation fees also can only be expenditures or
costs referred to in paragraph (c), being “financial costs” incurred
in connection with the relocation of the person,
are not so clear cut. The costs
can include expenditures, such as legal costs in connection with the relocation
and removal costs,
but might also include forgone benefits, such as loss of
profits, incurred in connection with the relocation. In
El Boustani v
Minister Administering the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
(2014) 199 LGERA 198
[2014] NSWCA 33
, it was not in controversy at trial or on
the appeal that compensation could be awarded under
for the profits lost
during the period from the date of acquisition to the date the business was
relocated onto alternative land
(at [17]). As both Basten JA (at [14]) and
Sackville AJA (at [104]) posit in their reasons for judgment in this appeal,
(c) is capable of extending to loss of income or profits resulting
from the forced relocation of a business conducted on the acquired
word “costs” in paragraph (f) has a different specific context to
the specific contexts in which the words “costs”
“fees” are used in the other paragraphs of
The adjectival
phrase describing the costs, “any other financial”, is capable of
bearing a wide meaning to include not
only expenditures (outgoings) but also
forgone benefits such as financial losses. The requirements in the later phrases
do not dictate that the costs can only be expenditures. A person can
not only “incur” an expenditure, but can also incur
a financial
loss. Indeed, the language that financial losses can be incurred is used in s
61(b) of the Just Terms Act. Both an expenditure
and a financial loss can relate
to the actual use of the acquired land. Both an expenditure and a financial loss
can be incurred
as a direct and natural consequence of the acquisition of the
word “other” in the expression “any other financial
costs” in paragraph (f) evidently conveys that the
costs in paragraph (f)
are to be costs other than those categories of loss attributable to disturbance
in paragraphs (a) to (e) of
s 59. However, this does not necessarily align
the meaning of the word “costs” in paragraph (f) with the meaning of
words “costs” and “fees” in paragraphs (a) to (e)
for three reasons.
as I have noted, the words “costs” and “fees” in
paragraphs (a) to (e) are strongly influenced by the
specific context in which
they are used, including the adjective qualifying the noun and the requirements
of the paragraph. The word
“costs” in paragraph (f) has a different
specific context.
the word “other” signifies that the costs falling within paragraph
(f) are to be costs not falling within paragraphs
(a) to (e). It would undermine
the carefully drawn scheme for compensation for loss attributable to disturbance
if costs and fees
of a category of loss attributable to disturbance described in
paragraphs (a) to (e), but not falling within those paragraphs because
failure to satisfy the requirements of those paragraphs, could nevertheless be
compensable under paragraph (f). As Basten JA
observes (at [13], [14] and [53]),
the construction of paragraph (f) should not subvert the limitations contained
within the earlier
paragraphs of s 59.
the words “costs” and “fees” in the other paragraphs do
not bear the same meaning. Whilst the legal
costs, valuation fees, stamp duty
costs and mortgage costs in paragraphs (a), (b), (d) and (e) are expenditures,
the financial costs
incurred in connection with relocation in paragraph (c) are
capable of extending to financial losses rather than being restricted
expenditures. It is therefore not incongruous to construe the expression
“any other financial costs” in paragraph
(f) as not only including
expenditures but also as extending to financial losses (as Sackville AJA notes
word “any” in the expression “any other financial costs”
in s 59(f) corroborates this construction flowing
from the word
“other”. It emphasises that the costs falling within paragraph (f)
are not to be restricted to the types
of costs and fees that fall within the
other paragraphs of s 59. To read the financial costs in paragraph (f) as being
expenditures, because the costs and fees in paragraphs (a), (b), (d)
and (e) are limited to expenditures, would not give effect to
the wide words
“any other”.
do not consider that the reference to “financial loss” in s 61(b)
assists in construing the expression “any other
financial costs” in
s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act. The two statutory provisions are directed to
different purposes.
61 is intended to avoid a person being compensated for the particular aspects of
compensation referred to in s 61(a) and (b).
A person is to be compensated for
the market value of the land acquired (s 55(a) of the Just Terms Act). Mostly,
the market value
of the land will reflect the purpose for which the land is
currently used. In some instances, however, the market value of the land
be assessed on the basis that the land has potential to be used other than for
the purpose for which it is currently used.
For example, the market value of
land currently used as a market garden in a peri-urban area might be assessed on
the basis that
the land has potential to be used for a higher and better use for
residential purposes, such as a residential estate. The realisation
potential of the land to be used for the more valuable residential purpose
necessitates the cessation of the current, less
valuable, market garden use.
This cessation of the current use in order to use the land for the more valuable
purpose can have two
consequences: first, there will be a forgoing of any
financial advantage, such as income or profits, from the current use of the
and secondly, there may be losses that need to be incurred in order to realise
the potential for land to be used for the more
valuable purpose, such as losses
attributable to disturbance of the current use.
61 ensures that compensation is not payable in respect of either of these
consequences (the first is covered by s 61(a) and
the second by s 61(b) of the
Just Terms Act). The rationale is that an award of compensation, on the basis
that the land has potential
to be used for a more valuable purpose than the
current use of the land, should take account of these necessary consequences of
the potential to use the land for a more valuable purpose than the
current use.
forgone financial advantages and financial losses might, to some extent, be
taken into account in assessing the market value
of the land, but they can also
separately be taken into account by making an adjustment of the total
compensation that is payable
under Part 3 of the Just Terms Act. This Court in
Sydney Water Corporation v Caruso
(2009) 170 LGERA 298
[2009] NSWCA 391
rejected the argument that s 61 was limited to the assessment of market value
(under s 55(a)) alone and was not referrable to the
other heads of compensation
claimable under s 55, including loss attributable to disturbance under s
55(d) and s 59 of the Just Terms
Act (at [184] and see [190]). Importantly, it
was held that “s 61(b) may deny a claim for loss attributable to
disturbance
pursuant to s 55(d) and s 59” (at [184]).
the reference to “financial loss” in s 61(b) includes “loss
attributable to disturbance” in s 55(d),
which loss is defined in s 59 to
include the six categories of loss attributable to disturbance in paragraphs (a)
to (f). As noted
above, some of these categories of loss attributable to
disturbance, being various types of costs and fees, are limited to expenditures
(paragraphs (a), (b), (d) and (e) of s 59), but other categories, being
financial costs, are capable of including not only expenditures
but also forgone
benefits (such as financial losses) (paragraphs (c) and (f) of s 59). The
category of “financial loss”
in s 61(b) extends to both expenditures
and financial losses for falling within any of the categories of loss
attributable to disturbance
does not necessarily follow, however, from this construction, that the wider
category of “financial loss” in s 61(b)
includes the specific
categories of loss attributable to disturbance in s 59, that the specific
categories of loss attributable to
disturbance in s 59 must include financial
losses. Whether any specific category of loss attributable to disturbance in s
include financial losses, in addition to expenditures, depends on the
proper construction of the specific category, in its specific
context and in the
general context of s 59. Assistance is not to be gained in construing each
specific category in s 59 from the
construction of s
“Reasonably incurred (or that might be reasonably be
second requirement for financial costs to fall within s 59(f) is that the
financial costs be “reasonably incurred”
or “might reasonably
be incurred”. The adverb “reasonably” governs the verbs
“incurred” and “might
be incurred” and not the noun
“financial costs”. The enquiry is whether the financial costs are
incurred or might
be incurred reasonably, not whether the financial costs are
reasonable in themselves.
second requirement is linked to the third and fourth requirements in
s 59(f). The financial costs that are reasonably incurred
or that might
reasonably be incurred must relate to the actual use of the land and be as a
direct and natural consequence of the
acquisition. As I explain below, these
further requirements of s 59(f) limit the financial costs that can fall within
the category
of financial costs in s 59(f).
“Relating to
the actual use of the land”
third requirement is that the financial costs reasonably incurred or that might
reasonably be incurred must be “relating
to the actual use of the
land”. The “land” in s 59(f) is the acquired land:
Blacktown Council v Fitzpatrick Investments Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWCA 259
, [10], [35];
Mir Bros Unit Constructions Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic
Authority (NSW)
[2006] NSWCA 314
Roads and Traffic Authority
(NSW) v Peak
[2007] NSWCA 66
“use” of the land is the use by the person entitled to compensation,
not the use by the acquiring authority:
Almona Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic
Authority (NSW)
(2008) 160 LGERA 375
[2008] NSWLEC 112
use must be an “actual” use and not a potential future use:
Blacktown Council v Fitzpatrick Investments Pty Ltd
at [5], [26]-[27];
Mir Bros Unit Constructions Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic Authority (NSW)
expression “relating to” is of wide import:
Blacktown Council v
Fitzpatrick Investments Pty Ltd
the actual use of the acquired land by the person entitled to compensation is
terminated by the acquisition, the loss of an
opportunity to continue to use the
land (and any concomitant financial loss) is not a financial cost reasonably
incurred “relating
to the actual use of the land”, but rather
financial costs
relating to the actual use of the land. The actual
use has come to an end. Any financial costs incurred after the actual use has
terminated, including the loss of the opportunity to continue operating a
business on the land, cannot relate to the actual use of
the land (as Basten JA
observes at [16]).
“As a direct and natural consequence of
the acquisition”
fourth requirement is that the financial costs reasonably incurred must be
“as a direct and natural consequence of the acquisition”.
word “consequence” establishes a requirement for a causal connection
between the acquisition of the land and the incurring
of the financial costs.
Paragraph (f) only requires that the incurring of the financial costs be
“a” and not “the”
consequence of the acquisition and
hence does not demand that the incurring of the financial costs be the only
consequence of the
acquisition:
Blacktown Council v Fitzpatrick Investments
distinction needs to be drawn between the acquisition and the carrying out of
the public purpose for which the acquisition was undertaken.
The financial costs
incurred need to be a consequence of the acquisition not the public purpose: see
Roads and Traffic Authority (NSW) v Peak
adjectives “direct” and “natural” limit the compensation
payable for loss attributable to disturbance
under s 59(f) by reference to the
proximity and nature of the causal connection. The word “direct”
requires that there
be a direct relationship between the acquisition and the
incurring of the financial costs. A direct relationship is to be contrasted
an indirect relationship between the acquisition and the incurring of the
financial costs, where although the acquisition affects
the incurring of the
financial costs, it does not do so directly but rather through a third variable
or action. The word “natural”
refers to the ordinary course of
things or events. Together, the words “direct” and
“natural” confine the
required causal connection between the
acquisition and the incurring of the financial costs. Only those financial costs
incurred as a direct and natural consequence of the acquisition will
fall within the scope of s 59(f).
limitation imposed by the requirement that the financial costs be incurred as a
direct and natural consequence of the acquisition
operates to confine the
compensation payable to United in this case. As Sackville AJA points out (at
[117]-[120]), the loss of future
profits from the business that had operated on
the acquired land is not a “direct and natural consequence” of the
acquisition.
The closure of the business that had operated on the acquired land
might be a direct and natural consequence of the acquisition,
but the loss of a
perpetual stream of profits from the business, by United not being able to
operate the business on the land indefinitely,
is not a direct and natural
consequence of the acquisition. Rather, the forgoing of these profits is a
consequence of United’s
decision to conduct its business under a tenancy
at will terminable on one month’s notice. As Sackville AJA finds at [118],
since one month’s notice was required to terminate the tenancy at will, at
most only one month’s profits could be said
to be a “direct and
natural consequence” of the acquisition. The loss of profits for an
indefinite period after one month
is not a “direct and natural
consequence” of the acquisition, but of other causes, including
United’s arrangement
of its business affairs. This interposition of a
third variable or action between the acquisition and the incurring of the
costs results in there being only an indirect relationship, rather
than the required direct relationship, between the acquisition
and the incurring
of the financial costs.
Application of construction of s
construction of s 59(f) of the Just Terms Act that I have proffered differs from
that accepted in
George D Angus
(CA) in a number of respects. As the
primary judge rightly applied
George D Angus
(CA), it would follow that
if a different construction of s 59(f) is to be adopted, the primary
judge’s award of compensation
for the forgone profits of the business was
what I have proffered as the correct construction of s 59(f), financial losses,
such as loss of profits of a business, do
not necessarily fall outside the
scope of “any other financial costs” in s 59(f). However, any loss
of profits incurred
after the business was terminated (and the actual use of the
acquired land ceased) does not fall within s 59(f), as the incurring
financial loss was not “relating to the actual use” of the land or
“as a direct and natural consequence
of the acquisition”. The award
of compensation by the primary judge calculated as the capitalised value of a
notional perpetual
stream of profits from the business on the acquired land is
not maintainable.
Accordingly,
the orders of the primary judge awarding compensation for this claimed loss of
profits should be set aside and the claim
adjustment of rent
made a second claim for loss attributable to disturbance relating to the
occupation fee paid by United under s 34 of the Just
Terms Act in order to stay
in occupation of the acquired land for a period of 223 days. The total payment
of occupation fees for
this period exceeded the amount of rent that United would
have paid to its landlords under the prior arrangements by $82,956. The
judge awarded compensation to be paid by RMS to United in that amount.
agree with Basten JA, for the reasons he gives at [55]-[64], that the appeal
with respect to the award of compensation for the difference
between the
occupation fee paid and the rent that would have been paid if the prior
arrangements had continued should be allowed
and the award set
agree with Basten JA as to the costs of the proceedings in the Land and
Environment Court and in this Court.
agree with the orders proposed by Basten JA in [71].
06 March 2019 - [154] Italicising case citations.
07 March 2019 - [115] - Amending "declaration" to "acquisition" in quote.
Footnote 11 deleting comma after "Gavan".
Footnote 50 amending case citation to "Minister administering".
Footnotes 63 and 64 deleting square brackets from pinpoint references.
Footnote 62 - amending 252 to read 242, [1975] to [1957], Denning LJ and
deleting square brackets from pinpoint reference.
06 September 2019 - [67] - Adding citation end of paragraph.
[90] - Correcting citation in fn 38.
16 September 2019 - [141], [142], [145] and [163] - Amendments to
typographical errors.
Elmon Pty Ltd
v Roads and Maritime Services
[2016] NSWLEC 168
88 NSWLR 752
[2014] NSWCA 352
The primary change since August 2015 has been the removal of
the reference to “solatium” in s 55(e) and its replacement
“the disadvantage resulting from
relocation”.
The identical language is now s
Terms Act, s 4(1),
Walker Corporation Pty Ltd v Sydney Harbour Foreshore
(2008) 233 CLR 259
[2008] HCA 5
, [35] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
[1954] AC 475
[1941] HCA 37
[1916] HCA 48.
Aerated Water at 65-66 (Griffiths CJ), 70 (Barton J), 74, 77
(Isaacs J) and 83 (Gavan Duffy and Rich
Aerated Water at
[1907] HCA 82.
Aerated Water at
[2013] NSWLEC 212
205 LGERA 357 (Preston
George D Angus at [47]-[63] (Tobias AJA, Emmett and Leeming
JJA agreeing).
George D Angus at [39] (the submission), addressed at
Smalley v Motor Accident Authority of New South
(2013) 85 NSWLR 580
[2013] NSWCA 318
(Leeming JA); 2
Elizabeth Bay Road Pty Ltd v The Owners – Strata Plan No 73943
[2014] NSWCA 409
(Leeming JA); South Western Sydney Local
Health District v Gould
[2018] NSWCA 69
(Leeming JA); see also
Thiess v Collector of Customs
(2014) 250 CLR 664
[2014] HCA 12
eg, Peter Croke Holdings Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic Authority of NSW
at 44 (Bignold J), approved in McDonald v Roads and Traffic Authority
of New South Wales
[2009] NSWLEC 105
169 LGERA 352
170 LGERA 298
(Tobias JA, Allsop P and Sackville AJA
George D Angus at
George D Angus at
[2018] NSWCA 252
(Payne JA, Beazley P and I
[2006] NSWCA 314
(Handley JA
[2010] NSWCA 236
175 LGERA 276 (Tobias
JA, Giles and
Macfarlan JJA agreeing).
[2011] NSWCA 328
Basten JA at [37].
United Petroleum Pty Ltd v Roads and Maritime Services
NSWLEC 35 (Primary
Judgment) at
Primary Judgment at
Primary Judgment at [26];
Conveyancing Act 1919
See at [6] above.
contains “an exhaustive
list of the relevant matters”: Walker Corporation Pty Ltd v Sydney Harbour
Foreshore Authority
(2008) 233 CLR 259
[2008] HCA 5 (Walker)
Tolson v Roads and Maritime Services
[2014] NSWCA 161
(Beazley P), [83] (Basten JA). Cf Melino v Roads and
Maritime Services
[2018] NSWCA 251 (Melino)
(Basten JA), [72]-[73]
(Payne JA, Beazley P
Section 59(a)
defines “loss attributable to
disturbance” to include legal costs reasonably incurred in connection with
the compulsory
acquisition.
United Petroleum’s claim for legal costs pursuant to
(a) failed on the ground that the costs incurred related primarily
to the commencement and conduct of proceedings rather than in connection
the compulsory acquisition: Primary Judgment at
(1916) 22 CLR 56
[1916] HCA 48.
See at [21]-[23]
Melino at [56] (Beazley P agreeing), citing Marshall v
Director-General, Department of Transport
(2001) 205 CLR 603
HCA 37 (Marshall)
Marshall at [62] (McHugh J), quoted in Walker at
[2013] NSWLEC 212
205 LGERA 357 (George
D Angus (LEC)) at
[90], [95].
Health Administration Corporation v George D Angus Pty Ltd
(2014) 88 NSWLR 752
[2014] NSWCA 352 (George
Angus LEC at
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
91 ALJR 936
(Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ), [35]-[40]
(Gageler J).
Melino at [12] (Basten
[2009] NSWCA 391
170 LGERA 298
Sydney Water v Corporation v Caruso at
George D Angus(CA) at
Leichhardt Council v Roads and Traffic Authority (NSW)
149 LGERA 439
(Spigelman CJ, Beazley, Bryson and Basten
JJA, Campbell J agreeing).
El Boustani v Minister administering the
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act 1979
[2014] NSWCA 33
199 LGERA 198 (El
(CA)) at [76]-[80] (Preston CJ of LEC, Beazley P and Gleeson JA
El Boustani v Minister Administering the
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act 1979
[2012] NSWLEC 266 (El
Boustani (LEC)) at
[138]-[150].
El Boustani (LEC) at
El Boustani (CA) at
George D Angus (CA) at
George D Angus (CA) at [55], referring to El Boustani (CA) at
George D Angus (CA) at
Roads and Maritime Services v Allandale Blue Metal Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWCA 7
LGERA 307 (Allandale)
(Basten JA, Ward JA
Aerated Water at
63-64 (Griffith CJ).
Aerated Water at 70 (Barton
Law Reform Commission, Lands Acquisition and Compensation,
ALRC 14, 1980 (Lands Acquisition). The Second Reading Speech for the
Acquisition (Just Terms Compensation) Bill 1991 (NSW) stated that the
“extensive consultation process” that had
led to the Bill took into
account two State reports prepared in 1968 and 1978 and the more recent Law
Reform Commission report on
Lands Acquisition: New South Wales Parliamentary
Debates, Legislative Assembly, 11 April 1991,1975 (Mr WTJ Murray, Deputy
Minister for Public Works and Minister for
Lands Acquisition at 242 citing Harvey v Crawley Development
Corporation
[1957] 1 QB 485
at 493 (Denning
Lands (Acquisition and Compensation) Bill 1980 (Cth), cl 35(2)(d) in Lands
Acquisition at 210.
Lands Acquisition at
George D Angus (CA) at
Allandale at [45] (Basten JA), [92] (Sackville
Dillon v Gosford City Council
[2011] NSWCA 328
184 LGERA 179
(Basten JA, Macfarlan JA and Handley AJA
Dillon at [70]-[72].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (495 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter