URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2006/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gibson [2006] NSWPB 3 (10 May 2006)
[2006] NSWPB 3
Health Care Complaints Commission v Ellen Morea Gibson
10 May 2006
The complaint of professional misconduct alleged that the pharmacist had
supplied anabolic/androgenic steroids (AAS’s) for a
period of 2 years
(1998 – 2000) to various patients for a purpose that did not accord with
recognised therapeutic standards
in circumstances where the pharmacist knew or
ought to have known that the substances were abused. The AAS’s were
to have been supplied on prescriptions that did not comply with the
requirements of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Regulation) in that the supplies were made on defaced/altered prescriptions and
on prescriptions which did not contain an
interval of repeat. It was also
alleged that the pharmacist had failed to cancel such prescriptions when the
interval of supply
was not clearly specified or when the prescription had reach
the last occasion on which it could be supplied contrary to the Regulation.
pharmacist had been practising since 1970 in community pharmacy in the Northern
Rivers region of New South Wales and was the
sole proprietor of a community
pharmacy, which became Quality Care accredited in 2000. The pharmacist
introduced a system for cancellation
of prescriptions in 2000 and a dispensing
system which prompts for the compliance with the requirement for an interval of
for such AAS’s. The pharmacist has also engaged in continuing
education activities and does more counselling with her patients
conduct giving rise to this complaint occurred.
The pharmacist admitted that
she had supplied Halotestin during the subject period to 10 male persons, when
she was aware that the
only approved indication for that medication was for
palliative therapy for advanced breast cancer. The pharmacist had supplied the
AAS’s on the basis of the prescription alone, most of which were private
prescriptions and had resisted contacting the prescriber
because of his
The pharmacist conceded that
the prescriptions had been altered but thought that the prescriber had effected
the alterations. There
was no distinguishing mark on the prescriptions to
indicate that they had been made by the prescriber. However the particular was
based on the defacement of the prescriptions and there was no evidence of that
put the Inquiry. The Board is not satisfied that particular
The pharmacist displayed an
extremely cavalier attitude to the subject prescriptions dispensed and
substantially compromised her professional
obligations and responsibility to the
patient and the public in doing so. Although the pharmacist is contrite about
the breaches,
the Board is not satisfied that the pharmacist at the time of the
hearing fully accepted the seriousness of the breaches. The Board
considers that
the pharmacist is lacking in certain aspects of her professional knowledge and
requires remedial work and education.
The particulars of the
complaint, excepting particular 2 have been proved to the Board’s
reasonable satisfaction and professional
misconduct established in that the
pharmacist engaged in conduct that demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge,
judgment and care
in the practice of pharmacy and improper conduct.
The pharmacist was
reprimanded, fined the maximum amount and made the subject of extensive
educative orders including the compilation
of a written or computer based
protocol to assist effective communication with
prescribers.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on 15 December 2005 into a complaint of
professional misconduct made under the provisions of the
Pharmacy Act
") by Judge Kenneth Taylor AM, RFD, Nominal Complainant and Acting
Commissioner of the Health Care Complaints Commission
against Ellen
Morea Gibson
of 35 Woodlark Street, Lismore in the State of New South Wales being a
pharmacist registered in this State.
The Pharmacist was at all relevant times the sole owner of "Gibsons Amcal
That Ellen Morea Gibson is guilty of professional misconduct pursuant to
Section 19D(1)(c)
in that the Respondent has
engaged in conduct that
demonstrates a lack of adequate knowledge, judgment and/or care in the practice
of pharmacy, and/or has engaged
in improper or unethical conduct relating to the
practice of pharmacy.
PARTICULARS
During the period November 1998 to
November 2000 the Respondent supplied the restricted substances
(anabolic/androgenic steroids)
in the quantities to the patients set out in
Annexure A and for a purpose that did not accord with recognised therapeutic
in circumstances where the Respondent knew or ought to have known
that the substances were commonly abused for a non-therapeutic
During the period November 1998 to
November 2000 the Respondent dispensed supplies of restricted substances, namely
anabolic/androgenic
steroids on diverse occasions on prescriptions that appear
to have been defaced and/or altered, contrary to clause 42(1)(d) of the
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Regulation").
During the period November 1998 to
November 2000 the Respondent dispensed supplies of restricted substances, namely
anabolic/androgenic
steroids on diverse occasions set out in Annexure A on
prescriptions upon which the interval of repeat was not included on the
prescription
by the prescriber, contrary to clause 41(1) of the
Regulation.
During the period November 1998 to
November 2000 the Respondent when dispensing supplies of restricted substances,
namely anabolic/androgenic
steroids, as set out in Annexure A, failed to cancel
the prescriptions in ink when the intervals at which the substances may be
were not clearly specified, contrary to the requirements of the
provisions of clause 43(2)(b) of the
Regulation.
During the period November 1998 to
November 200 the Respondent when dispensing supplies of restricted substances,
namely anabolic/androgenic
steroids, as set out in Annexure A, failed to cancel
the prescriptions in ink when the prescriptions had reached the last occasion
which it could be supplied according to the maximum number of times specified on
it, contrary to the requirements of the provisions
of clause 43(2)(c) of the
Regulation.
The following documents were tendered by consent:
Exhibit 1 – Bundle of documents
comprising two volumes including, significantly, the Amended Complaint and
Annexure, an investigation
report of Mr Ken Thomson, patient records, extract
from MIMS, Section 40 letter from His Honour Judge Taylor, response by the
Respondent,
peer review report by Mr David North (unsigned and undated), and
the Certificate of Registration of the Respondent;
Exhibit 2 – Bundle of protocols
(tendered by the Respondent) including protocol issued by the Respondent in
1998, a Dispensary
Technicians Responsibility document, a Certificate of
Accreditation under the Quality Care Pharmacy Program, General Rules for the
Customer dated 2000, Gibson’s Amcal Chemist Pharmacy Staff Front of Shop
General Rules 2000, Pharmacists Responsibilities for
the Quality Care Program,
2000 QCP dealing with consulting with the customer, a series of prescriptions
relating to the Quality Care
Program, Ellen & John Gibson (John Gibson being
the Respondent’s husband and the pharmacy’s business
manager)position
description, position description of employees, 2003 Duties of
a Dispensary Assistant, Protocol Statement of Limitations of the
Duties of a
Dispensary Assistant 2003, training programs conducted by the Department of
Education and Training in respect of community
pharmacy, Certificates of
Completion of Dispensary Assistants;
Exhibit 3 – Bundle of testimonials
and other documents;
Exhibit 4 – Summary of Evidence in
support of Particular 2.
Exhibit 5 – Bundle of original
prescriptions;
A non-publication order was made by the Board in respect of the patients
referred to in these proceedings. Later in the findings,
patients have therefore
been referred to as patients X and Y.
The Respondent gave evidence.
The Respondent was registered to practice as a Pharmacist in 1970. Since
that registration she has practised community pharmacy exclusively
Northern Rivers region of New South Wales. In 1983 the Respondent purchased a
business known as "Gibsons Amcal Pharmacy"
in Lismore and in 1993 the senior
partner of that business retired and she became the sole proprietor of it. In
1996 she purchased
another pharmacy and amalgamated that business with her
pharmacy. For approximately three years after the purchase she dispensed
delivered to private and repat patients at St. Vincents Private Hospital in
Lismore. In 2003 the Respondent took in a partner.
The Respondent’s
husband works in the pharmacy as the General Manager.
The Respondent continues as a member of the Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia and the Pharmacy Guild of Australia. She was a member
of the Guild in
1996 and she read the Guild bulletins. She continues with accreditation as a
Quality Care Pharmacy since 2000.
The Respondent had come to the attention of the Board for a dispensing error
in 1998. She said this was from misreading a direction
on a prescription. The
Board required her to participate in the Quality Assurance Program as a result
of the dispensing error.
Some of the documents tendered at this inquiry were
prepared by the Respondent in response to the Board’s request for the 1998
dispensing error.
The Respondent confirmed she had not been the subject of any other notice by
the Pharmacy Board or the Commonwealth Authorities in
respect to the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, nor has she been since the
subject period of the complaint, being 1998 to 2000, the subject of any
proceedings for breaches of the
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods
Regulations.
The Respondent said she participates in continuing pharmacy education
programs, reads the AJP, The Pharmacist, Retail Pharmacy and
The Australian
Prescriber. She has been to a couple of conferences and lectures, medication
management review sessions, and watched
DVDs and videos.
The Respondent, when asked by her Counsel as to whether or not she could
identify anything which could account for the dispensing
of the substances, the
subject of paragraph
of the Complaint,
I can’t really identify anything. In 1998 I did hurt my back
dramatically. It still plays up and I am a diabetic. In June
2000 I went on
insulin. I was arguing with or trying to get my doctor to do something about
it, probably for a good 8 or 9 months
prior to that...I eventually forced the
issue, made the appointment with a specialist, went to my GP, told him what my
readings were
and he started me on insulin the next week. It takes a period of
adjustment so I hadn’t probably been fully aware of these
things happening
in the shop. I just cannot work out why I missed it. I should have picked it
up but I didn’t
The Respondent further said she did not have a pharmacist employed
permanently in the complaint period and she used locums. It was
hard to get
regular pharmacists. She re-fitted the pharmacy commencing on the long weekend
in June 2000, and it was completed in
November 2000.
In respect of the testimonials from Thomas George MP (member for Lismore) and
The Honourable Ian Causley MP, the Respondent said that
they were contacted
orally about the testimonial and that she also told them the nature of the
complaint. Indeed she said that all
of the authors of the testimonials were
aware of the matters bringing her before the Pharmacy Board.
The Respondent conceded that the prescriptions in paragraphs
of the complaint were not duly
cancelled. There is now a system in place dating from 2000 where they are all
cancelled. She accepted
the particulars in paragraph
that in supplying anabolic/androgenic
steroids on various occasions on repeats where there was not an interval for a
repeat was not
in compliance with the Regulations. The dispensing system now
prompts her with a reminder to comply with the requirement that there
interval of repeat for such medications. The Respondent said, however, that she
had the same dispensary system in the subject
complaint period but she doubted
whether it brought up the requirement as to repeat intervals. It included a
patient profile medication
The Respondent said that Dr Stewart was always very hard to contact by
telephone with most messages being relayed by his secretary
or his wife to him.
In all her years of practising she said:
We probably would not have spoken to Dr Stewart personally more than a
dozen times and that’s since 1972 when I first came to
Lismore. He just
did not take calls
The Respondent said she now only basically dispenses few anabolic steroids on
authority prescriptions. She said that Dr Stewart
The most prolific writer of scripts in Lismore
She said about Dr Stewart:
He will never use computers, never will, I don’t think. He just
writes any alterations, changes, straight over the top. One
can use an example of Temaze, that is not uncommon for him to write on a
pensioner’s script 25 or 100, 1 to
4 at night repeat 3. You ring him and
this doesn’t have to be Temaze. It could be anything in the prescribing
ring him and the message comes back he is just waiting for the rules
to change, but he just, as I said, writes over the top. It
used to be up to
between 10 and 20 items on a prescription.
The Respondent said when answering a question about the alteration alleged in
the prescription for (Patient X) dated 28 July 1999
for Andriol:
We would not have probably questioned that, because that is exactly how
he writes his scripts. If he finds – he just goes straight
over the top
and never initials anything
The prescription for Deca-Durabolin for Patient Y dated 16 December 1999 had
a notation in the corner to indicate that the Respondent
had actually telephoned
the Doctor to verify the authenticity of the prescription and that there was no
repeat of it. No repeat
was dispensed.
In cross-examination, the Respondent said she has worked as a Pharmacist
consistently since 1970 except for a few short breaks when
she was having
children. She agreed that:
a Pharmacist is required to know the
recognised therapeutic quantities and purposes for the use of particular
substances;
a Pharmacist is required to know the
indications and contraindications for the use of a
a Pharmacist must know the current abuses
including illegal uses, if any, of a substance;
a Pharmacist must consult with the person
to whom the substance is supplied to ensure amongst other things the quantity of
the substance
being supplied accords with recognised therapeutic standards of
what is appropriate in the circumstances;
there must be consultation with the
person to whom the substance is supplied as to the purpose for which the
substance is to be supplied
and that it accords with the recognised therapeutic
standards which are appropriate in the circumstances.
The Respondent said the earlier dispensing error previously dealt with
occurred at the end of June or early July 1998 as a result
of which she prepared
the protocols and that it was her intention that the practice would follow the
protocols once it had gone through
quality assurance. There was a delay in
going through the quality assurance because of the shop re-fit. She agreed it
was her intention
to commit to writing the way in which she would conduct
herself as a Pharmacist and her pharmacy in accordance with the protocols.
of the items in the document refers specifically to steroid prescriptions.
The Respondent said she thought that she had seen a sharp rise in the number
of prescriptions for steroids being presented to the
pharmacy from about
November 1998. The Respondent said she tried to follow her own protocols in
relation to supplying the steroids
and did not know why she did not:
I have thought about that often. It is just one of those
The Respondent said that the record of interview was mostly accurate although
there are some parts which may not be. In her record
of interview at Question
173 Ken Thomson said:
Are you aware that a Pharmacist must not supply (dispense) a restricted
substance referred to in Appendix B, like anabolic/androgenic
steroids more than
once if the prescription fails to specify the intervals at which the substance
may be supplied?
Ellen Gibson said:
Not until you told me.
When asked whether or not at the time of that question and answer was the
first time the Respondent became aware of the restrictions
applying to
anabolic/androgenic steroids the Respondent said:
Look I cannot remember now. I can’t say yes or no to
She said that the repeat interval issue was not something that she had turned
her mind to when she had prepared the protocol in which
she addressed the issue
of anabolic steroids.
The Respondent said that there may have been instances where the computer
defaulted to her initials when someone else dispensed the
medication. She
agreed however that it was ultimately her responsibility as having the overall
charge of the pharmacy to ensure
the protocols are properly followed. She could
not identify the particular prescriptions where she thinks she may not have
them when her initials appeared. She agreed that in her protocol one
of the matters in relation to steroid prescriptions involved
knowing the patient
and the local doctor, and if applicable to ask if the drug required was for a
medical reason.
In her record of interview at question 78 when asked what she understood to
be the approved indications for the prescription of Halotestin
the Respondent
Something to do with testosterone insufficiency
The Respondent was shown the relevant section of the PP Guide and was asked
by Ken Thomson at question 83:
Would you agree that the only approved indication for the prescription of
Halotestin tablets is for palliative therapy for advanced
The Respondent replied:
Ken Thomson said:
Why do you think (Patient X) was taking Halotestin tablets?
X was a male patient.
The Respondent replied:
I would have absolutely no idea.
In cross-examination as to what her understanding was of the use a patient
may make of taking Halotestin, she said:
I cannot remember what my understanding was.
When pressed, she replied:
Look I cannot remember.
She agreed subsequently that she knew that the drug was used for palliative
care of inoperable breast cancer. When asked whether
it occurred to the
Respondent that Patient X might not be a person who had inoperable breast cancer
requiring palliative care, the
Respondent replied:
It may not have been but he easily could have been too. It is not
unusual for men to get breast cancer.
Did you ask him about that?
He was asked whether he was taking it for a medical reason. We were all
fairly aware of the privacy laws at that stage and if they
considered we should
not know the reason we were not told the reason. Dr Stewart would not even tell
us the reason.
The Respondent said she had no proof of asking Patient X but she said:
But all of these patients were asked at one time or another what they
were taking it for. As I said, most of them would reply that
that was not for
me to know, that they had visited a doctor and he had been discussed with
She said that she had thought about it since and it was a policy to ask them
all but she cannot prove any of that.
She agreed that she had supplied Halotestin over the subject period of the
complaint to at least ten males. She said it never occurred
to her that
Halotestin was often used by persons for non-therapeutic purposes, including
sporting activities such as body building.
She said she should have been more
conscious of it and referred to the Guild Bulletin of 1996. However, in the
record of interview
when asked whether she recalled having read the article from
March 1996 her answer was:
Not back that far, no.
She said she would have read the report but the details of it were not fresh
and current in her mind.
The Respondent was asked:
Would it be fair to say you were prepared to supply on the basis that
this was in the prescription and you would just trust that the
doctor had made
the correct decision?
Well, you assume that with most medications
The Respondent said:
we are now trained to think, to look at your drug interactions and look
at their profiles and sum up different things, but from ’98
onwards those
protocols were still, or that training was only still coming forward for the
older pharmacists, so you always believed
that the prescriber was ethical and
knew what he was prescribing for".
The Respondent said that she could not recall her thoughts back in those
She said that "
all these dispensings were for local people and all by
basically the one prescriber
." The Board notes that this was not always the
case as many came from other environs.
The Respondent offered that:
When [Patient Z] moved to Coffs Harbour there were some that came with
[Patient Z] from Coffs Harbour
She said that it probably caused her some concern at the time but she could
not remember exactly how much concern or whatever. She
was comprehensively cross
examined on the dispensing of the various drugs and her response was often that
she could not recall a
lot about that period of time. She said that she never
got any satisfaction from ringing Dr Stewart. She said that she would not
questioned that they were altered by Dr Stewart. She said that they pick up
other forgeries from other doctors. She said that:
you do get to know all your doctors’ handwriting and their general
prescribing habits and if there is anything we thought was
unusual we would have
phoned the prescriber and often did."
It did not strike her as unusual that there was a rapid increase in the
prescriptions for steroids from November 1998 to November
2000. She assumed that
they came around after the other pharmacist left town. She cites her bad back
and the high sugar levels for
not being able to focus and agreed that she did
not raise these issues with Mr Thomson or in her response to the complaint.
The Respondent said that participating in the Quality Care Pharmacy Program
has changed the way she practices pharmacy. As the protocols
are written down
she can refer to them and so can the staff. She does a lot more counseling with
the patients and she does not take
what the prescriber says on face value. She
engages in continuing education and has become an accredited pharmacist. She
the doctors. She said that she would now question every prescription
that came over the counter. She said that she is prepared to
undertake a course
of relevant education and study reasonably available to her, nominated by the
Board to satisfy it and the Commission
of her continuing fitness and competence.
She did not provide the authors of the testimonials with a copy of the amended
She could not recall telling the authors that the breaches occurred
over a period of two years nor did she tell them about the number
of patients
and the prescriptions involved. They were private prescriptions.
Counsel for the Complainant made the following points in her submissions:
That there should be a finding of
professional misconduct;
That the Respondent
be reprimanded and fined $4400.00;
Respondent attend an educational course regarding the appropriate dispensing of
anabolic steroids such course to be approved
by the Board and completed within 6
months of the order, the costs to be borne by the Respondent and the Respondent
to notify the
Board of satisfactory completion of the
That the Respondent was aware of her
professional obligations following the complaint that was dealt with in mid 1998
but that her
own protocol was not
That the Respondent found Dr
Stewart difficult to deal with and that she could not explain why she did not
to altered, defaced or unusual
prescriptions;
That the prescriptions coming
from Coffs Harbour did not, but should have, made alarm bells
That the Respondent has not shown that
she has a true insight in relation to the importance of practices with respect
The Board accepts these submissions.
Counsel for the Respondent made the following points in his submissions:
That the Respondent dropped the
That the Respondent has made
admissions in good faith and was offering reasons in the diabetes and the back
complaint, not excuses;
That the breaches
took place five to seven years ago, now eight years
That the Respondent has practiced
without blemish since the breaches;
Respondent conceded particulars 1,3,4 and
That the Respondent did not concede
particular 2;
In this regard counsel says
that the Board should have regard to the evidence of the Respondent on this
point and the fact that there
is no evidence to the contrary before the
That the Respondent will participate
in an educational course provided that it is relevant to the subject matter of
the complaint;
That the Respondent will
accept that a reprimand is
appropriate;
That a monetary penalty is not
appropriate, nor is it required to send a message to the
profession;
That the Respondent would write
an essay on her attitude towards her responsibility of establishing the
appropriate connection between
the medication prescribed and the
The Board accepts these submissions except for that submission set out in
paragraph 10.
The Board notes that it is to be provided with a signed copy of the amended
complaint. At the time of publication of these findings
and orders the Board has
not received this document. The signed original complaint became exhibit 6.
Particular 2 as pleaded refers to clause 42(1)(d) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods
1994 and refers to the prescriptions
being defaced and/or altered. The Respondent conceded that the prescriptions had
been altered.
She said in evidence that it had not occurred to her that they
could have been altered by anyone other than by Dr Stewart.
The prescriptions are in evidence and have been examined by the Board. The
Board finds on the evidence that the prescriptions had
been altered rather than
defaced. In relation to the issue of who had made the alterations to the
prescriptions the Board notes that
there does not appear to be any
distinguishing mark made by the doctor or any other sign to indicate that the
alterations were made
We have heard from the Respondent as to her history of dealing with the
issuing medical practitioner. The Respondent gave evidence
she recognised Dr Stewart’s handwriting and that she knew his prescribing
habits. The respondent said that
it did not strike her as unusual that there was
a rapid increase in the number of prescriptions from November 1998 to November
when another pharmacist left Lismore.
In the Respondent’s submission, someone from the complainant’s
investigation team should have checked with the "prescriber"
to ascertain if he
had made the alterations and that the Board should have regard to evidence of
the Respondent alone on this point
together with the fact that there is no
evidence to the contrary before the Board. The Board is not satisfied on the
evidence that
the prescriptions were altered by the issuing medical
practitioner. However, the Board notes that:
cl 42(1)(d) refers to when a prescription
for a restricted substance is "defaced". There is no qualification provided in
clause. It does not refer to alterations;
cl 42(1)(f) then provides for these
prescriptions to be "altered" by the issuing medical practitioner. The sub
clause provides a qualification.
In the course of the hearing the
Complainant appears to have blended the two sub clauses of 42(1)(d) and
The Complainant has moved on cl 42(1)(d) and not cl 42(1)(f). An amendment
was not sought to Particular 2 in the course of the hearing.
The Board is not
comfortably satisfied that Particular 2 has been proved.
The Board accepts that the Respondent is contrite about the breaches.
The Board notes that the Respondent has worked in the profession for a very
long time without blemish apart from the current matter
and the earlier one in
The Board is not satisfied that the Respondent at the time of the hearing was
fully accepting of the seriousness of the breaches and
the ramifications of
them. The Board considers that the Respondent is lacking in aspects of her
professional knowledge and requires
remedial work and education.
The Board is critical of the way in which the Respondent was practicing in
the pharmacy over the subject period. The Respondent displayed
an extremely
cavalier attitude to the prescriptions she dispensed and substantially
compromised her professional obligations and
responsibility to the patient and
the public in doing so. The Respondent failed to follow her own protocols and
the Board is left
to wonder if the protocols were only created to assist her in
dealing with the 1998 matter. By her actions the Respondent placed
little weight
on the value and importance of the protocols and proper systems and her conduct
was improper and not what the public
should be able to expect from an
experienced and senior pharmacist.
The Board finds that the Respondent resisted contacting Dr Stewart because of
his manner and did so risking her professionalism.
Mention was made in the evidence of the Respondent being in a position to
compile a written or computer based protocol in relation
to communications with
prescribers. The Board proposes to order this be done.
Having considered the totality of the evidence, including the admissions of
the Respondent and the objective seriousness of the breaches,
the Board is
comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities"
Bannister v
(1993) 30NSWLR699) that all the particulars of the complaint, with
the exception of particular 2, have been proved to its reasonable
satisfaction
and that the conduct constitutes professional misconduct, in that the Board
finds that the Respondent has engaged in:
Conduct that demonstrates a lack of
adequate knowledge, judgment and care in the practice of pharmacy and
Other improper conduct related to the
practice of pharmacy.
This is not a punitive jurisdiction, it is a protective one. The Board is
concerned to protect the public, to deter other pharmacists
from committing the
same breaches and to engender public confidence in the profession. The Board
considers that the imposition of
a fine in this case is appropriate. The Board
finds that conditions in respect of continuing professional education,
memberships
with professional associations and as referred to earlier, the
preparation of a protocol in relation to communications with prescribers,
appropriate. The Board feels that a significant part of that education should be
carried out in contact with other members of
her profession.
Accordingly, the Board makes the following orders pursuant to
Pharmacy Act
That Ellen Gibson is
reprimanded;
That Ellen Gibson is required to
complete, in each of the years 2006, 2007 and 2008 at least 30 hours of
continuing professional
education (CPE), of which at least 15 hours of each year
is to be in lecture, seminar, workshop or other contact activity. At the
conclusion of each year the Respondent is to submit to the Pharmacy Board a
report of the CPE she has completed during that year.
That Ellen Gibson is required to present,
within three months of the date of these Orders, to the satisfaction of a panel
of pharmacists
nominated by the Pharmacy Board, a one hour tutorial on the legal
and professional responsibilities of a pharmacist in dispensing
Prescription
Only medications, showing how procedures in place in her pharmacies ensure that
these responsibilities are met at all
That Ellen Gibson is fined the sum of
That Ellen Gibson is required to prepare
a paper of at least 2000 words discussing the dangers of inappropriate use of
anabolic steroids,
the legal responsibilities of a pharmacist when dispensing
anabolic steroids and the responsibilities of a pharmacist to establish
appropriate connection between the medication prescribed and the
A copy of that paper is to be provided to the Board within six months of the
date of these Orders.
That Ellen Gibson is to compile, and
provide to the Board within three months of the date of these Orders, a written
or computer based
protocol in relation to effective means of communications with
prescribers.
The costs of complying with these Orders are to be met by the pharmacist.
The effective date of these Orders will be one month from the date on which
Ellen Gibson is notified by registered post at her address
as it appears on the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (143 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter