URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/265.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARM v AAMI Ltd (Merit Review) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 265 (24 November 2020)
DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE
ARM v AAMI (Merit Review)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Merit Review
Loss of earning capacity – likely to be of a permanent nature –
weekly benefits to persons residing outside Australia
– casual Food and
Beverage Attendant – PAWE – claimant left Australia to reside with
his family – significant
injuries – no fitness for any time of work
6-12 months – physiotherapy and rehabilitation – recovery is good
doing light work – currently an Office Assistant in his father’s
restaurant business – require further surgery
– exceptional
circumstances.
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
ss 3.21(2)(a)
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
Motor Accident Guidelines 2017 cls 7.70.10, 7.73
Cases Cited
AAT v Allianz Insurance Ltd
[2018] NSWDRS MR 20
ABO v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
[2019] NSWDRS MR 41
San v Rumble (No 2)
(2007) NSWCA 259
Yacoub v Pilkington (Australia) Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 290
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
ARM – Claimant
AAMI - Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
OTHER MATTER ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Issued in accordance with
section 7.2(3)
Motor Accident Injuries Act
and clauses 7.70.10 and 7.73 of
Motor Accident Guidelines
Determination of a matter under
Date of Accident
13 July 2018
DRS Reference
DRS Decision Maker
Maurice Castagnet
Date of Decision
24 November 2020
Conference date and time
Assessment on the papers
Claimant representative
Mahen Manokarathas of Slater and Gordon
Insurer representative
The findings of the assessment of this Other Matter are as
subsection 3.21(2)(a)
and for the purposes of
section 3.21
claimant’s loss of earnings as a result of the motor accident on 13 July
2018 is likely to be of a permanent nature.
Date: 9 December 2019.
Costs: The amount of the claimant’s costs assessed is $1,660 plus
A brief statement of my reasons for this determination is
attached to this certificate.
Maurice Castagnet
DRS Decision Maker
Dispute Resolution Services
REASONS FOR DECISION – OTHER MATTER ASSESSMENT
Issued in accordance with section 7.2(3) of
Motor Accident Injuries Act
This determination relates to a matter arising under Section
3.21(2)(a) of the Motor Accidents Injuries Act 2017 about whether the
claimant’s loss of earnings is likely to be of a permanent nature (Weekly
benefits to persons residing outside Australia).
INTRODUCTION
1. In his application to the Dispute
Resolution Service (DRS), the claimant had categorised the dispute submitted for
determination
as a “Merit Review Matter” and the dispute type was
described as “Weekly benefits outside Australia”.
2. The matter
was referred to me by DRS as a Merit Review Matter to review a reviewable
decision under Schedule 2(1)(g) of the Motor
Accident Injuries Act 2017 (the
3. On 2 October 2020, I conducted a teleconference to seek further
information from the parties about the nature of the dispute.
established it was common ground between the parties that the claimant has been
residing outside Australia since 9 December 2019
and he is currently awaiting
approval of a visa to return to Australia.
5. I established that the issue
to be determined in this application was whether the claimant is entitled to
receive weekly payment
of statutory benefits while he is residing outside of
6. To be so entitled, there must first be a determination by DRS
under s 3.21(2)(a) of the Act about whether the claimant’s
earnings is likely to be permanent in nature.
7. The parties acknowledged
that the conduct of an internal review would not be of any utility and agreed
that the issue should be
referred directly to DRS for determination.
Decision Maker appointed under the Act, I have authority to proceed to determine
the matter as an “Other Matter”
under Section 7(2)(3) of the Act and
Clauses 7.70.10 and 7.73 of the Motor Accident Guidelines 2017(Version 5)
(“the Guidelines”).
BACKGROUND TO THE CLAIM
claimant is a 28-year old man who suffered injuries in a motor accident on 13
14 October 2018, the claimant made an
Application
for Personal Injury Benefits
for payment of statutory benefits which was
received by the insurer on 15 October 2018. Personal Injury Benefits are
statutory benefits
that include weekly payments for loss of earnings and the
cost of reasonable and necessary treatment. The claimant claimed both.
at the date of the motor accident, the claimant was employed as a casual Food
and Beverages Attendant at the XXX, Woolloomooloo.
12 November 2018, the insurer made a determination of the claimant’s
pre-injury weekly earnings (PAWE) in the amount of $1,247.18.
8 November 2018, the claimant received weekly payments of statutory benefits of
$997.74 per week representing 80% of his PAWE,
in accordance with s 3.8 of the
claimant was not entitled to receive weekly payments of statutory benefits prior
to that date because his claim was not received
by the insurer within 28 days of
the motor accident in conformity with s 6.13(2) of the Act.
15 January 2019, the insurer issued a
notice- benefits after 26 weeks
denying liability for payment of any
statutory benefits after 26 weeks from the date of the motor accident pursuant
to ss 3.11 and
3.28 of the Act on the basis that the claimant was wholly or
mostly at fault in the motor accident.
9 December 2019, the claimant left Australia to reside in India with his family.
He intended to return to Australia once his skilled
work visa was approved.
25 February 2020, DRS set aside the insurer’s liability decision of 15
January 2019 and determined that the claimant was
not mostly at fault in the
motor accident.
Consequently,
the claimant’s entitlement to payments of statutory benefits after 26
weeks from the date of the motor accident
was reinstated.
DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED
have considered the documents provided in the application, the reply and the
further documents provided by the parties during the
THE CLAIMANT’S INJURIES AND THE MEDICAL EVIDENCE
claimant suffered significant injuries in the motor accident. He was admitted to
St George Hospital for treatment and surgery.
He remained in hospital for 13
days until discharged on 25 November 2018.
to the report of his treating Orthopaedic Surgeon in Australia, Dr S.P Tan dated
1 July 2020, his physical injuries included:
a displaced
fracture of his right wrist that required pinning with a Zimmer screw,
a comminuted
fracture of his left fourth metacarpal base which required a hard T-Plate and
multiple screws,
a fracture of
the fifth left metacarpal which required reduction with a K-wire, and
a segmental
fracture of the right femur which was reduced with pins and plate with the
femoral shaft fracture fixated with a retrograde
Zimmer nail that by-passed the
hip plate to the proximal femur and locked distally and
proximally.
Certificate of Fitness
dated 29 August 2018, the claimant’s
nominated treating doctor, Dr Joyce Voon certified that he had no fitness for
of work until at least 13 January 2019. Dr Voon estimated that the
claimant would not be fit for any type of work for 6-12 months.
a report dated 14 March 2019, Dr Tan reported that the claimant was seen that
day and was doing very well after suffering multi-trauma
in the accident. He
noted that the claimant had returned to work in the hospitality industry. He
noted that the claimant complained
presence of the screws in the right distal femur. He was of the opinion that
physiotherapy
would be required for a year or beyond and that in a year’s
time, he would look at repeat x-rays to consider the removal of
the screws.
a medical certificate dated 3 February 2020 from Bhanavi Hospital, Mysore,
India, the reporting medical officer stated that the
claimant has been attending
the hospital for regular follow-ups. The claimant has received treatment for the
right neck of the femur,
right hip, right shaft femur, right scaphoid fracture
and fractures of 4th, 5th metacarpal bones on the left hand. He is undergoing
physiotherapy and rehabilitation through therapists recommended by the hospital.
When examined on 23 January 2020, the claimant was
advised to carry out light
work only and to avoid strenuous work involving excessive walking and lifting
his report dated 1 July 2020, Dr Tan said that the claimant would likely require
the removal of the screws in the right distal
femur and that he should return
for review in September 2020. A decision could then be made whether the surgery
could proceed in
October or November 2020.
13 October 2020, the claimant’s treating Orthopaedic Surgeon in India, Dr
H Umesh provided a
Certificate of Fitness
. He stated that the claimant
has been undergoing physiotherapy and rehabilitation at his clinic since 23
January 2020. He is of the
opinion that the claimant’s recovery is good
for doing light work and avoiding lifting weight, bending and walking long
He states that the claimant has capacity for that type of work for 8
hours a day, 5 days a week from 13 October 2020.
THE CLAIMANT’S WORK HISTORY SINCE THE MOTOR
to the pay slips from XXX produced at [R8], the claimant was working on average,
40.45 hours per week in the 22 weeks from
2 January 2018 to 10 July 2018.
insurer has calculated his PAWE in the amount of $1,247.18 gross per week based
on earnings for the period between 17 July 2017
and 10 July 2018.
than six months after the motor accident, on 24 January 2019, the claimant
returned to work as a guest service agent, with YYY
Hotel, Sydney. His duties
were to answer phone calls. Depending on the business requirements, he worked
between 20 and 35 hours per
week earning about $736.41 gross per week. He left
this employment on 27 March 2019 to relocate to Adelaide for his work visa
requirements.
23 April 2019, the claimant commenced employment with ZZZ Restaurant, Adelaide
as a waiter. He worked 10 to 15 hours per week and
earned about $201.74 gross.
His duties included taking orders, serving tables, taking payments, lifting
chairs and tables back into
the restaurant at the end of the night, helping to
get stock from the stock room and disposing of linen and garbage to the
areas. His employment was terminated on 20 May 2019. In that regard
the claimant stated: “
As I had not mentioned to them about my leg
condition they felt I was too slow for the job as it is a fast-paced restaurant
chef wanted me gone. Hence I was fired
the end of May 2019, the claimant commenced employment with WWW Steak House,
Glenelg, South Australia as a restaurant manager.
He worked 38 to 45 hours per
week and earned about $1,009.61 gross. His employment was terminated on 22
October 2019. The claimant
Management and owners felt that I
was too slow and were not happy with my performance
So they fired me
just before my probation was over.”
9 December 2019, the claimant returned to India to reside with his family. He is
now awaiting approval of a visa to return to Australia.
Certificate of Fitness
dated 13 October 2020, the claimant states
that he is currently an Office Assistant in his father’s restaurant
business. In
the employment declaration contained in that in that certificate
(which includes a declaration of any volunteer work) the claimant
My job is majorly an office job which is not very stressful on my
legs. I just call and organise things for the restaurant, like being
with suppliers, accounting work and checking and tallying liquor and food stock.
I can take a break or rest
when I please unlike a normal restaurant job
or any other job as I can concentrate on my recovery
SUBMISSIONS
insurer made its submissions first and the claimant replied to those
submissions. I shall refer to the parties’ submissions
in the order that
they were made.
The insurer’s submissions
insurer’s submissions may be summarised as follows.
the proper construction of the legislation, the insurer relies on the decision
AAT v Allianz Insurance Ltd
[2018] NSWDRS MR 020, for the proposition
that s 3.21 concerns “loss of earnings” not “loss
of capacity”
and on the decision of
ABO v QBE Insurance (Australia)
[2019] NSWDRS MR 041 for the proposition that “likely”
loss means that the loss is not expected to change for an indefinite
the Initial Needs Assessment report of Keystone Professionals dated 10 December
2018 it was stated that the claimant was making
very good progress. The claimant
was reported to have unrestricted neck, shoulder, finger and thumb capabilities.
The lower limb
was reported to have full right knee movement although there was
a feeling of screws at full flexion range. The claimant reported
that he was
independent in personal care activities and was able to do his own cleaning,
washing up, bed making, laundry, cooking
and tidying. The claimant reported he
could walk unaided within his apartment and overall his walking balance and
tolerance had improved.
He was able to walk very short
the second Allied Health Recovery Request dated 11 February 2019, the
claimant’s physiotherapist assessed the claimant as
fit for suitable
duties and hours and for working part-time in hospitality. The claimant was
reported to be able to be independent
with pain in sitting and standing. The
Claimant was able attend the gym, exercise, run and do cardio with some
his report dated 14 March 2019, Dr S.P. Tan, Orthopaedic Surgeon reported that
the claimant was doing very well and has returned
to work in the hospitality
industry. The insurer submits that this is the last medical report on file and
it does not accurately
depict the claimant’s recovery to date.
any event, there is enough information to determine the claimant now has full
capacity to work with no restrictions. The insurer
submits that since the motor
accident the claimant was able to return to work in several jobs until October
2019 and his employment
was terminated on the basis of other factors and not
because of the injuries he sustained in the motor accident or any physical
capacity issues.
the claimant is officially unemployed, he is able to do voluntary work in his
father’s business by engaging in duties
such as accounting and stock
ordering. This demonstrates that there is no issue with the claimant’s
physical functional capacity
claimant’s current unemployment status does not result from the motor
accident injuries and therefore does not constitute
entitlement to weekly
payments of statutory benefits. On that basis, the potential for weekly benefits
to be paid whilst overseas
does not arise.
claimant left Australia on his own volition with the intention of returning and
is currently unemployed due to unrelated reasons.
is no demonstration of a loss of earnings likely to be permanent in nature as a
result of the motor accident.
The claimant’
submissions
claimant’s submissions in reply may be summarised as follows.
the issue is about whether the claimant is likely to suffer loss of earnings,
not loss of earning capacity, an assessment on capacity
is not required for the
purposes of this dispute.
only requirement of ss 3.21(2)(a) to be satisfied is that there has been a
permanent loss of earnings in the sense that the claimant
has lost earnings
which he will never recover.
claimant is entitled to receive weekly payment of statutory benefits when
residing overseas, provided he meets the criteria in
s 3.21. It is irrelevant
whether the claimant chose to move overseas. In any event, the claimant moved
overseas after he lost his
job which turn caused by the restrictions imposed by
his injuries.
3.21(2)(a) does not refer to any loss of earning ‘capacity’, but
only loss of earnings. Whether there will be
any payment for future loss of
capacity is not a relevant consideration. It is the loss of earnings that has
to be considered in
terms of permanency rather than any permanent loss of
earning capacity.
LEGISLATION
making my decision, I have considered the following legislation and
guidelines:
Accident Injuries Act
(NSW) (“the Act”)
Accident Injuries Regulation 2017 (“
the Regulation
Accident Guidelines 2017 –
effective 20 December
the Guidelines”)
CONSIDERATION
sole issue for me to determine in this matter is whether the claimant’s
loss of earnings is likely to be of a permanent nature.
is a threshold issue which determines whether the claimant is entitled to
receive any weekly payment of statutory benefits in
respect of any period during
which he resides outside Australia.
set out below the provisions of the Act that are relevant to this
determination.
Section 3.21 provides as follows –
Weekly statutory benefits to persons residing outside Australia
(1) An injured person who resides outside Australia is not entitled to
receive any weekly payment of statutory benefits in respect
of any period during
which the person resides outside Australia, except as provided by this section
when the loss of earnings in
respect of which statutory benefits are payable is
likely to be of a permanent nature.
(2) An injured person residing outside
Australia is entitled to receive on a quarterly basis the amount of the weekly
payments accruing
due during the preceding quarter if —
(a) the Dispute Resolution Service has determined that the injured
loss of earnings is likely to be of a permanent nature
(b) the person establishes, in such manner and at such intervals
as may be required by the Motor Accident Guidelines, the person’s
and the continuance of the loss of earnings in respect of which the weekly
payment is payable.
[emphasis added]
Clause 3(1) of the Act defines
loss of earnings
as follows -
Meaning of “loss of earnings”
Loss of earnings
a loss incurred
or likely to be incurred
in a person’s income from personal
(2) A person’s
income from personal
(a) the amount that is the
income of the person consisting of
earnings, salaries, wages,
commissions, fees, bonuses, pensions, retiring
allowances and retiring gratuities, allowances and gratuities received in the
of employee or in relation to any services rendered, and
(b) the proceeds of any business carried on by the person either
alone or in partnership with any other person, and
(c) any amount received as bounty or subsidy in carrying on a
[emphasis added]
have read both parties’ submissions on how the determination of the issue
should be approached and make the following observations:
is no controversy about the parties’ submissions that my determination
should be concerned with the claimant’s
loss of earnings
his “loss of capacity”. That is made clear by s 3.21. The phrase
“loss of capacity” does not feature
in that section of the
legislation.
(b) I do not accept the claimant’s submission that the only requirement
of ss 3.21(2)(a) to be satisfied is that there has been
a permanent loss of
earnings in the sense that the claimant has lost earnings which he will never
recover. That is not the correct
approach in my view.
(c) The insurer submits that the most up-to-date
medical report on its file was the report Dr S.P. Tan, Orthopaedic Surgeon dated
14 March 2019. On that basis, it appears that the insurer took the view that the
claimant had not been receiving any further treatment
or rehabilitation and
concluded that – “there is enough information to determine the
claimant now has full capacity to
work with no restrictions”. I reject
that submission. Looking at the insurer’s own document [R21], it is
apparent that
the insurer was in possession of more contemporaneous medical
evidence in the report of Dr Tan dated 1 July 2020, as at 20 September
it has failed to take it into account in reaching its conclusion.
1, Clause 3(1) of the Act defines
loss of earnings
a loss incurred or likely to be incurred in a person’s income
from personal exertion.”
question to be addressed in ss 3.21(2)(a) is whether there is a loss of
earnings, and if so, whether the loss is likely to be
of a permanent nature.
determination of the extent of loss is not required. “
Permanent in
” is not defined in the Act. It should therefore be given its
ordinary meaning. Something is said to be permanent if it is durable,
long-lasting, static or likely to continue without change for an indefinite
period of time.
my view, the question may be answered by looking at:
evidence concerning the nature and extent of the claimant’s injuries,
(b) the claimant’s work history since the motor accident, and
(c) the medical evidence concerning the claimant’s fitness for work.
medical evidence and the claimant’s work history, as outlined above,
establish that the claimant has continued to lose earnings
since the accident.
There have been periods of total loss of earnings and periods of partial loss of
following matters lead me to conclude that the claimant’s loss of earnings
is likely to be of a permanent nature:
claimant suffered serious physical injuries. These required a lengthy stay in
hospital. He has undergone various surgical procedures
for several fractures.
Some hardware has been removed and some hardware is still in place.
orthopaedic surgeon in Australia, Dr Tan, and his orthopaedic surgeon in India,
Dr Umesh, have advised that he will require further
surgery in the near future
to remove the hardware in the right femur.
rehabilitation program includes orthopaedic supervision, physiotherapy and other
treatments. The program is still in progress
more than two years after the motor
accident. There is no medical evidence to suggest that it is likely to be
completed in the foreseeable
difficulties described by the claimant in his post accident employments indicate
that he is unable to cope with work in a fast-paced
environment for long hours
as he did before the accident.
claimant’s employment has been terminated on two occasions after the
accident because he was too slow.
claimant has been unable to achieve his pre-accident earnings in any employment
undertaken since the accident.
Certificate of Fitness
issued by Dr Umesh on 13 October 2020 states that
the claimant in unfit for his pre-injury work and only has capacity for some
work avoiding the lifting of weights, bending and walking for long
the basis of the above matters, it is highly likely that the claimant’s
loss of earnings is of a permanent nature.
therefore find that the claimant’s loss of earnings as a result of the
motor accident on 13 July 2018 is likely to be of a
claimant has made an application for costs.
claimant’s submissions may be summarised as follows –
there is not a prescribed dispute in this matter under the Act, there are no
prescribed cost provisions to permit the claimant
to recover his legal costs in
bringing the matter before DRS.
8.10 of the Act provides for the recovery of costs and expenses in relation to
claims for statutory benefits. Subsection (4)(b)
provides that the DRS can
permit payment of legal costs incurred by a claimant only if ‘exceptional
circumstances’ exist
to justify payment of legal costs incurred by the
decision maker exercises the power of the DRS and accordingly, has the power to
permit payment of legal costs incurred by the
claimant that are not otherwise
provided by the regulations.
terms of what makes the circumstances exceptional in this matter are the
claimant resides overseas. That makes him amongst a small minority (or
exceptional class) in terms of the motor accident scheme.
claimants can sort out their entitlement to weekly benefits with the CTP insurer
without any intervention of supervision by DRS.
In this matter, the claimant
does not have the choice because s 3.21 mandates that there be application to
DRS for approval before
quarterly payments can be made. In circumstances where
the Act mandates such determination, then that is truly exceptional.
claimants who are resident abroad and are entirely unfamiliar with the Act
should be entitled to recover their legal costs of
the mandated
application.
the decision maker is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances that
justify the payment of legal costs, then the capacity
to recover costs is at
large. However, for the sake of minimising argument, the claimant is prepared
to accept what would be the
regulated fee applying to other categories of such
statutory benefits disputes.
insurer did not make any submissions in reply.
My determination
San v Rumble (No 2)
(2007) NSWCA 259
the Court of Appeal considered the
term ‘exceptional circumstances’ in the context of whether indemnity
costs could be
claimed under
Motor Accidents Compensation Act
. Campbell JA said at [67]:
In deciding whether it
“exceptional case”
within the meaning of
, the court needs to find that the circumstances of the instant case are
unusual or out of the ordinary, whether that unusualness
or being out of the
ordinary arises from qualitative or quantitative factors.
Yacoub v Pilkington (Australia) Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 290
, when dealing
with the phrase “exceptional circumstances” in the context of r
31.18(4) of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
, his Honour also added
the following: exceptional circumstances can include a single exceptional
matter, a combination of exceptional
factors, or a combination of ordinary
factors which, although individually of no particular significance, when taken
together are
seen as exceptional; in deciding whether circumstances are
exceptional within the meaning of a particular statutory provision, one
keep in mind the rationale of that particular statutory provision.
8.10(3) of the Act provides that the claimant is only entitled to recover
reasonable and necessary legal costs if payment
is permitted by the Regulation
8.10(4) of the Act provides that the DRS can permit payment of legal costs
incurred by the claimant if exceptional circumstances
exist to justify the
payment of those costs.
agree that the circumstances described in the claimant’s submissions give
rise to a single exceptional matter and I therefore
satisfied that exceptional
circumstances exist to justify the payment of the claimant’s reasonable
and necessary legal costs.
Accordingly,
I exercise my discretion pursuant to ss 8.10(4)(b) of the Act and permit the
claimant to recover his reasonable and necessary
costs from the insurer.
assess those costs in the amount of 16 monetary units which equates to $1,660
My determination of the Other Matter assessment is
as follows –
to subsection 3.21(2)(a) and for the purposes of section 3.21, the
claimant’s loss of earnings as a result of the motor
accident on 13 July
2018 is likely to be of a permanent nature.
9 December 2019.
The amount of the claimant’s costs assessed is $1,660 plus
Maurice Castagnet
DRS Decision Maker
Dispute Resolution Services
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.16 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter