URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/566.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cheng v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPIC 566; (21 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Cheng v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPIC
Andy Chiu Hung Cheng
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
SENIOR MEMBER:
Brett Williams
DATE OF DECISION:
21 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; miscellaneous
claims assessment; whether accident caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the
claimant for the purposes of
sections 3.11
; claimant collided with rear
of stationary vehicle on motorway; speed limit 110km/h; hazard lights on
stationary vehicle not activated;
Podrebersek v Australian Iron & Steel
(Podrebersek),
Axiak v Ingram
Allianz Australia Insurance
Limited v Shuk
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Evic
– the claimant’s ability to perceive stationary vehicle obscured
by vehicle in front; vehicle in front changed lanes suddenly;
claimant applied
brakes; claimant did not fail to exercise reasonable care in the circumstances;
accident not caused wholly or mostly
by the fault of the claimant; relative
culpability cannot be assessed in accordance with
Podrebersek
there are at least two culpable parties.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
the purposes of
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
accident on
1 October 2023 was not caused wholly or mostly by the fault of
the purposes of
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
accident on
1 October 2023 was not caused wholly or mostly by the fault of Mr
insurer is to pay the claimant’s costs in the sum of $4,062.40 plus
statement of my reasons for this determination are attached to this
certificate.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Chiu Hung Cheng (claimant) was injured in a motor vehicle accident on the Hume
Motorway at Wilton on 1 October 2023 (accident).
He subsequently made a claim
for statutory benefits under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
Act) on Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance (insurer).
insurer admitted liability for the first 52 weeks after the accident but denied
liability thereafter on the basis that the accident
was caused wholly by the
claimant’s fault: ss 3.11 and 3.28 MAI Act.
claimant disputes the accident was caused wholly or mostly by his fault and has
referred the disputes under ss 3.11 and 3.28 to
the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) for assessment. The disputes are miscellaneous claims assessment
matters: Sch 2 cl 3(d)
and (e) MAI Act.
CASE MANAGEMENT
Preliminary
conferences were held on 7 July 2025, 22 August 2025 and 15 September 2025. The
claimant was given leave to issue a direction
for production on NSW Police and
case management directions were made.
proceedings were initially set down for hearing on 28 August 2025. The hearing
was vacated because NSW Police had not produced
documents in response to the
direction for production served by the claimant. The hearing was set down for 17
October 2025 and proceeded
at that time.
matter proceeded to hearing on 17 October 2025. No oral evidence was called.
Some facts were agreed by the parties and are referred
to later in these
reasons. Oral submissions were made by each party.
were a number of facts in dispute, including the following:
(a) whether there was one or two vehicles in front of the claimant immediately
before the accident;
(b) the speed of the claimant’s vehicle at the time of the collision,
(c) when the claimant first became aware of the presence of a stationary vehicle
in his lane and the distance between the claimant’s
vehicle and the
stationary vehicle at that time.
insurer maintained that the accident was caused wholly by the claimant’s
fault. The claimant’s case was that there
was no fault on his part.
STATUTORY FRAMEWORK
injured person is not entitled to statutory benefits under Part 3 of the MAI Act
more than 52 weeks after the motor accident concerned
if the accident was caused
wholly or mostly by the fault of the person: ss 3.11(1)(a) and 3.28(1)(a).
motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of a person if the contributory
negligence of the person in relation to the motor
accident, as referred to in s
3.38, was greater than 61%: ss 3.11(2) and 3.28(2) of the MAI Act.
3.11 and 3.28 are directed at the extent to which the injured person’s
failure to take reasonable care contributed
to the motor accident and are
concerned with contributory negligence not for the injury, but for the motor
accident, in a manner
that accommodates all types of motor accidents:
Limited t/as GIO v Evic
[2024] NSWSC 1272
) at [57] .
common law and enacted law as to contributory negligence that applies to an
award of damages in respect of a motor accident applies:
a finding of contributory negligence made in these proceedings, is to be
assessed as a percentage that reflects what the Commission
determines is just
and equitable in the circumstances of the case, none of the circumstances
referred to in s 3.38(2) being relevant,
and there being no percentage fixed by
the regulations: s 3.38(3)(c).
enacted law includes Div 8 of Pt 1A of the
Civil Liability Act 2002
Act). Section 5R(1) of the CL Act provides that the principles that apply in
determining whether a person has been negligent
also apply in determining
whether the person who suffered harm has been contributorily negligent in
failing to take precautions against
the risk of that harm. Section 5R(2)(a)
provides that, for that purpose, the standard of care required of the person who
harm is that of a reasonable person in the position of that
burden of proving the accident was caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the
claimant lies with the insurer. It is for the insurer
to lead evidence which not
only establishes the basis of its decision in relation to the claimed statutory
benefits, but also persuades
the Commission that on all of the evidence, it can
be concluded the accident was caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA v Richards
[2023] NSWSC
) at [45], [55] and [67].
REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE
evidence relied on by the parties is contained in a joint bundle filed on
October 2025. The evidence referred to by the parties in their written and oral
submissions has been considered: rule 67D(2) Personal
Injury Commission Rules.
than the claimant’s evidence, there is no evidence from any other witness
to the relevant events.
Emergency Department records include, relevantly, the following commentary in
the admission summary:
“...[the claimant] presented on
01/10/23 to the Campbelltown Hospital ED following a MVA. He was said to have
rear-ended a truck
while moving at a speed of about 110km/hr. He was wearing a
seat belt and the airbags deployed during the collision...”
claimant gave a statement to police on 14 October 2023. The statement is
recorded in the notebook of Probationary Constable Gilbody.
Relevantly, the
claimant stated:
“...About 3:30pm I left from Canberra to
drive home. At 5:40pm I was driving on the [H]ume motorway doing 110. I was
in the left lane. The car in front of me moved to the right. As soon as
he moved I saw the silver [T]oyota [C]orolla in front of
I tried to brake but I couldn’t stop in time. I collided with the back
left passenger side of the vehicle and their car spun
around into the emergency
lane. My car continued about 100m before stopped in the left lane.
I did not notice any hazard lights on the vehicle I hit...”
claimant’s application for personal injury benefits dated 27 October 2023
contains the following version of the accident:
another accident happened before my accident. Rego No. UUU66M & Rego No.
EBC66B collided slightly. UUU66M was
already parked in the emergency lane, but
EBC66B was parked in the normal traffic lane at a 45-degree angle and did not
emergency indicators on and put any hazard signs. I was driving in the
normal traffic lane at 110km/h. When I saw the EBC66B, [I]
have no time to
braked [sic] and crashed into the rear left part of EBC66B at 110km/h. My
car...went about 100 meters ahead before
claimant gave a statement to an investigator instructed by the insurer on 5
December 2023. Relevantly, he stated:
“[12] The accident scene
was the Hume Highway at Wilton, and it is a major arterial roadway. The accident
occurred about 2 kilometres
north from the intersection of Picton Road. At the
time of the accident the traffic flow was medium. The roadway is constructed of
sealed bitumen and is in a good condition. There are two lanes, and the line
markings are broken. The roadway runs in a general east
to west direction, and
it is level. The speed limit is 110 kilometres. At the scene of the accident
there are no warning signs.
[16] About 5.40pm, I was travelling in an easterly direction on the Hume
Highway at Wilton in the number one lane at a speed of 110
kilometres per hour.
At the time the traffic flow was medium in the same direction. At the time it
was day, and the weather conditions
were fine, and the roadway was dry. I was
wearing a seat belt. I was not using a mobile telephone. I did have the car
radio on, and
I was not distracted by anything.
[17] I was travelling along the roadway, and I was looking directly ahead.
There was a vehicle travelling in front of my vehicle in
the same lane about 150
metres ahead of me. I am not aware if there were vehicles travelling behind me.
The vehicle in front of me
suddenly changed into the number two lane. I
continued to travel in the number one lane. I then saw a silver [Toyota]
sedan...stationary
and the rear of the vehicle was in the number one eastbound
lane and the front of the vehicle was over the side of the roadway. This
was a forty-five-degree angle to the roadway.
[18] When I saw this vehicle, my vehicle was about 40 metres away from it. I
harshly braked and could not stop in time and the front
of my vehicle then
collided with the rear of the Toyota. After the impact my vehicle continued
along the roadway for about 60 metres,
and I stopped in the number one lane. I
stayed seated in my vehicle..
[21] My vehicle sustained damage to the front, and it was towed from the
scene. The other vehicles sustained damage..”
[22] the claimant stated police had not taken any action against him. The
records produced by police suggest that “action”
was subsequently
taken. At [23] the claimant stated that the cause of the accident was the
“Toyota blocking [his] lane.”
Police report dated 21 November 2023 records that the “incident’ was
reported on
14 October 2023. The report records the time, date and incident
location, together with the following “Crash Summary
“At 5:30pm vehicle 3 [a Toyota Corolla]
stopped on the Hume Highway in the far left lane for an unknown reason.
[V]ehicle 2
[a Renault Clio] that was behind them could not stop in time and
collided with the rear of vehicle 3.
After colliding with vehicle 3, vehicle 2 moved off the road and onto the
side of the road. Due to the crash two vehicles following
swerved around them
and out of the far left lane. Vehicle 1[the claimant’s vehicle, a Citroen
Picasso] however did not see
the crash and once the two vehicles moved out of
the way vehicle 1 collided with the rear passengers side of vehicle 3 spinning
off the road making a seconds [sic] collision for this particular
report records that unit 1, the claimant’s vehicle, was (in the opinion of
police) responsible for the accident. The reasons
for investigating police
recording this finding are not disclosed in the report.
were produced by NSW Police in response to a direction for production. In
addition to the claimant’s statement recorded
earlier, the documents
produced include a COPS report in which the following extended narrative is
“At 5:30pm driver 3 was driving northbound on the
Hume [H]ighway just passed [sic] Picton [R]oad. The driver has stopped his
vehicle on the far left lane on [sic] for an unknown reason. Due to this Vehicle
2 has failed to stop in time and collided with the
rear of vehicle 3 spinning it
slightly. Vehicle 2 then drove off to the side of the road to get out of the way
from oncoming vehicles.
Driver 1 was further two cars behind when this happened. The two vehicles in
front of driver 1 swerved out of the far left lane and
then driver 1 saw vehicle
3 sitting in the lane he was driving in. Driver 1 tried to stop his vehicle but
could not stop in time
and collided with the rear passenger side of vehicle 3
forcing it to spin off the road.
Driver 1 pulled his vehicle over to the side of the road however was too
injured to get out from the vehicle himself and waited for
an ambulance before
being moved.
Police and an ambulance attended the scene and helped the drivers exchange
details however a report was not taken at the time due
to belief it was not
required at the time.
At 7:00pm on Saturday 14th of October 2023, driver 1 attended Narellan Police
station to report the crash to get an event number for
insurance under the
belief he is not at any fault.
A report has been made on the 23/10/2023 after speaking with supervisors to
gain advice on how to conduct the investigation.
Driver 1 has been notified that he will most likely be the driver at fault
however at this stage Police must get driver versions from
the remaining drivers
before anything can be done as police are still unsure as to who is at
This incident consists of two separate crashes and narratives will be
adjusted once drivers have been spoken to...”
report records that the claimant was issued with an infringement notice for the
offence “[d]rive behind other vehicle too
closely to stop safely”.
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant’s submissions
claimant relies on written submissions dated 5 June 2025. At [4] – [6] the
claimant addresses the facts he argues should
be found. Among other matters, he
submits that:
(a) while driving on the M31 Hume Motorway he encountered the scene of an
earlier collision between two other vehicles, one of which
was stopped in the
designated emergency lane and the other stationary in the same lane in which he
was travelling;
(b) the vehicle stationary in his lane had not engaged any indicator or hazard
warning lights, nor were there any other warning signals
or flares to alert
approaching traffic;
(c) he was driving at approximately the posted speed limit;
(d) weather conditions were poor, with significant fog causing low visibility in
(e) as a result of the foggy conditions and the absence of any warning lights or
indicators on the stationary vehicle, he was unable
to perceive the stationary
vehicle “in time”;
(f) he braked and attempted to take evasive action when he saw the stationary
vehicle, and
(g) the front side of his vehicle collided with the side of the stationary
claimant submits he acted as a “reasonable driver under the
circumstances”, that the primary cause of the collision
was the unexpected
presence of the vehicle stopped in the lane in which he was travelling, and that
there was no “negligence”
on his part. In the claimant’s
submission, the accident was caused by the fault of the “other
driver” and not “mostly
by his fault”.
claimant submits that there is no evidence he was inattentive or not watching
the road and that he was “keeping a proper
lookout”. He argues that
he immediately reacted as soon as the other vehicle became visible. In his
submission, the very fact
he attempted braking and swerving upon noticing the
stopped car demonstrates he was “keeping lookout”. The claimant
that the hazard presented by the other driver was so sudden and unusual
that even a diligent lookout afforded only “split seconds
of reaction
claimant argues that a stationary car on a freeway lane is “an anomaly a
reasonable driver would not anticipate during normal
travel” and that his
inability to avoid that hazard should not be equated with a failure to maintain
a proper lookout on his
claimant argues it was the other driver’s “dangerous and unlawful
stop” that effectively eliminated the margin
that any reasonable driver
would ordinarily have to avoid an accident. In his submission, the
insurer’s emphasis on theoretical
stopping distance overlooks the fact
that no amount of “prudent” distance would safely allow for a
completely stationary
obstruction on a freeway in the absence of prior
the claimant’s submission, his response was that of a reasonable driver
under emergency conditions. The sudden presence of
the stopped vehicle created
an emergency scenario. In the claimant’s submission, he reacted
“instantly and appropriately”
by braking hard and attempting to
avoid a collision. He relies on the “agony of the moment principle”;
that a person
confronted with a sudden emergency is not held to the same
standard of precise judgment as one who has time to deliberate.
claimant argues he did everything a reasonable driver could do in the moment and
that his conduct was not blameworthy or the “predominant
cause of the
crash”. He submits that he did not breach his duty of care as a driver,
that he was keeping a lookout, traveling
at a safe speed and distance for the
conditions, and reacted as “any cautious driver would have”. In his
submission,
the mere fact of a rear-end collision “does not automatically
prove the following driver’s negligence, especially in
these extraordinary
circumstances.”
[23] – [28] the claimant submits the accident was caused by the fault of
the driver of the stationary vehicle. He argues
that the vehicle was unlawfully
stopped in a travel lane on a freeway in breach of road rule 177, that the
driver did not activate
hazard lights or place any warning devices to alert
oncoming traffic, did not pull over to the shoulder or emergency stopping lane,
and failed to mitigate the hazard created by the presence of the vehicle on the
the claimant’s submission, the other driver’s negligent actions were
the primary cause of the accident; but for the
vehicle being stopped unlawfully
in his path, the collision would not have occurred. In his submission, it was
the presence of that
stationary vehicle in a high-speed environment “that
set the stage for disaster.” The accident was, in his submission,
precipitated by the other driver’s “extraordinary and negligent
conduct.” The claimant argues that liability for
the accident rests
“predominantly (if not entirely) with the other driver and that “at
the very least, the other driver’s
fault far exceeds any minor
contributing negligence that could possibly be attributed to [him], meaning [he]
cannot be considered
‘mostly at fault’ under the Act.” The
claimant argues that his driving was “reasonable” and did not
the accident.
[30] – [34] the claimant refers to relevant “authorities” and
submits that those cases “establish a clear
principle directly applicable
to [his] circumstances”; that a claimant who encounters an unforeseen,
unilluminated hazard on
the road is generally not considered wholly or mostly at
fault for the ensuing collision.
oral submissions, the claimant re-iterated his written submissions. He withdrew
his submission that weather conditions were poor,
with significant fog causing
low visibility. He argued there was one vehicle in front of his, not two, that
he did not have time
to avoid the accident, and that the accident was not caused
by his fault. If a finding to the contrary was made, he submitted the
was caused by the fault of the driver of the Toyota, and the accident was not
caused wholly or mostly by his fault.
submissions
insurer relies on written submissions dated 26 June 2025, 11 September 2025 and
9 October 2025.
its 26 June 2025 submissions the insurer refers to relevant evidence and submits
the claimant was travelling in the left most lane
on the Hume Highway motorway
and at the same time, the insured driver was stationary in the same lane,
following a crash with another
vehicle. Reference is made to
Vairy v Wyong
Shire Council
(2005) 223 CLR 422
[2005] HCA 62
Manley v Alexander
(2005) 223 ALR 228
[2005] HCA 79
Pennington v Norris
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR
the insurer’s submission, the claimant failed to keep a proper lookout,
failed to maintain a safe distance between his vehicle
and the vehicle in front,
and should have been put on notice by the vehicle suddenly changing lanes in
front that there was a change
of circumstances on the roadway.
insurer submits the claimant continued to drive in the same lane without slowing
down from 110km/hr. In the insurer’s submission
the evidence indicates the
vehicle travelling ahead of the claimant was able to avoid the stationary
vehicle on the left lane.
insurer argues that a reasonable person in the claimant’s circumstances
ought to have “known the dangers of failing
to exercise reasonable
caution” and that “a reasonable person would have taken greater
caution for their own safety by
keeping a proper lookout for any changes of
conditions and possible dangers on the roadway”. In the insurer’s
submission,
the claimant was wholly at fault for the accident.
submissions dated 11 September 2025 the insurer restated its submission that the
accident was caused wholly by the claimant’s
fault. The insurer noted that
two vehicles ahead of the claimant swerved around the vehicles involved in the
earlier accident and
argues the claimant should have been able to do so as well
had he been exercising reasonable care.
insurer argued the insured driver was not at fault for the accident, the
claimant was “wholly at fault”, and the claim
insurer submitted it is “inappropriate to assess this dispute by reference
to the decision in
because the principle arising from that decision
applies only to single vehicle accidents”. In the insurer’s
submission,
the proceedings involve a claim that the insured was at fault for
the accident and in those circumstances, liability must be decided
between the
insured and the claimant, and apportioned if appropriate, rather than only
assessing the extent to which the claimant’s
conduct departed from the
required standard of care in the manner adopted in
further submissions dated 9 October 2025 the insurer again addressed
. In the insurer’s submission, paragraphs [61] and [73] in that
decision illustrate that, because there were two vehicles involved
accident, determining whether the accident was caused wholly by the
claimant’s fault should not be undertaken by reference
to the extent to
which the claimant departed from the standard of care required of a reasonable
person in his position, but rather
by reference to the relative culpability of
the drivers involved in the accident. The insurer refers to a number of
decisions of
the Commission and relies in particular on the approach taken in
Eskander v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
[2025] NSWPIC 211
) at [83] – [84].
the insurer’s submission, the nature of the enquiry will be different in
multi-party accidents. The insurer submits, relying
Allianz Australia
Insurance Limited v Shuk
[2023] NSWSC 788
Podrebersek v
Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd
(1985) 59 ALR 529
[1985] HCA 34
Podrebersek
), that in a case involving multiple vehicles an
apportionment of culpability is required, even if that apportionment is all to
of the parties, whereas in single vehicle motor accidents involving an owner
driver “the
approach is taken” regarding departure from
the required standard of care.
the insurer’s submission, in circumstances where the claimant was driving
at 110km/h with 150 metres of space between him
and the vehicle in front, and
where that vehicle was able to avoid the hazard on the roadway, he would have
had five seconds or more
from when that vehicle swerved to avoid the stationary
vehicle ahead of him on the roadway in which to identify the hazard and take
appropriate evasive action.
insurer submits the claimant was wholly at fault for not keeping a proper
lookout and taking appropriate evasive action, particularly
where the history in
the discharge referral indicates he was still travelling 110km/h at the time of
is, the insurer argues, no suggestion there were any bends in the road leading
up to the accident which could have otherwise
obscured the claimant’s
view, or that he suffered from any condition or disability which would render
his perception response
time “worse than average”.
insurer’s case is that the insured vehicle was situated stationary on the
roadway because it had been impacted by another
vehicle “well
before” the claimant’s vehicle approached it.
insurer submits that, in relation to the impact of the claimant’s vehicle
with the insured vehicle, the claimant is wholly
insurer argues that because the claim involves an allegation that the insured
driver was at fault for the accident, liability
must be decided between the
insured driver and the claimant, and apportioned. In the insurer’s
submission, the appropriate
apportionment is 100% to the claimant and 0% to the
insured driver.
oral submissions the insurer argued there were two vehicles in front of the
claimant’s vehicle, that he did not brake and
was travelling at 110km/h
when the collision occurred, that he failed to maintain a proper lookout and
failed to keep a safe distance
between his vehicle and the vehicle in front. The
insurer submitted that the accident involving the Toyota and the Renault
an “appreciable period” before the subject accident.
insurer also drew attention to what in its submission is a disparity in the
claimant’s two statements with respect to when
he first saw the Toyota. In
this regard, reference was made to the claimant’s statement to police at
[4] and his statement
dated 5 December 2023 at [17].
insurer argued that a finding should be made that the claimant saw, or should
have seen, the Toyota when it was 150 metres in
front of him and that he had
ample opportunity to avoid the risk posed by the presence of the Toyota on the
roadway in front of him.
insurer maintained its submission that if it is found the accident was caused by
the fault of the claimant and that no other driver
was at fault, the accident
was caused wholly by the claimant’s fault. In this regard, the insurer
again argued the approach
at [83] – [84] is
correct and should be adopted.
is convenient to refer to the vehicles involved in the two accidents as
(a) “the Citroen” – the claimant’s vehicle. Referred to
as unit 1 in the police reports;
(b) “the Renault” – the first vehicle that collided with the
Toyota, referred to as unit 2 in the police reports,
(c) “the Toyota” – the vehicle stationary in the
claimant’s lane of travel with which both the Renault and
claimant’s vehicle collided, referred to as unit 3 in the police reports.
following facts were agreed by the parties at the hearing:
(a) the accident occurred at approximately 5.40pm on 1 October 2023 on the Hume
Motorway near Wilton;
(b) the weather was fine and visibility was good;
(c) the road was dry;
(d) the speed limit was 110km/h;
(e) the claimant was not driving above the speed limit;
(f) the claimant was travelling in an easterly direction;
(g) there were two traffic lanes for vehicles travelling in an easterly
(h) the Toyota was stationary in the same lane in which the claimant was
travelling;
(i) the Renault had earlier collided with the Toyota;
(j) following that collision and before the subject accident the Renault had
moved wholly off the roadway, and
(k) the driver of the Toyota did not activate the hazard lights on his vehicle
after the collision involving the Renault.
agreed facts are consistent with and supported by the evidence before the
Commission. I make findings in accordance with the agreed
find that when the collision involving the claimant’s vehicle occurred the
Toyota was stationary partly on the roadway, the
front of the vehicle being
“over the side of the roadway”, with the rear of the vehicle being
in the roadway at a 45-degree
angle. In this regard I accept the evidence given
by the claimant at [17] of his 5 December 2023 statement.
find that the front of the claimant’s vehicle collided with the rear of
the Toyota.
is a dispute between the parties about whether there were one or two vehicles
travelling ahead of the claimant in his lane of
travel before the accident. The
insurer submits there were two vehicles based on the narrative in the police
report dated 21 November
2023, that refers to two vehicles swerving around the
Toyota and the Renault, and the narrative in the COPS report produced under
direction by NSW police that records:
“... Driver 1 was
further two cars behind when this happened. The two vehicles in front of driver
1 swerved out of the far left
insurer argues these narratives must have been based on what the claimant told
police. I do not accept this submission. In his
statement to police made on 14
October 2023 the claimant only referred to one vehicle in front of him, stating:
in front of me moved to the right. As soon as he moved I saw
the [Toyota]...”.
the statement he gave the investigator on 5 December 2023, the claimant
“There was a vehicle travelling in front of my vehicle
in the same lane about 150 metres ahead of me. I am not aware if there
vehicles travelling behind me. The vehicle in front of me suddenly changed into
the number two lane.”
the two occasions he has given a statement the claimant referred to only one
vehicle in front of him. I accept that evidence and
find that there was one
vehicle travelling ahead of the claimant in his lane of travel before the
evidence before the Commission does not allow a finding the be made with any
specificity as to how long before the accident the
collision between the Renault
and the Toyota occurred. That having been said, I am satisfied the collision
between the Renault and
the Toyota did not occur immediately before the subject
accident; the driver of the Renault had time to move their vehicle off the
roadway after the collision with the Toyota.
the evidence it is not possible to make a finding about whether the driver of
the vehicle in front of the claimant saw that collision
evidence does not allow a finding to be made on the probabilities about whether
the Toyota was stationary on the road before the
Renault collided with it and,
if so, why. Nor does the evidence allow findings to be made about how that
collision occurred. It is
not apparent from whom the description of that
accident recorded in the COPS report was obtained.
accept the claimant’s evidence that the vehicle in front of him
“suddenly” changed lanes.
insurer submits there is a conflict in the claimant’s evidence about
precisely when he first saw the Toyota in the lane
ahead of him. In his
statement to police the claimant said:
“The car in front of me
moved to the right. As soon as he moved I saw the silver [Toyota] in front of
his statement to the investigator the claimant
“...[t]he vehicle in front of me suddenly changed into
the number two lane. I continued to travel in the number one lane. I
silver [Toyota] sedan...stationary...”
am satisfied the distances referred to by the claimant in his statement to the
investigator at [17] and [18] are estimates. That
is clear from the
claimant’s use of the word “about” in each paragraph with
respect to the distances he refers
am not satisfied that before the vehicle in front of the claimant changed lanes,
the stationary Toyota was visible to the claimant.
Further, I am not satisfied
that a reasonable person in the claimant’s position would or should have
been aware of the presence
of the Toyota on the roadway, let alone that it was
stationary, prior to the vehicle in front changing lanes. It is probable the
claimant’s vision of the road ahead of him was obscured by the presence of
the vehicle in front of him.
is no evidence as to whether the vehicle in front of the claimant sped up or
slowed down when it changed lanes. The claimant’s
vehicle may have closed
on that vehicle, reducing the distance between the two vehicles and between the
claimant’s vehicle
and the Toyota. There is no evidence as to how close
that vehicle was to the Toyota when it changed lanes.
is no expert evidence before the Commission about perception-reaction times. The
time between when the vehicle in front of the
claimant suddenly changed lanes
and the collision between the claimant’s vehicle and the Toyota was, on
the probabilities,
a few seconds. The claimant was required to perceive and
respond to the sudden change of lanes by the vehicle in front, the presence
the Toyota ahead of him and that the Toyota was stationary.
accept the claimant’s evidence that he attempted to apply the brakes of
his vehicle when he saw the Toyota. Although a finding
time of the collision cannot be made with precision, having found the
claimant’s vehicle was travelling
at or about, but not in excessive of,
110km/h, and given my finding he applied the brakes, I am satisfied the
claimant’s vehicle
was traveling at a speed of less than 110km/h when it
collided with the Toyota.
DETERMINATION
dispute to be determined in these proceedings is whether for the purposes of ss
3.11 and 3.28 of the MAI Act the accident was
caused wholly or mostly by the
fault of the claimant. The claimant does not have to prove the accident was
caused by the insured
driver, although he may seek to do so in order to argue
that, for example, in the event it is found the accident was caused by his
fault, it was not caused wholly (or mostly) by his fault.
is the insurer who has denied liability for the claim on the basis that the
accident was caused wholly by the claimant’s
fault. As recorded earlier,
the onus rests with the insurer to lead evidence which not only establishes the
basis of its decision
but also persuades the Commission that on all of the
evidence, it can be concluded the accident was caused wholly or mostly by the
fault of the claimant:
Was the accident caused
by the claimant’s fault?
is no question that, as the driver of a motor vehicle, the claimant had a duty
to take reasonable care for his safety (and the
safety of other road users)
having regard to all the circumstances of the case:
Vairy v Wyong Shire
[2005] HCA 62
) McHugh J at [26]. The duty is always
the same; to conform to the legal standard of reasonable conduct in the light of
the apparent
at [25]. Driving requires reasonable attention
to all that is happening on and near the roadway that may present a source of
More often than not, that will require simultaneous attention to, and
consideration of, a number of different features of what is
already, or may
later come to be, ahead of the vehicle's path:
Manley v Alexander
per Gummow, Kirby, and Hayne JJ at [11].
principles that apply in determining whether a person has been negligent also
apply in determining whether the person who suffered
harm has been
contributorily negligent in failing to take precautions against the risk of that
harm. For that purpose, the standard
of care required of the person who suffered
harm is that of a reasonable person in the position of that person: s 5R
Civil Liability Act
the facts as I have found them, I am not satisfied the accident was caused by
any failure on the part of the claimant to take reasonable
care. Prior to the
accident he was traveling within the speed limit. There was nothing about the
prevailing conditions that required
him, exercising reasonable care, to travel
at a lower speed. A reasonable person in his position would not have been aware
presence of the Toyota on the roadway, let alone that it was stationary,
until after the vehicle in front of him suddenly changed
find that, contrary to the insurer’s submission, when the claimant first
saw the Toyota, he would not have appreciated it
was stationary. A reasonable
person in his position, driving on a motorway with a speed limit of 110km/h, in
moderate traffic, would
not have expected a stationary vehicle in the lane ahead
of him. The hazard lights of the vehicle had not been activated. It would
taken time for the claimant to perceive the Toyota was stationary. This in turn
reduced the time he had to respond to the presence
of the vehicle on the
claimant found himself in a situation which was not of his making. He did not
have the opportunity for calm reflection. Once the
claimant appreciated the
Toyota was stationary, he reacted by applying the brakes of his vehicle. His
response to the risk presented
by the Toyota was reasonable, and consistent with
the exercise by him of reasonable care in the circumstances.
follows that I do not accept the insurer’s submission the claimant was not
keeping a proper lookout.
insurer argues that as the vehicle in front of the claimant was able to detect
and respond to the risk posed by the Toyota, the
claimant should have been able
to do likewise, and his failure to do so supports a finding that he was not
exercising reasonable
care. I reject this submission. Unlike the claimant, the
line of site of the driver of the vehicle in front of the claimant was not
obscured by the presence of another vehicle. The opportunity for, and the time
available to, the driver of that vehicle to perceive
and respond to the presence
of the Toyota was greater than the opportunity available to the claimant. For
this reason, they were
not in an analogous position.
insurer also argues the claimant failed to exercise reasonable care because he
failed to keep a safe distance behind vehicles
in front of him. The submission
is rejected. The evidence does not support a finding that the claimant was not
keeping a safe distance
between his vehicle and the vehicle in front of him that
ultimately changed lanes.
to the Toyota, the claimant was not, and could not, have been aware it was
stationary on the roadway until the vehicle in front
of him suddenly changed
lanes. He did not have an opportunity to keep a safe distance between his
vehicle and the stationary Toyota.
Further, having become aware of the Toyota,
the claimant would not immediately appreciated it was stationary.
find that the accident was not caused by the claimant’s failure to
exercise reasonable care.
Was the accident caused wholly or
mostly by the claimant’s fault?
the findings I have made, it follows that, for the purposes of ss 3.11 and 3.28,
the accident was not caused wholly or mostly
by the fault of the claimant.
finding about whether the accident was caused by the fault of the driver of the
Toyota is not required. Had such a finding been
necessary, I would have found in
the affirmative. The driver of that vehicle knew or ought to have known there
were other vehicles
traveling behind them at high speed and that the perception
and reaction time of the drivers of those vehicles in response to seeing
stationary vehicle in their lane of travel was limited. The exercise of
reasonable care by the driver of that vehicle required,
at a minimum, that they
activate the hazard lights of the vehicle. In circumstances where the driver of
the Renault had time following
the collision to move the vehicle off the
roadway, a reasonable person in the position of the driver of the Toyota had
time to activate
the hazard lights on their vehicle. Further, the driver of the
Toyota should have moved the vehicle off the roadway as the driver
Renault had. There is no evidence that he was unable to do so because of
mechanical defect or the damage caused by the accident
involving the Renault. In
any event, as I have already said, given the findings that have been made,
whether the accident was caused
by the driver of the Toyota does not arise for
determination.
The insurer’s
submissions
insurer’s case that the accident was caused wholly by the fault of the
claimant has been rejected. It is, however, appropriate
to address the
insurer’s submissions with respect to the application of
its submission that in a case involving multiple vehicles an apportionment of
culpability is required, even if that apportionment
is all to one of the
Mitchelmore J made clear in
at [56], the focus of ss 3.11(1)(a) and
3.28(1)(a) is whether the motor accident was caused wholly or mostly by the
fault of the
injured person who is in receipt of statutory benefits. The
qualifiers “wholly or mostly” inform each other and are intended
address the same mischief, namely, contributory negligence. Her Honour went on
to say at [57] that:
“Considered in the particular statutory context for which Part 3 makes
provision, ss 3.11 and 3.28 are directed at the extent
to which the injured
person’s failure to take reasonable care contributed to the motor
accident. The sections (and s 3.36)
use the word “fault” accompanied
by a qualifying phrase (“wholly or mostly”) which clearly invokes
contributory
negligence. That is confirmed by the express reference, in subs
(2), both to contributory negligence and s 3.38. Consistently with
the balance
of Part 3, the provisions are concerned with contributory negligence not for the
injury, but for the motor accident,
in a manner that accommodates all types of
motor accidents, including single vehicle accidents where the injured person is
Relevantly,
s 3.38(1) states that the common law and enacted law as to contributory
negligence that applies to an award of damages
in respect of a motor accident
applies (except as provided by that section) to weekly payments of statutory
benefits for any period
of loss of earnings or earning capacity that occurs more
than 52 weeks after the time of the motor accident.
a finding of contributory negligence were made in these proceedings, it was to
be assessed as a percentage that reflected what
the Commission determined is
just and equitable in the circumstances of the case, none of the circumstances
referred to in s 3.38(2)
being relevant, and there being no percentage fixed by
the regulations: s 3.38(3)(c).
recorded at [60] in
, the enacted law of contributory negligence
includes Div 8 of
Pt 1A of the
. Section 5R(1) provides that
the principles that apply in determining whether a person has been negligent
also apply in determining
whether the person who suffered harm has been
contributorily negligent in failing to take precautions against the risk of that
Section 5R(2)(a) provides that, for that purpose, “the standard of
care required of the person who suffered harm is that of
a reasonable person in
the position of that person”.
insurer referred to and relied on
and the reference made to that
decision in
at [61]. In
it was found the accident
concerned was caused by the fault of both the claimant, a pedestrian, and the
driver of the vehicle that
hit her. Because of those findings an apportionment
of relative culpability was required. The reference to, and discussion about,
must be read in light of these findings.
Podrebersek
Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson, Brennan and Deane JJ concluded that,
in a normal case, contributory negligence requires an apportionment
the plaintiff and defendant of their respective shares in the responsibility for
the damage, and which involves the comparison
both of culpability and of the
relevant importance of the acts of the parties in causing that damage:
apportionment was required in
Podrebersek
because there had been a
finding the accident in question was caused by both the negligence of the
defendant and the contributory
negligence of the plaintiff. Relative culpability
cannot be assessed in accordance with
Podrebersek
if a motor accident was
caused only by the fault of a claimant and no other person. It follows that I do
not accept the insurer’s
submission that, in an accident involving more
than one vehicle, where it is found that the accident was caused by the fault of
claimant and not by the fault of another driver, Mitchelmore J’s
construction of ss 3.11 and 3.28 requires an apportionment
claimant’s culpable conduct and the non-culpable conduct of the other
driver. Such a comparison does not involve an
assessment of relative
culpability, would involve a logically inconsistent approach, and produce a
logically inconsistent outcome.
Contributory
negligence must, however, be assessed by reference to something. Mitchelmore J
accepted in
at [67] the submission that the words “wholly or
mostly” do not require comparison of the acts of at least two parties.
[68] her Honour said that
Axiak v Ingram
(2012) 82 NSWLR 36
[2012] NSWCA
) provided an example of how contributory negligence can be
applied in the absence of a tortious defendant, and in that regard referred
the reasons of Tobias JA at [85]. Her Honour went on to say that both
Davis v Swift
[2014] NSWCA 458
illustrated
the broader point, that the inability to balance relative culpability and causal
responsibility does not preclude an
assessment of contributory negligence.
with the reasoning of Mitchelmore J in
and Tobias JA in
, in a case in which it has been found an accident involving a
claimant and another driver was caused by the fault of the claimant
but not the
fault of the other driver, assessment of whether the accident was caused wholly
or mostly by the fault of the claimant
is to be undertaken by inquiring how far
the claimant departed from the standard of care he or she was required to
observe in the
interests of his or her own safety. It does not involve, as
submitted by the insurer, an assessment of culpability in accordance
Podrebersek
and does not involve an apportionment of the claimant’s
culpable conduct and the non-culpable conduct of the other
claimant seeks an order for payment of his legal costs in accordance with the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
(NSW) “up to” the maximum
amount (16 monetary units).
parties agreed that there were two disputes, one under s 3.11 and the other
s 3.28 and that the claimant was entitled to recover costs for each
dispute at the maximum allowed under the regulations.
insurer is to pay the claimant’s costs in the sum of $4,062.40 plus
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (587 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter