URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2021/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AAF v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited [2021] NSWPICMRP 1; (26 March 2021)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
AAF v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
[2021] NSWPICMRP 1
RESPONDENT:
QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd
APPEAL PANEL:
Katherine Ruschen
Kriesen Seeneevassen
Elyse White
DATE OF DECISION:
26 March 2021
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS- Review panel to consider whether Merit Reviewer erred by
not including the sum of approximately $8,000 said to represent
payments for services rendered by the applicant for the purpose of calculating
merit review decision set aside; directions made; further
information is required including accountant’s records; insurer is
recalculate the claimant’s PAWE.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
single merit review decision of Merit Reviewer Koya dated 22 December 2020 is
set aside and in its place the following directions
(a) The Claimant is to provide to the Insurer all documents provided to his
accountant for the purpose of preparing the Claimant’s
2020 Income Tax
Return and Amended Income Tax Return, including the supplementary sections in
those tax returns, within 14 days of
the date of this decision. The Insurer may
request an authority from the Claimant authorising the accountant to provide
this information
directly to the Insurer.
(b) Should the Insurer be of the view any further information or documents are
required, in addition to the accountant’s records
covered in the above
direction, the Insurer is to issue a request for that further information within
14 days of this decision.
(c) The Claimant is to provide a response to any further request for information
or documents issued by the Insurer within 14 days
of receipt of that request.
(d) If the Claimant wishes to provide any further information or documents to
the Insurer for the purpose of assessing his PAWE,
not covered by the above
directions, the Claimant is to provide any such information or documents to the
Insurer within 14 days of
this decision.
(e) Once the above directions have been complied with, the Insurer is to
recalculate the Claimant’s PAWE based on the information
including any further information obtained as a result of the above directions.
Statement of Reasons
single merit review decision determined by Merit Reviewer Roohi Koya dated
22 December 2020 was referred to this Review Panel
for determination under
section 7.15(3) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
Review Panel members confirmed they had no previous involvement with this
matter, or with the above injured person. All Review
Panel members also
confirmed that there was no conflict or any other reason why they would be
unable to approach this review with
an open mind.
Panel Conference
initial conference of the Review Panel was held on 8 March 2021 at 4.00 pm.
Merit Reviewer Ruschen acted as the Chairperson of
the Review Panel. A final
conference of the Review Panel was held 24 March 2021 at 2.00
Merit Review Decision under Panel Review
Reviewer Roohi Koya determined the following in the single merit review
The reviewable
decision is set aside and the following decision is made in substitution for the
reviewable decision:-
a) The Claimant’s pre-accident weekly earnings is $124.68 payable from 30
b) This determination takes effect on 22 December 2020.
c) Legal costs: Nil.
Disputes identified by the Parties
Review Panel considered the Application for Review by AAF (the Claimant) and
noted that the following aspects of the single merit
review decision were
(a) Whether Merit Reviewer Koya erred by not including the sum of approximately
$8,000 said to represent non-cash payments for services
rendered by the Claimant
for the purpose of calculating the Claimant’s pre-accident weekly earnings
The Claimant’s submissions
Claimant contends prior to the motor accident he earned income in the form of
both cash and non-cash payments by completing online
surveys and market
Reviewer Koya made a finding at paragraph 18 of the single merit review decision
of 22 December 2020 that “the non-cash
payments are linked to the
applicant’s income earning activity and should be included in the
calculation of the Claimant’s
PAWE” However, Merit Reviewer Koya
went on to note that “Some of the evidence submitted, for example,
Priceline or VISA
reward cards, do not show a date when the non-cash payments
were earned”.
Reviewer Koya excluded non-cash payments received in the period more than 12
months prior to the accident or after the accident
and any records that could
not be verified as falling within the relevant period (see paragraph 19 of the
decision of 22 December
Reviewer Koya then calculated total earnings in the relevant 12 month period
immediately before the accident (30 June 2019 to
29 June 2020) in the sum of
$6,483.24. This is in contrast to the Claimant’s tax return for the period
1 July 2019 to 30 June
2020 in which the Claimant declared “other
income” of $15,000.
7.15(2) of the Act states an application for the referral of a decision to a
Review Panel may only be made on the grounds
that the assessment was incorrect
in a material respect.
grounds submitted by the Claimant are that the single merit review decision
contains material error in that despite accepting
non-cash payments are income
for the purpose of the Claimant’s PAWE, the single merit review decision
went on to disregard
key evidence of non-cash payments earned in the relevant
year, namely his tax return for the financial year ending
The Insurer’s submissions
Insurer submits Merit Reviewer Koya considered all documents provided and
therefore has performed all elements of the assessment
in accordance with the
Guidelines. Further, the Insurer submits the Claimant has not provided any
source documents in support of
the total “other” income of $15,000
declared in his tax return such that there is no evidence as to what types of
make up this other income and no evidence to verify the amount.
Summary of documents considered
Review Panel members confirmed that they had received and considered the
following documentation:
(a) The single merit review decision issued by Merit Reviewer Koya on
22 December 2020.
(b) The Application, the Reply and the documents provided by the parties for the
purposes of the single merit review.
(c) The Application for review and attached documents.
(d) The Reply and attached documents.
(e) The Statement of Reasons issued by the Proper Officer on 22 February 2021
referring this matter to a Review Panel.
Legislation and Guidelines
making our decision, the Panel has considered the following legislation and
guidelines:
(a) The Act.
(b) Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017 (Regulations).
(c) The Motor Accident Guidelines 2017 (the Guidelines).
Factual background
Claimant was injured in a motor accident on 30 June 2020.
is no dispute that the Claimant is an “earner” for the purpose of
the time of the accident, the Claimant generated income as an
“earner” by completing online market surveys and research.
received income in the form of both cash and non-cash payments (e.g. reward
cards/vouchers) for this work.
is also no dispute that non-cash payments of the type received by the Claimant
form part of his earnings “as an earner”
and therefore, subject to
verification of earnings, are to be included for the purpose of calculating the
Claimant’s PAWE.
ATO Interpretative Decision 2002/822 also supports the
position that payment in cash or by way of a gift as an incentive to participate
in market research is assessable income. It follows from this that it is to be
included in calculation of an injured person’s
the purpose of calculating his PAWE the Claimant provided various documents
including his “Amended Individual tax return
2020”, “Taxation
Estimate” worksheet for the year ended 30 June 2020, a PayPal transaction
history statement and
details of various rewards/vouchers/earnings received in
return for completing online surveys and market research.
of the rewards/vouchers/payments were received by the Claimant either prior to
the relevant 12 month period (30 June 2019 to
29 June 2020), or after the end of
the relevant 12 month period (the last date being 29 June 2020).
Claimant’s PAWE is to be assessed under Schedule 1, Clause 4(1) (this does
not appear to be in dispute). Pursuant to Clause
4(1) the Claimant’s PAWE
is “the weekly average of the gross earnings received by the earner as an
earner during the
12 months immediately before the day on which the motor
accident occurred...” Accordingly, Merit Reviewer Koya properly
disregarded
rewards/vouchers/earnings received by the Claimant either prior to
30 June 2019 or after 29 June 2020 and any payments that could
not be verified
as falling within the relevant period.
Reviewer Koya assessed total earnings during the relevant period to be
$6,483.24. This produces a figure for the Claimant’s
PAWE of $124.68 per
Claimant’s Amended Individual Tax Return records:
(a) The Claimant’s “Main salary or wage occupation” as
“Interviewer-surveys or market research”.
(b) The sum of $15,000 in the supplementary section as “Other income
– Category 1 income”.
(c) The tax return is prepared by his accountant, MLC Accountants.
(d) The Taxation Estimate worksheet records the $15,000 as being
“income/loss from other sources”.
Claimant has now provided his MyGov generated income tax return 2019-20 which
(a) “Occupation where you earned most income” as “interviewer
– surveys or market research”.
(b) His “other” income as “Category 4 Income” (not
Category 1 as stated in the amended tax return).
the extent the Claimant has provided source documents to support the amount
declared as other income in his tax return, those documents
only evidence
earnings in the sum of $6,483.24 during the relevant period. This leaves the sum
of approximately $8,000 as being an
unverified amount, including whether any
part of this amount was earned after 29 June 2020 (i.e. on 30 June 2020) and/or
was obtained
from sources other than work as an “earner” and is
therefore to be excluded from calculation of the Claimant’s
Consideration
issue for consideration is whether the Claimant has established earnings
“as an earner” for the purpose of calculation
of his PAWE in the sum
of $15,000 on the basis of his amended tax return or whether he has only
established earnings “as an
earner” in the relevant period in the
sum of $6,483.24 (based on the available source documents).
Reviewer Koya found:
(a) The amended tax return “is considered a relevant reflection of
‘earnings’ for the purpose of Schedule 1(4)
of the Act” at
paragraph 17 of the single merit review decision.
(b) Non-cash payments should be included in calculation of the Claimant’s
PAWE at paragraph 19 of the single merit review decision.
Merit Reviewer Koya ultimately did not adopt the figure in the tax return as the
Claimant’s gross earnings for the
relevant period. Whilst the Claimant
contends this is an error, it is clear from a reading of the decision as a whole
that the amended
tax return was considered but ultimately disregarded because
there was no information “as to the details of what items or types
income make up the total $15,000” (see paragraph 17 of the single merit
review decision).
Review Panel agrees the tax return is a “relevant” document. Clearly
this document was considered by Merit Reviewer
Koya, as Merit Reviewer Koya went
on to observe the difficulty that the global amount for income from
“other” sources
in the amended tax return cannot be analysed without
further information/documents.
a tax return is a relevant document, this does not mean it is to be taken as
definitive evidence of earnings “as an earner”
for the purpose of
calculating an injured party’s PAWE. In some cases, the tax return alone
may be sufficient, for example
when an injured person has only one source of
income in the form of wages received from an employer and the relevant 12 month
is the same period as covered by the tax return. In other cases, it is
not straightforward and it is necessary to look to the source
documents in order
to analyse the extent to which an amount declared as income represents income
“as an earner” during
the relevant period for the purpose of
Schedule 1, Clause 4(1) of the Act.
the reasons set out below the Review Panel is of the view that in this
particular case, further information is required in order
to be able to analyse
the extent to which income from other sources in the Claimant’s 2020
amended tax return is income “as
an earner” received during the
period 30 June 2019 to 29 June 2020 and is therefore to be included in the
calculation of the
Claimant’s PAWE.
Claimant submits that because he stated his “main” occupation as
“interviewer – surveys or market research”
in the amended tax
return it follows that all of the “other” income is income derived
from that work. The Review Panel
does not agree. The ATO instructions for
completing the relevant question in the tax return (question 1) is that the
taxpayer is
to write the occupation from which they earned most of their income
from salary or wages. This does not mean that all income from
“other” sources is akin to salary and wages derived from work as an
interviewer. A taxpayer is only required to state
their “main”
occupation. This does not mean that all, or even a substantial amount of income
from “other”
sources is derived from that occupation. For example, a
taxpayer may have a “main” occupation for the purpose of that
of their “other” income that is akin to salary or wages but earn
substantially more in “other” income
from investments.
ATO’s instructions for completing the supplementary tax return in respect
of other income lists types of income that are
to be included as “other
income” in the supplementary section. The “ATO Individual Tax Return
Instructions Supplement
2020” identifies Category 1 other income as:
(a) Lump sum payments in arrears except lump sum payments in arrears relating to
superannuation income streams.
(b) Foreign exchange gains.
(c) Benefits or prizes from investment-related lotteries and some game-show
(d) Reimbursements of tax-related expenses (not including ATO interest remitted)
or election expenses.
(e) Assessable balancing adjustments when you stop holding a depreciating
(f) Gains, on the disposal or the redemption of traditional securities, that are
assessable under section 26BB of the ITAA 1936.
(g) Work-in-progress amounts assessable under section 15-50 of the
Assessment Act 1997
the income is Category 1 income, as stated in the amended tax return, it is
unlikely that this income is income “as an earner”
for the purpose
of the Act.
2 income is remission of an ATO interest charge claimed as a deduction and
Category 3 is assessable FHSS released amounts.
4 is “any income not described in category 1, 2 or 3.” The
Claimant’s MyGov document suggests the income
is Category 4, which is
inconsistent with the amended tax return. If it is Category 4 then it might be
income “as an earner”
being the Claimant’s cash and non-cash
payments as an interviewer or it might be a mix of income “as an
and income from other sources that is not income “as an
earner”. Absent the source documents used by the Claimant’s
accountant to prepare the amended tax return, this is not known. Without the
source documents, it is also not known whether any of
the $15,000 in the amended
tax return was received after 29 June 2020 (i.e. on 30 June 2020) and is
therefore to be excluded from
calculation of the Claimant’s PAWE.
the Claimant has provided a signed statement regarding the $15,000 declared in
his amended tax return the Review Panel is not
satisfied that this statement is
sufficient to verify the Claimant’s earnings “as an earner”.
The Claimant’s
statement acknowledges the amount of $15,000 is an estimate
only and was not based on actual receipts or invoices. The Claimant states
“it is possible the amount of $15,000 was actually accidentally
underestimated, as I did not keep copies of all of the vouchers
received”. The Claimant does not provide any basis for the estimate in his
statement in circumstances where he did not keep
all relevant documents.
the Panel notes that documents provided by the Claimant indicate the PayPal
“cash” is not cash in the traditional
sense (i.e. that can be
withdrawn from the PayPal account in cash) but is an online form of
“currency” that is “converted”
into reward cards or
vouchers through certain retailers. It is possible therefore that there is some
duplication in the gross earnings
assessed by Merit Reviewer Koya, which is
based on the PayPal statement and the available evidence of reward cards and
This may also be why the Claimant did not “keep copies of all
the vouchers” he received, as some of those vouchers likely
represented
conversion of PayPal currency and not separate payment for services rendered.
6.24 of the Act provides:
(1) A claimant
must co-operate fully in respect of the claim with the other party to the claim
(being the insurer on the claim or,
if there is no insurer, the person against
whom the claim is made) for the purpose of giving the other party sufficient
information—
(a) to be satisfied as to the validity of the claim and, in particular, to
assess whether the claim or any part of the claim, may
be fraudulent, and
(b) to be able to make an early assessment of liability, and
(c) to be able to make an informed offer of settlement in the case of a
claim for damages.
(2) In particular, the claimant must comply with any reasonable request by
the other party—
(a) to furnish specified information (in addition to the information
furnished in the claim) or to produce specified documents or
records, or
(b) to provide a photograph of and evidence as to the identity of the
(3) The reasonableness of a request may be assessed having regard to
criteria including the following—
(a) the amount of time the claimant needs to comply with the request,
(b) whether the information sought is cogent and relevant to a determination
of liability or quantum of loss, having regard to the
nature of the claim,
(c) the amount of information which has already been supplied to or is
available to an insurer to enable liability and quantum of
loss to be assessed
and an offer of settlement made,
(d) how onerous it will be for the claimant to comply with the request,
(e) whether the information is privileged,
(f) whether the information sought is sufficiently specified,
(g) the time of the request and whether the claimant will be delayed in
commencing proceedings for damages by complying with the
(4) A duty under this section in respect of a claim for damages applies only
until court proceedings are commenced in respect of
the claim but if the
claimant fails without reasonable excuse to comply with this section, court
proceedings cannot be commenced
in respect of the claim while the failure
is apparent to the Review Panel that further enquiry should be made of the
Claimant by the Insurer pursuant to section 6.24(2)
in relation to evidence of
the Claimant’s pre-accident gross earnings during the period 30 June 2019
to 29 June 2020, particularly
in circumstances where the Claimant has stated the
sum of $15,000 is an estimate only.
the Claimant provided sufficient source documents to his accountant to enable
the accountant to identify the type or types
of income and their respective
amounts, including the dates on which the income was received to enable his
accountant to prepare
the tax return, including the supplementary section and
including the categorisation of “other” income. That same evidence
ought to be made available to the Insurer for calculation of the
Claimant’s PAWE.
6.3 of the Act sets out each party’s duty to act with good
(1) A claimant
and an insurer each have a duty to act towards the other with good faith in
connection with a claim.
(2) The duty of
a claimant to act with good faith includes the following
(a) a duty to act honestly and not mislead,
(b) a duty to disclose all relevant information (including reports by health
professionals) in a timely manner,
(c) a duty to promptly do all things reasonably necessary to facilitate the
resolution of any dispute involving the claim.
(3) The duty of
an insurer to act with good faith includes the following
(a) the duty to provide a claimant with information about entitlements to
statutory benefits and damages,
(b) the duty to provide a claimant with all relevant information (including
reports by health professionals) relied on to make a
decision on a claim,
(c) the duty to provide written reasons for all decisions that materially affect
a claimant’s entitlement to statutory benefits
or damages,
(d) the duty to advise a claimant of any right under this Act to review any such
decision of the insurer,
(e) the duty to make prompt payment of statutory benefits and damages.
source documents that informed the tax returns are “relevant
information” for calculation of the Claimant’s
PAWE and ought to be
provided by the Claimant under section 6.3(2)(b), even if the Insurer did
not request same under section 6.24.
to section 6.6 of the Act a merit reviewer may issue directions for compliance
with duties under section 6.3. Section 6
6 relevantly
(1) The Commission,
when undertaking a claims assessment
or merit review under Part 7, may give directions to a party to a claim
the purpose of ensuring compliance by the party with a duty arising under this
(2) If a claimant fails
to comply with such a direction without reasonable excuse, the Commission may
direct the insurer to
weekly payments of statutory
benefits to the claimant under
Part 3 while the failure continues.
following directions are made by the Review Panel under section 6.6 of the Act:
(a) The Claimant is to provide to the Insurer all
documents provided to his accountant for the purpose of preparing the
2020 Income Tax Return and Amended Income Tax Return, including
the supplementary sections in those tax returns within 14 days of
the date of
this decision. The Insurer may request an authority from the Claimant
authorising the accountant to provide this information
directly to the Insurer.
(b) Should the Insurer be of the view any further information, other than the
accountant’s records, is required then the Insurer
is to issue a request
for that further information within 14 days of this decision.
(c) The Claimant is to provide a response to any further request for information
issued by the Insurer within 14 days of receipt
of that request.
(d) If the Claimant wishes to provide any further information to the Insurer for
the purpose of assessing his PAWE, the Claimant
is to provide this information
to the Insurer within 14 days of this decision.
the above directions have been complied with, the Insurer is directed to
recalculate the Claimant’s PAWE based on the information
including any further information obtained as a result of the above
directions.
Determination and directions
Review Panel’s determination is as follows:
(a) The single merit review decision of Merit Reviewer Koya dated 22 December
2020 is set aside and in its place the following directions
48.1.1 The Claimant is to provide to the Insurer all documents provided to
his accountant for the purpose of preparing the Claimant’s
2020 Income Tax
Return and Amended Income Tax Return, including the supplementary sections in
those tax returns, within 14 days of
the date of this decision. The Insurer may
request an authority from the Claimant authorising the accountant to provide
this information
directly to the Insurer.
48.1.2 Should the Insurer be of the view any further information or documents
are required, in addition to the accountant’s
records covered in the above
direction, the Insurer is to issue a request for that further information within
14 days of this decision.
48.1.3 The Claimant is to provide a response to any further request for
information or documents issued by the Insurer within 14 days
of receipt of that
48.1.4 If the Claimant wishes to provide any further information or documents
to the Insurer for the purpose of assessing his PAWE,
not covered by the above
directions, the Claimant is to provide any such information or documents to the
Insurer within 14 days of
this decision.
(b) Once the above directions have been complied with, the Insurer is to
recalculate the Claimant’s PAWE based on the information
including any further information obtained as a result of the above directions.
Review Panel Certification
certificate has been viewed by Merit Reviewer Katherine Ruschen, Merit Reviewer
Kriesen Seeneevassen and Merit Reviewer Elyse
White who have confirmed that they
are in agreement.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.06 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter