URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/573.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Felsch v NPV International Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPIC 573; (23 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION OF MEMBER
Felsch v NPV International Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPIC 573
Ian Edward Felsch
RESPONDENT:
NPV International Pty Ltd
John Isaksen
DATE OF DECISION:
23 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workers Compensation Act 1987
; claim for
permanent compensation for injury to the right wrist and hand (including complex
regional pain syndrome (CRPS)); injury
or consequential conditions to the right
elbow and right shoulder; consequential conditions to the left wrist, left
elbow, and left
shoulder; consideration of
Moon v Conmah Pty Ltd
Arquero v Shannons Anti Corrosion Engineering Pty Ltd
on claims of
consequential conditions; whether CRPS can be referred for assessment of whole
person impairment (WPI) when no assessments
made by experts but there is a
finding of injury; consideration of
Bindah v Carter Holt Harvey Wood Products
Australia Pty Ltd
and arbitral decision of
Elsworthy v Forgacs
Engineering Pty Ltd
– worker did not sustain an injury or
consequential condition to the right elbow or right shoulder; worker did sustain
a consequential
condition to the left wrist, left elbow, and left shoulder and
those body parts can be referred for assessment for WPI; CRPS in the
can be referred for assessment for WPI.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
The Personal Injury Commission (Commission) determines:
award for the respondent on the claim of an injury to the right elbow and right
shoulder on 9 June 2016.
award for the respondent on the claim of a consequential condition affecting the
right elbow and right shoulder as a result of
the injury sustained on 9 June
applicant has suffered a consequential condition affecting his left wrist, left
elbow and left shoulder as a result of the injury
he sustained to his right
wrist and right hand in the course of his employment on 9 June 2016.
applicant has been found by medical experts to have symptoms referable to
complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) as a result of
the injury he sustained to
his right wrist and right hand in the course of his employment on 9 June 2016.
The Commission orders:
matter is remitted to the President for referral to a Medical Assessor as
Date of injury: 9 June 2016.
Body parts: Right upper extremity (wrist; hand), left upper extremity
(wrist; elbow; shoulder), and CRPS in the right hand (if verified
by the Medical
Method of assessment: whole person impairment.
following documents are to be forwarded to the Medical Assessor:
(a) Application to Resolve a Dispute with attachments;
(b) Reply with attachments;
(c) Application to Lodge Additional Documents filed by the applicant on
September 2025, and
(d) a copy of this decision.
A brief statement is attached setting out the Commission’s reasons
for the determination.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Edward Felsch, the applicant in these proceedings, makes a claim for a lump sum
payment for 20% whole person impairment (WPI)
pursuant to s 66 of the
Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act) as a result of an injury he sustained
on 9 June 2016 while employed as a labourer with the respondent, NPV
international
Felsch claims that he sustained an injury to the right hand and wrist, and an
injury and/or consequential condition to the right
elbow and shoulder, and a
consequential condition affecting the left wrist, left elbow and left shoulder,
as a result of the injury
sustained on
9 June 2016. Mr Felsch also claims
that he has the condition of complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) as a result
of the injury sustained
on 9 June 2016.
Felsch has undergone two operations as a result of the injury sustained on 9
(a) a right ECU tendon debridement/synovectomy plus ECU excision performed by Dr
Myers on 26 April 2017, and
(b) a right de Quervain’s release performed by Dr Dowd on 24 October 2018.
claim for 20% WPI is based upon an assessment made by Dr Dryson, occupational
physician, in a report dated 29 January 2024. Dr
Dryson makes an assessment of
10% upper extremity impairment (UEI) of the right wrist, 4% UEI of the right
elbow, 9% UEI of the right
shoulder, 2% UEI of the left wrist, 2% UEI of the
left elbow, and 9% UEI of the left shoulder.
claim for a lump sum payment for WPI made by the lawyers for Mr Felsch on
May 2024 also claims that Mr Felsch had “probable Complex Regional Pain
Syndrome”, although no assessment of WPI is
made by Dr Dryson for
respondent admits liability for an injury to the right wrist and hand. However,
the respondent disputes liability for the claims
made by Mr Felsch that he has
sustained an injury and/or consequential condition to the right elbow and
shoulder, and a consequential
condition affecting the left wrist, left elbow and
left shoulder. The respondent also rejects an application made by Mr Felsch that
any referral for assessment of WPI should include CRPS affecting the right upper
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
parties agree that the following issues remain in dispute:
(a) whether the applicant sustained an injury and/or consequential condition to
the right elbow and shoulder as result of the incident
on 9 June 2016;
(b) whether the applicant has suffered a consequential condition affecting the
left wrist, left elbow and left shoulder as a result
of the injury sustained on
9 June 2016, and
(c) whether the condition of CRPS affecting the right upper limb can be included
in any referral to a Medical Assessor for the assessment
PROCEDURE BEFORE THE PERSONAL INJURY COMMISSION
parties attended a conference and hearing on 15 October 2025. I have used my
best endeavours in attempting to bring the parties
to the dispute to a
settlement acceptable to all of them. I am satisfied that the parties have had
sufficient opportunity to explore
settlement and that they have been unable to
reach an agreed resolution of the dispute.
Pecelj appeared for the applicant, instructed by Mr Sparke. Mr Hanrahan appeared
for the respondent, instructed by Mr Orr.
Documentary evidence
following documents were in evidence before the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) and considered in making this determination:
(a) Application to Resolve a Dispute and attached documents;
(b) Reply with attached documents, and
(c) Application to Lodge Additional Documents filed by the applicant on
September 2025, which annexed copies of clinical notes from St Clair Medical
Oral evidence
was no application to adduce oral evidence or to cross examine the applicant in
these proceedings.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
Whether the applicant sustained an injury and/or consequential condition
to his right elbow and right shoulder as a result of the
incident on 9 June 2016
The applicant’s evidence
Felsch has provided statements dated 20 November 2020 and 25 November 2024.
Felsch states that on 9 June 2016 he was trying to unload some wooden doors when
he felt a snapping and popping sensation in his
right wrist, and his right hand
then swelled up and “virtually locked”. Mr Felsch does not describe
any symptoms affecting
his right elbow or right shoulder following this
Felsch provides a summary of medical treatment which he underwent following the
incident on 9 June 2016, including two operations
to the right wrist and hand in
April 2017 and October 2018. Mr Felsch states his general practitioner was
initially Dr Owen Green,
but he changed to Dr Gupta at St Clair Medical Practice
in January 2018.
Felsch states that he was continually told by his doctors not to use his right
hand for any lifting, gripping or pushing. He states
that he avoided using his
right hand due to the significant amount of pain that he was experiencing.
Felsch provides details of the development of pain in his left wrist, left elbow
and left shoulder following the incident on 9
June 2016, but does not provide
any details of the development of any symptoms in his right elbow or right
shoulder. He does state
that he has pain in his right arm, and constant pain,
discomfort and restriction of movement in the right elbow.
medical evidence
are no clinical records in evidence from Dr Owen Green, who was the first doctor
that Mr Felsch said he attended upon following
the incident on 9 June 2016.
Myers initially sees Mr Felsch on 27 September 2016 and records that Mr Felsch
felt a snapping, popping sensation in his right
wrist on 9 June 2016. Dr Myers
diagnoses a right wrist injury with ECU subluxation instability. There is no
mention in this report
of any injury to, or symptoms affecting, the right elbow
or right shoulder from the incident on 9 June 2016.
clinical notes from St Clair Medical Practice cover a period from 9 January 2018
23 August 2023. I could not locate, nor was I directed to, any reference
to treatment required for symptoms experienced by Mr Felsch
in the right elbow
or right shoulder. There is no reference to any problems with the right elbow or
right shoulder in a report from
Dr Gupta dated 17 February 2020.
Dryson records that on 9 January 2016 Mr Felsch was unloading objects weighing
approximately 15-20 kg when he felt a “pop”
in his right wrist. Dr
Dryson does not record any symptoms affecting the right elbow or right shoulder
at that time.
Dryson records that Mr Felsch reports pain radiating up the arm from the right
wrist, to about 5 cm below the elbow. He records
from Mr Felsch that the right
shoulder is “okay”.
Dryson makes no diagnosis of any condition affecting the right elbow. He
diagnoses painful restricted range of movement of both
Dryson assesses 4% UEI of the right elbow and 9% UEI of the right shoulder.
Those assessments of impairment are based upon range
Dryson states that he records details from Mr Felsch of symptoms which are
consistent with a diagnosis of CRPS, but he could find
no clinical evidence of
CRPS on the day of his assessment.
Dryson in a supplementary report dated 17 February 2025 concedes that there are
no radiological investigations of the right shoulder,
but states: “Mr
Felsch has developed symptoms suggestive of a complex regional pain syndrome
involving the right upper extremity
and this will, in my opinion, be affecting
his right shoulder function.”
A/Prof Kleinman, orthopaedic surgeon, has provided reports at the request of the
respondent dated 5 December 2019, 19 September 2024
and 22 December 2024.
his first report dated 5 December 2019, A/Prof Kleinman records details of the
9 June 2016 which are consistent with the details recorded by Dr
Dryson, namely that
Mr Felsch felt something “pop” in his right
wrist when he was undertaking some lifting. A/Prof Kleinman does not record
Felsch experiencing any symptoms in his right elbow or right shoulder, either at
the time of the incident on 9 June 2016 or up
until this examination.
report from A/Prof Kleinman dated 19 September 2024 is produced after Mr Felsch
makes his claim for a lump sum payment for WPI.
A/Prof Kleinman does not record
Mr Felsch complaining of any symptoms in his right elbow or right shoulder.
He finds a full range of movement in the right elbow and
stiffness in the right
shoulder, but states that
Mr Felsch made no complaints of pain or injury to
the right shoulder.
Kleinman provides a further report dated 22 December 2024. He writes in regard
to the right shoulder:
“In my opinion the pain in Mr
Felsch’s right shoulder is not related to his right wrist injury as if he
had severe pain
in his right wrist, he would not have been using his right arm
excessively.”
Kleinman writes in regard to the right elbow:
“I can find no
mention in his report of how Dr Dryson relates his right elbow condition to the
incident on 9/6/16 and Dr Dryson
does not supply the evidence of which he relies
to support his views.”
Determination
Trustees of the Society of St Vincent de Paul (NSW) v Maxwell James Kear as
administrator of the estate of Anthony John Kear
[2014] NSWWCCPD 47
DP Roche said at [38]:
“The authorities
establish that a “personal injury” is “a sudden and
ascertainable or dramatic physiological
change or disturbance of the normal
physiological state” (Gleeson CJ and Kirby J
at [39]). In other words, as stated at [81]
, it is “a sudden identifiable pathological
is simply no evidence provided in this dispute which would allow me to be
satisfied that Mr Felsch suffered a sudden identifiable
pathological change to
either his right elbow or right shoulder in the incident on 9 June 2016.
and most significantly, Mr Felsch does not provide any evidence of symptoms
immediately following the incident which would
suggest some pathological change
to the right elbow or right shoulder, and which would allow a medical expert to
opine as to whether
an injury had been sustained to either or both of those two
body parts.
there is no medical evidence which supports a finding that Mr Felsch sustained
an injury to his right elbow or right shoulder
as a result of the incident on 9
June 2016. There is no material from soon after the incident, in particular from
Dr Green, to confirm
any symptoms affecting those parts of the body. The first
medical report which I could locate following the incident is from Dr Myers
27 September 2016, and that report does not refer to any injury to the right
elbow or right shoulder.
Dr Dryson nor A/Prof Kleinman record details of symptoms experienced by Mr
Felsch in the right elbow or right shoulder immediately
following the incident
on 9 June 2016.
will therefore be an award for the respondent on the claim for an injury to the
right elbow and right shoulder on 9 June 2016.
determination of whether a condition suffered by a worker is as a consequence of
a work injury was considered by DP Roche in
Conmah Pty Limited
[2009] NSWWCCPD 134
). In that matter the worker claimed WPI
from symptoms experienced in the left shoulder as a consequence of an accepted
the right shoulder. DP Roche said at [45]-[46]:
is therefore not necessary for Mr Moon to establish that he suffered an
‘injury’ to his left shoulder within
the meaning of that term in
section 4 of the 1987 Act. All he has to establish is that the symptoms and
restrictions in his left
shoulder have resulted from his right shoulder injury.
Therefore, to the extent that the Arbitrator and Dr Huntsdale approached the
matter on the basis that Mr Moon had to establish that he sustained an
‘injury’ to his left shoulder in the course of
his employment with
they asked the wrong question.
The test of causation in a claim for lump sum compensation is the same as it
is in a claim for weekly compensation, namely, has the
loss ‘resulted
from’ the relevant work injury (see
Sidiropoulos v Able Placements Pty
[1998] NSWCC 7
(1998) 16 NSWCCR 123
Rail Services
Australia v Dimovski & Anor
[2004] NSWCA 267
(2004) 1 DDCR
President Roche then proceeded to state that the expression “results
from” should be applied using the principles
set out by Kirby P in
Kooragang Cement v Bates
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
President Kirby said in
been well recognised in this jurisdiction that an injury can set in train a
series of events. If the chain is unbroken
and provides the relevant causative
explanation of the incapacity or death from which the claim comes, it will be
open to the Compensation
Court to award compensation under the Act.”
P then said at [463]-[464]:
“...What is required is a common
sense evaluation of the causal chain. As the early cases demonstrate, the mere
passage of time
between a work incident and subsequent incapacity or death, is
not determinative of the entitlement to compensation. In each case,
the question
whether the incapacity or death ‘results from’ the impugned work
injury... Is a question of fact to be determined
on the basis of the evidence,
including, where applicable, expert opinions.”
Dryson finds restriction of movement of the right elbow and right shoulder and
accordingly makes assessments of impairment. However,
he does not explain how
those restrictions are as a result of the injury on 9 June 2016 and thereby
satisfy the test in
Hevi Lift (PNG) Ltd v Etherington
[2005] NSWCA 42
Hevi Lift),
McColl JA (Mason P and Beazley JA
agreeing) said at [84]:
“It has long been the case that a
court cannot be expected to, and should not, act upon an expert opinion the
basis for which
is not explained by the witness expressing it.”
is no causal link identified at all by Dr Dryson between the injury to the right
wrist and the restriction of movement in the
right elbow.
Dryson does opine that symptoms suggestive of CRPS involving the right upper
extremity would be affecting his right shoulder function.
However, he does not
explain the mechanism or rationale for this given that those doctors who have
identified Mr Felsch as having
symptoms of CRPS, and whose reports will be
addressed elsewhere in this decision, limit those findings to the right hand. Dr
does not explain how symptoms of CRPS in the right wrist and hand can
extend to restricted movement in the shoulder.
is no other medical support for the claim made by Mr Felsch that he has
conditions affecting his right wrist and right shoulder
as a result of the
injury to his right wrist and hand.
is otherwise difficult to understand as a matter of logic how Mr Felsch can have
restrictions and symptoms in his right elbow and
right shoulder when, on his own
evidence, he has been limiting the use of his right arm.
will therefore be an award for the respondent on the claim of a consequential
condition affecting the right elbow and right
shoulder as a result of the injury
sustained on 9 June 2016.
Whether the applicant has suffered a
consequential condition affecting his left wrist, left elbow and left shoulder
as a result of
the injury sustained on 9 June 2016
The applicant’s evidence
addition to the two operations which he underwent, Mr Felsch describes having
several injections to treat the condition of his
right wrist and hand, and
periods when he has had his right wrist in a splint. Mr Felsch
“I was continually told by my doctors not to use my
right hand for any lifting, gripping or pushing. I avoided using my right
due to the significant amount of pain it was causing me. I was relying on my
left arm to do any day-to-day lifting, including
eating, using my phone, getting
in and out of chairs, toileting and anything else I would be doing.”
Felsch states that he began to develop significant pain in his left elbow and
forearm towards the end of 2018. He states that he
was on a cruise when he had
to use his left hand to arise from his bed and his left hand locked and twisted,
which caused tenderness
to his left wrist.
Felsch states that he has constant pain, discomfort and restriction in his left
arm. He complains of muscle spasms in his left
shoulder. He states that he now
relies upon his left arm to perform basic household tasks or self care tasks.
The medical evidence
first reference in the clinical notes from St Clair Medical Practice in regard
to problems with the left upper limb appears to
be on 13 December 2018 when Dr
Gupta records:
“fell on left hand on cruise
using left hand most of the time as rt and is quiet sore
balanced his wt on left hand”
there are multiple entries in those notes in regard to treatment for various
parts of the left upper limb, some of which
were referred to by Mr Pecelj and
include the following:
(a) on 15 January 2019: “left wrist also sore” and “left hand
sore on picking things”;
(b) on 31 January 2019: “left hand is still sore”;
(c) on 4 March 2019: “left elbow sore”, and a referral is given for
an ultrasound of the left elbow;
(d) on 18 July 2019: “sore left elbow”; “has been using left
side more”;
(e) on 30 December 2019: “left elbow gets sore depending on
(f) on 28 May 2020: “did half lawn mowing with left hand and left elbow
got sore”, and
(g) on 25 February 2021: “flare up of left elbow as well”.
Gupta writes in a report dated 17 February 2020:
restrictive of rt hand could have contributed in overuse of left side but I
can’t comment on causal factor for
left elbow lateral
epicondylitis.”
is a referral for an X-ray and ultrasound recorded by Dr Gupta on 5 May 2022,
with a note of “pain in left shoulder, no
Dryson records that Mr Felsch is unable to do the cleaning or laundry at home,
and that his daughters are doing the lawns. Dr Dryson
records that Mr Felsch
goes shopping with his wife, but he does not do any of the lifting.
Dryson finds restriction of movement of the left wrist, left elbow and left
shoulder on examination. He diagnoses Mr Felsch as
having left lateral
epicondylitis and restricted range of movement of the left shoulder.
Dryson concludes in his report dated 29 January
“Subsequently, because of Mr Felsch’s efforts to
protect his right wrist, he has developed symptoms on the left wrist,
and left shoulder, all of which can be considered overuse injuries.”
his supplementary report dated 17 February 2025, Dr Dryson adds to his opinion
on the cause of the restrictions he found in the
left upper limb as
“The reason why I consider the left arm symptoms to
be due to overuse is because Mr Felsch was clearly relying heavily on his
upper limb because of the development of the complex regional pain syndrome in
the right upper limb. Although Associate Professor
Kleinman points out that he
was not working since 2016 and was “inactive”, the fact remains that
during normal activities
of daily living, including dressing and undressing,
showering, and light household duties, he was preferentially using the left arm.
There were no new injuries to explain onset of symptoms in the left
his first report dated 5 December 2019, A/Prof Kleinman records that Mr Felsch
strained his left wrist when trying to get up from
his lounge because he could
not use his right hand to do so.
Kleinman finds Mr Felsch to be slightly tender to palpation of the lateral
epicondyle of the left elbow. However, he concludes
that Mr Felsch does not meet
the clinical requirements for a diagnosis of tennis elbow.
Kleinman concludes that the left upper extremity is not causally related to the
original injury because the left wrist condition
was caused by the incident at
this but not due to
his right wrist condition.”
Kleinman records in his report dated 19 September 2024 that Mr Felsch has
developed pain in his left shoulder since the previous
examination in 2019. He
finds the left shoulder to be stiff. He also states that Mr Felsch has signs
consistent with lateral epicondylitis
of the left elbow.
Kleinman records that Mr Felsch is unable to do the vacuuming, lawn mowing or
gardening, and that he spends the day watching
television.
Kleinman does not consider that the lateral epicondylitis of the left elbow is
due to overuse because Mr Felsch has been inactive.
He considers that the pain
complained of by Mr Felsch in the left shoulder is due to constitutional
degenerative changes and not
due to overuse.
Kleinman confirms his opinion that Mr Felsch’s complaints of pain in the
left shoulder, left elbow and left wrist are
not due to overuse because Mr
Felsch has not worked and has been inactive since the work injury in
Determination
accept that Mr Felsch sustained a serious injury to his right wrist and hand on
9 June 2016. He has undergone two operations to
the right wrist. He has had
multiple injections in the right wrist. He has had to wear a splint on several
occasions. He has sought
treatment from pain specialists and tried different
is therefore entirely understandable that Mr Felsch would limit as much as
possible the use of his dominant right hand and use
his left hand and arm for
his activities of daily living.
the amount of use required by the left hand and arm is questionable having
regard to the available evidence. Mr Felsch has
not worked at all since the
injury of 9 June 2016. Both Dr Dryson and A/Prof Kleinman record that Mr Felsch
does not undertake household
tasks. That information leads A/Prof Kleinman to
conclude Mr Felsch’s complaints of pain in the left shoulder, left elbow
left wrist cannot be due to overuse because Mr Felsch has not worked and has
been “inactive” since the work injury in
Nevertheless,
I accept that Mr Felsch has had to mostly use his left hand and arm for his
normal activities of daily living. Mr Felsch
refers to reliance upon his left
arm for activities such as eating, getting in and out of chairs, and toileting.
Dr Dryson refers
to the preferential use of the left arm dressing and
undressing, showering and light household duties. These activities have been
undertaken by Mr Felsch for almost 10 years now.
Furthermore,
the clinical notes from St Clair Medical Practice include attendances which
record the treatment of the left upper limb
coinciding with the use of that body
part. It is recorded that “left hand sore on picking things” on 15
January 2019.
A sore left elbow is recorded on 18 July 2019 when “using
left side more”. It is recorded that the “left elbow
depending on usage” on 30 December 2019.
consider that Dr Gupta is even handed in the observation which he makes in his
report dated 5 May 2022 that restrictive use of the
right hand could have
contributed to overuse of the left upper limb but defers to others to provide a
definitive conclusion on this
Having regard to the applicant’s evidence of undertaking basic activities
of daily living with the use of the left arm since
the work injury in 2016, the
references in the clinical notes from St Clair Medical Practice regarding
symptoms of pain from use
of the left arm, and
Dr Dryson’s
understanding that the normal activities of daily living have required
preferential use of the left arm, I prefer
the opinion reached by Dr Dryson that
the development of symptoms in the left wrist, left elbow and left shoulder have
been caused
by overuse of the left hand and arm.
conclusion is consistent with the path of reasoning adopted by DP Wood when she
accepted the expert opinion on causation of a
consequential condition in
Arquero v Shannons Anti Corrosion Engineers P/L
[2019] NSWWCCPD 3
“...the evidence was consistent
with the historical medical evidence and Mr Arquero’s statement evidence.
It was not inherently
incredible, and provided a logical basis on which the
necessary causal connection could be established.”
prefer the opinion of Dr Dryson over that provided by A/Prof Kleinman because I
accept from the evidence I have just referred to
that Mr Felsch has not been as
inactive as suggested by A/Prof Kleinman. I accept that Dr Dryson has provided a
logical basis for
the necessary causal connection to be established.
contemporaneous medical records indicate that the symptoms complained of by
Mr Felsch in the left wrist, left elbow and left shoulder have developed at
different times. Symptoms in the left wrist and elbow
are recorded by Dr Gupta
in early 2019, whereas a referral for scans for the left shoulder is not made
until May 2022.
Nevertheless,
Dr Dryson concludes that the restriction of movement he finds in the three
joints of the left upper limb is due to overuse
of that limb because of the
injury to the right hand and wrist, and this satisfies the test set out in
Hanrahan submits that the record made by Dr Gupta on 13 December 2018 of Mr
Felsch falling on his left hand while on a cruise and
injuring his left hand and
wrist is evidence of a separate injury to the left wrist and casts doubt on the
contention that symptoms
in the left wrist are due to overuse.
evidence regarding the onset of symptoms in the left wrist at around this time
is unclear. Mr Felsch states that he was on a cruise,
but that he injured his
left wrist when he was using his left arm to get out of bed. The brief entry
made by Dr Gupta is: “fell
on hand on cruise”. A/Prof Kleinman
records that Mr Felsch strained his left wrist when trying to get up from his
Mr Felsch did sustain an injury to the left wrist in the form of a strain or
sprain to the left wrist does not preclude the
finding that I have made on a
review of the available evidence that Mr Felsch has also suffered a
consequential condition to his
left wrist as a result of the work injury. The
contribution of that incident to any permanent impairment of the left wrist can
determined by a Medical Assessor, and this was quite fairly conceded by Mr
Hanrahan in his submissions.
will therefore be a finding that Mr Felsch has suffered a consequential
condition affecting his left wrist, left elbow and left
shoulder as a result of
the injury he sustained to his right wrist and right hand in the course of his
employment on 9 June 2016.
will be a referral to a Medical Assessor for assessment of WPI of the left upper
limb (wrist, elbow and shoulder).
Whether the condition of CRPS
affecting the right upper limb can be included in a referral to a Medical
Assessor for the assessment
The medical evidence
pages of a report from Dr Russo, pain medicine physician, dated 22 November
2017, is broken up in the attachments to the ARD.
The first page of the report
is at ARD 223.
Dr Russo writes that Mr Felsch reports symptoms of CRPS in
terms of swelling of the hand, intermittent red discolouration of the hand,
sweating coming from the palm, and abnormal hot sensation coming from the
is another page of that report at ARD 151 wherein Dr Russo writes that on
examination there was marked sweat coming from the
palmar surface of the hand
and diffuse swelling through the fingers and hand, although colour change and
temperature change was within
normal limits. Dr Russo found the right wrist,
right shoulder and cervical spine to be unremarkable. Dr Russo concludes that Mr
is a report from Dr Wallace, interventional pain specialist, in the attachments
to the ARD (166-167) which is incomplete, and
the date of the report cannot be
verified. Dr Wallace does write:
“Ian exhibits allodynia,
hypoalgesia, swelling of the right hand and decreased strength. Therefore he
fits the Budapest criteria
for diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome. This
diagnosis was also made by Dr Russo as far as I can understand.”
is another report from Dr Wallace dated 12 November 2018 in the Application to
Lodge Additional Documents at page 32 wherein
there is confirmation of a
diagnosis of “CRPS right hand”.
Dowd, plastic, reconstructive and hand surgeon, initially sees Mr Felsch on 9
March 2018 and finds the whole of the right hand
to be moderately swollen and
there is reddish discolouration to the hand. Dr Dowd writes: “I have no
doubt he has complex regional
pain syndrome and has had for a number of
are multiple occasions in the clinical notes from St Clair Medical Practice
wherein a diagnosis of CRPS is recorded, commencing
on 19 January 2018, which is
Mr Felsch begins to attend that practice.
Dr Dryson and A/Prof Kleinman could not identify clinical evidence of CRPS
during their examinations of Mr Felsch. However, Dr
Dryson still diagnoses
“Probable Complex Regional Pain Syndrome” as one of the injuries or
conditions sustained by Mr
Determination
accept from a review of the medical evidence that Mr Felsch has had symptoms of
CRPS in the right hand. There are three treating
specialists who have found
symptoms referable to CRPS in the right hand and have concluded that Mr Felsch
has had CRPS.
have given particular weight and preference to the opinion of Dr Dowd because he
carries the additional burden of deciding on whether
surgery should be performed
when the patient is also suffering symptoms of CRPS. Dr Dowd ultimately
performed a right de Quervain’s
release in October 2018.
the question is whether the referral for WPI should include an assessment of
Pecelj submits that so long as there is an injury to the right upper limb there
can be a referral for assessment of that limb which
includes an assessment for
Hanrahan submits that there has been no assessment of WPI for the condition of
CRPS, and therefore there is no dispute, and thus
there can be no referral for
assessment of CRPS.
claim for lump sum compensation made on behalf of Mr Felsch which is made by
letter dated 9 May 2024 claims: “due to our
client’s efforts to
protect his right wrist, he began to develop consequential injuries in the left
wrist, left elbow and left
shoulder as well as complex regional pain
syndrome”. The letter includes a copy of the report of Dr Dryson dated
29 January 2024 wherein Dr Dryson includes a diagnosis of “Probable
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome”.
respondent has therefore been put on notice of a claim made by Mr Felsch that he
has CRPS as a result of the work injury, and
A/Prof Kleinman has had the
opportunity in his reports to address this condition and whether it has been
caused by the work injury.
dispute notices issued by GIO on behalf of the respondent dated 6 December 2024,
13 January 2025 and 12 March 2025 subsequent to the claim made by Mr Felsch
make no reference to CRPS but dispute injury or consequential
conditions to both
upper limbs other than to the right wrist.
Greater Taree City Council v Moore
[2010] NSWWCCPD 49
Roche said at [141]:
“... where an employer admits that a
worker received an injury and the only compensation claimed is lump sum
compensation, the
assessment of the degree of permanent impairment is a matter
for an AMS.”
this matter, the respondent accepts that Mr Felsch has sustained an injury to
his right hand and wrist, and I have provided reasons
as to why I accept that Mr
Felsch has had symptoms of CRPS in the right hand. It is now for a Medical
Assessor to assess WPI of the
right hand and wrist, which includes an assessment
for CRPS, given that it is established that Mr Felsch has sustained an injury
the right wrist and hand and has suffered CRPS as a result of the injury to the
right wrist and hand.
was an approach taken by Arbitrator Egan in
Elsworthy v Forgacs Engineering
[2017] NSWWCC 64 (
“Accordingly, while it is clear from
Bindah, Bishop
Jaffarie v Quality Castings Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWWCCPD 79
Commission must determine the liability before a matter may be referred to an
AMS impairment, if the condition referred
for assessment is CRPS, once it is so
referred the AMS is bound to diagnose the existence of the condition by
application of the
prescriptive definition in cl 17.5 and Table 17-1. This is it
so regardless of any determination of the Commission. Additionally,
diagnosis by the AMS must be made on the day of assessment applying Chapter 17,
and the AMS is not concerned with, or at least
not bound by, whether it may have
been diagnosable in the past.”
reference to
is the Court of Appeal decision of
Bindah v Carter
Holt Harvey Wood Products Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 264
, wherein Emmett
J said at [119]:
“Consequently, Order 3 of the Certificate of
Determination on 21 November 2011 simply recorded the arbitrator's determination
that Mr Bindah had incurred
injury. That determination involved a
conclusion on a matter of causation, being that Mr Bindah's employment was a
substantial contributing
factor to his injury. The arbitrator did not need to
make a determination about the precise nature of the injury, because that matter
fell within the province of a medical dispute, which was for the approved
medical specialist, and, if necessary, the Appeal Panel,
to determine. The
arbitrator's determination that Mr Bindah had suffered an
that he had suffered an injury according to the definition of that term in s 4
of the Compensation Act. That definition includes
both a personal injury and an
aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration of a disease. It was
then for the approved
medical specialist to determine the degree of permanent
impairment that
resulted from
the injury. That determination involved a
conclusion on a matter of causation, as indicated by the words in bold.
(emphasis in [118]
and [119] in
accordance with those observations in
there has been a finding of
injury to the right wrist and hand, and the precise nature of that injury,
including CRPS, now falls within
the province of the Medical Assessor.
there has not been an assessment of WPI for CRPS does not preclude such an
assessment being made by the Medical Assessor. I find
support for this
conclusion in
Klement v Bull-N-Bush Nurseries Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 466
wherein Schmidt AJ said at [73-73]:
that neither Dr Lai nor Dr Doig had concluded that Mr Klement’s shoulder
injury had resulted in an impairment,
could not confine the medical dispute. The
assessor was not bound by those conclusions. He had to make his own assessment,
regard to their reports and the other material which he had to consider
because of the way the claim had been advanced and resisted,
based on opinions
which he formed, having undertaken the examination of Mr Klement which he
This statutory scheme accepts that injuries can improve or worsen over time
and so an assessor must base his conclusions on his own
findings and opinions,
formed at the time of the assessment, while taking into account what earlier
examinations have established.”
neither Dr Dryson nor A/Prof Kleinman found impairment from CRPS of the right
hand does not confine this medical dispute. The
Medical Assessor will make his
or her own assessment based on a finding that Mr Felsch has sustained an injury
to the right hand
and wrist and has been diagnosed by three treating specialists
as having had CRPS. CRPS is a condition which can improve or worsen
and, as observed in
it is the diagnosis on the day of
assessment which is critical as to whether there will be a finding of WPI for
referral for assessment of WPI to the Medical Assessor will include CRPS in the
right hand (if verified by the Medical Assessor).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.15 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter