URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/73.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
State of New South Wales (Sydney Local Health District) v BNV [2025] NSWPICPD 73; (17 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
State of New South Wales (Sydney Local Health District) v BNV
NSWPICPD 73
State of New South Wales (Sydney Local Health District)
RESPONDENT:
Employers Mutual Limited – TMF
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W24722/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Acting Deputy President Geoffrey Parker SC
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
17 October 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
appeal is dismissed.
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 12 February 2025 is
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
I de-identify the
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – psychological injury – whether the
worker sustained primary psychological injury in the nature
of an aggravation of
her pre-existing psychological injury in the course of her employment and
whether employment was the main contributing
factor to the injury – no
error by Member found
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Ms K Balendra, counsel
Turks Legal
Respondent:
Mr C Tanner, counsel
Turner Freeman Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
12 February 2025
INTRODUCTION
appeal is from the Personal Injury Commission (Commission) Workers Compensation
Division determination dated 12 February 2025.
respondent was employed by the appellant at the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital
(RPA) as an office clerk.
Proceedings
were filed by the respondent alleging a primary psychological/psychiatric injury
as a result of protracted bullying, harassment,
isolation, ostracisation, lack
of support and unrealistic expectations.
12 February 2025 the Commission determined:
[respondent] sustained primary psychological injury (in the nature of an
aggravation of her pre-existing psychological
condition) in the course of her
employment with the [appellant], with a deemed date of injury of 26 July 2022,
with her employment
being the main contributing factor to injury.
(2) The [respondent] has no current capacity for work resulting from the
injury from 4 December 2023 to date and continuing.
(3) As at 4 December 2023, the [respondent’s] pre-injury average weekly
earnings were $1,170 (subject to indexation). The [respondent]
entitlement to weekly compensation payable under
Compensation Act
from 4 December 2023 ongoing in accordance with
Workers Compensation Act 1987
at $936 (subject to
indexation).”
the reasons that follow, the appeal is dismissed and the Member’s
determination is confirmed.
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
I have directed that
this decision should be de-identified. My reasons are:
(a) The respondent has a history of trauma and psychological ill health.
(b) Her daughter who has provided statement evidence also has a history of
significant trauma.
(c) I recognise the necessity for proceedings in the Commission to be open and
transparent nevertheless in my view there is significant
and unacceptable risk
to the respondent and her daughter’s health and well-being.
(d) A de-identification order will not in my view operate to prejudice the
administration of justice or the Commission’s proceedings.
(e) The public interest in open justice is outweighed to a substantial extent by
the need to limit the degree of trauma likely to
be experienced by the
respondent who will inevitably be further impacted by reading these reasons.
(f) The respondent has advised that she does not oppose de-identification. The
appellant did not respond to a direction to advise
of any opposition.
MEMBER’S STATEMENT OF REASONS
Member made three interlocutory decisions which are not the subject of
she determined that the statements of employees of the appellant which were
served late should not be received in evidence.
she refused an application for leave to cross-examine the respondent.
she allowed the appellant to rely upon a report of Dr Berry dated 12 November
parties agreed the issues for determination as follows:
(a) whether the respondent sustained primary psychological injury (in the nature
of an aggravation of her pre-existing psychological
injury) in the course of her
employment with RPA with her employment being the main contributing factor to
the injury, and if so,
(b) whether the respondent had suffered/suffers an incapacity for work resulting
from the injury from 4 December 2023 and has an
entitlement to weekly
compensation payable under
Workers Compensation Act
respondent was employed by the appellant from 25 October 2021. She last worked
for the appellant on 25 July 2022. She was admitted
to Hornsby Hospital on 26
evidence before the Commission was entirely written.
Member summarised and paraphrased the extensive lay and medical evidence.
Member quoted from the respondent’s statement at length and she
“... [the respondent] particularised a number of events
between December 2021 and July 2022 involving her manager, ... which
amounted to bullying and harassment. In submission RPA did not take issue with
the fact that interactions occurred during
the course of [the
respondent’s] employment with RPA which were capable of leading to a
perception by [the respondent] that
she was bullied and
25 July 2022 the respondent contacted her general practitioner, Dr Yacoub, who
in turn directed her to the closest accident and
emergency department. The
respondent was picked up by her daughter from work. She attended Hornsby
Hospital on 26 July 2022 and was
subsequently transferred to Northern Beaches
Hospital where she remained for three to four weeks.
Member observed that the respondent reported her suicidal ideation became severe
despite receiving intensive treatment after her
discharge from hospital,
resulting in her admission to Gordon Private Hospital from 23 November 2022 to
24 December 2022.
Member quoted the respondent’s daughter’s
“I strongly believe that my mother’s mental
health had significantly deteriorated after suffering from the bullying and
harassment that she experienced whilst working at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital.
I am fully aware of my mother’s pre-existing
psychological injuries;
however, I strongly believe that my mother has never been impacted to this
extent after suffering from her
work injury at the Royal Prince Alfred
Member quoted from the respondent’s mother’s
“I am fully aware that [the respondent] has
suffered from pre-existing psychological injuries in the past, particularly due
to some traumatic experiences that she had faced with her ex-partner and
previous childhood sexual abuse. However, I have never seen
[the respondent] in
such a fragile state.”
Member noted from the records of a previous employer:
October 2020 [the respondent] was requested by [the] director of [the previous
employer] to attend a meeting on 9 October
2020 to discuss a number of concerns
regarding [the respondent’s] performance, which had reportedly previously
been raised
with [the respondent]. On 13 October 2020 [the respondent] was
provided with a written warning relevant to [the respondent’s]
meet the required standard of her role, with her workplace performance to be
reviewed on 3 November 2020. On 30 October
2020 [the respondent] was again
requested by [the director of the previous employer] to attend a meeting on 3
November 2020 to review
her work performance, as previously
foreshadowed.”
respondent was granted, subject to the provision of a medical certificate,
stress leave on 9 February 2022 by the appellant.
7 July 2022, the respondent’s manager’s manager wrote to the
respondent in the following terms:
“Thanks for the meeting
with us today. It was a good discussion and thank you for your input. In
particular we discussed:
Your leave and hope that most of your illnesses are now over and you can have
a healthy rest of year with very little sick leave.
That you have had at least 6 EAP and the guidelines suggest that from now on
you arrange these outside your daily shift.
That you meet with [the manager] and [a colleague, M] when [M] is back from
holidays to go through the daily admin duties that must
be completed. Your
specific duties will be documented together with [the manager] to provide clear
guidance to ensure that they are
completed by the end of each day. To monitor
this and get feedback from both you and [the manager] on workload and
distribution and
to see if [M] has any advice for work practices, [M] will meet
with you and [the manager] on a weekly basis.
That I follow up with [a colleague, S] about wrapping up the team discussions
that he has led and providing a way forward to healthy
collaboration.”
Member quoted extensively from the respondent’s clinical records with the
Dural Medical Centre; the Hornsby Ku-ring-gai
Hospital; and Psychology Today
(Raynor Lander), a clinical psychologist.
respondent had specialist psychiatric care from Dr Manambrakkat. The Member
observed “[the respondent] apparently cancelled
her consultation with Dr
Manambrakkat scheduled for 15 November
Manambrakkat recorded that the respondent gave up work in November 2020 as she
was not effective. He diagnosed her as having “current
depression since
November 2020” and major depression with psychotic features and
post-traumatic stress disorder. During the
consultation on 18 October 2021, Dr
Manambrakkat said the respondent reported her mood was better. The Member
incorrectly said Dr
Manambrakkat recorded that she feels “she has turned a
corner”. Dr Manambrakkat did record the respondent was “considering
getting a part-time job.”
respondent was admitted to Gordon Private Hospital on 17 November 2022. The
treating psychiatrist, Dr Sazhin, recommended that
the respondent make an
application for a disability support pension.
evidence of the appellant’s independent medical witness, Dr Berry, was
contained in a series of reports. The Member summarised
the past psychiatric
history given to Dr Berry at the initial assessment, and quoted the following
summary at length.
Berry diagnosed complex post-traumatic stress disorder and major depressive
Member said:
“Dr Berry accepted [the respondent’s]
diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder was an aggravation of the pre-existing
for which [the respondent] was already receiving treatment and said,
‘work was a contributing factor to the worsening of her
Dr Berry explained:
‘She has significant pre-existing vulnerabilities which make her most
susceptible to developing further psychiatric issues and
having difficulties
managing interpersonal relationships. It is against this background that work
and the difficulties she had with
other staff and the issues raised about her
attendance must be viewed.
They appear to directly precipitate the onset of
psychological symptoms but only did so because of [the respondent’s]
pre-existing
vulnerabilities
(my emphasis)
Member reviewed Dr Berry’s further supplementary reports and opinions. Dr
Berry did not accept that immediately before the
commencement of her employment
with RPA the respondent had enjoyed a consistent period of mental health
stability. Dr Berry identified
the key stressors, apart from those arising from
the employment at RPA, impacting on [the respondent’s] mental health
(a) previous sexual trauma in childhood;
(b) a previous lengthy abusive relationship;
(c) the unexpected death of her brother;
(d) her daughter’s sexual assault with slow recovery, and
(e) her son’s illness which resulted in intensive care unit admission.
Member quoted Dr Berry’s opinion:
“(c) the identified
stressors are a more significant factor affecting [the respondent’s]
psychological injury than her
employment with RPA, and while it is not possible
to identify one particular stressor as the main contributing factor, ‘her
history to exposure to trauma over many years, particularly in childhood, is
likely the key to her
presentation.’”
Member noted:
“Dr Khan provided an opinion [the respondent]
suffered an aggravation of her pre-existing psychological injury in the course
of her employment with RPA, with her employment being the main contributing
factor to the aggravation of her pre-existing psychological
injury of major
depressive disorder with anxious
Khan, the respondent’s independent medical witness, challenged Dr
Berry’s opinion in his reports of 25 July 2023, 4
September 2023 and 28
September 2023 on the basis that:
“Despite her longitudinal
history of trauma and mental health difficulties, she had been able to pursue
tertiary education and
obtain and [sustain] long-term employment, including as a
practice manager at an orthodontics practice. If her pre-existing conditions
were as debilitating as suggested by Dr Berry, it is unlikely that she would
have been able to function before the subject injury
in this capacity.
Furthermore [the respondent’s] engagement in mental health treatment in
the past for [her] pre-existing conditions
was not continuous but was rather
limited to periods of one to one and a half years of treatment on a few
occasions in her adult
life. If her pre-existing conditions were as debilitating
as suggested by Dr Berry, she would be expected to have needed to continue
psychological treatment and psychiatric treatment without any significant breaks
in her treatment ...
Leading up to her workplace psychiatric/psychological injury, [the
respondent’s] pre-existing psychiatric/psychological conditions
stable for an extended period of time. This is consistent with the medical
records from her treating practitioner, Dr Ben
Yacoub, where there were no
progress notes about mental difficulties between 21 October 2021 and 9
February 2022.”
Member quoted Dr Khan as maintaining the opinion that the pre-existing mental
health difficulties and other non-related stressors
did not significantly impede
the respondent’s capacity to work. It was Dr Khan’s opinion that the
injury was the result
of her employment with the
referring to the parties’ submissions, noting that copies were available
and were not reproduced, the Member proceeded
to identify the relevant
statements of legal principle. There is no dispute as to the correctness of
those statements of principle
and there is no appeal on the basis that the
Member misstated the law, misapplied a correct principle or failed to determine
matter in accordance with authority.
Member returned to the detail of the respondent’s history as given in her
She observed there
was no dispute by the appellant that the interactions between the respondent and
other members of the appellant’s
staff occurred and were “capable of
leading to perception by the respondent that she was bullied and
infer the Member accepted the evidence of the respondent’s daughter and
mother as to the deterioration of the respondent’s
mental state associated
with the workplace complaints at the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital.
Member reconciled the entries in the documents produced by the previous employer
and the Dural Medical Centre records and said:
“While [the
respondent] explained she ceased working with [the previous employer] to become
a full time carer for her daughter
during her slow recovery from sexual assault,
it is evident from Dr Yacoub’s clinical records that during the period of
employment with [the previous employer] [the respondent] was suffering
mental health fragility against a backdrop of childhood sexual
brother’s sudden death overseas, her daughter’s sexual assault and
her son’s hospital admission. Dr
Yacoub noted on 19 October 2020 that
[the respondent] was ‘struggling at work’ and noted on
2 December 2020 [the respondent]
‘lost her work, not able to work
with all health, mental health issues, her daughter still not well, with very
low mood’.”
Member therefore noted the inconsistency between the respondent’s current
evidence and the documented history with respect
to the events. The Member
recognised that there was an inconsistency which she described as an
“anomaly”, but she said:
“... I do not consider
any anomaly arising relevant to reason behind [the respondent] ceasing work with
[the previous employer]
is of significance in circumstances where [the
respondent’s] ceasing work with [the previous employer] in late 2020
with significant familial stressors [the respondent] was under during
2020, including [the respondent’s daughter’s] slow
recovery from her
sexual assault earlier the same year and [the respondent’s] intention to
engage in full time care of her
daughter. While it may be [the
respondent’s] mental fragility during 2020 played a part in her inability
to perform her role
with [the previous employer] ... I am of the view [the
respondent] has provided a consistent history to her treating practitioners,
treating psychologist, her treating psychiatrist and the independent medical
examiners of a significant deterioration in her
mental health due to behaviours
she was subjected to in the course of her employment with RPA, being a
deterioration observed by
both [the respondent’s daughter] and [the
respondent’s mother]. Although none of the hospitals’ clinical
record complaint by [the respondent] about the behaviours she was
subjected to while working with RPA, this is perhaps not surprising
circumstances where it is evident one of the hospitals specifically advised [the
respondent] that they ‘do not do workers
compensation
latter was a reference to the Northern Beaches Hospital statement by Dr Lawler.
The Member was alert to the fact that Hornsby
Ku-ring-gai Hospital and Northern
Beaches Hospital did not have any note of complaint on presentation of
difficulty at work. Indeed
the Hornsby Ku-ring-gai Hospital had a note
“works as admin RPA (feels supported)”.
Member said that particular entry was clearly at odds with the clinical records
of the Dural Medical Centre and the evidence of
the respondent, the
respondent’s daughter and the respondent’s
The Member also noted
that Gordon Private Hospital, to which the respondent was referred on
17 November 2022, made no mention of
the respondent’s complaint while
Member discounted the absence of history of the RPA events because of Dr
Lawler’s statement that the Northern Beaches Hospital
did not do workers
compensation. The Member said, “I have no reason to believe Gordon Private
Hospital was any different in
its approach to workers compensation
Member thus discounted the absence of an extensive history of the RPA complaint
to the hospitals because there was a consistent
history of complaint at the
Dural Medical Centre and that Dr Lawler at the Northern Beaches Hospital had
said that that hospital
did not treat workers compensation patients.
Member said:
“Dr Berry felt that while [the
respondent’s] employment with RPA was a significant factor to the
aggravation of her symptoms,
the main contributing factor was the familial
stressors, which he identified as previous sexual trauma in childhood, a
previous lengthy
abusive relationship, the unexpected death of her brother, her
daughter’s assault and difficult recovery, and her son’s
that resulted in intensive care unit
admission.”
Dispositive
of the issue of injury:
“142. Following review of the evidence
as a whole and careful consideration of counsels’ submissions, I accept
[the respondent]
as a credible witness and I accept [the respondent]
sustained psychological injury, in the nature of an aggravation of her
pre-existing
psychological injury, with her employment being the main
contributing factor to injury.
accept [the respondent’s] pre-existing psychological injury was aggravated
in the course of her employment with RPA and that
her symptoms
‘intensified’, ‘increased’ or became ‘more
serious’ due to the behaviours she was
subjected to while working with
RPA, and I am of the view that when considering the competing causal factors
(both work related and
non-work related) of the aggravation [the respondent]
suffered, it was the behaviours to which [the respondent] was subjected while
working with RPA that represent the main contributing factor to the aggravation
of her pre-existing psychological injury. While there
is no doubt there are a
number of non-work factors that have impacted [the respondent’s] mental
health over time, which are
neatly identified by Dr Berry, these non-work
factors are stressors that are longstanding and are stressors for which [the
respondent]
was treated before she commenced her employment with RPA in October
2021 and for which she was not treated again until after a reported
deterioration in her mental health with complaint of being subjected to
concerning behaviours by [the manager] and her work colleagues
in February
circumstances where there is no new non-work factor identified which is a
competing causal factor of the respondent’s injury
in the nature of an
aggravation of her pre-existing psychological injury, for the reasons outlined I
am satisfied on the balance
of probabilities that the respondent sustained
injury in the nature of an aggravation of her pre-existing psychological injury,
her employment being the main contributing factor to injury. As required by
, I feel an actual persuasion of the existence of that
Member then considered the issue of incapacity, finding that the respondent had
no current work capacity from 4 December 2023
and that that incapacity resulted
from the injury.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
respondent does not dispute that the appeal was filed within time.
Threshold issues
respondent does not dispute the appeal satisfies sections 352(3) and (4) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
Interlocutory decision
decision is not an interlocutory decision.
On the papers
appellant submits that the matter is appropriate for determination on the basis
of the papers. The respondent accepts the appellant’s
submissions in this
Personal Injury Commission Act
, together with
Procedural Directions PIC 2 and WC 3 provide that I may be satisfied with the
documents and the submissions of the
parties such that they are sufficient to
enable the appeal to be determined on the papers without holding any formal
hearing. I am
satisfied that this is a proper matter in which to determine the
issues in the appeal without holding any conference or formal hearing.
NATURE OF THE APPEAL
appellate jurisdiction conferred by s 352(5) of the 1998 Act is as
“An appeal under this section is limited to a
determination of whether the decision appealed against was or was not affected
by any error of fact, law or discretion, and to the correction of any such
error. The appeal is not a review or new hearing.”
State of New South Wales v
the Court of Appeal
constituted by five members delivered important guidance as to the appellate
leading judgment delivered by Leeming JA
(with whom Kirk and McHugh JJA agreed, with short agreeing judgments from Bell
CJ and Free
JA) directed at [91] as follows:
“Future appeals
under s 352 should apply the approach in
Warren v Coombes
. Appropriate deference is to be given to members where their findings
are based on evidence in respect of which they have an advantage
(such as the
kind identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential Member
hearing an appeal. But it is not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the
an inference was ‘open’ to the member, as if the member
were a jury and there was some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential
member, after making appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the
member, would reach a different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she
should not shrink from giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential member
will be dismissing
an appeal but without fully addressing whether there is an
error of fact, law or discretion.”
kind of matters identified in
“... factual findings which are likely to have been
affected by impressions about the credibility and reliability of witnesses
formed by the trial judge
as a result of seeing and hearing them give their
. It includes findings of secondary facts which are based on a
combination of these impressions and other inferences from primary
this matter, the Member determined the respondent’s claim on the basis of
the written evidence. Her findings of fact did
not depend on impressions about
credibility or reliability of the witnesses in so far as she neither saw nor
heard them. Nevertheless,
it is important to note the jurisdiction provided by
s 352(5) is not engaged unless there is error on the part of the Member
respect to fact, law or discretion.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant relies on the following four grounds of appeal:
(a) Accepting the lay evidence in circumstances where it was unreasonable to do
(b) Failing to consider a relevant consideration in evaluating the evidence,
namely the psychiatric symptoms and treatment regime
of the respondent
immediately prior to commencing employment and their effect.
(c) Determining that a “new non-work factor” needed to be identified
as a competing causal factor of the respondent’s
(d) Failing to consider a relevant consideration in determining that the
respondent’s current incapacity arose as a result
of her employment with
the appellant.
Ground A: Accepting the lay evidence in circumstances where it
was unreasonable to do so
Appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the Member expressly noted the following matters from the
(a) the respondent stated that her medical health had never impacted her work
capacity (at reasons [25]);
(b) the respondent ceased work to become a full-time carer for her daughter and
that once her daughter’s health had improved
she commenced seeking
re-employment (at reasons at [26]), and
(c) the respondent’s mother stated that the respondent had never suffered
any previous or prior work incapacity and that the
respondent always continued
to work through confronting situations about her family breakup and separation.
appellant submits that whilst the Member did not extract in the reasons the
evidence of the respondent’s daughter, her evidence
at pages 19 to 20 of
the Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD), at paragraphs [8] and [10], was that
the respondent was hardworking,
career driven and was moving up in the ranks by
way of career progression.
appellant submits:
(a) On 2 December 2020, 2 March 2021, 29 May 2021, 2 September 2021
Dr Yacoub had issued Centrelink Medical Certificates to the respondent
certifying her totally unfit for work with a diagnosis which initially included
depression but by March 2021 included post-traumatic
(b) In October 2020 the respondent was provided with a written warning in
relation to her ability to perform her work at her previous
employer, and
attended meetings in relation to her work
performance.
(c) On 19 October 2020 Dr Yacoub’s clinical records revealed that the
respondent had lost her job as she was unable to work
due to the mental health
issues, her daughter was still not well and she continued to experience very low
refused leave to the appellant to cross-examine the respondent on the basis that
the appellant (sic, respondent) was not fit
to be cross-examined, the Member did
not address the appellant’s submissions at first instance regarding the
credit of the
respondent.
appellant submits that the Member did not address the inconsistencies between
the statement evidence of the respondent’s
daughter, the
respondent’s mother and the medical and employment records. The only
inconsistency the Member sought to address
was in relation to what the
respondent said was the cause of her leaving her previous employment and what
was recorded in the medical
and employment
the Member did not address were the assertions made by the lay witnesses that
the respondent’s mental health issues had
not previously affected her
capacity to work.
appellant submits the Member’s uncritical acceptance of the evidence of
the respondent’s daughter and mother supported
the Member’s finding
that the respondent suffered an injury in the form of an aggravation of
pre-existing injury.
appellant submits:
“In circumstances where the Member did not
address inconsistencies between the lay evidence and medical and employment
did not allow the Appellant to cross-examine the Respondent, and did
not address the issue of credit, the acceptance of the lay evidence
unreasonable.”
Respondent’s submissions
respondent filed submissions on 22 April 2025 and then filed amended
submissions, after publication of the judgment in
, on 25 August
2025. I proceed on the basis that the amended submissions are intended to
substitute for the original submissions.
respondent submits:
“2. ... the appellant’s
submissions are challenged on the basis that they:
(1) fail to acknowledge or address the limited issues requiring determination
by the Member, i.e. as noted at [7] of the Statement
of Reasons:
‘whether [the respondent] sustained [a] primary psychological injury
(in the nature of an aggravation of her pre-existing psychological
the course of her employment with RPA with her employment being the main
contributing factor to injury’ and
(2) [not pressed]
(3) disclose no error (asserted without foundation as ‘errors of
law’ in the appeal submissions) that would constitute
a basis for
revocation of the Member’s decision.
four grounds of appeal raise irrelevant issues regarding evidence that has no
bearing on the material issues determined in favour
of the worker, i.e. whether,
in the course of the worker’s employment with the appellant, she was
subjected to work related
stressors which served to aggravate her pre-existing
psychological injury, and were the main contributing factor to such
aggravation.”
respondent submits that the appellant conceded in its written submissions that
“interactions between the [worker] and her
managers occurred and that they
were capable of leading to the [worker’s] perception, correctly or not,
that she was bullied
and harassed.”
respondent submits that, given that concession, the remaining and material
issues for determination of the liability were limited
to whether the
interactions:
(a) caused her to suffer a psychological injury, and
(b) were the main contributing factor to such injury.
respondent notes that the appellant does not submit that the interactions
between the worker and her managers
did not cause
her to suffer a
psychological injury (emphasis in the original).
respondent noted that Dr Berry confirmed in response to questions seeking
revision of his opinion that “on balance, work
was a significant factor to
the exacerbation of symptoms.”
respondent then poses the question, was the work the main contributing factor to
the aggravation, exacerbation, acceleration or
deterioration of the
worker’s underlying psychological condition, and submits that
determination of that issue required evaluation
of whether there were other
factors not related to work which caused during the period of the worker’s
employment with the
appellant the aggravation, exacerbation, acceleration and
deterioration of the worker’s pre-existing psychological condition.
respondent submits that there are two issues requiring evaluation,
(a) during the course of the worker’s employment from 25 October 2021 to
25 July 2022 (the period of injury) was the worker
exposed to stressors
unrelated to work which caused her to suffer aggravation, exacerbation,
acceleration and deterioration of her
pre-existing psychological injury, and, if
(b) were work related stressors, or other stressors, during the period of injury
the main contributing factor to the aggravation,
exacerbation, acceleration or
deterioration of her pre-existing psychological injury or were other stressors
not related to her employment
the main contributing factor to such aggravation,
exacerbation, acceleration or deterioration.
respondent then directs attention to the Member’s conclusion at reasons
[143] that it was the behaviours to which the respondent
was subjected while
working with RPA that represent the main contributing factor to the aggravation
of her pre-existing psychological
respondent submits that no other conclusion was open to the Member. Furthermore,
the respondent submits, “it would follow
as a matter of commonsense that
such intensification of, and increase in, the worker’s symptoms reflected
an aggravation of
her pre-existing condition, pursuant to the behaviours to
which she was subjected in the course of her employment with the
appellant.”
respondent submits that the appellant’s preoccupation with the
pre-existing history is likewise dealt with by the Member
in reasons [143] where
the Member acknowledges:
“... there is no doubt that there are
a number of non-work factors that have impacted [the respondent’s] mental
over time, which are neatly identified by Dr Berry, these non-work
factors are stressors that are longstanding and are stressors
for which [the
respondent] was treated before she commenced her employment with RPA in October
2021 and for which she was not treated
again until after a reported
deterioration in her mental health with complaint of being subjected to
concerning behaviours by [the
manager] and her work colleagues in February
respondent submits the appellant has failed to demonstrate any source of
aggravation during the period of the worker’s employment
appellant on 25 October 2021 to 25 July 2022 that was not work related and
capable of being assessed to be a greater contributing
factor to the aggravation
of her condition than the undisputed work related stressors and refers to
paragraph [142] of the Member’s
reasons to the effect that there was no
new non-work factor identified.
respondent concludes her general submission with:
appellant’s grounds of appeal do not engage with the material questions of
cause and contribution. If, in the imagination
of those representing the
appellant, the worker was, during the period of her employment with the
appellant, subjected to another
source of aggravation of her pre-existing
condition which contributed to a greater extent to the aggravation of her
condition than
the undisputed work-related stressors, that other source was not
identified in the proceedings before the Member, and [has] not been
on appeal.”
specifically with Ground A, the respondent submits that the width of the ground
is not supported by the appellant’s
submissions and that the
appellant’s complaint is limited to the lay evidence of the
respondent’s daughter and mother
relating to the issue of whether the
worker was incapacitated for work prior to her period of employment with the
respondent submits that whether the worker took time off work or struggled at
work prior to commencing employment with the appellant
was irrelevant to the
question of whether the stressors experienced at work between October 2021 and
July 2022 where the main contributing
factor to the aggravation of her
pre-existing condition.
evidence establishes that the worker had a capacity for employment with effect
from 25 October 2021 notwithstanding her pre-existing
psychological injury.
She was, as the evidence establishes, able to work for 8 months until the
cumulative effect of workplace stressors
resulted in the decompensation and
incapacity on 25 July 2022. The respondent submits that the evidence does not
disclose any other
contemporaneous stressor arose during the 8-month period
which would have caused the worker’s decompensation and incapacity
respondent submits that periods of incapacity preceding the worker’s
employment with the appellant are not relevant to whether
following demonstrated
capacity to her employment with the appellant she suffered an aggravation
resulting in her undisputed incapacity
in July 2022.
erroneous recollections of the respondent’s daughter regarding the
worker’s capacity prior to her employment with
the appellant do not negate
the reliability of the rest of her evidence, including her observation of the
deterioration of the worker’s
mental health during the period of her
employment with the appellant.
the impressions of the worker’s mother, that the worker had never suffered
from any previous work-related incapacity
is no basis to reject the rest of her
respondent points out that the worker was not reliant on the evidence of either
witness to establish that she was subjected to
work related stressors during the
period of employment with the appellant and those stressors aggravated her
pre-existing condition.
Nor did those witnesses bear upon the issue of the main
contributing factor to such aggravation.
respondent says that those witnesses were peripheral and there is no attack on
the worker herself, who the Member accepted as
a credible witness.
respondent submits that there is a wealth of evidence which confirms the
stressors to which the worker was subjected in the course
of her employment with
the appellant which are conceded by the appellant and recorded by the worker in
her statement and the histories
provided to a variety of medical practitioners.
are contemporaneous records of the onset of symptoms in response to those
stressors in the clinical notes of Dr Yacoub on 9
February 2022, 15 March 2022
and 17 March 2022. Similarly, Dr Berry acknowledged the relevance of
work-related stressors in aggravating
the worker’s condition.
Consideration
appellant conceded in its submissions to the Member dated 22 November
“... The [appellant] does not take issue with the fact
that interactions between the [respondent] and her managers occurred
... they were capable of leading to the [respondent’s] perception,
correctly or not, that she was bullied and
dispute identified in the s 78 Notice as indicated by the appellant in the
submission to the Member was:
“Liability was disputed on the
basis that the [respondent’s] employment with the [appellant] was not the
main contributing
factor to the aggravation of her pre-existing psychological
condition.”
Berry’s clear evidence was that:
“Work was a significant
factor in the exacerbation of her pre-existing PTSD. Work stress was identified
in the medical record
of her hospital admission but did not appear to be a
significant focus of treatment. In terms of other contributing factors, during
the assessment, [the respondent] reported:
daughter’s assault took place four years previously. It did not appear to
be a significant factor for [the respondent’s]
That she left
her abusive partner in July 2020 and that, although this had been stressful, it
was ‘not bad stress’. Despite
this, given that the relationship had
been ongoing for many years and led to [the respondent] losing control over
significant areas
of her life, this may also have been a contributing
Berry says:
“The work issues she experienced in July 2022
would be unlikely on their own to have caused such significant symptoms. Her
were severe because of her background trauma including childhood abuse
and spending many years in a controlling relationship with
the report of 28 September 2023 Dr Berry says:
balance, work was a significant factor to the exacerbation of symptoms (she
presented to hospital the day after ceasing
work). However, it was not the main
contributing factor. The main contributing factor was a series of stressors
which had been ongoing
Dr Berry does not say is that absent the work stressors, the respondent’s
psychological condition would have deteriorated
to the extent to which it did.
In other words, on the appellant’s own case the Member’s conclusion
at paragraph [144]
adverse to the appellant is correct.
Member’s assessment of the appellant’s submissions with respect to
the respondent’s credit may not have been
as comprehensive as demanded by
the appellant, but her conclusion adverse to the appellant did not depend on the
evidence of the
respondent’s daughter or her mother on this point. The
respondent’s pre-RPA history of ill-health or employability was
an issue with respect to the matters to be determined by the Member. Even if it
be assumed, contrary to the evidence of
the respondent’s daughter and
mother, the pre-existing conditions were florid before the commencement of
employment with RPA
and that the respondent’s psychological condition
impacted on her pre-RPA employment and employability, the evidence does not
establish that either was the main contributing factor to the aggravation in the
course of employment between 21 October 2021 to
25 July 2022. Those matters
were, as Dr Berry said, part of the background stressors.
only factor relevant to the deterioration in the respondent’s
psychological condition between 25 October 2021 and 25 July
2022 were the
workplace stressors. There was no competing contributory factor. Unless there
was a new non-work factor or the respondent’s
pre-existing medical
conditions were such as to be responsible for the psychological deterioration,
the Member’s conclusion
that the work stressors were the main contributing
factor was both inevitable and correct.
A of the appeal is dismissed.
Ground B: Failing to consider a relevant consideration in
evaluating the evidence, namely the psychiatric symptoms and the treatment
regime recorded by Dr Manambrakkat prior to the respondent’s
Appellant’s submissions
Member noted that the respondent was under the specialist psychiatric care of
Dr Manambrakkat between 5 May 2021 and 18 October
2021. At the first
consultation Dr Manambrakkat diagnosed major depression with psychotic
features and post-traumatic stress disorder.
paragraph [92] of the reasons, the Member noted that on 18 October 2021
Dr Manambrakkat said that the respondent had reported that
her mood was
better and that she “feels she has turned a corner”. Dr Manambrakkat
reported that the respondent was considering
getting a part-time job.
appellant submits that there is no reference to the respondent saying that she
feels she has “turned a corner” in
that report and it is unclear to
what the Member was referring.
appellant quotes from Dr Manambrakkat’s report, noting that a review was
to occur on 15 November 2021.
appellant submits that the symptoms experienced by the respondent, as well as
the expectation that she would continue to be treated
by her specialist, are
relevant matters that the Member should have considered in evaluating the
evidence and reaching her conclusions.
The Member extracted parts of Dr
Manambrakkat’s reports, but at no point did she note or consider any of
the symptoms that
were recorded by Dr Manambrakkat. This failure resulted in the
Member failing to critically evaluate the medical evidence before
appellant quotes from Dr Khan’s report that by 18 October 2021, the
respondent’s symptoms had improved in their frequency
and intensity. Dr
Khan “maintained” that her mental state was stable and the
respondent was not experiencing any enduring
symptoms of trauma, depression and
anxiety prior to her employment with the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital.
Member did not evaluate the validity of Dr Khan’s opinion, which the
appellant submits was both internally inconsistent
in that Dr Khan stated the
respondent was not suffering from enduring symptoms of depression and anxiety
prior to her employment
when accepting that a record just 7 days earlier noted
that her symptoms had improved in their frequency and intensity, and also
inconsistent with the symptoms actually recorded by Dr Manambrakkat.
the Member extracted and relied on the records of Raynor Lander, but this
witness did not have a record of the psychiatric
symptoms recorded by Dr
Manambrakkat. Ms Lander also recorded that the respondent stressed to her that
despite her evidence of psychological
fragility she had always remained in the
workforce, either on a part-time or full time basis, which is at odds with the
medical records
of Dr Yacoub, however, the Member makes no attempt to evaluate
the validity of the opinion of Ms Lander in light of these inconsistencies.
appellant submits that the Member uncritically relied upon the opinions of Dr
Khan and Ms Lander for the observations at reasons
[141] and at [143].
is submitted the Member misread the report of Dr Manambrakkat as the doctor did
not note that the respondent “feels she has
turned a corner” on 18
October 2021. Further, the doctor noted that the respondent’s symptoms
were improving but were
still experienced as at 18 October 2021. Finally,
there was no basis for the inference that the respondent’s failure to seek
medical assistance for her mental health between 21 October 2021 and 9 February
2022 meant that she did not require medical assistance
for her mental health.
She was experiencing significant symptoms 3 days earlier and had suffered COVID
over Christmas as noted by
the Member at [60].
appellant submits that the effect of the Member’s failure to evaluate and
analyse the medical evidence in light of the symptoms
recorded by Dr
Manambrakkat was that the Member reached her conclusion that the respondent
suffered an aggravation of her pre-existing
condition on an incorrect
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the submissions in support of Ground B do not address
the issue which required determination, that is,
whether the worker’s
employment was the main contributing factor to the aggravation of her
pre-existing condition.
records of Dr Manambrakkat during the period 5 May 2021 to 18 October 2021 are
evidence of the worker’s condition prior
to commencing employment with the
appellant on 25 October 2021. That evidence confirms the worker’s
pre-existing condition
with reference to which it was then necessary to consider
the issue of aggravation by reason of the stressors experienced in the
employment with the appellant.
respondent submits that there was no dispute that the worker, following her last
consultation with Dr Manambrakkat, had the capacity
to secure and commence
employment with the appellant as she did on 25 October 2021. She was,
notwithstanding her pre-existing condition,
able to work for a period of 8
months until becoming totally incapacitated. The issue for determination was the
cause of such incapacity.
Berry, whose opinions have not been acknowledged in the appellant’s
submissions, accepted that the psychological symptoms
which the worker developed
around 2022 were precipitated by multiple stressors of which work was one.
the circumstances, the appellant’s endeavour to avoid liability was
reduced to whether, given multiple stressors, employment
was the main
contributing factor to the undisputed aggravation of the worker’s
Consideration
accept the respondent’s submissions.
was not in issue that the work stressors had played some part in the aggravation
of the pre-existing psychological condition. The
dispute was as to whether the
work stressors with the appellant were the main contributing factor to the
aggravation.
did not depend on the existing condition of the respondent, at least in the
absence of evidence that the pre-existing condition
itself, without the work
stressors, would have resulted in the respondent being in the same condition in
which she was on 25 July
misreading of Dr Manambrakkat’s report had no effect on the conclusions
expressed by the Member at reasons [143] which are
factually accurate. Contrary
to the appellant’s submission, the evaluation of Dr Manambrakkat’s
evidence made no difference
to the conclusion that the respondent had suffered
an aggravation of her pre-existing condition. It was common ground that the
had suffered an aggravation to her pre-existing condition as a
consequence, at least in part, of the stressors in the course of employment
RPA. The issue was whether those stressors represented the main contributing
B of the appeal is dismissed.
Ground C – Determining that a new non-work factor needed
to be identified as a competing causal factor of the respondent’s
Appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that it is not sufficient for there simply to be no new
non-work factor identified. As noted in
Federal Broom Co Pty Ltd v
what also must
be considered is whether the consequences of the respondent’s affliction
have become more serious. This requires
an evaluation of the respondent’s
symptoms and treatment both before and after the commencement of work.
Member failed to consider the symptoms the respondent suffered, as noted by
Dr Manambrakkat, before her injury. The Member also
failed to consider the
circumstances of the respondent both before and after commencing work with the
appellant, namely, that the
respondent was receiving regular treatment and was
monitored by a psychiatrist prior to her employment. The respondent ceased
with her psychiatrist and commenced full time work. These
considerations were specifically noted in the submissions of the appellant
causative of the respondent’s post-work symptomatology.
appellant submits that by failing to consider the respondent’s pre-work
employment circumstances and concluding that a new
non-work factor needed to be
established in order to establish that employment was not the main contributing
factor to a deterioration
in the respondent’s symptoms, the Member
committed an error or law.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent notes the appellant’s reference to
“what also must be considered is whether the consequences of the
[worker’s] affliction have become more serious.”
The respondent
submits the worker’s condition underwent transition from being able,
notwithstanding her underlying condition,
to discharge her responsibilities as
an employee to the appellant for a period of 8 months, to being rendered totally
incapacitated
and requiring hospitalisation.
issue for determination was why, what caused her to suffer the onset of such
serious incapacitating symptoms.
appellant’s medicolegal case as provided by Dr Berry was that the work was
one factor precipitating her symptoms in 2022.
In order to consider whether work
was the main contributing factor to the aggravation of the pre-existing
condition it was necessary
to consider whether there were competing sources of
aggravation at the relevant time. If there were competing sources of
aggravation,
it would then have been necessary to engage in a comparative
evaluation in order to determine whether the worker’s employment,
distinct from other causal factors, was the main contributing factor to the
aggravation.
respondent submits the Member was correct. The appellant does not identify any
aggravating factor in addition to the undisputed
work-related stressors.
Manambrakkat’s records regarding the worker’s condition in 2021
cannot offer any assistance in evaluating whether the
worker encountered
stressors capable of aggravating her condition in 2022 and which of those
factors was predominant.
Consideration
medicolegal case advanced by the appellant through Dr Berry was that the
respondent had suffered an aggravation of the pre-existing
psychological
conditions by reason of a number of factors including the work-related stress.
He thought the work stressors were significant
but not the main contributing
was no case advanced by the appellant that the respondent had not suffered an
aggravation of the pre-existing conditions. It
was not necessary therefore to
evaluate the respondent’s symptoms and treatment regime before and after
commencing work to
establish whether the respondent’s condition had
deteriorated during the period she was subjected to the work-related
the extent that such an evaluation was required, the respondent is correct in
its submission that as at 21 October 2021 she was
able to pursue full-time
employment with the appellant, whereas as at 25 July 2022 her psychiatric
condition had deteriorated to
such an extent that she was unable to pursue
employment, required admission to hospital as an inpatient and was
psychiatrically very
unwell. It is not disputed that she was then totally
incapacitated for work.
was no evidence to the effect that the symptoms exhibited by the respondent as
at 25 July 2022 were caused by the cessation
of her treatment with her
psychiatrist or by her non-attendance at the medical review with Dr Manambrakkat
on 15 November 2021. The
appellant’s submission at [26] is not grounded in
any medical evidence.
would have been open to the appellant to run a case along the lines that because
the respondent had failed to persist with her
treatment by Dr Manambrakkat, her
pre-existing psychiatric condition had regressed. But that is not the case that
was advanced by
the appellant and there was no medical evidence to support such
a contention.
submission presented by the appellant to the
respondent’s condition was symptomatic and deteriorating immediately prior
to her commencing employment with the appellant
on 25 October 2021 due to
multiple pre-existing stressors is not grounded in the evidence.
contemporaneous evidence is that of Dr Manambrakkat in his report of
18 October 2021. He says: “At review today, she reported
better. Nightmares had reduced to 2 times a week instead of daily. Flashbacks
were 2 times a day instead of multiple times
a day. She did not need somebody
outside her bathroom when she used it and she could sometimes complete her
activities in the bathroom
in one go without needing to come out to allay her
anxiety. Her mood was better and she was doing more at home. She was also
considering
getting a part time job. She walked her dog 2 times a day, cooked
once a day and also managed to do some cleaning at
suggested he would review her on 15 November 2021. Those observations, with
respect, do not support the submission made
to the Member at [5.28] that the
respondent “was symptomatic and deteriorating immediately prior to her
commencement of employment
with the [appellant] on 25 October 2021 due to
multiple pre-existing stressors”.
Manambrakkat does not say that the respondent’s condition was unstable or
that it was likely to deteriorate. There is simply
no evidence that the
respondent’s “psychiatric condition relating to her pre-existing
stressors very likely deteriorated
to the point of requiring psychiatric
admission on 26 July 2022 absent ongoing psychiatric treatment and review since
2021.” There is no medical evidence from Dr Manambrakkat,
Dr Khan or Dr Berry.
is not to the point that the respondent had multiple stressors immediately prior
to admission to Hornsby Hospital. There is no
doubt the aggravation acted upon a
pre-existing psychiatric condition.
appellant does not in its submissions to the Member at [5.28] identify
“non-work related stressors”. That is the very
point the Member
makes at reasons [144].
Member accepts that the worker did not make reference to her employment as
having a contribution to her presentation when admitted
to the Hornsby Hospital
or the Northern Beaches Hospital. She provides her explanation for accepting
that explanation, which is not
challenged on the appeal.
respect, the medical advisers at the two hospitals do not address the
contribution from employment at all. As the appellant correctly
employment did not figure largely in the history given to the hospitals. But the
absence of such a history in the hospital
records was accepted by the Member to
be due to Dr Lawler’s telling the respondent that the Northern Beaches
Hospital did not
service compensation claims. Furthermore, the Member regarded
the history contained in the GP’s notes as establishing that
respondent did report the stressors at RPA to her medical adviser commencing 9
February 2022.
C of the appeal is dismissed.
Ground D – Failing to consider a relevant consideration
in determining that the respondent’s current incapacity arose
as a result
of her employment with the appellant
Appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the Member’s reliance on Ms Lander’s belief
that the respondent’s incapacity for work
was a result of her employment
with RPA, was at odds with the contemporaneous medical and employment records
and an issue that was
not addressed by the Member.
Member also relied upon Dr Khan at [154] who stated that she had dealt with a
number of personal stressors through comprehensive
mental health treatment.
However, as noted in the reports of Dr Manambrakkat, the respondent was still
obtaining treatment at the
time she commenced working with the appellant. She
had not dealt with her personal stressors as she was still experiencing symptoms
related to them which are relevant considerations which the Member failed to
consider in accepting the opinion of Dr Khan.
Member also failed to consider what effect the subsequent diagnosis of
schizoaffective disorder at February 2024 had on the employment
respondent.
appellant submitted that the Member failed to consider the relevant
considerations in determining that the respondent’s
current incapacity
arose as a result of her employment with the appellant.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that she had a capacity for work as at 25 October 2021 when
she commenced employment with RPA, notwithstanding
her underlying condition
which had been the subject of treatment by Dr Manambrakkat. She was able to work
each day and discharge
her contractual obligations as an employee of the
Member found that the undisputed work-related stressors were the main
contributing factor to the aggravation of the worker’s
psychological
condition. The aggravation, that is, the injury deemed to have been received on
26 July 2022, marks the worker’s
transition from a capacity for employment
which she had demonstrated for 8 months notwithstanding her underlying
condition, to being
totally incapacitated. Her injury is manifestly a material
factor which has caused her incapacity.
Consideration
is no evidence that the aggravation sustained in the course of employment to
which the RPA stressors were the main contributing
factor resolved. In the
absence of such evidence, the conclusion that the respondent’s undoubted
incapacity for employment
was caused by the injury in the course of employment
with RPA is correct and without error.
D of the appeal is dismissed.
appeal is dismissed.
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 12 February 2025 is
Geoffrey Parker SC
ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT
17 October 2025
Certificate of Determination
dated 12 February 2025 (reasons),
[128]–[130].
Cosmopolitan Homes
[2008] NSWCA
[2025] NSWCA 157
Leeming JA in
Referring to the
appellant’s written submissions before the Member dated 22 November 2024,
[4.1]–[4.22].
Appellant’s
submissions, [7].
Respondent’s amended submissions,
Appellant’s
written submissions before the Member dated 22 November 2024,
Appellant’s
written submissions before the Member dated 22 November 2024,
report dated 4 September 2023, Reply to Application to Resolve a Dispute
(reply), pp 13–15.
Berry’s report dated 28 September 2023, reply, pp
[1964] HCA 34
Appellant’s written submissions before the Member dated 22 November 2024,
ARD, p 1,014.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter