URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1315.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Emmott [2025] NSWSC 1315 (14 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Emmott
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1315
Hearing Date(s):
26 August 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
(1) Order that, until further order, these proceedings
(2023/279049), Michael Wilson & Partner Ltd v John Forster Emmott, be,
hereby are, stayed.
(2) Order that neither party is entitled
to make application for any order in these proceedings with respect to the stay
1 until there has been a final determination (including any appeal)
(i) all proceedings presently listed in the High Court
of Justice for England and Wales before HH Judge Pelling KC for determination
January 2026;
(ii) all other proceedings in the High Court
of Justice for England and Wales between Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd, or
Wilson and Mr John Forster Emmott, except for the Part 7 claim
(CL-2021-000728), known as the Sinclair Debt claim;
whichever is the later.
(3) The Motion filed by Mr Emmott on 25 May 2025 is
otherwise dismissed.
(4) The Motion filed by Michael Wilson
& Partners Ltd on 29 May 2025 is dismissed.
(5) Michael
Wilson & Partners Ltd are to pay Mr Emmott’s costs of both
Catchwords:
PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL LAW – Foreign judgments and orders –
Application for variation or rescinding of previous orders
– Application
for continuation of stay previously ordered
PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL
LAW – Orders sought – Where plaintiff seeks to rescind, set-aside or
vary an order made by a Judge
of the Supreme Court of NSW regarding the
registration of foreign orders based on an alleged error of law and fact –
said order was made by consent – Whether the order was consented to
by the parties in error as a result of an error of fact
and foreign law –
Insufficient cause shown that the order was made irregularly, illegally or
against good faith – No
application of the ‘slip rule’
contained in r 36.17 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
Where order sought by the plaintiff does not fall within any identified rules
contained within the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
Supreme Court Act
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) – Where inappropriate for the
Court to exercise discretion to set aside an order whilst an appeal is pending
with respect
to that order – Relief not granted
INTERNATIONAL LAW – Orders sought – Where plaintiff seeks through
Notice of Motion a declaration that a stay ordered
by a Judge of the Supreme
Court of NSW remains in full force and effects whilst awaiting the outcome of
similar proceedings in a
foreign jurisdiction – Whether a stay ordered
previously has come to an end as a result of the delivery of a foreign judgment
– Whether there has been final determination of the defendant’s
set-off application – Where stay order contains
reference to bankruptcy
petitions and statutory demands which have not yet been determined – Where
international judicial comity
and public interest suggests that overlapping
proceedings should not be heard simultaneously in different jurisdictions
it would be contrary to public policy to permit the same matters
to be litigated in Australian courts before the outcome of a set-off
application
in a foreign court – Where the stay order was made on the basis that there
would be a determination of a balancing
figure after the completion of set-off
– Relief granted
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Foreign Judgments Act 1999
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) rr 18.1, 18.3, 36.15,
36.16, 36.17
Supreme Court Act 1970
Cases Cited:
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v Emmott
[2021] NSWCA 315
Wilson & Partners Limited v John Forster Emmott
[2025] NSWCA 37
Wilson & Partners Limited v Emmott (No 3)
[2025] NSWCA 74
Michael Wilson
& Partners Limited v John Forster Emmott (No.4)
[2025] NSWCA 152
Wilson & Partners Limited v Emmott
[2024] NSWSC 1258
Michael Wilson &
Partners Limited v Emmott
[2024] NSWSC 1435
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd
as assignee of Robert Colin Nicholls & Temujin International Limited (as
trustee of Temujin
International (trading) v Emmott - Final
[2024] NSWSC
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v Nicholls and Ors
[2011] HCA 48
(2011) 244 CLR 427
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v John Forster
[2024] EWHC 449 (Comm)
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v John
Forster Emmott
[2024] EWHC 2731 (Comm)
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited
v John Forster Emmott
[2025] EWHC 716 (Comm)
Michael Wilson & Partners
Limited v John Forster Emmott
[2025] EWHC 747 (Comm)
Texts Cited:
Not Applicable
Procedural rulings
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd (P)
John Forster Emmott (D)
Representation:
M Wilson (P)
J Baird (D)
Solicitors:
Wilson & Partners Ltd (P)
Duggan Legal (D)
File Number(s):
2023/279049
Publication Restriction:
Not Applicable
The Proceedings
31 August 2023, Michael Wilson & Partners Limited (“MWP”)
commenced proceedings by a Summons against John Forster
Emmott (“Mr
Emmott”), seeking orders pursuant to s 6 of the
Foreign Judgments
1999 (Cth) with respect to a series of judgments, orders and Costs
Certificates arising from various proceedings in the High Court
of Justice of
England and Wales (“EWHC”).
Summons also sought orders pursuant to the same legislation for the registration
of judgments or orders arising from proceedings
in the High Court of the British
Virgin Islands (“BVIHC”).
the Summons sought the registration of judgments and orders made in various
proceedings in the New Zealand High Court (“NZHC”).
The Orders of the Senior Deputy Registrar
2 February 2024, the Senior Deputy Registrar (or “Registrar”) of
this Court made two sets of orders. One set consisted
of six orders, one of
which had 26 sub-paragraphs in which the Registrar ordered the registration
of the listed foreign judgments
(the “Registration Orders”). In the
other set of orders, which consisted of 10 paragraphs, the Registrar otherwise
the application to register a number of judgments (the
“Dismissal Orders”).
Challenges to the Orders of the
Senior Deputy Registrar
23 February 2024, Mr Emmott filed a Notice of Motion seeking that the
Registration Orders be set aside (“Emmott’s First
Motion”). He
sought additional (or alternative relief), including an order that the
proceedings be stayed to a specified time.
8 April 2024, MWP filed a Notice of Motion seeking a review of the Dismissal
Orders, an extension of time for the Notice of Motion
seeking such review and
leave to file and serve an Amended Summons. The amendments to the Summons sought
to include various further
judgments and orders issued in favour of MWP after
the Summons was first filed (“MWP’s First
Background and Context
is apparent from the terms of the Summons, the orders of the Registrar and the
nature of the orders sought variously by Mr Emmott
and MWP in their Notices of
Motion, that there has been extensive litigation in a number of countries around
the world between MWP,
Mr Emmott and others, arising out of an agreement made in
December 2001 between MWP and Mr Emmott, that Mr Emmott would join MWP
Director and shareholder, in effect, from January 2022. At that time, MWP
practised as a law firm and a business consultancy
from offices in Kazakhstan.
It is unnecessary in this judgment to recite the detail of the disputes arising
from the termination
of that agreement, and the conduct engaged in by MWP, Mr
Emmott and others.
the curious, an overview of the history between 2001 and 2011 can be found in
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v Nicholls and Ors
[2011] HCA 48
(2011) 244 CLR 427 at
. As well, further context and background can be
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v Emmott
[2021] NSWCA 315.
are two judgments of the EWHC, being
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v
John Forster Emmott
[2024] EWHC 449
Michael Wilson
& Partners Limited v John Forster Emmott
[2024] EWHC 2731
should be referred to.
the first of those two judgments of HH Judge Pelling KC in the EWHC, his Honour
said this, at [2]:
“I do not intend in this judgment to set out again the general history
surrounding this apparently never-ending dispute. It
is set out in many of the
more than 30 reported earlier judgments I have given in these proceedings.
In summary, following an order
permitting Mr Emmott to enforce the arbitral
award in his favour against Michael Wilson & Partners Limited
as if it was a judgment and order of the High Court, he
obtained a worldwide freezing order against MWP. There followed what can
described as an avalanche of litigation between MWP and Mr Emmott in England and
Wales but also numerous overseas jurisdictions,
including Australia, New Zealand
and the BVI. It has engaged in England courts at all levels up to and including
the Supreme Court;
in Australia, courts at first instance and appellate level in
at least the state of New South Wales; and the High Court of Australia
first instance and appellate courts in the BVI and first instance courts in New
Zeeland [sic].”
the second of the two judgments referred to above, an order for a case
management stay of the proceedings in the EWHC was made
by HH Judge Pelling KC,
pending the hearing and determination of a claim in this Court.
[33] of the second judgment of the EWHC, HH Judge Pelling KC said of the case
management stay order:
“33. I am fully aware that a step of this sort is
exceptional but the circumstances surrounding this litigation are extraordinary
and unique at least in my experience. As long ago as February 2019, Peter
Jackson LJ concluded his judgment in
Emmot v Michael Wilson &
Partners Ltd
[2019] EWCA Civ 219
[2019] 4 WLR 53
‘Having listened to the history of the litigation between these two
solicitors, I protest at the shameful waste of time and
money caused by their
private dispute, which has now continued for 13 years and left their
reputations in tatters. We were told that
Mr Emmott's global costs amount to
£2·5m, and Mr Wilson's several times that. Courts in four countries
have been (and in
at least two cases are being, with no end in sight) plagued
with their proceedings and counter-proceedings. It appears that Mr Wilson
will stop at nothing to prevent Mr Emmott from receiving the award to which, for
all his deceit, he is entitled. ... Any court in
this jurisdiction that has to
consider this dispute in future would do well to remember that the overriding
objective in civil proceedings
includes a duty on the court to save expense,
deal with the case expeditiously and fairly, and allot to it an appropriate
the court's resources, while taking into account the need to allot
resources to other cases; further, that the parties have a duty
to help the
court to achieve this. This pathological litigation has already consumed far too
great a share of the court's resources
and if it continues judges will doubtless
be astute to allow the parties only an appropriate allotment of court
It is a matter of record that since then at least three new claims were
commenced by MWP, there have been applications that have
generated 37 judgments
from me alone that are reported in the Westlaw database and at least that number
of other judgments and rulings
that have not made it to that data-base. There
have been numerous applications for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal
as I have said two extended civil restraint orders that have had little or
no effect because of necessity they have been made in
only some of the issued
claims. I refer to this not in relation to the suggestion that these proceedings
are abusive but because
it shows, regrettably, that the lack of proportionality
identified by Peter Jackson LJ has continued. Proportionality lies at the
of the stay I am imposing.”
is quite clear from the reasons of HH Judge Pelling KC for granting a case
management stay of proceedings in the EWHC, that, in
a spirit of international
judicial co-operation which would avoid any inappropriate usage of scarce
judicial resources in whichever
court there was litigation between the parties,
it was appropriate for the proceedings before him to await the outcome of the
List proceedings this Court, which were determined by the judgment of
Hammerschlag CJ in Eq.
claim between MWP and Mr Emmott here was filed in the Commercial List of the
Equity Division. It was ultimately heard by Hammerschlag
CJ in Eq and dealt with
by a judgment in favour of Mr Emmott:
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd
as assignee of Robert Colin Nicholls & Temujin International Limited (as
trustee of Temujin
International (trading) v Emmott - Final
[2024] NSWSC
by Summons filed on 19 February 2025, sought leave to appeal from the final
judgment of Hammerschlag CJ in Eq, and from decisions
of his Honour not to grant
an adjournment of the proceedings.
Emmott sought security for costs of these appellate proceedings. On
15 April 2025, security for costs was ordered by Basten AJA
for the reasons
which he delivered in
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v Emmott (No 3)
[2025] NSWCA 74.
sought leave to appeal from the decision of Basten AJA. On 20 June 2025, leave
was refused by the Court of Appeal (Leeming, Mitchelmore
and Free JJA) for the
reasons set out in
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Emmott (No 4)
[2025] NSWCA 152.
has not, as yet, lodged the required security for costs of the appellate
proceedings. Until it does, these appeal proceedings
are stayed.
Proceedings before Schmidt AJ
two Notices of Motion to which I have referred at [
] above, were heard, in
this Court, by Schmidt AJ on various dates in August 2024, followed by receipt
of written submissions. In
the proceedings before Schmidt AJ, MWP was
represented by Mr G Burton of Senior Counsel and Mr Emmott was represented
by Mr Baird
of counsel.
Honour expressed her conclusions and reasons in a judgment delivered on 10
October 2024:
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v Emmott
(“the first judgment”). She directed that the parties
bring in short minutes of the orders necessary to be made to reflect
which had been reached and her Honour’s reasons. The parties were unable
to agree on the orders to be made in all
respects. However, they agreed in
substance on some of the orders.
Honour issued a second judgment on 12 November 2024, setting out the orders
which she made:
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v Emmott (No.2)
[2024] NSWSC 1435
(“the second judgment”). The orders made by
her Honour are as follows:
“(1) Order 3(k) of the Registrar’s 2 February 2024
orders, relating to Items 21 to 24 inclusive referred to in MFI
(2) These proceedings be stayed until the
final determination of the defendant’s 22 July 2022 set off application by
High Court of Justice, Business and Property Court of England & Wales,
Commercial Court.
(3) The parties confer after the High
Court’s judgment is delivered, with a view to identifying the real issues
between them.
(4) The plaintiff pay the defendant’s
costs of the parties’ February and April 2024 motions to date, as agreed
(5) The proceedings be listed before the
Registrar for further directions at 9.30 am on 11 March 2025, with liberty to
on 72 hours’ notice in writing, in the event that the High
Court’s judgment has not been delivered before that date.”
Proceedings Consequent upon the Judgment of Schmidt AJ
filed a Notice of Intention to Appeal on 5 November 2024. On 20 January 2025,
MWP filed a Summons seeking leave to appeal from
the judgments and orders of
Schmidt AJ. MWP also sought an extension of time if that was needed.
Emmott sought an order for security for costs of the summons seeking leave to
appeal. McHugh JA made an order for the provision
of such security:
Wilson & Partners Limited v John Forster Emmott
[2025] NSWCA 37.
application for leave to appeal against the decision of McHugh JA brought by MWP
was dismissed on 20 June 2025 by the Court of
Appeal in the same judgment as it
dealt with the application for leave to appeal against the decision of Basten JA
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v John Forster Emmott (No.4)
has not, as yet, lodged the security for costs ordered by McHugh JA.
the absence of security, the appellate proceedings against the two judgments of
Schmidt AJ are stayed.
Two Further Interlocutory
Applications
are now two further interlocutory applications which arise in the proceedings
heard by Schmidt AJ, which fall for determination
in this judgment. Both arise
from the terms of the orders made by Schmidt AJ, the events which have since
occurred in the EWHC,
and a dispute between the parties about the true meaning
and effect of the orders of Schmidt AJ.
first Motion in time was that filed by Mr Emmott on 25 May 2025, (“the
second Emmott motion”) seeking the following
“1. A declaration that the stay ordered by Schmidt AJ on
12 November 2024 ([2024] NSWSC 1435) remains in full force and effect.
2. Further, or in the alternative, an order that the
proceedings be stayed until the final determination of the Defendant’s
Application in the High Court of Justice, Business and Property Court of England
& Wales, Commercial Court (QBD) dated 22 July
4. Such further or other order as to this Honourable Court may
second Motion in time was that filed by MWP on 29 May 2025 (“the second
MWP motion”), and was in the following prolix
“1. In accordance with and pursuant to the law, the CPA
and the UCP [sic], MWP hereby seeks to rescind, set-aside and vary
order (1) of
the orders of Schmidt AJ issued and made in this Court on 12.11.24, setting
aside order 3(k) of the Judgment/Orders
of Senior Deputy Registrar P. Clayton of
02.02.24 (the “Recognition Judgment/Order”) relating to Items 21 to
24 inclusive
referred to in MFI 1 (the “Schmidt Orders”), in
accordance with the Direction Orders of Senior Deputy Registrar J. Hedge
19.05.24 (the “Directions Order”), made as a result of a remote
hearing attended by all parties.
judgment of HHJ Pelling KC, sitting
as a High Court judge, in the Commercial Court of the B&PC of the EWHC of
15.01.25, to which
proceeding and judgment the Respondent/Judgment Debtor is
party and by which he is bound, it was found and held that there is no
limitation issue under section 24(1) of the English Limitation Act 1980, being
the applicable law, as can be seen from the Notes
to section 24, Volume 2 of the
White Book at paragraph 8/64 reflecting the findings by Lords, Browne-Wilkinson,
Lloyd of Berwick,
Nolan, Hoffman, Hope of Craighead, sitting in the House of
Lowsley and Another v. Forbes (Trading as L.E. Design Services)
[1981] 3 All ER 897
of [sic] 29.07.98, so that Order (1) of the
Schmidt Orders were consented to by the parties and made in error and arose as a
of a mistake and error of fact and English law, and should be rescinded,
set-aside and/or varied.
3. That the Respondent/Judgment Debtor shall pay all of
MWP’s costs of this Notice of Motion on the indemnity basis, to
assessed if not agreed and with an interim payment on account of the same to be
made by the Respondent/Judgment Debtor to MWP
within a period of no later than
fourteen (14) days, free and clear of all and any bank charges, setoffs,
withholdings, deductions,
cross-claims or counterclaims.
4. Such further or alternative orders as the court considers
appropriate.
5. Liberty to apply on three (3) days prior written
two Notices of Motion came on for hearing before me on 26 August 2025. At that
hearing, Mr Wilson appeared for MWP, and Mr Baird
of counsel appeared for Mr
Emmott. The Motions were heard together. The evidence which was read was taken
in both Motions.
support of the second MWP Motion, MWP provided a Court Book which consisted of
6,647 pages across eight volumes. It is apparent
that this Court Book replicated
the one supplied to Schmidt AJ for the proceedings heard by her Honour, to which
had been added some
further documents which post-dated her Honour’s
judgments. With respect to the bundle provided by MWP, it is necessary to
record that the vast majority of the Court Book was not specifically referred to
and the Court was taken to comparatively few of
the pages in that Court Book.
Indeed, the Court was not taken, by MWP, to the documents of most significance
to the resolution of
these proceedings.
Application to
Cross-Examine Mr Emmott
the evidence for Mr Emmott on the Notices of Motion was being read, Mr
Wilson, for MWP, indicated that he wished to cross-examine
Mr Emmott on his
affidavits.
enquired of Mr Wilson whether notice had been given to Mr Emmott’s lawyers
of that requirement, and if so, when. Mr Wilson
asserted that he had done so by
email. Counsel for Mr Emmott took instructions and informed the Court that, at
no time, had either
his solicitors, or he personally, received any such email.
He submitted that he and his instructing solicitor were unaware of any
requirement for Mr Emmott to give evidence, and that the absence of such
requirement meant that Mr Emmott, who had been present in
Sydney during the week
before the hearing was to take place, had left Australia.
informed Mr Wilson that he would need to produce evidence of his email being
sent to Mr Emmott’s solicitors and that he could
renew his application if
that became available to him.
in course of the hearing of the Motions, Mr Wilson informed the Court that
arrangements were in place to attempt to obtain
a copy of that email, the
application to cross-examine Mr Emmott was not renewed, and the email was not
ever produced to the Court,
or to Mr Emmott’s lawyers. The application to
cross-examine Mr Emmett, accordingly, lapsed.
if the application had been renewed, it would have been necessary for the Court
to have considered whether it would have been
appropriate and relevant to the
issues falling for consideration for cross-examination to have been
order to understand the issues which were put before the Court for its
determination, it is necessary to set out some parts of
both the first and
second judgments of Schmidt AJ.
The First Judgment of Schmidt
briefly sketching the background and context of the litigation, her Honour noted
that the Registrar was not informed, prior
to making the Registration Orders and
the Dismissal Orders, that MWP had taken steps to enforce disputed judgments and
way of bankruptcy proceedings in the EWHC. Her Honour noted that the
Registrar was not told that Mr Emmott had, by an application
filed in the EWHC
on 22 July 2022, sought “
... set off orders in relation to various of
those judgments, given costs orders which have been made in his
[7], her Honour noted:
“The English set off application was due to be heard in July 2024, but was
adjourned until February 2025 because of problems
with Mr Wilson’s
appearance on the day fixed for the hearing. There in issue is costs orders made
in favour of the Company,
which it claims total almost 6 million pounds, as well
as the costs orders made in favour of Mr Emmott, which he claims total over
million pounds.”
[9], her Honour said:
“Also yet undecided in England is the enforcement of the arbitral award
made in favour of Mr Emmott with the sum awarded now
claimed to exceed 5 million
pounds. There, the question of the set off of costs orders made in favour of the
Company also arises
to be determined.”
[17]-[21], her Honour recorded these matters:
“17. Given what the parties have advanced, despite this,
it appears that they are incapable of sensible agreement about costs
orders made
in Australia. That has had the result that despite what is on foot elsewhere in
respect of the Company’s English
enforcement proceedings and
Mr Emmott’s set off application, the Company intends to pursue
Mr Emmott’s bankruptcy in
Australia, relying on the disputed foreign
judgments, despite the impending hearing in England.
18. Since the judgments were registered in February, the
Company has served an Australian bankruptcy notice on Mr Emmott. It has
notified him and indicated to the Court that it intends to pursue those
bankruptcy proceedings here, irrespective of the English
proceedings.
19. Were the Company to proceed as it intends in Australia, it
appears inevitable that Mr Emmott, who will also be entitled to
rely on unpaid
costs orders made in his favour in other jurisdictions, as well as the orders
which resulted from the arbitral proceedings,
will resist such enforcement. As
explained in
Porter, Re Slater (No 3)
[2021] FCA 688
bankruptcy proceedings the Court also having power to set off a costs order
against a judgment sum.
20. That being so, it follows that in the foreshadowed
bankruptcy proceedings, issues of the same kind as those which have to be
determined in the proceedings presently listed for hearing in the High Court of
England and Wales in February 2025, will arise. Although
once they are decided
in England, it appears that the outcome will bind them.
21. It should be observed that the prospect of these parties
litigating the same matters in both England and Australia, which seems
likely, does not accord with the public interest. That is reinforced by the
factual complexity of the parties’ litigious
history, which the evidence
and submissions led in these proceedings has shed some light on. Still, the
Company is intent on pursuing
the course it has embarked on here, rather than
awaiting the outcome of the English set off application listed for hearing in
Honour noted, at [23], that the likely outcome of the February 2025 hearing in
the EWHC of the set-off application would be a
balancing costs
” being made by the EWHC. Her Honour noted that, even if that
Court’s conclusions were later disturbed by an appeal, “
Honour then referred to bankruptcy proceedings in the Federal Court of
Australia, and at [26] said:
“It follows that in England, once a balancing order is made in respect of
the disputed judgments which are also there in issue,
consequential orders will
be made. Logically, such orders are likely to set aside earlier orders which
arise to be considered in
these proceedings. If he is successful, once made,
Mr Emmott will be entitled to rely on such orders to set aside the
registration
of the disputed judgments in this Court and to resist their
enforcement here. If he is not, the parties ought then to be capable
resolving much of what remains in issue in these proceedings.”
Honour then went on to consider whether the Registration Orders should be set
aside, or alternatively, whether the proceedings
should be stayed.
Honour noted that, shortly before the hearing of the Motions listed before her,
that MWP had filed a Second Further Amended Notice
of Motion which sought leave
to further amend its Summons “
... seeking the registration of other
foreign judgments which will be relied on in the English set off
application
Honour then went on to consider what issues she was being asked to resolve. At
[38], her Honour said:
“38. What was in issue thus included
(1) this Court is the appropriate Court in which to register
the judgments;
(2) the registration of any further judgments should
be entertained before the English proceedings are determined;
(3) Mr Wilson should be joined as a party to
these proceedings;
(4) the extensions of time sought to file the
Company’s notice of motion should be granted;
(5) in obtaining the Registration Orders, the Company made the
disclosures required by the Rules and, if not, whether the failure
involved any abuse of process;
(6) the Registrar’s orders made on 2 February 2024 should
be set aside; and
(7) the proceedings should be stayed pending determination of
the set off application in the High Court of England and Wales.”
Honour noted at [39], that it was ultimately accepted between the parties that
the Registrar had erred in registering some of
the judgments.
[40], her Honour expressed her conclusions in this way:
“40. For reasons which follow, I have concluded that:
● this Court is the appropriate Court in which to pursue
the registration of the disputed foreign judgments;
● the proceedings should be stayed pending determination
of the set off application which is listed for hearing in the High
England and Wales;
● Mr Wilson should not now be joined as a party to these
proceedings, his joinder not being relevant to the resolution of
the real issues
now lying between the parties; and
● other issues (including whether an extension of time
should be granted and whether further judgments should be registered)
not, at this stage, be determined.”
[41] and following, her Honour expressed her reasons for reaching those
conclusions. She said:
“41. That is because the resolution of the English
proceedings in the near future will impact the rights of both the Company
Emmott and result in orders affecting some, at least, of the judgments and
orders which remain in dispute.
42. I am satisfied that even if the disputed judgments were
capable of being registered in February 2024, the adjournment of the
bankruptcy proceedings until the resolution of the set off application,
currently prevents their enforcement in England,
until further order. Justice
does not permit some different practical result in Australia.
43. It rather requires that the enforcement of the challenged
judgments in Australia should likewise be prevented, until the English
proceedings have been determined. That can best be achieved by these proceedings
being stayed until final orders in respect of the
set off application have been
made in England.
44. Given the parties’ history, there is of course a real
prospect that the final outcome of what is being litigated in England
be known until the outcome of an appeal.
45. Despite this, once the outcome of the English litigation is
known, the Company will be in a position to know what judgments
and orders it is
entitled to pursue further in Australia. The parties should then confer about an
appropriate way forward, in accordance
with the obligations imposed on them by
Civil Procedure Act
46. At this stage I am satisfied that this course is likely to
issues lying
between these parties, bearing in mind the Court resources that litigation here
will otherwise utilise, potentially
only to be overtaken by the outcome of the
English litigation.”
Honour returned to the question of a stay at [84]. She identified the essential
question which she was called upon to resolve
... whether these
proceedings should be stayed, pending the resolution of the English set off
proceedings
”. Her Honour noted that the Court was required to act in
accordance with the dictates of justice and the provisions of
Civil Procedure Act
Honour declined to accept the proposition that permitting MWP to pursue in
Australian courts, arguments which would be canvassed
and determined in the EWHC
in February 2025, would accord with the application of the overriding purpose
specified in
Civil Procedure Act
(NSW), namely
to facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the
proceedings. Her Honour noted that permitting
MWP to proceed in Australia would
put the parties to unnecessary costs and would risk contradictory judgments
being given by English
and Australian courts about the same matters, at
unnecessary cost and inconvenience to the Australian community. Her Honour noted
that the parties would be bound by the resolution of their dispute in the
English courts and, further, that it would be contrary
to public policy to
permit the same matters to be litigated in Australian courts before the outcome
of the English set-off application
is known. Her Honour concluded at
“I am thus satisfied that justice requires that these proceedings be
stayed, pending the determination of the proceedings in
the High Court of
England and Wales, given that the hearing of the English enforcement proceedings
has been deferred, pending the
determination of what is in issue in the High
Court of England and Wales in relation to set off.”
Honour proceeded, at [91]-[92], to say this:
“91. What is listed for hearing in February 2025 is Mr
Emmott’s claim about the set off of unpaid judgment debts in
costs which he owes the Company, against those which it owes him. There is also
a dispute about the respective amounts
of those costs, as well as in relation to
the arbitral award.
92. On the Company’s case it is owed costs in excess of
5,911,934 pounds, but Mr Emmott claims it is owed some one tenth
of this amount.
What the correct figure is need not be determined in these proceedings,
being the subject of the hearing listed in the High Court in February
.” (emphasis added)
Honour concluded her first judgment, setting out these views at [102] and
“102. There are thus significant issues lying
between the parties about matters not easily resolved, many of them due to
be resolved in the English proceedings in February 2025. That
being the case I am satisfied that these issues would better await
resolution of those proceedings, that likely to significantly reduce what
is really in issue between the parties in these proceedings.
103. I am satisfied that justice requires that
the parties have the opportunity to consider the outcome
of the English proceedings,
which ought to put them
into a position where the disagreement about the registration of
the remaining of the challenged judgments,
can relatively
shortly be agreed. Unless set aside on an appeal the parties will, after
all, be bound by the orders made in the English
proceedings.
104. Compliance with the obligations imposed on them by
Civil Procedure Act
should thus result in
an agreement about the further orders which should then be made in
these proceedings.
105. In all those circumstances I am satisfied that the
appropriate order now to make is to stay the proceedings, rather than
determine, at this stage, what other judgments and orders, if
any, must have their registration set aside.”
Honour directed the parties to bring in Short Minutes of Order, rethinking the
precise terms of the Orders sought by each party.
Judgment of Schmidt AJ
her second judgment, Schmidt AJ set out the orders that each party contended
to Order (1) in the Second MWP Motion, both parties agreed, although their
proposed orders were expressed in somewhat different
words, that Order 3(k) of
the Registrar’s orders should be set aside. The making of this order by
the Registrar was specifically
challenged in Emmott’s First Motion.
differences in language do not affect the substance of what each party was
contending for, namely that the particular order of
the Registrar should be set
respect to the terms of the stay to be granted, the parties did not agree. They
also did not agree with respect to costs. Her
Honour, for the reasons which she
expressed, made the orders set out above at [
is to be observed that her Honour’s reasons for granting the stay
exhibited the same attention to international judicial
co-operation as had been
shown by HH Judge Pelling KC, when he ordered a case management stay of
proceedings in the EWHC.
will be necessary to come to the submissions and arguments dealing with the two
Notices of Motion, but it is first instructive
to identify what has, in fact,
happened in the EWHC since the delivery of Schmidt AJ’s two
Events Since Judgments of Schmidt AJ
17 and 18 December 2024, Mr Emmott’s application to the EWHC for a
set‑off was heard by HH Judge Pelling KC (“the
15 January 2025, HH Judge Pelling KC delivered his reasons for judgment and made
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Emmott
[2025] EWHC 747
is clear from these reasons that HH Judge Pelling KC had heard and was giving
judgment in respect of three applications which were
heard in December. One of
those applications was that made by Mr Emmott by Notice dated 22 July 2022. That
application sought a declaration
in these terms:
“A declaration that, as a matter of principle, [Mr Emmott] is entitled to
set off a judgment debt in his favour against the
claimant (‘MWP’)
against various cost orders obtained by MWP against him in various different
claims, concerned with
or related to his attempts to enforce his judgment
against MWP.”
other two applications can be put to one side.
the course of the December hearing, MWP put into evidence, before the Court, a
spreadsheet, said to be current at that time, which
was described by HH Judge
Pelling KC in his judgment as a document purporting:
“... to set out all the sums which are due and owing from MWP to Mr Emmott
including interest accumulating on that sum from
time to time and all sums which
are alleged by Mr Wilson on behalf of MWP to be due to MWP from Mr Emmott, as a
result of various
transactions and costs orders over a number of years made by
courts both in England and Wales and elsewhere around the world.”
the end of the December hearing, HH Judge Pelling KC reserved judgment and
adjourned the proceeding for delivery of judgment on
15 January 2025. On that
date, MWP, through Mr Wilson, presented a further iteration of the spreadsheet
to the Court through the
medium of his 61st Witness Statement.
interpolate to say here, that Mr Wilson and MWP clearly thought that such a
spreadsheet, and the calculations, were relevant to
the proceedings being dealt
with at the December hearing. Otherwise, Mr Wilson would not have tendered the
document and an updated
version of it.
Judge Pelling KC noted the claim being made in the 61st Witness Statement of Mr
Wilson, which was to the effect, in summary, that
MWP owed no money to
Mr Emmott, who, in fact, owed substantial sums of money to MWP. At [6] of
his reasons, his Honour noted that,
notwithstanding all that Mr Wilson had
written, the orders sought by MWP were limited to directions to Mr Emmott to
file and serve
evidence in response to the spreadsheet, including specified
15 January 2025, as the judgment states at [9], Mr Wilson raised new, and
unforeshadowed arguments about the net position between
the parties, including a
limitation argument. At [13], his Honour discussed Mr Wilson’s attempts to
re-open the application
and rely on limitation arguments.
the course of his reasons of 15 January 2025, HH Judge Pelling KC said at
“38. In my judgment, therefore, there can be no real
doubt that in principle, Mr Emmott is entitled to set off his liability
under costs orders as and when they arise in these proceedings against the
judgment sum together with interest as it has accrued
down to the date when the
right to set off is asserted. As I have said, set off operates as a defence and
will generally arise where
there is a dispute either before a court at
determining a summary judgment application on the cross claim or an insolvency
determining an application to set aside a statutory demand or adjudicating
upon a winding up or bankruptcy petition. Generally, it
is inappropriate to
expect a court to resolve such an issue other than in the context of such
proceedings, where the issue that arises
can be determined in the relevant
context. There will generally be a need to determine the state of account at
such a hearing. There
may well be a dispute as to when the set off should be
applied, which will be relevant to how interest should be treated as
accumulating
on the judgment on the one side, and on the sums due under the
costs order on the other. There may be issues as to what, if any,
sums should be
treated as set off prior to considering the particular costs order concerned as
there would be in this case, on the
basis that MWP seeks to assert that the
right of set off has been lost by reference to a myriad of different
transactions, with only
those about which there is no dispute or which can be
established to the summary judgment standard being available to be taken into
Honour noted the existence of the document within which the spreadsheet was
contained. With respect to that document and what
occurred at the December
hearing, his Honour noted, at [45]-[46], the following:
“45. More importantly, no attempt has been made to
provide any coherent supporting evidence. It was only at the end of the
before the hearing that commenced on Tuesday 16, December, that a bundle of
material was produced. This was so, even though
the application had been listed
for months, and Mr Emmott had been asking for such material for weeks, if not
months prior to the
start of the hearing. This material was not in the form of a
witness statement, but of various documents or extracts from documents
support what is alleged in the spreadsheet. Mr Emmott complained in the
strongest terms about this, on the basis that he
had been seeking the underlying
material to support what was contained in the spreadsheet for months, and he had
had no chance to
respond sensibly to the material given when it was served. I
46. In my judgment, this was in effect, if not by intention, a
forensic ambush that would have given MWP an illegitimate procedural
over Mr Emmott. It is something I am not prepared to countenance. In fact
however it does not matter because there are
many more fundamental objections to
Mr Wilson’s approach.”
also interpolate here that Mr Wilson, on behalf of MWP, provided evidence, which
he contended substantiated MWP’s claim that
the declaration as to
set‑off ought not be made because there were no sums remaining which
Mr Emmott could set off: see [42]
of the judgment. In other words, the
existence of a net balance sum was regarded by Mr Wilson as being in issue at
the December hearing.
[48], his Honour referred to the trial of what he described as “the Part
7 claim”. At [49], his Honour said:
“MWP has commenced a part 7 claim against Mr Emmott, bearing the number
CL-2021-000728, in which many of the claims referred
to in the spreadsheet,
although not all, have been claimed against Mr Emmott. No doubt Mr Emmott will
plead set off in defence of
that claim in addition to any other affirmative
defences advanced concerning the effect of the various instruments relied upon,
example. If and when that claim comes to trial, the issues that arise will
be resolved, and what Mr Wilson claims to want, namely,
the final account
between him and Mr Emmott will be the result. There may be other procedural
routes to what Mr Wilson wishes to
achieve that are quicker or cheaper. However,
that is one of the routes at least that will enable the set off factual issues
resolved finally.”
discussed various pathways by which an ultimate accounting could occur between
MWP and Mr Emmott to the effect of that advanced
by MWP by its spreadsheet, but
based upon proper evidence, and enabling time for preparation by Mr Emmott to
respond to the question
of who owed what to whom, his Honour then, at [54], said
“Returning the application, I am prepared to declare that as a matter of
general principle, Mr Emmott is entitled to resist
enforcement of the costs
order made against him by reference to the judgment debt. However, all questions
concerning whether in fact
such a defence is available must be resolved either
at the hearing of the application to set aside the statutory demands when the
issue will be whether Mr Emmott has established a right to set off to the
limited level required for such an application, or at the
trial of the Part 7
claim or any other claim or application issued by MWP where the issue can be
properly resolved – something
that will involve MWP preparing an account
along the lines explained earlier and supporting the sums claimed in it with
proper evidence,
which in the case of proving the costs claims may involve
nothing more than producing the orders containing the summary assessment
orders of the SCCO evidencing the detailed assessments or default
assessments.”
Honour finally concluded at [56], with this:
“Mr Wilson expressed the view that any judgment I gave dealing with the
general principle but not determining the factual issues
that arise in relation
to the sums that MWP maintains are due ... would result in courts around the
world simply concluding that
set off was available. In my judgment, no court
anywhere reading this judgment could conclude that was what its effect was or
intended to be. All that this judgment resolves is whether, as a matter of
English law, Mr Emmott is in principle entitled to seek
to set off against any
costs order made against him in favour of MWP so much of the judgment debt owed
by MWP to Mr Emmott as remains
unpaid or unaccounted for by earlier setoffs.
Whether as a matter of fact set off is available will depend upon a careful
analysis at any particular date when set off has been asserted by Mr
Emmott of the state of account between MWP and Mr Emmott. What
test a court will
apply in resolving that factual question will depend on the nature of the
application being determined and the
law that governs the application.”
making the in-principle declaration to which earlier reference has been made at
] above, on 15
January 2025, HH Judge Pelling KC also made this order:
“3. All questions concerning whether there was any and if
so what part of the judgment debt remained due to Mr Emmott at
the date when
each right to set off was claimed, must be determined either at the hearings of
MWP’s bankruptcy petitions against
Mr Emmott or Mr Emmott’s
applications to set aside MWP’s statutory demands (in each case to the
evidential standard that
applies to such petitions or applications), or at the
trial of MWP’s Part 7 Claim as to the Sinclair debts owed by
to MWP in CL-2021-000728.”
is abundantly clear from the terms of the in-principle declaration, and the
terms of this order, that HH Judge Pelling KC had not
finally determined the
issue of what the net balance was, either in favour of MWP, or else, Mr Emmott.
20 March 2025, HH Judge Pelling KC delivered a further judgment which dealt with
whether the case management stay ordered by his
Honour on 1 November 2024
should be, or should not be, reimposed in light of the events which had
occurred. In that judgment, his
Honour described what had occurred in the
proceedings before him and identified the claim being made in this Court, which
subject of the judgment of Hammerschlag CJ in Eq. His Honour noted that
MWP had launched an appeal from the judgment of Hammerschlag
CJ in Eq to the New
South Wales Court of Appeal. Further, he noted what he had earlier recorded
matters being debated before him if MWP
succeeded on its appeal with respect to the judgment of Hammerschlag CJ in Eq.
Honour continued the case management stay with some limited exceptions. Included
in those exceptions was:
“Any further application or claim MWP may choose to bring (if so advised)
for a declaration and/or judgment, ruling and order
that, in the events that
have happened there are no sums remaining due and owing from MWP to
Mr Emmott and all and any appeals therefrom.”
Honour’s reasons are contained in
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited
v John Forster Emmott
[2025] EWHC 716 (Comm).
then appears that, on 7 April 2025, MWP commenced a further claim against Mr
Emmott, by which it applied for a “declaration
judgment ruling and/or
order” which, although expressed in various ways, was intended to
determine the underlying question
of whether, as MWP claimed, it was owed money
by Mr Emmott, or not. In other words, it was intended to result in a
finding of the
net balance between the parties. These new proceedings were
apparently brought under Part 8 of the UK Civil Procedure Rules.
any event, the set-off proceedings seeking to identify the balance owing (if
any) to MWP, were due to be heard before HH Judge
Pelling KC in August 2025.
They did not proceed at that time. All extant proceedings, including the Part 8
claim, were adjourned
until January 2026 for a two-day hearing.
orders made by HH Judge Pelling KC on 5 August 2025, also dealt with the filing
and service of evidence, and outlines of arguments
to be made. It is entirely
clear from these orders that both parties were, at that stage, still to complete
their evidence.
yet, there has been no determination of the question of whether MWP is owed
money by Mr Emmott, or whether Mr Emmott is owed money
by MWP. Nowhere has there
been a definitive judgment setting out what the balance of the accounts between
the two parties may be.
Hearing of the Two Motions
is against this factual background that the Court came to hear the Second Emmott
Motion and the Second MWP Motion.
needs to be recalled, at the outset, that MWP filed a Notice of Intention to
Appeal with respect to the two judgments of Schmidt
AJ, which was served on Mr
Emmott on 6 November 2024. On 18 January 2025, MWP filed a Summons in the New
South Wales Court of Appeal,
seeking leave to appeal against both judgments of
Schmidt AJ. A Notice of Appeal, also dated 28 January 2025, was filed together
with the Application for Leave.
2 of the Notice of Appeal was in the following form:
“The appellant appeals against the whole of the first judgment and
decisions of Schmidt AJ in the NSWSC CLD on 10.10.24 at
[2024] NSWSC 1258
which reasons were delivered and the decision was recorded on the cover as
‘Proceedings are stayed’, though in respect
of which no final orders
were entered and made as the same were reserved, pending further evidence,
argument and submissions, in
the usual way, and most importantly, the second and
final judgment of Schmidt AJ in the NSWSC CLD at
[2024] NSWCA 1435
handed down on 12.11.24 and, in particular, the related final orders of 12.11.24
that were only made and issued after the
final and second judgment was handed
down on 12.11.24. Of course, it is trite law and practice that one appeals only
final orders
and not mere judgments.”
Notice of Appeal then sets out in a prolix, rambling and unfocused way,
15 grounds of appeal against the first judgment of Schmidt
AJ. The Notice
of Appeal slips between identifying a specific ground and making submissions,
and setting out argument with respect
to those grounds. It is unnecessary to set
out the many pages of argument and grounds.
orders sought in the appeal include the following:
“2. Set aside the two (2) judgments and decisions of
Schmidt AJ, recorded on 10.10.24 and 12.11.24 at
[2024] NSWSC 1258
[2024] NSWSC 1435
, granting a stay of proceedings in the Common Law Division of
the NSWSC No. 2023/00279049 and the final orders that were only issued,
and made on 12.11.24.”
can be observed, MWP’s appeal seeks orders which would set aside those
orders, the meaning of which I am asked to consider
in this hearing.
MWP’s Second Motion
is difficult to encapsulate, in an entirely satisfactory manner, the substance
of the written submissions. It is clear that the
principal form of relief in
MWP’s second Motion is that set out in Order 1 – where MWP seeks an
order of the Court rescinding,
setting aside and varying (Order 1) the orders of
Schmidt AJ, which order was made by consent, and which set aside Order 3(k)
the Registration Orders of the Registrar on 2 February 2024.
contention of MWP is that that order:
“... was consented to by the parties and made in error and arose as a
result of a mistake and error of fact and English law,
being the applicable law,
and accordingly the Order should be rescinded, set aside and/or varied.”
oral address, Mr Wilson for MWP accepted that the order of Schmidt AJ was
made by consent. He submitted that the order was made
on the basis of an
understanding of English law in respect of limitations. He submitted that by
reason of a judgment made some months
after the orders of Schmidt AJ were made
(i.e., the judgment of 15 January 2024 of HH Judge Pelling KC), that limitation
period issue
was reconsidered, with the consequence that ,as the law had
changed, the earlier consent order had been agreed to by mistake.
Wilson accepted that MWP had not filed any evidence establishing, as a matter of
fact, that he, on behalf of the company, or the
company itself, held the
requisite belief upon which he asserted that the company had acted in consenting
to the order before Schmidt
AJ. Instead, he accepted that his argument was that:
“... there is no direct evidence of the requisite belief at a time prior
to the order being sought, but you seek to submit
that I should draw that
conclusion by inference arising from the fact that the state of the law as to
limitations was ‘x’
at the relevant time and was later demonstrated
to be ‘y’; ‘x’ and ‘y’ being
opposites.”
this point, counsel for Mr Emmott submitted that:
(1) There was no evidence put before the Court as to the circumstances
surrounding, and the belief of, MWP, or Mr Wilson, before
consent to the order
was given. Such evidence would be essential to support the ground as a basis for
the orders being sought by
(2) Given that the order made by Schmidt AJ was a final order, the Court, except
on appeal, has only limited power to set aside the
order. It does not have the
power to do so outside those powers conferred on it by the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules
(NSW) (“UCPR”);
of the UCPR was inapplicable as a source of power because,
in the circumstances (which I have earlier described) it cannot be said
judgment ‘...
was given or entered, ... irregularly, illegally or
against good faith
’. Mr Emmott pointed to the fact such a claim was
not being articulated;
(4) Mr Emmott submitted that r 36.16 of the UCPR was equally inapplicable.
A Notice of Motion for setting aside or varying of the
order was not filed
either before the entry of the Order sought to be set aside, or else within 14
days after the Order was entered.
Mr Emmott submitted that the second MWP Notice
of Motion was filed over six months after the order was made and entered;
(5) Accordingly, Mr Emmott submitted that the Court could not make the order
Court, when asked to vary or set aside an order given after judgment, is, in the
absence of consent, only capable of so doing
in accordance with r 36.15 or
r 36.16 of the UCPR. Mr Emmott made it plain that he was not consenting to
any setting aside, or variation,
of Schmidt AJ’s order.
the hearing concluded, Mr Wilson sent, to the Court, an email in which he
indicated that, in support of MWP’s Second Motion,
he relied upon UCPR
rr 36.15 and 36.17; UCPR rr 18.1 and 18.3;
Supreme Court Act
Supreme Court Act
“and the CPA 2005”.
accept the submission of counsel for Mr Emmott that rr 36.15 and 36.16 have
no application in the circumstances here. The Order
sought to be varied was made
(and entered) by Schmidt AJ because both parties consented to it, or the
substance of it. There is no
basis put before the Court which could amount to
sufficient cause being shown
” that the Order was made
... irregularly, illegally, or against good faith
contrary, the Order was made entirely regularly.
also accept the submissions of counsel for Mr Emmott that the fact that the
Second MWP Motion was first filed over six months after
the Order was made,
means that the power conferred on the Court by r 36.16 cannot be exercised.
The second MWP Motion is out of time,
and the power to set aside an order is
unavailable.
36.17 of the UCPR is limited to the purpose of correcting any clerical mistake
or an error arising from an accidental slip or
omission. That power, generally
known as the “slip rule” is wholly inapplicable here, where the
application is to set
aside an Order in its entirety. No mistake or error in the
contents of the Order is complained of.
other provisions relied upon by MWP are entirely irrelevant as a source of power
to make the Order sought. Rules 18.1 and 18.3
deal with the need for, and
content of, a Notice of Motion.
Section 46(4)
Supreme Court Act
provides for the Court of Appeal to have a power to discharge or vary an
order made by a Judge of Appeal.
principal Order sought by MWP in the Second MWP Motion does not fall within any
of the identified rules. This Court does not have
the power to make the order.
well, even if I was persuaded that the Court had a general power to make such an
order, any such order would involve the Court
exercising a discretion so to do.
Given that MWP has sought leave to appeal against all of the orders made by
Schmidt AJ, and that
appeal has not yet been finalised, it would not be
appropriate for this Court to exercise any discretion to set aside an order,
there is an appeal pending with respect to that order.
the second MWP Motion has failed to identify any legal basis for the making of
the principal order sought, I have concluded that
it is wholly without merit and
must be dismissed.
The Second Emmott Motion
second Emmott Motion arises from a contention by MWP, which was adhered to
firmly by Mr Wilson, on behalf of MWP, in his submissions
before me, that the
stay ordered by Schmidt AJ had come to an end as and from 15 January 2025,
because of the effect of the judgment
of HH Judge Pelling KC, delivered at that
is clear that there is a substantive issue between the parties as to the effect
of the stay ordered by Schmidt AJ, and also as
to the substance and effect of
the proceedings in the EWHC, over which HH Judge Pelling KC presides.
Emmott submits that, having regard to the terms of Orders 1 and 2 of
HH Judge Pelling KC on 15 January 2025, it is simply impossible
to conclude
that there has been any final determination of Mr Emmott’s set-off
application, as contemplated by Schmidt AJ in
her orders.
Emmott supports this submission by reference to the nature of the proceedings to
be heard by HH Judge Pelling KC in January 2026.
He draws attention to the
fact that the formal sealed order of the EWHC refers to a range of proceedings
commenced variously between
2006 and 2024, and notes that the orders were made
with respect to each of those proceedings. In particular, Mr Emmott draws
to the terms of Order 3, which include a reference to various
bankruptcy petitions or statutory demands, which have not yet been
determined,
and the trial of the
claim in the EWHC, with respect to what is known
between the parties as the “Sinclair debts”. He submits that those
have not been completed.
Emmott further draws attention to the 2024 case management stay judgment of
HH Judge Pelling KC, which involves the same proceedings,
proceeded in a way which I have earlier described as expressing a degree of
international judicial comity, which contemplated
that the EWHC proceedings,
with some exceptions, would be stayed, pending finalisation of proceedings in
Australia arising from the
judgment of Hammerschlag CJ at Eq.
differently, Mr Emmott submitted that it was entirely plain from the judgments
in the EWHC, that there has been no final determination
of his claim for a
set-off, which had two components to it: first, a question as to whether it was
a matter of general principle
that Mr Emmott was entitled to a set-off, and,
secondly, whether, upon proper calculations, Mr Emmott would owe MWP any money
the end of the computation of setting-off various amounts, or whether, in
fact, MWP would owe him money.
Emmott pointed to the fact that there has been no balancing judgment, or one
which, in any way, reaches a net financial position
between the parties, and
that such a judgment would not, at the earliest, be expected until delivery of
judgment consequent upon
the hearing in January 2026, and perhaps any appeal
therefrom. Mr Emmott also contended that the completion of other proceedings
would also be likely to be relevant.
those reasons, Mr Emmott submitted that there is no interpretation of the orders
made by Schmidt AJ which could result in an assertion
that the stay her Honour
ordered has come to an end.
submitted that the order of Schmidt AJ, read by reference to its terms, cannot
be taken to have continued in existence after 15
January 2025, because the only
set‑off relief sought by Mr Emmott, was that expressed in his application
made in proceedings
CL-2014-000916, dated 22 July 2022, which sought
“that the claimant is entitled to set off any order for costs made against
him in favour of the defendant against the judgment
debt the claimant has
against the defendant.”
Accordingly,
MWP submitted that those proceedings had been fully resolved by the first order
made in January 2025, and as nothing
further remained to be determined, Order 2
of the orders of Schmidt AJ of 12 November 2024 had fallen in, so that the stay
Wilson pointed to the fact that, separately from the July 2022 application, in
order to facilitate a determination of what monies
were owing by one party to
the other, MWP had chosen to commence the
proceedings to which
reference has been made. He submitted that it was these proceedings which are to
be determined in January 2026.
As they are separate proceedings commenced after
the stay ordered by Schmidt AJ, they did not fall within the terms of her
seems to me that, in order to understand the relief that Schmidt AJ was
granting, the starting point is to be found in her Honour’s
the course of her first judgment, Schmidt AJ at [7] noted, by reference to what
her Honour described as the “
English set-off application
that there was in those proceedings:
“... in issue ... costs orders made in favour of the Company which it
claims total almost 6 million pounds, and as well as
the costs orders made in
favour of Mr Emmott which he claims total over 2.4 million pounds.”
Honour particularly noted, at [21], that it did not accord with the public
interest that both parties should be litigating “t
he same matters in
both England and Australia
”. Her Honour was concerned that that seemed
likely, unless some relief was granted. Her Honour noted in that regard, that
was intent on pursuing the course it had embarked upon in this Court, unless
the relief sought by Mr Emmott in the first Emmott Motion
was granted.
Honour further noted that MWP ought to have disclosed
“... the position in relation to the ongoing proceedings in the English
courts which are considering the parties’ rights
of set off, including in
relation to the disputed judgments”.
Honour further, at [81], considered that one of the possible outcomes of the
set‑off application appeared to be an order,
which encapsulated all of the
disputed judgments in orders:
“... into one judgment which specifies the amount, if any, Mr Emmott
is liable to pay the Company in respect of all of these
costs judgments and
Honour was there considering, in effect, which court was the appropriate one to
be seized of the determination of a significant
question between the parties
which would fix an amount owed by Mr Emmott to MWP, or else owed by MWP to
that background, her Honour determined to stay these proceedings, pending the
resolution of the proceedings in the EWHC. That
this was her Honour’s
intention is plain from her reasons. At [87], her Honour identified the fact
that the parties may be
put to unnecessary costs if the proceedings in Australia
were dealt with, or there may be a risk of contrary judgments being given
English and Australian courts about the same matters, which would be costly and
inconvenient to the Australian community. And,
further, that the parties would
be bound by the resolution of their dispute in the English courts. In those
circumstances, her Honour
was satisfied that it would be contrary to public
policy to permit the same matters to be litigated in Australian courts before
outcome of the English set‑off application is known.
was being litigated in Australia was the entitlement to have various foreign
judgments registered. There is no point in registering
those judgments unless
MWP was intending to enforce them – including by taking bankruptcy
proceedings against Mr Emmott. But
in those proceedings, Mr Emmott would be
entitled to claim that the debts were not due and owing because he was entitled
to a set‑off.
It was in order to avoid these Australian re-litigation
proceedings, that her Honour determined it was inappropriate and contrary
public policy to permit similar matters to be litigated in Australia and
is clear that her Honour had in mind that, at the conclusion of proceedings in
the EWHC, there would be a determination of the
balancing figure after all
judgments, debts and orders for costs were set-off against each other, including
by calculation of outstanding
interest and so on. It was with the intention of
providing the parties with the time and opportunity in an orderly and
procedurally
fair manner to obtain a judgment on the merits from the EWHC, that
her Honour stayed the proceedings.
light of the later proceedings in the EWHC, and the orders made by HH Judge
Pelling KC for the filing of evidence, and outlining
what is to be determined by
him in January 2026, it is plain that her Honour’s stay, whilst it was
intended to pause these
proceedings pending a final determination, including on
an appeal, if one is lodged, by one or other party, of the net balance sum,
not have been worded with the precision necessary to deal with MWP’s
overly technical approach, which I have earlier noted.
my view, MWP well understood that was what her Honour intended and had in mind.
The terms of MWP’s proposed Order 5 demonstrate
this conclusion.
5 of the orders proposed by MWP was in the following terms:
“Relist the proceedings for further directions on February 2025, after
judgment has been handed down by HH Judge Pelling KC
in the set‑off
application listed to be heard on 17 February 2025 in CL-2014-000916.”
hearing of an application limited to the obtaining of a declaration as to
whether, as a matter of general principle, Mr Emmott was
entitled to set-off the
various costs orders he had obtained in his favour against costs and/or
judgments obtained by MWP, is not
an application which would have taken two days
to be heard. As the subsequent orders made in the EWHC show, the two‑day
is required so that the evidence going to calculations of the value at
various points in time, of various of the judgments, costs
orders and other
financial imposts, to which the parties are exposed as a consequence of their
more than a decade of litigation,
can be weighed up and a conclusion on the
merits reached.
seeks now to argue something which is inconsistent with their submissions to
this Court, on a basis which is highly artificial
and opportunistic, and does
not reflect what the EWHC, and Schmidt AJ intended, by way of international
judicial comity, namely that
in the public interest, only one court should
determine the balance sum owing by one party to the other, and that such
proceedings
were, from an Australian perspective, best placed to occur in the
light of the artificial, and wholly impractical, construction advanced by MWP,
accompanied by its threat to proceed with respect
to enforcement proceedings, it
is appropriate that this Court grants relief of the kind sought in the Second
Emmott Motion.
purpose of the relief is to ensure that there is no doubt about the stay of the
Australian proceedings.
is inappropriate for this Court to vary the orders which were made by a fellow
judge of the Common Law Division, in circumstances
where there is an appeal on
foot which seeks that the Order under consideration here, ought be set aside on
the basis that it was
made erroneously.
am satisfied that to quell the controversy between the parties, and for the
avoidance of any further doubt, the better course is
to make an order reflecting
the substance of the Second Emmott Notice of Motion, but in slightly different
am satisfied that it is appropriate for the determination on the merits of
MWP’s claim, that based upon judgments or orders
for costs which have been
made, and the balance owing between the parties to be determined in the EWHC.
The interests of the administration
of justice strongly suggest that
cost-effective manner.
my view, the orders should be made on the Second Emmott Motion which provide for
a stay of these proceedings, until such time as
there is a final determination
(including on appeal) of the issue between the parties as to whether MWP is
entitled to be paid money
by Mr Emmott, or else, as he claims, he is
entitled to be paid money by MWP. I am conscious that components of this
ultimate issue
are to be found in a number of pieces of, as yet unresolved,
litigation in the EWHC, and the orders must be expressed to take all
proceedings into account.
considered carefully the terms of any stay order, I have concluded that it is
appropriate to exclude from the stay order, the
proceedings known to the parties
and the EWHC as the “Sinclair Debt claim”. I note that HH Judge
Pelling KC excluded
these proceedings from the case management stay which he
ordered on 17 March 2025: see
Michael Wilson & Partners Limited v John
Forster Emmott
[2025] EWHC 716 (Comm).
, HH Judge Pelling KC noted
that the Sinclair Debt claim being made by MWP was “
contentious
”, and that the proceedings were “
at an early
”, and that, at the time of his judgment, there was no basis for
staying it.
reason why I think that the Sinclair Debt claim (CL-2021-000728) should be
excluded from the stay is that the matter is not yet
listed for a final hearing,
that the parties should be free to prepare that litigation without any
suggestion that they would be
in breach of my stay order and that, having regard
to the nature of the stay being ordered, it may be unfair to either or both
at this stage, to be required to wait until the final determination
(including on appeal) of those proceedings before seeking further
orders in this
Second MWP Motion has been dismissed. In my view, it was wholly without merit.
MWP should pay the costs of that application, because
it should never have been
respect to the costs of the Second Emmott Motion, in my view, Mr Emmott has
had substantial success with respect to that Motion.
He has established that the
stay which was imposed by Schmidt AJ was intended by her, and ought to be
understood as being still in
existence, notwithstanding the contrary being
asserted by MWP. In that circumstance, it is appropriate that costs follow the
I would order MWP to pay Mr Emmott’s costs of the
make the following orders:
(1) Order that, until further order, these proceedings (2023/279049), Michael
Wilson & Partner Ltd v John Forster Emmott, be,
and hereby are, stayed.
(2) Order that neither party is entitled to make application for any order in
these proceedings with respect to the stay in Order
1 until there has been a
final determination (including any appeal) of:
(i) all proceedings presently listed in the High Court of Justice for England
and Wales before HH Judge Pelling KC for determination
in January 2026;
(ii) all other proceedings in the High Court of Justice for England and Wales
between Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd, or Mr Michael
Wilson and Mr John
Forster Emmott, except for the
claim (CL-2021-000728), known as the
Sinclair Debt claim;
whichever is the later.
(3) The Motion filed by Mr Emmott on 25 May 2025 is otherwise dismissed.
(4) The Motion filed by Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd on 29 May 2025 is
(5) Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd are to pay Mr Emmott’s costs of
both Motions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (374 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter