URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2009/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Larden [2009] NSWPHT 1 (25 May 2009)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) v Larden
[2009] NSWPHT 1
INQUIRY PURSUANT TO SECTIONS 114, 122,
Pharmacy Practice Act 2006 No 59
Tribunal Members
Mr. Peter Dwyer (Chairman)
Jonathan Chen (Pharmacist Member)
Ms. Margaret Duguid
(Pharmacist
Dr. Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
Complainant
: NSW Health Care Complaints
Commission;
: Dr Dale Warwick Larden;
Dates of Hearing
16, 17 March 2009.
Pharmacist—Professional
Misconduct—Unsatisfactory
Professional Conduct—Convictions for offences concerning Drugs of
Addiction— Drug abuse
/ dependence—Impairment—Character.
Legislation cited:
Pharmacy Practice Act 2006
, Schedule 6 Clauses 5, 11(1) & 13; Division 3 of
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002—
Clauses 112
(1), 173 (1);
Cases cited:
A Solicitor v The Council of the Law
Society of NSW
[2004] HCA 1
Bannister v Walton
unreported, 30 April 1992);
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR
[2007] NSWPB 1
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW)
HCCC v Litchfield
(1997) 42 NSWLR 630
Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
McBride v Walton
(NSW CA, unreported, 15 July 1994);
Ziems v Prothonotary of
the Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
Wentworth v NSW Bar
Association
[1992] HCA 24
(1992) 176 CLR 239.
Appearances:
Mr. P. Griffin of Counsel (instructed by Ms. S. Connors) appeared for the
Complainant; The Respondent was unrepresented and appeared
Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct;
Respondent has been convicted of offences in New South Wales, the circumstances
of which render him unfit in the public interest
to practise pharmacy;
Respondent suffers from an impairment;
Respondent’s registration is cancelled and he is not to be
re-registered;
application by the Respondent for review of the above order under Division 3 of
Pharmacy Practice Act
may not be made until
after three (3) years from the effective date of these orders.
Respondent to pay the costs of the Complainant as agreed or if agreement cannot
be reached, either party may have the matter re-listed
for assessment by the
Date of Orders: 25 May 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
The Complaints
Five (5) complaints pursuant to the
(“the Act”) made by the Complainant, the NSW Health
Care Complaints Commission were referred to the Tribunal for its
At the commencement of the inquiry the Complainant was granted leave to amend
the complaints. The Complaints as amended, allege as
COMPLAINT ONE
The Respondent has been guilty of professional misconduct pursuant to section
39 (2) (b) of the Act in that the pharmacist:
(a) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the pharmacist
in the practice of
pharmacy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist
of an equivalent level of training
or experience, and/or
(b) has engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
PARTICULARS
From 11 August 2003 to 2 February 2004 the pharmacist was employed as a
pharmacist at Lulic's Pharmacy, 196 Military Road, Neutral
Bay, New South Wales
("Lulic's Pharmacy").
On 2 September 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 800
Dexamphetamine tablets and unlawfully entered only 200 of these
tablets in the
Register contrary to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 2002
2 September 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 300 Oxycontin
tablets and unlawfully entered only 80 of these tablets
in the Register contrary
to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
On 10 September 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 180 Oxycontin
tablets and unlawfully entered only 60 of these
tablets in the Register contrary
to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
On 10 September 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 600
Dexamphetamine tablets and unlawfully entered only 100 of
these tablets in the
Register contrary to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
On 10 September 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to
record in the Register receipt of 120 Oxycontin tablets
contrary to clause 112
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
On 15 September 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to
record in the Register receipt of 120 Oxycontin tablets
contrary to clause 112
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
On 23 September 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 300 Hypnodorm
tablets and unlawfully entered only 270 of these
tablets in the Register
contrary to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
On 23 September 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to
record in the Register receipt of 1,000 Dexamphetamine
tablets contrary to
clause 112 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
On 23 September 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to
record in the Register receipt of 240 Oxycontin tablets
contrary to clause 112
(1 ) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
23 September 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to
record in the Register receipt of 420 Oxycontin tablets
contrary to clause 112
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
8 October 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to record
in the Register receipt of 800 Dexamphetamine tablets
contrary to clause 112 (1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
14 October 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 1,000
Dexamphetamine tablets and unlawfully entered only 200 of these
tablets in the
Register contrary to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
14 October 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to record
in the Register receipt of 320 Oxycontin tablets
contrary to clause 112 (1) of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
17 October 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to record
in the Register receipt of 320 Oxycontin tablets
contrary to clause 112 (1) of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
17 November 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 220 Oxycontin
tablets and unlawfully entered only 180 of these tablets
in the Register
contrary to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
21 November 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to record
in the Register receipt of 300 Hypnodorm tablets
contrary to clause 112 (1) of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
25 November 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to record
in the Register receipt of 240 Endone tablets
contrary to clause 112 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
25 November 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to record
in the Register receipt of 320 Oxycontin tablets
contrary to clause 112 (1) of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
28 November 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 140 Oxycontin
tablets and unlawfully entered only 40 of these tablets
in the Register contrary
to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
2 December 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to record
in the Register receipt of 120 Oxycontin tablets
contrary to clause 112 (1 ) of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
2 December 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to record
in the Register receipt of 140 Oxycontin tablets
contrary to clause 112 (1 ) of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
15 December 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 600 Dexamphetamine
tablets and unlawfully entered only 300 of these
tablets in the Register
contrary to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
18 December 2003 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 300 Hypnodorm
tablets and unlawfully entered only 240 of these tablets
in the Register
contrary to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
21 January 2004 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to record
in the Register receipt of 1,000 Dexamphetamine
tablets contrary to clause 112
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
21 January 2004 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist unlawfully failed to record
in the Register receipt of 240 Physeptone tablets
contrary to clause 112 (1) of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
27 January 2004 at Lulic's Pharmacy, the pharmacist received 280 Oxycontin
tablets and unlawfully entered only 240 of these tablets
in the Register
contrary to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
the period 2 September 2003 to 27 January 2004 the pharmacist misappropriated
quantities of Oxycontin, Dexamphetamine, Hypnodorm,
Endone and Physeptone
tablets from Lulic's Pharmacy.
the period 2 September 2003 to 27 January 2004 the pharmacist self-administered
quantities of Oxycontin, Dexamphetamine, Hypnodorm,
Endone and Physeptone
tablets he had misappropriated from Lulic's Pharmacy.
13 March 2006 and 25 June 2006 and on 30 June 2006 and on 2 August 2006, the
pharmacist forged and presented prescriptions
belonging to Dr. Lunz and received
Oxycontin tablets contrary to
section 16(2)
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Act 1966
March and June 2006 the pharmacist presented 80 fraudulent prescriptions at the
Pharmacy by Mail Chemist in Maroubra.
6 February and 13 February 2004 the pharmacist was admitted to The Sydney
Private Clinic for detoxification in relation to
Oxycodone and Diazepam.
a letter to the Complainant dated 16 May 2007 the pharmacist admitted that at an
unspecified time he was probably taking at least
2,700mg of Oxycodone per day if
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to section 39
(2) (b) of the Act in that the pharmacist:
(a) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the pharmacist
in the practice of
pharmacy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist
of an equivalent level of training
or experience, and/or
(b) has engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct relating to the
practice of pharmacy,
PARTICULARS
The Complainant repeats and relies upon the particulars in support of
Complaint One.
COMPLAINT THREE
Has been convicted in New South Wales of various criminal offences, the
circumstances of which, render the pharmacist unfit in the
public interest to be
registered as a pharmacist pursuant to section 39 (2) (a) of the Act.
PARTICULARS
5 July 2005 in the North Sydney Local Court the pharmacist was convicted and
sentenced in relation to five (5) counts of failure
to enter relevant prescribed
particulars in the register contrary to clause 112 (1) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
He was fined $500.00 and ordered to
pay costs of $63.00 in relation to one count and fined $50.00 and ordered to pay
court costs of
$65.00 in relation to the other four counts.
5 July 2005 in the North Sydney Local Court the pharmacist was convicted and
sentenced in relation to three (3) counts of making
a false and misleading entry
in the register or record contrary to clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
He was fined $50.00 and ordered to
pay court costs of $65.00 in relation to each count.
5 July 2005 the North Sydney Local Court took into account a further nineteen
(19) counts, consisting of eight (8) counts of making
a false and misleading
entry in the register or record contrary to clause 173 (1) of the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
and eleven (11) counts of failure
to enter relevant prescribed particulars in the register contrary to clause 112
( I ) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
18 January 2006 in the Waverley Local Court the pharmacist was convicted and
sentenced in relation to two (2) counts of forge
or fraudulently alter a
prescription for prescribed restricted substance contrary to
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act
fined $500.00 in respect of each count.
18 January 2006 in the Waverley Local Court the pharmacist was convicted and
sentenced in relation to two (2) counts of utter
a forged or fraudulently
altered prescription for prescribed restricted substance contrary to section 16
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act
He was fined $500.00 in respect of each count.
20 September 2006 in the Waverley Local Court the pharmacist was convicted and
sentenced in relation to five (5) counts of forge
or fraudulently alter a
prescription for prescribed restricted substance contrary to section 16 (2) of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
He was placed on a
bond to be of good behaviour for a period of 18 months in respect of
each count.
20 September 2006 in the Waverley Local Court the pharmacist was convicted and
sentenced in relation to five (5) counts of utter
a forged or fraudulently
altered prescription for prescribed restricted substance contrary to
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
He was placed
bond to be of good behaviour for a period of 18 months in respect
of each count.
COMPLAINT FOUR
The Respondent is not
of good character.
PARTICULARS
The Complainant repeats and relies upon the particulars in support of
Complaints One, Two and Three.
The Respondent suffers from an impairment.
PARTICULARS
1. The pharmacist is addicted to oxycodone and / or methadone.
Complainant repeats and relies upon the particulars in support of Complaints
One, Two, Three and Four.
the commencement of the Tribunal’s Inquiry Counsel for the Complainant
produced a copy of a letter from the Complainant to
the Respondent dated 10
March 2009,ultimately admitted into evidence without objection, as
” (formerly MFI 1) seeking the
Respondent’s consideration as to whether any admissions would be made at
the commencement
of the inquiry but noting that the Respondent was not obliged
to make any such admissions. The letter included an extract from a
decision of
the NSW Court of Appeal [
McBride v Walton
(unreported 15 July 1994) at
page 12] which considered how the question of good character should be
determined [TS 3.4-5.6].
Complainant’s letter sought the above information in circumstances where
it was aware that the Respondent would not be legally
represented at the
inquiry, and accordingly as Counsel for the Complainant observed, “...it
would not be prudent...”
to have private discussions on that aspect with
the Respondent. The letter noted and it was confirmed by the Respondent, that
Respondent had previously advised a solicitor with the Complainant
Commission that he had made certain admissions [TS 3].
Respondent made formal admissions to the complaints of
professional
as particularised in Complaint 1; to
unsatisfactory
professional
as particularised in Complaint 2; and to the
convictions
particularised in Complaint 3 [TS 4.7-5.3].
Respondent did not admit Complaint 4 (
) [TS 5.4].
Respondent admitted that he is addicted to
but did not admit
that he is addicted to
The Evidence:
agreement of the parties the documents [which ultimately were admitted into
evidence as
(Complainant) and “
” (Respondent)]
to be relied on
by each of them, were provided to the Tribunal members in advance of the
were tendered by the Complainant and by the Respondent and were admitted into
evidence. A list together with a description
of the exhibits, is set out below,
at the conclusion of these reasons.
was given before the Tribunal by Mr. Bruce Battye, Acting Principal Pharmacist,
Pharmaceutical Services Branch (PSB), New
South Wales Department of Health. The
PSB responsibilities include those relevant to the operation of the New South
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods
& Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
. Mr. Battye gave evidence of the PSB
investigation into the Respondent’s conduct relevant to the complaints.
His statements
and related documents are included in
Gary Swift a specialist physician in the area of drug addiction, treatment and
rehabilitation, was called by the Complainant to
give evidence to the Tribunal
concerning his treatment of the Respondent. Dr. Swift continues to treat the
Respondent including by
the prescribing of
situated in Chippendale, having commenced treatment in January 2006. His
letter to the Pharmacy Board concerning his treatment of
the Respondent is
included in Respondent’s
Respondent’s records of treatment at
produced in response
to a Summons issued at the Complainant’s request, were admitted into
evidence without objection, as
Respondent cross-examined Mr. Battye and Dr. Swift and gave oral evidence before
the Tribunal.
Transcript of evidence at the Inquiry was taken—Day 1 (16 March 2009):
Pages 1 to 53; Day 2 (17 March 2009): Pages 54-130;
Respondent is aged 39 years. He studied Pharmacy at the University of Sydney
from 1988 to 1991 and received his Bachelor of Pharmacy
degree in February 1992
with his academic record including the notation of final result, as Honours
Class I. He was awarded the Guild
Insurance Prize for Senior Year. His academic
record also includes a mark of 97.0 in the Honours course in Pharmaceutical
Exhibit R-A)
. He went on to achieve a Ph.D. in
Pharmaceutical Chemistry at the University of Sydney in 1995 which included
studies of the synthesis
of chemotherapeutic agents and the subsequent testing
of those drugs.
Respondent was first registered as a pharmacist in New South Wales on 8 April
1992. He remained registered until his name was
removed from the register on 9
January 2008 after failure to pay the annual renewal fee by 31 December 2007.
His right to practice
was suspended from 14 March 2007 until removal of his name
from the Register on 9 January 2008 [see
Certificate under Clause 11(1), Schedule 6, of the
Pharmacy Practice Act
Respondent’s suspension followed a ‘
letter to him from the Registrar of the NSW Pharmacy Board dated 16 February
2007, after his continuing failure to comply with an
undertaking to attend an
arranged medical assessment by the Board’s nominated doctor (
). This undertaking followed a meeting between the Respondent
a Pharmacy Board
on 14 October 2004, the
of which was admitted into evidence before the Tribunal,
without objection, as
Evidence of the investigation
Respondent first came to the notice of the PSB in February 2004 as a result of a
phone call received from pharmacist Mr. Ivan
Lulic, proprietor of
at Neutral Bay, a northern suburb of
Sydney. Mr. Battye was the principal investigator in the investigation which
followed, ultimately
leading to the respondent being convicted at the North
Sydney Local Court on 5 July 2005 for offences under the
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
2002 consequent upon the Respondent’s
failure to comply with various aspects of the recording requirements for
dexamphetamine
tablets and
tablets, all classified
drugs of addiction
in Schedule 8 of the legislation.
Particulars
numbered 1 to 28 inclusive, of Complaint 1 describe the Respondent’s
alleged conduct concerning the above medications
, facilitating their misappropriation by failing to enter the
receipt thereof or by making false or misleading entries, in the Register
these drugs which he self-administered, as alleged in Complaint 1.
above convictions in the North Sydney Local Court are particularised as
Particulars numbered 1, 2 and 3 in Complaint 3, related
to failure to enter,
false or misleading entries and failure to enter relevant prescribed
particulars, in the Register.
his evidence Mr. Battye described the quantities of the misappropriated drugs as
in this experience, falling “...
the highest category of
anyone that I have dealt with..
” [TS 17.3]. During the investigation
Mr. Battye found no direct evidence of the Respondent selling any of the
misappropriated
drugs nor of otherwise passing them on to others [TS 17.6]. No
information was conveyed to Mr. Battye by police officers subsequently
in these matters, that any of the drugs had been sold or otherwise given to
George Hospital and to the Justice Health
facility at Long Bay Prison at each of
which the Respondent was employed for a period as a pharmacist.
an informal meeting with the Respondent on 27 August 2004, the Respondent,
following initial denials, conceded that he had
a problem with
indicating to Mr. Battye that “...
he had a habit...of about 2.7
grams per day
...” [TS 18.8] and “...
dependency on
...(and that)...
he was also taking dexamphetamine
Battye’s statement of 30 June 2005 [
” at Tab 2, document number 9] describes the
Respondent’s admissions during the above informal meeting on 27 August
of his dependence on
“...over the last 5-10
years”; that he had obtained
by falsifying records at
Lulic’s Pharmacy
; and that he had used
dexamphetamine
tablets. He also informed Mr. Battye that he had been treated for depression
by psychiatrist Dr. Rosalie Wilcox, following his admission
in the period following his ceasing employment at
Lulic’s Pharmacy
and prior to commencing employment at the St.
George Hospital.
letter from Dr. Wilcox (undated) received by the Complainant on 31 October 2006,
advised that she had last seen the Respondent in
consultation in January 2006
and enclosed copies of her treatment records. Dr. Wilcox also advised that she
had written a letter
of support to help the Respondent “...get onto a
methadone program.” [
” at Tab 9].
Her letter “
to whom it may concern
” dated 25 January 2006
seeking assessment of the Respondent “...for admission urgently to a
Methadone Program...”
is included in the records of
admitted into evidence [
letter [part of
’] referred to above, Dr.
Swift acknowledged that the Respondent came into his care on 27 January
his informal meeting with Mr. Battye on 27 August 2004 referred to above, the
Respondent agreed to relinquish his authority as
a pharmacist, to possess,
manufacture and supply Schedule 8 drugs which came into effect officially, on 10
September 2004. Shortly
before leaving this meeting, the Respondent told Mr.
Battye he was using 4 grams of
daily. He admitted taking
dexamphetamine
tablets from
Lulic’s Pharmacy
and to making false drug register records but
denied supplying any other person. Further information received by the PSB
that the Respondent had been diverting drugs at
from at least 2001.
Respondent participated in a formal Record of Interview at the Mascot Police
Station on 13 April 2005 [included in
Tab 2, document number 8]. Following this interview Police conducted a
prosecution of the Respondent culminating in his
appearance at the North Sydney
Local Court where he pleaded guilty to the charges and at which the court took
into account further
charges, as particularised in Complaint 3.
his evidence before the Tribunal Mr. Battye described how following the initial
complaint from Mr. Lulic, the PSB investigation
expanded significantly in
seeking records from various wholesalers who had provided medications to
Lulic’s Pharmacy
in the relevant period under investigation and
collating same with the pharmacy’s records to ascertain quantities
misappropriated.
Because of the volume of material, Mr. Battye told the
Tribunal, it was decided at this stage of the PSB investigation, to make
Lulic’s Pharmacy
its primary focus. However this did not end the
investigation which later led to other areas.
A further statement by Mr. Battye dated 28 March 2007, admitted into evidence as
” (at Tab 1), describes how
further investigation disclosed the dispensing of many prescriptions for the
Respondent in the eastern
suburbs area of Sydney, mainly for
tablets in varying strengths, from at least May 2005 and throughout 2006. It was
also learned that the Respondent had again been
charged with offences of forging
or fraudulently altering and presenting, prescriptions for prescribed restricted
substances.
examining the above dispensed prescriptions located in the eastern suburbs,
enquiries were made which indicated that these were
forgeries. Forty four
prescriptions for
tablets were confirmed as having been issued
to the Respondent in the period May 2005 to January 2006 by Dr. Peter Fallon of
Also confirmed was the prescribing of 13 prescriptions for
tablets by Dr. George Panos, for the Respondent in the period
31 January 2006 to 23 October 2006.
According to the Respondent’s
evidence to the Tribunal, Dr. Panos continues as his current general medical
practitioner.
ongoing investigation according to Mr. Battye’s statement [
’, Tab 1] also confirmed that 13 prescriptions for
tablets purportedly issued to the Respondent by Dr. Anoma
Nagasinghe in the period 8 November 2005 to 14 December 2005 had not been
by her. Dr. Nagasinghe’s statement appears as Annexure “A” to
Mr. Battye’s statement (
Mr. Battye describes in his statement, a visit to Dr.Nagasinghe by police in
2005 who later informed her that the
Respondent had appeared in Court and been
fined concerning the forged prescriptions. These convictions are included in
12 March 2007, Mr. Battye visited Dr. David Lunz, orthopaedic surgeon, at the
Prince of Wales Private Hospital. Dr. Lunz had been
consulted by the Respondent
concerning a complicated fracture. He was shown 377 prescriptions or duplicate
prescription forms, for
tablets and
purportedly issued during 2006 by him. Dr. Lunz confirmed these were not issued
by him. Dr. Lunz’s statement appears
” to Mr. Battye’s Statement (at Tab1,
his interview with Dr. Lunz on 12 March 2007, Mr. Battye was informed that Dr.
Lunz had been contacted by the Health Insurance
Commission and by Maroubra
Detectives about forged prescriptions and later became aware that the Respondent
had been charged accordingly
and dealt with at Court (see Mr. Battye’s
Statement, above). These convictions are described in Complaint 3.
Battye ascertained that another purported prescriber at the Prince of Wales
Hospital (“Tony Hawthorn”) had never been
employed at that
his evidence [TS 24-25] Mr. Battye expressed concern that it was not clear to
him during his investigation, that medical specialists
who were providing
reports upon which an authority was issued to prescribe
Respondent were “...
fully aware of the situation and
Respondent’s)...
dependency on opiates
.” [TS 25.3].
Cross-examined
by the Respondent, Mr. Battye cited as an example, what appeared to him to be
some confusion, in effect that there
appeared to be no adequate differentiation
between the drug dependency issue of the Respondent being on the
program and the requirement of the Respondent for analgesia [TS 34]. Without
objection, a letter dated 27 September 2006 from Dr.
Chimene Bhar, Staff
Specialist in Pain Management, Prince of Wales Hospital & Community Health
Services, addressed to the Respondent’s
GP Dr. Panos was admitted into
evidence as
”. This referred to the
Respondent being on the
program whose prescriber (Dr. Swift at
according to the evidence before the Tribunal) could
not prescribe
and that the Respondent “...
reviewed by a pain clinic.
” [Ibid.] Mr. Battye was cross-examined by
the Respondent on the contents of the letter [TS 36].
Respondent was critical of the PSB in his questions to Mr. Battye, for not
having “...
...[impairment]...
could have died several times
38.8] Mr. Battye’s response [TS 39.3] described the way in which detection
of forged prescriptions depends upon
PSB officers picking up material
in the field
...” and relies also “...
the expertise of the pharmacist
”. The Tribunal appreciates how the
Respondent might feel given his long history of admitted dependency, the
resultant disruption
to his life, his family and his professional career; and
the genesis of his drug-related problems about which he gave frank evidence.
However, the Tribunal finds nothing in the evidence before it that warrants
criticism of Mr. Battye or the PSB, in all the circumstances
of the difficult
and extensive investigation as presented to the Tribunal. In any event, before
the Tribunal the Respondent did not
seek to avoid responsibility for his
Battye expressed concern to the Tribunal during his evidence [TS 33.7] that some
pharmacists appeared not to have adequately checked
forged prescriptions for
to ensure their validity. In effect, Mr. Battye emphasised the
serious obligations of pharmacists to be satisfied of the validity
prescriptions before dispensing them consistent with their legal
obligations.
Respondent’s cross-examination of Mr. Battye included questions directed
to Mr. Battye’s earlier answer to a question
from Counsel for the
Complainant to the effect that at the time of his appearance at the North Sydney
Local Court on 5 July 2005,
the Respondent was engaged in the forging of
prescriptions “...all over the eastern suburbs...” contrary to what
said to the Court by the Respondent’s Counsel (in those proceedings)
that the Respondent was then undergoing rehabilitation
and in the care of a
psychiatrist [ TS 20.8-21.8]. In response to what the Respondent put to him to
the effect that he was not forging
prescriptions at the time of his appearance
before the court, Mr. Battye undertook to check his records [TS 32.2-33.5; TS
which he later did and it was confirmed by Counsel for the
Complainant [at TS 124.2] that Mr. Battye did not seek to press the opinion
had earlier expressed to the Tribunal.
to a question from the Respondent after consulting his records, Mr. Battye
confirmed that since the Respondent’s
last court appearance on 20
September 2006 there was nothing to indicate that the Respondent had engaged in
any further forging of
prescriptions (TS 39.8-40.9].
Evidence of Dr. Swift
As an addiction specialist physician Dr. Gary Swift has practiced at
for almost 20 years and, until the end of 2008 had
practiced at the Alcohol and Drug Service, St. Vincent’s Hospital, Sydney
for about 23 years. He commenced treatment of the Respondent on 27 January 2006.
His letter to the Pharmacy Board 9 February 2009,
”] confirmed Dr. Wilcox’s referral to him
because of the Respondent’s dependence on
. It noted a
gradual reduction of his intake of
and that the Respondent was
currently “
...not on any other opioids
...(and that)...he currently
has clean drug screens.” He noted the Respondent’s consistency in
attendance at the clinic
dosing, the level of which was
then 100 mg daily, reduced gradually from 200 mg daily.
Swift’s letter also described the Respondent’s compliance
with all program regulations and is committed to his rehabilitation
and will be continuing to reduce his dose of
his evidence before the Tribunal Dr. Swift described the very large intake of
taken by the Respondent when he first presented to the Clinic
that he was very drug seeking at that time and
...(Dr.Swift)...
increased his dose of methadone to 200 mg per
.” [TS 57.8].
Swift told the Tribunal that the Respondent was now quite a different person
from that at his initial presentation and that the
Respondent had been
requesting and initiating the dose reduction
).” [TS 58.5]. Dr. Swift expressed his view that the
Respondent’s
dose would reduce from his current daily
dose of 100 mg. He described a period of approximately two to three years
generally, for
someone to cease
provided their attendance was
maintained and no “...
extraneous drugs
...” were used [TS
58.8-59.1]. He described the urinalysis program at the clinic and noted that the
Respondent “...
appears to want to get better
response to questions from Counsel for the Complainant, Dr. Swift agreed it
would be prudent for the Respondent to use a single
medical centre or clinic to
allow liaison between its various doctors. He also agreed that for persons
recovering from an addiction,
the support of family and friends is important.
Swift acknowledged the Respondent’s intelligence and described his
discussions with him about re-entry to the Pharmacy profession
which Dr. Swift
urged him to do but his response was equivocal. He described the
Respondent’s current employment as a positive
step in his recovery.
Swift told the Tribunal that he sensed that the Respondent was depressed but
although he has not discussed this with him, he thought
that what he believed to
be a mild depression had been difficult for the Respondent “...
himself out...
and too big a mountain to climb to get back into the
.” [TS 67.7] It was Dr. Swift’s opinion that the
Respondent would benefit from psychiatric assessment.
the Tribunal, in responding to questions from the Respondent, Dr. Swift
considered issues relevant to the Respondent’s
reduced dosage of
antidepressant medications in the context of what was put by him to Dr. Swift as
health plan
...” generated by his GP [TS69.8].
response to the Tribunal’s questions Dr. Swift described the urinalysis
. He was also asked by the Tribunal whether
the Respondent continued to be dependent on “...
and he responded;
Yes, by definition he is dependent on the methadone, you mean,
and oxycontin, yes, but that's the aim of the treatment, to make someone
dependent on the medication and then to wean them off.
Swift also responded to the Tribunal’s questions concerning the success
treatment programs. The Tribunal asked further
questions of Dr. Swift about the nature of the Respondent’s continuing
dependency:
Q. And a question was addressed to you by Ms Duguid to the
effect that does Dr Larden remain dependent on oxycodone or methadone,
I think you answered that he did remain dependent?
A. On methadone, yes. Oxycodone I am not so sure because I think recently
I have only gone on self-report and I haven't contacted
Q. Do you know the GP? A. Yes.
Q. And is the GP's name in the records? A. Yes.
Q. And I'm not being pedantic here but when, in terms of the
Practice Act
, that for the purposes of the Act a person is taken to suffer from
an impairment if a person who habitually abuses alcohol, or is
addicted to a
deleterious drug, although the question put by my colleague was in terms of
dependence, does dependence equate to addicted?
Is that correct? Are they
interchangeable?
A. Sorry, in a generic sense yes but in terms of the Act that's different
because it was read to me earlier in the waiting room
and I wasn't aware of the
word deleterious and so that's not something that I have been aware of
previously, so someone is dependent,
they are physically dependent,
psychologically dependent if they are addicted, yes, they are addicted but
deleterious is another
matter. That is giving weight to maybe the type of drug
or amount of drug that is deleterious to them or maybe their motives. I
aware of that definition. I have never seen that before.
Dr Larden would be on methadone because it is indicated and
prescribed for a drug addiction or drug dependence. I don't think it
deleterious to him. I think it is helping him to get on with his life and
amounts of street
narcotics or other narcotics. The other oxycontin is another matter because I
don't know whether he is doctor shopping,
or on that specifically for his
orthopaedic problem, which is a different issue.
[TS 75.8-76.6]
In later evidence, the Respondent addressed the issue of any continuing
dependency on
Swift expressed the opinion that liaison as needed, between him and any other
doctor treating the Respondent, would assist his
rehabilitative role. The
emphasis of such liaison would change from time to time but ongoing contact with
the treating GP was needed;
if the Respondent consulted a psychiatrist then a
report from such practitioner provided to Dr. Swift, would be sufficient.
his level of pain currently, the Respondent’s asked further questions of
DR LARDEN: Q. If in my submission I had ceased the oxycontin some
four or five months ago of my own volition, even though I still
had an authority
current by Pharmaceutical Services Branch, if I had ceased that, would that give
you some idea that my pain level
had improved?
A. Well yes. Yes, I would think so. You are talking about a hypothetical?
You are saying you did?
Q. I have ceased? A. Right, okay.
Q. If I hadn't ceased that oxycontin would still show up on the urine screen
as another opiate, wouldn't it? A. Yes.
Q. Since I was taking it every day, even if I stopped on Monday and had a
urine screen Thursday it would still be in there most likely?
A. It may or may
Q. So if I had been seen by the pain clinic each and every time I needed a
new approval for the oxycontin? A. Yes.
Q. Would you say the pain was being managed correctly? A. Yes.
Q. If the GP did a blood test and found that I didn't have osteoporosis but
osteopenia and so I had low calcium and put me on a drug
like Actonel to improve
the bone strength and stability, that could lead to reduction in pain which
would be reflected in the cessation
of the oxycontin?
A. I'm not too sure. Medically that's not an area I am well versed in. I'm
not certain about that. You probably know more about
that than me.
Evidence of Dr. Wilcox
records of consultations between Dr. Rosalie Wilcox, psychiatrist, and the
Respondent were in evidence before the Tribunal (
” at Tab 9). Dr. Wilcox’s assessment of the
Respondent when referred to her included an observation that the Respondent
someone who would readily seek
” (consultation, 6 February 2004). She also noted the
Respondent’s (former) wife’s observation that she thought
suffered from depression
...” (consultation 10 February
2004) a condition for which Dr. Wilcox prescribed anti-depressant medication.
Dr. Wilcox’s
records cease at 6 October 2004. Her letter to the
Complainant accompanying the records, noted that she had limited contact with
the Respondent over the two years prior to the consultation in January 2006 when
she referred him for acceptance into a
Wilcox provides some insight into the Respondent’s drug dependence. Her
report dated 25 May 2005 (
annexure “f”) recorded the history given by the Respondent that
for over 10 years he had been taking various forms of narcotic
...” having “...
had a dependence on prescribed
.” She also noted that his employment as a pharmacist enabled
him to obtain drugs “...
without any difficulty
Respondent had told Dr. Wilcox that he blamed his “...
...” for his reliance on drugs. He acknowledged that
taking on significant responsibility from a young age had become
quite a burden
...” and that “...
over the years he had become
professionally isolated and had no contact with his fellow
.” Further, Dr. Wilcox noted, he “...
resorted to
self medication as a way of managing his stress
her report (25 May 2005, above) Dr. Wilcox notes that the Respondent
has no desire to ever work as a pharmacist especially in the area
of retail pharmacy. However he has not totally excluded the possibility
working in a research position
Respondent’s evidence
noted above, the Respondent was not legally represented at the inquiry. He had
prepared no statement he said, as none had been
requested. Accordingly, the
Tribunal suggested that the Respondent consider such matters as he wished to
address before the Tribunal,
relevant to the Complaints and his admissions.
Respondent confirmed to the Tribunal that he did not intend calling anyone to
give evidence on his behalf. He told the Tribunal
he would give evidence.
to 1991 the Respondent was not one to take any medication but during that year,
his Honours year at University, when under some
pressure, he started taking
tablets for headaches. His first child was born in 1991. He met
his wife in 1989 during his undergraduate studies. His addiction
during 1992 when he started to extract
tablets. He told the Tribunal he was able to do this given his skills and
access to equipment. His second child was born in 1993 and
he and his wife
purchased a house which the Respondent started to renovate at the same time as
studying, doing some work as a university
demonstrator and working in community
pharmacy. He relied on
to achieve these various activities.
Respondent worked part-time as a pharmacist at
Lulic’s Pharmacy
1993 but in this period he obtained no drugs from this pharmacy for his personal
use. On completion of his doctoral studies in
1995 he worked as a research
assistant and Associate Lecturer in toxicology in the Pharmacy Department as it
then was, at the University
of Sydney, for about six months followed by
approximately four weeks working in the analytical section of the government
of Analytical Laboratories at Lidcombe.
1996 the Respondent spent about 11 months as a pharmacist at the Westmead
Hospital which included a period in the haematology /oncology
department which
he found depressing and he returned to general pharmacy duties at the hospital.
He left the hospital to work for
Commission (“HIC”) in the area of
Pharmaceutical Benefit
fraud, later with the “doctor shopping task force” which he
enjoyed because of his empathy with those he encountered in
the course of his
duties as he then realised that he had a problem even though he did not admit
it. His ongoing abuse of
continued. He left the HIC in about
association with
commenced in about 1998 when he obtained
tablets from “...some friends in pharmacy...” who had
since graduated but he alone accepted fault for his problems and
did not blame
leaving the HIC, the Respondent commenced work as a Senior Scientist in the
Nuclear Medicine Department at the Prince of Wales
Hospital, Randwick a role
which did not involve any pharmacy-related duties. He was able to continue his
extraction of
but at this stage he realised that it had become
ineffective and he started to obtain access to
leaving the Prince of Wales Hospital, the Respondent worked in some community
pharmacies during which in about 2001, he commenced
misappropriating
tablets. During this year his fourth child, a son, was born,
later diagnosed with
autistic spectrum syndrome
. His marriage was
beginning “...
disintegrate
...” at the end of
August 2003, the Respondent commenced full-time duties at
on five days each week, as the pharmacist-in-charge according to
Mr. Lulic (Statement, in
”, Tab 2, pp
246-254). Following detection of the misappropriation of quantities of
dexamphetamine
tablets, his employment was terminated early in February 2004.
February 2004 he was admitted to the
Sydney Private Clinic
for about a
week in the care of Dr. Rosalie Wilcox who wanted to inform the Pharmacy Board
of his problems but he demanded that she
not do so. Before the Tribunal the
Respondent conceded it would have been better had Dr. Wilcox informed the Board
at that time,
when he was taking up to 4 grams of
together with
dexamphetamine
no employment prospects on discharge from the Clinic, the Respondent started
tablets in large quantities being no longer
able to extract
as before; and he had then been off all
for about three months including during his hospital admission.
Later in 2004 he was able to obtain work as a pharmacist at the St.
Hospital at Kogarah during which he continued taking
Nurofen Plus
tablets. This work lasted for about four weeks and he then
obtained employment as a pharmacist at the NSW Justice Health pharmacy
Long Bay Prison where by reason of his drug-taking activities he was observed by
colleagues as unable to function appropriately
and this employment ceased.
14 October 2004, the Respondent met with a
by the NSW Pharmacy Board during which he gave certain undertakings one of which
was to attend an appointment with a Board-nominated
psychiatrist which he failed
to attend after several appointments were made in the period October 2004 to
February 2005 the Respondent sustained a serious and complicated leg fracture
following a fall from the roof of his home necessitating
a series of surgical
procedures during the following month. He later commenced employment as a
security officer after obtaining a
security licence.
to his orthopaedic injuries the Respondent obtained prescriptions from a Dr.
Fallon for medications but he had not at this
stage started to forge
prescriptions although he conceded he may have changed the dates on them
sometimes as he would at times, receive
three or four prescriptions at a single
visit. It was not long before the Respondent’s forging of prescriptions
began, following
his appearance before the North Sydney Local Court in July
2005. As the Respondent told the Tribunal:
I used my knowledge of the psychology of people to
work the system, so that I could get as many scripts as I could...I started to
forge scripts and I did it with the same level of commitment and skill I applied
to everything
else in my life unfortunately, and that’s why I was
able to obtain such a large amount.
further court appearance in September 2006 resulted in the Respondent being
placed on a ‘
good behaviour bond’
for a period of 18 months
following convictions for breaches of Section 16 (2) of the
& Therapeutic Goods Act
Respondent commenced
treatment by Dr. Swift at
in January 2006. He and his wife were divorced in 2008. At the time of the
inquiry he had been in full-time employment for eight months,
in a position
unrelated in any way, to the practice of pharmacy. He now lives with his 15 year
old daughter. He expressed optimism
in his current situation.
being cross-examination by Counsel for the Complainant, the Tribunal addressed
questions to the Respondent. Summarised, his
answers included the following:
current treating orthopaedic surgeon;
in approximately, October 2008;
Prescribed by
his current GP, Dr. Panos who is aware of his continuing
treatment by Dr. Swift, he takes antidepressant medication;
orthopaedic problem, Dr. Panos initiated Calcium supplementation and other
medication which has proved beneficial;
Dr. Panos is not
aware of the complaints against the Respondent currently before the
He failed to
keep appointments with the medical practitioner nominated by the Pharmacy Board
for various reasons as at the time he
was not able to deal with his problem and
saw nothing to gain from such consultation; and he had no desire to go back into
his evidence the Respondent told the Tribunal of his loss of faith in the drug
laws of the country and in the profession of Pharmacy.
The Tribunal explored
this with the Respondent as follows:
Q. Could you turn your attention to the drug laws as they apply
in New South Wales?
A. Well, I just felt that given my knowledge of drugs, and I just felt
that I was the best person to determine what drugs I should
take. Perhaps I was
wrong. I think many people's lives have been ruined by the fact that drugs are
criminalised and my life was
ruined and may still be ruined.
Q. Do you have any view about the acceptance of requirements by
pharmacists to observe laws?
A. I do now because I now see that they are very insidious in the way
they work, drugs. There is an initial honeymoon period that
people go through
when these things have a beneficial effect and it is not just for the opiates,
it is for the amphetamines, benzodiazepine,
they all work marvellously well
initially but they do destroy you in the end.
Q. You also included your loss of faith in the profession of pharmacy.
Could you tell the Tribunal something about that?
A. Well, I don't want to bring up any particular pharmacies or pharmacy
profession, but I have worked in areas where the pharmacy
has just been there as
a legal means whereby say some clinic treating male impotence, for example,
might use that pharmacy to manufacture
large quantities of their items for sale
in their clinics, or other pharmacies that are merely there to pump as many
drugs into nursing
the maximum profit, and when I walked past a pharmacy up in Randwick,
before Christmas and there were people out the front with loud hailers saying
come in for discounts, and you walk in and there
are aisles of perfume and one
little pharmacy up the back, things like that
. [TS 96-97]
Respondent was cross-examined by Counsel for the Complainant. His evidence
included the following summarised answers:
He did not have
any family or friends attend this Inquiry by the Tribunal as he did not want to
involve others in his problems;
He currently,
has no ambition to return to pharmacy but he would like to return to an area
that would use his scientific background;
He was critical
of and cynical about, community pharmacy practice in effect because of what he
had seen as a commercial, profit orientation
but he regarded hospital pharmacy
as ethically conducted;
He remained
compliant with his court-imposed
good behaviour bond
He intended, in
time, to make reparation to Mr. Lulic for the cost of drugs misappropriated by
the Respondent; and he agreed with
Counsel for the Complainant, that it would be
a good start to write a letter of apology to Mr. Lulic;
was questioned by Counsel for the Complainant about his attitude to disclosure
of his convictions to a prospective employer in
a position where he might have
access to medications:
Q. In what circumstances, if any, would you currently tell an
employer about your previous convictions? A. If they were relevant
employment.
Q. When you say relevant, does that mean if you had to answer a specific
question about whether you had any prior criminal history?
A. Yes, that's
Q. Does it also extend to a circumstance where you might be working in a
situation where there was access to medications? A. Yes.
Q. In those circumstances you would make a disclosure about your
convictions?
A. There would be no reason to because I would not contemplate taking on a
position where there was such a possibility of exposure
to medications, because
I don't think that I can still be trusted with medications.
Q. Why do you think that?
A. Because I have a drug addiction problem and
that's something that I don't think anybody ever gets over. It is no different
having an alcohol problem. When you are at Alcoholics Anonymous, even when
you have been there 10 years to an AA meeting you still
get up and say - in my
case it would be a Narcotics Anonymous meeting, I would get up and say my name
is Dale Larden and I am addicted
to narcotics.
Q. Do you go to NA meetings? A. No.
Q. Has it ever been suggested to you that you would benefit from doing so?
A. No, it hasn't.
responding to questions from Counsel for the Complainant, the Respondent told
the Tribunal he could not recall what he had told
the Pain Clinic at the Prince
of Wales Hospital in 1998 but that at that time he was exhibiting drug-seeking
behaviour; that his
symptoms were truthful but exaggerated. He agreed with
Counsel, that in so reporting these symptoms to the Pain Clinic he was not
honest with them.
Respondent was questioned by Complainant’s Counsel about his demand to Dr.
Wilcox in 2004, that she not contact the Pharmacy
Board about his problems:
Q. Do you accept that you threatened Dr Wilcox with legal
action against her and the clinic if such a report was made? A. I may
Q. Do you remember saying to her not to do anything because you wanted to
Q. Did you in fact contact your solicitor? A. I didn't even have a
solicitor at the time.
Q. Did you repeat upon discharge the threat to take legal action if any
report was made?
A. I don't remember but quite possibly. It's the sort of
thing I possibly would have done at the time.
Q. Sitting here today, do you accept that that was an improper threat to
make to a treating psychiatrist? A. Certainly.
A. Because she was trying to help me and if she had contacted the Pharmacy
Board, all of this would have probably been avoided.
cross-examination by Counsel for the Complainant, elicited the following
summarised responses:
exception of his consultations with Dr.Wilcox, he had not received any
assessment from any other psychiatrist between 2004
and the present;
apologised to Dr. Lunz concerning the forged prescriptions and had told him that
he had been charged with relevant offences;
He acknowledged
that he had betrayed Dr. Lunz’s trust;
He conceded that
his communication to the Complainant Commission (
” at Tab 3, pages 555-556) was both unprofessional
and offensive; at that time he told the Tribunal he saw the Complainant as
harassing him but in retrospect he in effect, accepted the Commission’s
obligations but at the time he felt as if the whole
world was against him
although he now accepts that he had “...
brought it all on himself and
he had basically given up
.” [TS 115.6]
Asked about what
had caused him to write the above communication “...
in such dark
...” the Respondent replied “
My career had fallen apart.
I had betrayed the trust of my employers and friends. I had betrayed the trust
of my profession. The only
thing keeping me alive really was my children at that
point, so I was suicidal”
series of questions was asked by Counsel for the Complainant about his past
behaviour and the future as he now saw it:
Q. As you sit here today, doctor, is it fair to say you have a
more optimistic view of your future than you had in May 2007? A.
Q. Are you satisfied that you have a proper understanding of why you behaved
in the way you did?
A. Yes, I do. I know why. I had reached a point of no
return. I was reckless in my behaviour and I saw no way out. I saw no future.
It is not that I treated it as a joke, it's just that I saw no future. There
was a light at the end of the tunnel but it was a
Q. I take it you listened carefully to the evidence Dr Swift gave to
the Tribunal today?
Q. My recollection is that Dr Swift was of the view that you would
currently benefit from some form of psychiatric assessment?
A. Yes, it seemed
to be what he was saying.
Q. Do you accept what Dr Swift says in that respect? A.
Q. During the course of the day have you contemplated whether you
will take action to following that advice?
A. No, I haven't given it any
consideration but I don't know, maybe I should.
Q Let me put it bluntly: Can you see a distinction between acknowledging
past misconduct on the one hand and thinking deeply about
understanding why it
occurred on the other?
Q. Can you see how someone listening to your evidence might come to the view
that you are quite ready to admit your mistakes in the
past but that you seem
reluctant to delve in depth into the why you behaved as you did?
think anyone wants to look at themselves in the mirror and admit to themselves
their own misgivings. I think it is a
very difficult thing to do.
Q. I imagine, Doctor, it has been a difficult thing for you to come to these
proceedings and to tell the Tribunal about your behaviour
over the last 17
A. It has been very difficult and up until Sunday night I wasn't even
sure if I'd come and I didn't come for absolution from the
Pharmacy Board. I
didn't come to seek my registration back. I came because I know now that the
way I behaved was completely inconsistent
with the way people should behave. I
can't begin to make excuses for myself but I can't change the past, I can only
learn to live
Q. You have just described to the Tribunal the reasons why you have come
today. What's your motivation for being here?
A. So I could draw a line
under this and move on with my life.
Q. And do you recognise that your chances of moving on with your life
successfully will probably involve going back and understanding
why your life
was derailed in the past?
A. Yes. I will have to go through that
Q. It's not a process that you approach with any enthusiasm, is it,
A. No, it's not.
Q. Do you accept that for the Tribunal to have confidence in what you might
do in the future requires the Tribunal to make some assessment
of insight into conduct in the past? A. Yes, of course they do, yes.
Q. In those circumstances, with the exception of the evidence of
Dr Swift, why have you decided to come to the Tribunal without any
from any other person that might assist the Tribunal in that way?
I didn't want anybody to make excuses for me and the only person that could
provide any insight into what happened was
me, and I was offered a barrister
such as yourself, and a solicitor free of charge, but I didn't want any legal
witchcraft to make
things any different than what the outcome would be if the
Pharmacy Board heard the truth from me, and I was truthful with the Pharmacy
Tribunal and I haven't lied.
I have come to the conclusion that lying, conniving, cheating, deceiving, get
you nowhere in life. It just moves you round and round
in circles and that's
what I was doing for 17 years and I wasn't just deceiving other people, I was
deceiving myself. I was trying
to pretend I had a happy marriage and a happy
life. I was trying to pretend I was an upstanding pharmacist with a PhD but I
I was just a drug addict, just like all those other drug addicts that I
line up with at the methadone clinic every morning.
Q. Do you understand that other professions, both health and legal, can
assist you in this process?
A. Yes, but I didn't want to drag anyone else
down into this mire that I had dug for myself.
[TS 116.2-118.3]
And the following [at TS 119.8-123.9]:
CHAIRMAN: Q. Dr Larden, Mr Griffin has now finished his
questions to you. Is there any other matter that you want to now raise with
Tribunal? A. No.
Q. Yesterday morning when we dealt with your admissions I did take you to
the complaint and I wanted to be satisfied that the Tribunal
completely what you wanted to say about that and you made those admissions in
respect of each complaint but for that which
alleges that you are not of good
character and that's correct? That's what you admitted to? A. Yes.
Q. In looking at those complaints I assume that you have taken into account
the particulars of each complaint? A. Yes.
And in further evidence: ...................
Q. Mr Griffin asked you a question which referred to Narcotics
Anonymous and I think you responded to that, that you hadn't attended
meetings of that? A. Correct.
Q. And you are obviously familiar with that association? A. Yes.
Q. And are you aware of any achievements which it makes in the field of
rehabilitation from drug abuse? A. Not specifically.
Q. You know what it does? A. Yes.
Q. And you would be familiar also with Alcoholics Anonymous? A. Yes.
Q. In other words, like people who have had similar problems sharing things
with one another? A. Yes.
Q. Would you think that that might be of assistance to you?
Yes, I liked to think - I did like to think that I could go on the methadone
program and stay off other drugs and just reduce
my dose of methadone slowly and
finally get off narcotics, but I'm not so sure if I can.
Q. Dr Swift indicated in his evidence that this diminution of the level
of methadone dosage is dependent upon a gradual response?
A. Yes. It would
be gradual. It has taken me probably 18 months to come off 200 to 100, but
that's not really a big deal in all
honesty, because I think once you get past
the dose of 100 it becomes a blocking dose, so it's not much of an achievement
Q. I think he did give a period this morning, didn't he?
A. He said six
to even 24 months, 18 to 24 months. That's what I have in mind. I don't want
to go into the methadone clinic every
day, or three days a week, but I do it
because I have no alternative and because I do want to get better and get over
though it will be hard, and I have got a lot of amends to make. I
have hurt a lot of people, directly or indirectly, not least my
although there were problems with my marriage beforehand, this was the catalyst
for its destruction and the impacts that
has had on my children, and that was
part of the reason why this Pharmacy Tribunal probably didn't hold as much
weight as it should
have with me, because having lost that access to my children
in that way there was really nothing more that could be taken from me.
I can't change what has happened, I just have to find a way through it.
Q. You understand and appreciate the role of the Tribunal? A. Yes I
Q. And the public interest which it serves? A. Yes, indeed.
Q. In your evidence I think it could be said that you have demonstrated that
you are a person who is perhaps reasonably self-sufficient.
Would that be a
fair description of you? A. Yes.
Q. And when I asked you a question before on behalf of the Tribunal about
Narcotics Anonymous, does your self-sufficiency prevent
you from going to an
organisation like that?
A. I think that's part of the reason why I haven't
sought help like Narcotics Anonymous is because I felt that I could deal with
every problem myself.
Q. There has been mention in the evidence and materials and from
Dr Wilcox about your suffering from depression, and questions have
to you about a psychiatrist, and I know that a GP currently provides
anti-depressant medication for you, but would you also
consider making sure that
you receive appropriate psychiatric assessment from time to time to assist that
complaint to the extent
that you may have it, to ensure that it gets
A. I can try. I wouldn't like to make a guarantee that I would have
to be held to later.
Q. Again I don't think a person as educated as yourself would overlook the
important role of a psychiatrist where there is a condition
such as depression.
You'd agree with that? A. Yes.
Q. And it is not an uncommon condition today? A. Yes.
Q. All my questions are directed to bearing in mind what I mentioned about
your apparent self-sufficiency and the need to look to
others to ensure that
your life may be adequately turned around? A. Yes.
Q. Before I invite my colleagues on the Tribunal to ask any questions...can
I ask you, in the longer term how do you today regard
your future?
I'd like to commit myself to the job I have got now. I mean, for the last 17
years I have been performing in all these
roles but I think 90 percent of my
time and thought has been taken up in drug seeking behaviour and endeavours,
such as extracting
codeine. If I had put all that energy towards my employment
then I possibly would have had a greater success in my life than I have
Q. That's the past. My question is directed to the future?
A. Now that
I no longer need to concern myself with drugs, with seeking drugs, I'm committed
to working full-time and getting on
with my life essentially.
Q. You have made, on a number of occasions, a reference to any return to
practising the pharmacy profession. Having asked you a
question about the
future, as you presently see it, can I ask you how you regard that, that is a
A. I can't see it in the future. I
can't. I don't know. I don't - I couldn't see myself ever working in retail
pharmacy again,
Q. On what basis do you say that now?
A. Because I was always bored with
retail pharmacy, although I did enjoy the patient contact and helping patients.
It became very
difficult when it's a business orientated model and limited time
can be spent, and I just did become bored and that was another factor
development of the drug addiction, I think, to escape the boredom that I found
Q. Just finally, from what you have said as well I think you still regard
yourself as being addicted to methadone? A. Yes.
Q. And dependent on that? A. Yes.
MS DUGUID: Q. I was wondering, Dr Larden, Dr Swift mentioned this
morning about the fact that at Clinic 36 there were counselling
available at the clinic, maybe not at the this particular moment, as you
mentioned, but had that ever been suggested to
you and did you ever avail
yourself of that opportunity?
A. It actually hasn't been suggested to me and
I wasn't aware there was counsellors at the clinic, and I'm pretty sure there is
counsellors at the moment there, but in all honesty if it was suggested I
probably wouldn't have gone.
you think you might now? A. I think I probably need to.
Complainant’s submissions
Complainant provided the Tribunal with a written outline of its submissions in
which it emphasised the protective object of the
(“the Act”)
including its mechanisms
to ensure that pharmacists are fit to practise; and the role of the Tribunal to
give effect to the statutory
objects by dealing with matters referred to it such
as the present Complaints before the Tribunal.
to the statutory, protective purpose, the Complainant emphasised the
consequences of the Tribunal’s decisions generally
by way of a deterrent
effect on other pharmacists tempted to fall below relevant standards; the
maintenance of high standards in
the profession of Pharmacy and the maintenance
of the community’s confidence in the profession.
its submissions, the Complainant emphasised the special position of pharmacists
who have significant privileges conferred upon
them which are based upon a
foundation of trust a corollary of which is the imposition of very high
standards with which pharmacists
must comply. In being permitted to work alone,
the trust in pharmacists is necessarily relied upon by regulatory authorities,
community and health professions.
respect to Complaints 1 and 2 (
Professional Misconduct
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
) admitted by the Respondent, the
Complainant submitted that the Respondent betrayed the trust of those who either
employed or supervised
him and by his misconduct over a lengthy period, failed
to comply with the law in a most serious way. Independently of the
Respondent’s
admissions, the Complainant submits that his conduct fell far
short of the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist with equivalent
training and experience; and accordingly, that he is guilty of improper or
unethical conduct such as to justify cancellation of his
registration.
to Complaint 3 (the convictions) the Complainant’s submissions referred to
the discretion [in Section 66 (2) (c) of
the Act] available to the Tribunal
where a pharmacist has been convicted of criminal offences, including suspension
or deregistration,
where the circumstances render the pharmacist unfit in the
public interest, to practise pharmacy. It is therefore, the Complainant
necessary for the Tribunal to consider the circumstances of these convictions in
its determination of their consequences
for the Respondent. It is the
Complainant’s submission, given the manner in and the period over which,
the offences were committed,
that the Tribunal would find the Respondent unfit
in the public interest, to practise as a pharmacist, even allowing for his
to drugs at the relevant time.
the issue of
(Complaint 5) the Complainant referred to the
definition contained in Section 10 of the Act and cited the evidence of Drs.
and Swift concerning the Respondent’s history of addiction and
current treatment in the
program. The Complainant submitted
that although the Respondent denied any continuing addiction to
, his admission to a current addiction to
satisfies the statutory definition of
the issue of
(Complaint 4),
the Complainant noted the
absence of any expert evidence before the Tribunal that might assist a more
informed understanding of the
reasons which led to the Respondent’s
misconduct. On this, the Tribunal notes that the evidence of Dr. Wilcox does
some relevant material based on her consultations with the Respondent,
as noted above. The Complainant submits that the Respondent’s
addiction is
relevant to the issue of
and his admitted misconduct relates to
drugs and addiction. The Complainant cited a decision of the NSW Court of
McBride v Walton
(unreported, 15 July 1994) which included
consideration of the question whether a finding of professional misconduct
should be followed
by a consequential finding that a practitioner is not of good
is submitted by the Complainant noting the observations in
that the Respondent’s misconduct cannot be attributed
to an error of judgment or be seen as an isolated episode but rather,
long and deliberate pattern of dishonesty for which he declined to accept
professional advice and support including his
failure to comply with his
undertaking to the Pharmacy Board’s Review Panel to attend for examination
by its nominated psychiatrist,
Complainant emphasises that it is the Respondent who bears the onus to establish
that there is no risk of recurrence or an acceptable
risk and submits there is
insufficient evidence before the Tribunal to satisfy this onus. Citing the words
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re Medical Practitioners Act
67 SR (NSW) 448
at 461, the Complainant submits that the mere
passage of time since the misconduct has occurred during which there is no proof
anything discreditable has occurred, is insufficient; what is needed is
clear evidence of change.
is submitted by the Complainant that it is of vital importance that the
Respondent fully appreciates and understands his misconduct.
supplementary oral submissions Mr. Griffin for the Complainant, quite fairly,
took the opportunity to include references to
the Respondent’s evidence to
the Tribunal which Counsel described as indicating some cause for optimism
including his sincerity
in apologising for what he had done. Counsel submitted
that the Respondent’s genuine contrition is an essential element but
must be accompanied by an insight and an awareness as to why the conduct
occurred “...
a process which is slowly dawning
...(on him)
that if he can convince himself that there are health professionals
with expertise who are ready and willing to assist him, he might
prospects in that respect
.” [TS 129.7]
Griffin also acknowledged the “...
...”demonstrated by the Respondent in appearing before the
Tribunal at this inquiry especially when he had not practised pharmacy
years and submitted that the Respondent needs to address these various issues
especially by availing himself of the support
of others as from his evidence he
appeared not only professionally isolated but perhaps personally isolated as
noted in his submissions, that given the Respondent’s intelligence and
ability, it would be unfortunate if he were not
able to “...
...” of those qualities in the future.
the serious nature of the complaints and the period over which the
Respondent’s misconduct occurred, the Complainant submits
strong case for deregistration. Counsel distinguished the Respondent’s
case from another involving a pharmacist’s
drug abuse, decided by the NSW
Pharmacy Board —
[2007] NSWPB 1.
Unlike the present case,
contained considerable evidence of successful drug and general,
rehabilitation.
to the discretion available to the Tribunal in Clause 13 (1) of Schedule 6 of
the Complainant
seeks an order for costs against the Respondent.
Respondent’s submissions
by the Tribunal to put to it anything by way of submissions, the Respondent
first apologised through the Tribunal, to the
Pharmacy Board. He acknowledged
also the need to apologise to may others and suggested this need had probably
prevented his going
Narcotics Anonymous
where one of it’s
‘steps’ involves an apology to those who have been wronged. He
accepts that he has a need to do
this. The Respondent wanted the Tribunal to
understand that in the past he had reached a point in his behaviour where he no
felt in control of his life.
Respondent readily conceded he had breached “...
the special position of
a pharmacist
...” and suggested that because of his special
qualifications he was probably given more trust than “...
...” which had given him more latitude to abuse that trust,
resulting in the Complaints now before the Tribunal.
was frankly acknowledged by the Respondent that it was his own fault that he
allowed these drug-related problems to develop, and
It was my fault. I allowed it to happen through my actions and my
inactions. I know that certainly I couldn't work as a pharmacist
now. I know
that and I may not ever be able to work as a pharmacist because drug addiction
is a problem that is ongoing. [TS 128.8]
looking to the future, the Respondent told the Tribunal:
I would like to think that I could make changes in my life. I
would like to think that I can get better and improve and I need to
that. I need to believe there is some hope because in 2006-2007 when I wrote
those letters back to the Health Care Complaints
Commission in such a manner I
had no hope.
I'm sorry I have wasted so much time and the resources of the government in
training me to be a pharmacist, only to throw it back
at them. I used to love
pharmacy once and somewhere I lost sight of that along the way. That's all I
can say. [TS 128.9-129.3]
considering the complaints before it, the Tribunal needs to be satisfied to the
standard articulated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
is, comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities, but that having
regard to the serious nature of the charge and the
consequences, the
satisfaction cannot be produced by “
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony or indirect references
1: Professional
Unsatisfactory
professional
1 and 2 and the particulars were admitted by the Respondent.
Independently
of the Respondent’s admissions to these two complaints, the Tribunal is
satisfied to the requisite standard, that
evidence of the nature and extent of
the Respondent’s conduct demonstrates that his knowledge, skill, judgment
possessed and
care exercised in his practice of pharmacy is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist of an equivalent
experience and that such conduct is improper and unethical and meets the
definition of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
in Section 37 (1) (a)
and (h) of the Act.
independently of the Respondent’s admissions, the Tribunal is satisfied to
the above standard, given the nature and extent
of the evidence, that his
unsatisfactory
professional
is of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify cancellation of his registration and constitutes
professional misconduct
by Section 36 of the
Tribunal finds both complaints proven.
Complaint 3
Convictions
complaint alleges that the Respondent’s convictions of the criminal
offences and the circumstances of these offences in
evidence now before the
Tribunal render him unfit in the public interest to be registered as a
pharmacist pursuant to Section 39
(2) of the Act.
complaint and the particulars of the convictions were admitted by the
Respondent.
convictions relate to the Respondent’s conduct in failing to comply with
relevant requirements of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
Therapeutic
including some offences within pharmacy practice. The
necessity for pharmacists to observe such laws is obvious especially given
public interest the legislation is intended to benefit.
Tribunal has had regard for the circumstances of these offences:
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
decision of the High Court of Australia.
was considered by the High
A Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
in which it emphasised the need to closely examine the facts
constituting the offence to determine whether the practitioner is a
proper person to practice. The principles enunciated within these decisions are
equally applicable to pharmacists.
facts and circumstances of the offences to which the convictions relate when
committed by a pharmacist, are extremely serious
and repugnant to the principles
underlying the proper professional practice of a pharmacist.
Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite standard that the Respondent has been
convicted of the offences particularised in the Complaint
and that the
circumstances thereof are such as to render him unfit, in the public interest,
to practise pharmacy, even allowing for
his drug dependence at the relevant
time. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds the Complaint proven.
Complaint 4
Respondent is not of good
1, 2 and 3 which the Respondent has admitted, are relied on as the particulars
of this complaint.
Complainant submitted that the Respondent’s admitted misconduct relates to
drugs and to his addiction, which is relevant
to the issue of character.
Further, in light of the evidence, such admitted conduct cannot be attributed to
an isolated episode or
an error of judgment. The Complainant described the
Respondent as having engaged in a long and deliberate pattern of dishonesty.
Respondent’s failure to comply with his undertaking to the Pharmacy Board
to attend upon its nominated medical practitioner
for assessment is an example
of his declining to accept professional support and advice.
the conclusion of the Respondent’s evidence the Tribunal Chairman asked
the Respondent the following question concerning
the issue of good
Q. And can I ask you in respect of the complaint that is complaint
number 4, that which alleges that you are not of good character,
do you have
anything further to say to the Tribunal in support of what you say in response
to that complaint?
A. Well, based on the evidence the Tribunal has heard and the evidence that
I have been reminded of, certainly if I was in your position
I couldn't consider
myself to be of good character and, having been reminded of my past now, I don't
think I'm of good character
either, so I would no longer deny that complaint,
but I'd like to say that people can change and I'd like to have the opportunity
to change for myself so that perhaps one day I can be of good character.
[TS 120.3-120.5]
With the further response from the Respondent:
A. Well I can't change the past. I just have to learn to live with it and
I'd like to think I'm of good character, but now I'm not
so sure. [TS 120.8]
Notwithstanding
what the Respondent said about no longer denying the complaint having been
reminded of his past, the Tribunal must
consider independently, whether the
Respondent is presently not of good character.
McBride v Walton
(unreported, 15 July 1994) the NSW Court of Appeal
considered how the question of good character should be determined:
"To determine whether a finding of proven misconduct should be
followed by a consequential finding that the practitioner is not of
character in the context of fitness to practise medicine, one must consider: (a)
whether the misconduct can be satisfactorily
explained as an error of judgment
rather than a defect of character; (b) the intrinsic seriousness of the
misconduct qua fitness
to practise medicine; (c) whether the misconduct should
be viewed as an isolated episode and hence atypical or uncharacteristic of
practitioner's normal qualities of character; (d) the motivation which may have
given rise to the proven episode of misconduct;
(e) the underlying qualities of
character shown by previous and other misconduct; and (f) whether the
practitioner's conduct post
the proven episode of misconduct demonstrates that
public and professional confidence may be reposed in him to uphold and observe
the high standards of moral rectitude required of a medical
practitioner."
Respondent has complied with his
good behaviour bond
imposed by the Court
in September 2006. He told the Tribunal he has not engaged in any inappropriate
conduct since then. Mr. Battye
had no evidence available to him, to indicate
otherwise. The Respondent ceased taking legitimately prescribed
in about October 2008 but he remains on the
supervised by Dr. Swift. He frankly disclosed the genesis of his problems
and the nature and extent of his past behaviour. He accepts
blame for his
conduct and acknowledges he has wronged others. He wishes to apologise to his
former employer Mr. Lulic and to make
reparation to him for the significant
economic loss suffered by the Respondent’s misappropriation of drugs. He
indicates a
willingness to consider the important role of health professionals
and others, including
to assist his
rehabilitation efforts especially given his acknowledged personality trait, in
effect to rely only on himself.
noted above, the Respondent told the Tribunal that he wants the opportunity to
change, to restore his good character. To his credit,
his evidence and demeanour
before the Tribunal, suggests that he is determined to do so.
JA observed in
Ex Part Tziniolis: Re Medical Practitioners
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
"Reformations of character and of behaviour can doubtless occur
but their occurrence is not the usual but the exceptional thing. One
assume that a change has occurred merely because some years have gone by and it
is not proved that anything of a discreditable
kind has occurred. If a man has
exhibited serious deficiencies in his standards of conduct and his attitudes it
must require clear
proof to show that some years later he has established
himself as a different man."
The Respondent has exhibited serious deficiencies in his standards of conduct
by his admitted drug-seeking behaviour. His failures
depart seriously, from the
legal and ethical standards demanded of a pharmacist. There must be
clear proof
” as described by
JA, that the
Respondent has established himself as a different person.
observed by the NSW Court of Appeal in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
(1997) 42 NSWLR 630:
“The lapse of time
since the events giving rise to a complaint ... may ... be relevant in
determining whether the doctor has
undergone a reformation of character and
behaviour, or whether the incidents can be viewed as isolated or passing
departures from
proper professional standards attributed to youth or
inexperience ...”
Respondent’s conduct was not an isolated incident having occurred over a
significant period.
in a recent case decided by the NSW Pharmacy Board, the Respondent brought no
other evidence before the Tribunal in support
of the changes in the attitude and
lifestyle he described in his evidence. In
[2007] NSWPB 1
May 2007) also a drug-related misconduct matter, the Board noted the requirement
clear proof
” of change. The Board
found on the question of reformation of character, evidence called on the
pharmacist’s behalf about
the recent changes in his attitude,
very compelling.
called by the Complainant, Dr. Swift did provide supportive evidence of the
Respondent’s attitude to and compliance
with his rehabilitative,
treatment and he has trusted the Respondent with medication.
Dr. Swift described to the Tribunal how he thought the Respondent
is now a different person to how he was initially
58.5]. Dr. Swift’s treatment commenced in January 2006 and he has remained
in such capacity on a regular attendance
basis, to the present [see also TS
61.2-61.9; 67; 76.5]. His treatment records were in evidence before the Tribunal
Complainant submitted (Outline submissions at paragraph [6.1]) and the Tribunal
agrees, that at the time of the Respondent’s
conduct he was not of good
character. The Tribunal also notes the supplementary, supportive submissions of
Mr. Griffin, Counsel for
the Complainant, based on the Respondent’s
evidence to the Tribunal. The Complainant accepted the Respondent’s
in expressing his apology for what has occurred [TS 129].
Tribunal notes Mr. Battye’s evidence that since the Court’s
imposition of its
good behaviour bond
in September 2006, there is nothing
to indicate any further forging of prescriptions [TS 39.8-40.9].
is no evidence before the Tribunal of anything to indicate a deficiency of
character in the Respondent prior to the commencement
of his drug-seeking
behaviour. The Tribunal notes in this respect, that the Respondent’s
entitlement to registration as a pharmacist
on 8 April 1992 included the
necessity for the Board to be satisfied of his good character pursuant to the
then operative
Pharmacy Act
[s.17 (a)].
Respondent is currently in full-time employment and lives with his daughter,
which after his divorce and disruption to family
life, he is enjoying. He has
conveyed some degree of optimism including the possibility of again using his
considerable and special
skills demonstrated by his academic achievements. The
Tribunal acknowledges the Respondent’s positive approach towards
improvement,
now under way.
Tribunal is required to make an assessment of character at the time of the
Hearing. The standard the Tribunal must apply is the
Accordingly, applying that standard, the Tribunal cannot be comfortably
satisfied that the Respondent is not of good character.
Complaint 5
Complaint as amended particularises an addiction to
and also relies on the particulars in support of the other four
complaints.
Respondent admits his addiction to
is defined in Section 10 of the
(1) For the purposes of this
Act, a person suffers from an impairment if the person suffers from any
physical or mental impairment,
disability, condition or disorder that
detrimentally affects or is likely to detrimentally affect the person’s
physical or
mental capacity to practise pharmacy.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person who habitually abuses
alcohol or is addicted to a deleterious drug is taken to suffer
impairment.
evidence of Drs. Wilcox and Swift describe the Respondent’s dependence.
The Respondent told the Tribunal how at one stage
he was taking up to 4 grams of
nexus between
in the context of the
Respondent’s dependence or addiction, was the subject of Dr. Swift’s
evidence before the Tribunal
(see paragraph 47, above).
Dr. Swift told the Tribunal, the Respondent remains dependent on
[TS 76.5] “...
indicated and prescribed
for a drug addiction or drug dependence
.” Asked by the Tribunal
whether the Respondent “...
continues to be dependent on
...” He responded: “
Yes, by definition he is
dependent on the methadone...and oxycontin...but that’s the aim of the
treatment, to make someone dependent
on the medication and then to wean them
.” [TS 73.5]
noted earlier, it was the Respondent’s evidence he had not taken any
since about October 2008. He admits to an addiction to
Tribunal appreciates the therapeutic purpose of the treatment given by Dr. Swift
and its rationale as noted above. He differentiated
in his evidence [at TS 76.2]
when taken to the words of Section 10 (2) of the Act, between the description
deleterious
applied to the nature or amount of the
drug concerned and the treatment with
, which was in his view,
deleterious
” to the Respondent. The Tribunal notes in
this context, that many drugs might be considered deleterious in the sense of
potentially harmful if not used appropriately.
the evidence before it, The Tribunal considers that the Respondent’s
admitted addiction to
is inherent in his treatment and the
evidence is sufficient based on that element, for the Tribunal to be satisfied
to the requisite
standard that the Respondent suffers from an
as defined by Section 10 of the Act and accordingly, the Tribunal finds the
complaint proven.
Respondent’s professional career as a pharmacist has been limited. His
admitted drug seeking behaviour commenced long ago
as described in his evidence.
Wentworth v New
South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
(1992) 176 CLR 239
at 250-251).
Professional disciplinary proceedings are intended for the protection of the
community, to maintain proper and ethical
professional standards and to protect
the good standing and reputation of the profession of pharmacy. Deterrence is
also an important
element in the exercise of the Tribunal’s
an order for suspension or removal is made, its purpose is “...
public point of view, for the protection of those who require protection, and
from the professional point of view, in order
that abuse of privilege may not
lead to loss of privilege”
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202.
Bannister v Walton
(NSW Court of Appeal, unreported, 30 April 1992)
‘The right to practice [medicine]
affords to a practitioner privileges and opportunities which are not available
He is expected to maintain a relationship with patients who are
affected by his character. The relationship is one which touches
matters such as
trust, confidence, confidentiality and right conduct. Clinical capacity is by no
means the only consideration to
which regard is to be had in determining whether
a person is appropriate to practice medicine. It is necessary that the public be
protected against those who, through having the appropriate skills do not have
the character for the opportunities and privileges
which the right to practice
Although involving a medical practitioner the above statement is applicable
to a pharmacist.
relevant time for determining the fitness of a the Respondent to practise is the
time of the Tribunal’s determination (See
A Solicitor v The Law Society
of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
to Section 66 (2) of the Act the Tribunal may suspend registration for a
specified period or direct that such registration
be cancelled when it is
satisfied of a person’s professional misconduct; where the person’s
convictions and the circumstances
of the offences render the person unfit in the
public interest to practice Pharmacy; or where the person is not of good
considering its determination, the Tribunal is reminded of what was said by
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
34 NSWLR 408
"... Improvement – The final consideration concerns
an aspect of the public interest to which, as I believe, insufficient attention
has been paid in these cases. I expressed my views in this regard in Kotowicz v
Law Society of New South Wales (Court of Appeal,
7 August 1987, unreported). I
was there in dissent as to the result of the application. But, I hold to my
opinion, as applicable
to this case. It is an opinion which has enjoyed some
favour in other Australian jurisdictions:
‘Because the jurisdiction is for the protection of the public,
regard also may be had, to the public’s interests in the
restoration to
the Roll of such persons as have demonstrated, including by their work,
activities and life, a fitness to be restored.
For cultural and historical
reasons, redemption and forgiveness are important attributes of the shared
morality of our society. In
part, this is because of the teachings of religious
leaders who have profoundly influenced our community’s perception of
and fairness, reflected from the earliest time in the courts: see, eg.
St Matthews Gospel 18, 11ff; The Acts, 3, 19. In part, it
derives from the
self-interest which any community has to encourage the rehabilitation of those
who lapse and to hold out to them
the hope that, by diligent and honourable
efforts over a period, their past may be forgiven and they may be restored to
opinion of their family, friends, colleagues and society. The
public’s interest also includes the economic interest which is
involved in
utilising, to the full, the skills of talented people who have undergone years
of rigorous training but who, having misconducted
themselves, have had to be
removed for a time from positions of responsibility and trust.’"
formulating its orders, the Tribunal regards the words of
apposite to the present case to the extent that they address the encouragement
of rehabilitation and the importance in utilising
to the full, the skills of
talented people.
regard for the proven complaints 1 to 3 inclusive, it is the decision of the
Tribunal that the Respondent’s registration
be cancelled.
is not included in Section 66 (2) of the Act, the Tribunal may
by Section 66 (1) exercise any power that the Board can exercise under
Disciplinary powers of Board and Tribunal)
one of which is provided by
Section 64 (1) (c) being an order that the person seek and undergo medical or
psychiatric treatment or
counselling. Because the Respondent is not presently
registered, such an order would have effect only so as to prevent him being
registered unless the order is complied with or to require the conditions
concerned to be imposed when the person is registered,
as appropriate. Such an
order could be imposed where a complaint of
is found as in
this case. Given the evidence of the Respondent’s compliance with his
current treatment regime and apparent determination
to overcome his problem
together with his willingness to consider suggestions advanced during the
Hearing, the Tribunal makes no
such order.
to Section 66 of the Act, The Tribunal orders that the Respondent’s
registration is cancelled which by Section 66 (3)
as the Respondent has ceased
to be registered, is an order that he not be re-registered.
Tribunal further orders pursuant to Section 66 (4) of the Act that an
application for review of the above order under Division
3 of Part 6 of the Act
may not be made until after three (3) years from the date of the above
to Clause 13 of Schedule 6 to the Act, the Tribunal orders the Respondent to pay
the Complainant’s costs as agreed
or if agreement cannot be reached,
either party may have the matter re-listed for assessment by the Tribunal.
These Orders are to take effect one (1) calendar month from the
date on which the Respondent is notified by registered post at the
address given
for the purpose of this inquiry, of the Tribunal’s written statement of
its decision.
: 25 May 2009
COMPLAINANT’S DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
EXHIBIT “C—1”: Folder 1
:—documents at tabs
numbered 1 to 13:
Complaint dated 4 July 2008
Letter of complaint from Mr Bruce Battye, NSW Department of
Health—Pharmaceutical Services Branch (“PSB”) dated
2005 including investigation report with attachments as follows:
of Bruce Battye regarding his conversation with Mr. Ivan Lulic on 4 February,
dated 6 February 2004;
obtained from the St George Hospital;
obtained from Justice Health including letter to the Director General of Health
NSW containing allegations against Dr Larden;
list of unaccounted drugs;
of Authority documents;
of Ivan Lulic dated 19 January 2005;
letter Bruce Battye to Dr Larden dated 17 March 2005;
of an interview with Dr Larden dated 13 April 2005;
statement of Bruce Battye dated 30 June 2005 and Statement of Martin Power (PSB)
dated 30 June 2005
(a) Letter from the Registrar North Sydney Local Court dated 4 July 2006
providing the following material associated with the hearing
of 5 July 2005:
(b) Tape of Proceedings
(c) Police facts;
(d) Form 1- List of additional charges ;
(e) Extracts from Dr Larden’s resume
(f) Report of Dr Larden’s treating psychiatrist Dr Rosalie Wilcox dated 25
(g) Extracts from NSW Poisons & Therapeutic Goods legislation
(h) Certificates of conviction dated 14/6/06 (x 26)
Transcript of Proceedings before Magistrate Brennan of the North Sydney
Local Court dated 5 July 2005
Email from Dr Larden dated 24 May 2006 indicating he is not likely to work
again as a pharmacist and consenting to the Commission
obtaining his medical
Email from Dr Larden dated 14 September 2006 consenting to the Commission
obtaining information from the NSW Pharmacy Board
Consent form to obtain medical records limited to the end of 2004
Letter from the NSW Pharmacy Board dated 29 September 2006 to the HCCC
indicating that Dr Larden gave an undertaking to the Board
that he would not
practice as a pharmacist unless the Board otherwise determined, which it had
Letter from Dr Larden’s treating psychiatrist, Dr Wilcox received 31
October 2006 updating her treatment of Dr Larden to January
Statement of Mr Ivan Lulic, pharmacist, dated 1 November 2006
(a) Letter from Registrar Waverley Local Court dated 7 November 2006 providing
the following material regarding the hearing on 20
September 2006
(b) List of charges
(c) Certificates of Conviction dated 7/11/06 (x 10)
(a) Letter from Constable Joel Hill of NSW Police at Maroubra received 23
November 2006 providing the following material regarding
the hearing on 20
September 2006:
(b) Facts sheet;
(c) COPs Sheet
(d) Criminal history
Transcript of Proceedings before Magistrate Gilmour of the Waverley Local
Court dated 20 September 2006
EXHIBIT “C—2”: Folder 2—
documents at tabs
numbered 1 to 6 inclusive:
(a) Complaint from Mr Bruce Battye, PSB dated 28 March 2007 with
attachments as follows:
Statement of Dr Anoma Nagasinghe dated 6 March 2007
Statement of Dr
David Lunz dated 12 March 2007;
Pharmacy Printouts obtained by PSB
Email to the Commission from Dr Larden dated 16 May 2007
Letter to the Commission from Dr Larden dated 25 May 2007
(a) Documents received from Leading Senior Constable Joel Hill, Maroubra Police
dated 17 November 2006
(b) Police Facts Sheet dated 7/8/06
(c) COPS sheet
(d) Criminal history
(a) Documents forwarded by Waverley Court on 7 November 2006
(b) List of Charges
(c) Certificates of Conviction dated 7/11/06 (x 10)
Original prescriptions received from PSB
EXHIBIT “C—3”
Certificate under Clause 11(1), Schedule 6,
Practice Act
dated 16 March 2009.
EXHIBIT “C—4”
Letter dated 27 September 2006, from Dr. C. Bhar (Prince of Wales Hospital
& Community Health Services / Pain Clinic) to Dr. G.
EXHIBIT “C—5”
Medical records concerning Respondent, produced by
response to Summons.
EXHIBIT “C—6”
Report of Health Panel meeting 14 October 2004, Pharmacy Board of NSW,
EXHIBIT “C—7”
Letter dated 16 February 2007: Registrar Pharmacy Board of NSW to
Respondent,
[formerly marked “MFI
Letter dated 10 March 2009:
Ms. S. Connors (HCCC) to Respondent.
RESPONDENT’S DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
bundle of documents
containing the following:
11 February 2009: Respondent (handwritten, overwriting on a letter from
Complainant to the Respondent 19 December 2008) to Complainant;
February 2000: Dr. G. Swift /
, to Pharmacy Board of NSW;
University of
: Transcript of Academic Record dated 22 January 1992 for Respondent:
Bachelor of Pharmacy, conferred 28 February 1992, Final Result:
Honours Class
University of
: Examination results, 1991, B. Pharm. Academic Year 4;
Co-authored by Respondent, in
Paediatrics
Vol. 112, No. 3, September
2003, 242-247;
: Pages 1-5 inclusive, “ Pagewood Pharmacy...”
prescriptions for respondent dispensed;
Co-authored by Respondent in
Tetrahedron
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (773 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter