URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2021/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Deering v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2021] NSWPICMRP 5; (9 September 2021)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Deering v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
NSWPICMRP 5
Rachel Jane Deering
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
Brett Williams (Chair)
Terence O’Riain
Michael Sofoulis
DATE OF DECISION:
9 September 2021
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS- Merit Review Panel; whether claimant can recover weekly
payments for time she took off work to attend treatment
providers; merit review
matter; dispute about whether the insurer is entitled to refuse payment of
statutory benefits in accordance
with section 6.13 of the
Motor Accidents
Injuries Act 2017
(MAI Act); minor injury dispute; statutory benefits;
earner; loss of earnings;
Merit Reviewer’s decision set
aside; claimant incurred a loss of earnings pursuant to Schedule 1 Clause 3 of
the MAI Act; claimant
entitled to weekly payments of statutory benefits to the
extent that she suffered a loss of earnings when she attended treatment
providers; section 6.13 of the MAI Act dispute is a miscellaneous claims
assessment matter; minor injury dispute is a medical assessment
matter; Merit
Review Panel cannot determine section 6.13 of the MAI Act or minor injury
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
to the merit review decision by a single Merit
Reviewer, the Merit Review Panel sets aside the Merit Reviewer’s decision
3 December 2020 and substitutes the following decision:
leave, which Mrs Deering used to attend medical appointments related to the
accident, was conditional on being repaid to her employer
and has been repaid.
Accordingly, Mrs Deering has incurred a loss of earnings pursuant to Schedule 1,
Clause 3 of the MAI Act.
Deering is entitled to weekly payments of statutory benefits to the extent that
she suffered a loss of earnings on those occasions
she attended her treatment
providers in relation to injuries she sustained in the motor accident.
Mrs Deering was self-represented there are no orders as to
1. Mrs Deering was injured in a motor accident on 29 June 2018.
2. Mrs Deering required medical treatment from the date of accident and was
attending her healthcare practitioners during work hours
so she could maintain
her employment as a law firm’s practice business manager.
3. While Mrs Deering’s Application for Personal Injury Benefits (her
claim) was noted as lodged on 7 November 2018, she submits
that she had
attempted to lodge her claim prior to that date.
4. Initially her claim for weekly benefits under Division 3.3 of the
Accidents Injuries Act 2017
(MAI Act) was declined as the insurer found that
she had not provided evidence of her incapacity and loss of earnings.
5. This decision was conveyed during a phone conversation on 28 February 2020
between Mrs Deering and the insurer’s claims consultant.
There was no
evidence of a letter to Mrs Deering confirming that
6. Mrs Deering applied for internal review of the decision.
7. The decision was affirmed in an Internal Review Certificate dated 15 May
8. Mrs Deering subsequently applied for a Merit Review of the insurer’s
9. In a certificate dated 3 December
the Merit Reviewer affirmed
the insurer’s decision. Mrs Deering sought a review of the Merit
Reviewer’s decision.
10. On 1 April 2021 the President’s Delegate accepted the review
application on the grounds that it was suspected that the Merit
Review decision
was incorrect in a material respect.
11. The Delegate noted Mrs Deering’s submission that she contacted the
insurer the day after the accident. The Delegate was
satisfied that if Mrs
Deering contacted the insurer prior to 7 November 2018 it is possible her claim
may have been ‘made’
prior to this date and that consequently she
may be entitled to additional statutory benefits payments with respect to the
prior to 7 November 2018.
12. Section 6.13 of the MAI Act addresses time limits for making claims for
statutory benefits. The dispute about when the claim for
statutory benefits was
made falls for determination under that provision.
13. Merit Reviewers and Merit Review Panels do not have jurisdiction to
determine disputes under section 6.13 of the MAI Act. A dispute
of that nature,
subject to section 7.41(2)(b), requires an insurer to conduct an internal review
under section 7.41
and may be the
subject of a miscellaneous claims assessment by a Member of the Commission under
Schedule 2(3)(k) and Division 7.6
of the MAI Act.
14. The Merit Reviewer also referred to a minor injury decision that Mrs
Deering disputed.
15. The minor injury dispute is a medical assessment matter under Schedule 2
clause 2(e) of the MAI Act. It is not a merit review
matter. Medical
Assessors determine medical disputes.
16. A Medical Assessment Certificate in relation to minor injury is binding
under section 7.23(2)(b) of the MAI Act. The Medical Assessor’s
certificate(s) is (or are if there is more than 1), in connection with a merit
review under Division 7.4 is be conclusive evidence
as to whether the
injuries Mrs Deering suffered in the accident were minor injuries.
17. There is a
further matter that is the subject of disputation. The insurer’s original
decision conveyed to Mrs Deering on
28 February 2020, and the Internal Review
Certificate dated 15 May 2020, addressed the claim for weekly payments under
Division 3.3
relating to absences from work to attend treatment providers.
This dispute, as to whether or not Mrs Dearing suffered a loss of earnings
defined under Schedule 1 of the MAI Act, is reviewable under Schedule 2, clause
1(a) of the MAI Act as a merit
18. The Panel
can and will address this dispute.
19. The insurer’s decision about weekly payments is a matter that
should have been addressed by the Merit Reviewer in her decision
of 3 December
20. The Panel’s review of the Merit Reviewer’s decision is
conducted under Division 7.4, specifically section 7.15 of
21. All Panel members confirmed that they had no previous involvement with
this matter, or with Mrs Deering. All Panel members also
confirmed that
there was no conflict or any other reason that they would be unable to approach
this review with an open mind.
Legislation and guidelines
22. The Review Panel considered the following:
Injury Commission Act 2020
(the PIC Act);
Accident Guidelines (the Guidelines);
Motor Accident
Injuries Regulation 2017 (the Regulation), and
Personal Injury
Commission Rules.
Conduct of the review
23. The Panel is required
to decide what the correct and preferable decision is in respect to this merit
, is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inquire into any matter
relevant to the issues in dispute in such manner as the
met via teleconference on 6 and 27 August 2021
with Merit Reviewer Williams acting as chairperson. The Panel determined that no
teleconference with the parties was required.
25. The Panel decided that the insurer’s Internal Review Certificate
dated 15 May 2020 was the reviewable decision.
26. In accordance with Procedural Direction PIC2 the Panel is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection
proceedings, so that the Panel may determine the matter on the papers without
holding a teleconference or formal hearing
(see section 52(3) of the
Documents considered
Panel considered the Application and
the documentation attached to the Application and Reply.
28. The Panel also considered the statement of reasons of the single Merit
Reviewer and the Proper Officer’s decision to refer
the matter to the
Submissions & Previous Decisions
Mrs Deering’s submission dated 4 May
29. This submission, contained in a letter dated 4 May 2020, predates the
insurer's internal review dated 15 May 2020 in respect of
the original decision
dated 28 February 2020. The submission at [2] of this letter refers to the
repayment of wages that Mrs Deering’s
employer paid her while attending
necessary medical appointments.
30. These submissions include an attached letter from Mrs Deering's general
practitioner confirming that she was attending treatment
necessary to her
recovery and that it would be ongoing. That document also included a schedule of
past treatment attendances.
Internal Review Certificate dated 15 May
31. The insurer’s
internal review certificate was, relevantly to the merit review, characterised
as a dispute regarding reimbursement
of sick leave to Mrs Deering’s
32. Mrs Deering had taken breaks during her workdays to attend necessary
treatment. She requested that the insurer repay her employer
for wages paid to
her at those times.
33. The insurer rejected that request on the basis that sick leave was
excluded as that classification of leave was not income lost
from personal
34. The insurer’s decision states;
“Pursuant to clause 3(1) of Schedule 1 of the Act, a ‘loss of
earnings’ is defined as a ‘
loss incurred or likely to be incurred
in a person’s income from personal exertion
’. However, clause
3(3)(d) states that a person’s income from personal exertion excludes the
‘monetary amount of
any annual, sick or other leave entitlement.’
35. The certificate states that the insurer declined to reimburse Mrs
Deering’s employer accordingly.
Mrs Deering’s submissions dated 29 May
36. Mrs Deering’s submissions dated 29 May 2020 were lodged with the
DRS Application and supporting documents.
37. Mrs Deering raises the following points:
(a) The insurer had determined her injuries were minor, which she
(b) As a result of the insurer finding that her injuries were minor, her
ongoing medical expenses and weeklies would no longer be
paid 26 weeks after the
(c) Sick leave taken to attend medical appointments during work hours ought
to be reimbursed.
38. The first two points relate to the insurer's minor injury findings.
39. Mrs Deering affirms in these submissions that her employer is expecting
to be repaid the leave she took while attending medical
appointments.
Insurer’s submissions dated 22 September
40. This submission, provided by McCabe Curwood Lawyers, argues that Mrs
Deering's claim is not open-ended but for a closed period
between 7 November
2018 to 29 December 2018, due to the operation of section 6.13(2), which
requires that any claim for statutory
benefits must be lodged within 28 days of
the date of accident for a claim to be backdated.
41. The claim form is referred to in this document as being lodged on 7
November 2018.
42. In Mrs Deering's submissions, she refers to lodging her claim earlier
than this and submits that she satisfied the requirements
of section 6.13(2) of
the MAI Act.
43. Mrs Deering is claiming full reimbursement of leave (characterised as
wages paid while attending medical appointments) from 29
June 2018 to 29
December 2020.
44. The insurer says that as the claim form was not lodged until 7 November
2018, due to the operation of this part of s 6.13 of the
MAI Act, weekly
payments for the loss of income from personal exertion could not commence until
the date of lodgement.
45. Further, the
insurer submits that the claim for weekly payments ceases after 26 weeks
post-accident (29 December 2018) due to
Mrs Deering's injuries being assessed as
minor (as defined under the MAI
insurer tabulates 11 treatment attendances as being the only sums in
47. These attendances are between 8 November 2018 and 24 December 2018 with a
total value of $1,613.27 at $133.33 per hour.
48. No submissions are made in relation to the amount of Mrs Deering’s
pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE).
49. The insurer disputes Mrs Deering's entitlement to weekly payments on the
basis, pertinently to the internal review decision under
Division 3.3 of the MAI
Act, that she did not demonstrate a loss of wages with relevant payslips showing
her pay was docked, or evidence
of an agreement that time off work would have to
be refunded to her employer.
Mrs Deering’s submissions dated 27 October
50. Attachment 1 to this letter traverses each paragraph of the
insurer’s submissions dated 22 September 2020. This summary
address the Division 3.3 of the MAI Act aspects.
51. At [7] Mrs Deering confirms she is “claiming for lost wages from
date of accident.”
52. Addressing [8(b)] of the insurer's submissions, Mrs Deering confirmed
that the insurer has failed to pay her “lost wages”.
53. At [11(b)] she refers to attachment 3, which is her letter to SIRA dated
30 July 2020 stating she repaid her employer for the
time taken off to attend
medical appointments with bank details confirming that on 30 July 2020 she
repaid her employer a total of
$18,424.94.
54. Attachment 4 to the submissions, as referred to at [11(d)] of attachment
1, is her employer's letter to SIRA dated 29 July 2020,
which states that the
employer and Mrs Deering agreed that Mrs Deering was expected to repay her
employer for any time lost from
work due to her attending medical appointments
related to the motor accident.
55. Attachment 5 is her employer’s letter dated 31 July 2020, which
acknowledges that Mrs Deering repaid the sum equivalent
to the “lost
wages” she is seeking.
Merit Review dated 3 December 2020
56. The merit reviewer
refers to the reviewable decision made 28 February 2020 but did not review that
57. The merit reviewer then refers at [3], to the internal review certificate
dated 15 May 2020, which confirms the original decision
to deny reimbursement of
sick leave dated 28 February 2020.
58. At [6.1], [6.3] and [6.4] the merit reviewer refers to the employer's
letter and material supporting the proposition that Mrs
Deering was
out-of-pocket for her attendances for treatment.
59. In the merit reviewer’s reasons at [12] to [19], the merit reviewer
begins a discussion of the non-reimbursement of wages
to Mrs Deering's employer
but does not engage with Mrs Deering’s proposition that this leave
was repaid.
60. The merit reviewer states that the insurer has agreed to pay Mrs Deering
for the period 7 November 2018 to 29 December 2018 in
the sum of $1,613.29.
This is not the case.
61. The merit reviewer determined that because of the date the claim was
made, Mrs Deering cannot receive any weekly payments between
the date of
accident and the date of lodgement, (being four months and nine days after the
62. At [29] the merit reviewer states that the question of whether sick leave
can be reimbursed is not before her.
63. The merit reviewer affirmed the insurer’s internal review
Mrs Deering’s submissions dated 28 December
64. Mrs Deering’s submissions in this letter at [3] addresses the claim
that her employer had to be reimbursed for the time
she was away from work
attending medical treatment.
65. At [14 to 16] Mrs Deering asserts that she attempted to lodge her almost
immediately after the date of accident. Her attempts
were frustrated by the
insurers. As such her claim ought to be treated as being lodged in accordance
with section 6.13(2) of the
MAI Act and be paid from the date she first
attempted to lodge her claim.
Insurer’s submissions 29 January 2021 from McCabe
66. The insurer submits that Merit Reviewer White has not erred in her
findings and has correctly determined that section 6.13(2)
of the MAI Act
applies to Mrs Deering’s application, that is Mrs Deering’s time
away from work could not be reimbursed
prior to the lodgement date as it was
more than 28 days after the accident.
67. The insurer also disputes Mrs Deering's entitlement to weekly payments
under Division 3.3 of the MAI Act on the basis that she
did not demonstrate a
loss of wages or provide evidence of a contemporaneous agreement that time off
work would have to be refunded
to her employer.
68. The insurer notes that Mrs Deering’s minor injury status was
determined in Medical Assessment Certificates (MAC) issued
29 October 2020
(visual system)
and 21 November
2020 (head, cervical spine and left shoulder), which confirmed that her injuries
were minor for the purpose of the
Mrs Deering’s submissions 18 February
69. Mrs Deering’s submissions dated 18 February 2021 do not address the
issues under Division 3.3 of the MAI Act.
70. As a review panel we are empowered to affirm or set aside the decision of
single merit reviewer under section 7.15 of the MAI
71. As we read them, Mrs Deering’s numerous submissions indicate that
her concerns are:
(a) Recovery of wages for time off to attend medical treatment;
(b) when her entitlement to statutory benefits commenced, and
(c) when those benefits ceased.
72. As recorded earlier in these reasons, neither the Merit Reviewer nor this
Merit Review Panel have jurisdiction to determine whether
the insurer is
entitled to refuse or has to start payments of statutory benefits in accordance
with section 6.13 of the MAI Act.
73. Likewise, the Panel does not have jurisdiction to determine whether the
insurer is entitled to apply section 3.11(1)(b) of the
MAI Act to refuse payment
of statutory benefits on the basis that the accident-related injuries are
74. However, the Panel has jurisdiction to determine the amount of statutory
benefits that are payable under Division 3.3 of the MAI
Act and whether Mrs
Deering has suffered a loss of earnings, which is the matter this Panel can
decide upon.
75. The Merit Review dated 3 December 2020 affirmed the insurer’s
internal review decision to decline Mrs Deering’s claim
for loss of
earnings but did not provide reasons addressing that issue.
76. It is not disputed that:
(a) Mrs Deering meets the definition of an earner under Schedule 1, clause 2,
of the MAI Act.
(b) Mrs Deering was employed as a legal practice business manager at the
relevant times.
77. The evidence before the Panel is that Mrs Deering was attending medical
treatment during work hours.
78. Subject to the issue as to when her claim was lodged, which we cannot
determine, and given that medical assessors have determined
that her injuries
caused by the accident are minor injuries, Mrs Deering’s entitlement to
weekly payments of statutory benefits
under Division 3.3 of the MAI Act is
limited to the first 26 weeks after the date of accident.
79. Based on the date that her claim is said to have been lodged her
entitlement to weekly payments were payable between 7 November
2019 and 29
December 2018.
80. Mrs Deering has provided correspondence that confirms she has repaid her
employer for time away from work to attend treatment.
She has, in those
circumstances, incurred a loss of earnings.
81. Attachment 3 of Mrs Deering’s submissions dated 27 October 2020 is
a copy of her letter to SIRA dated 30 July 2020 stating
she has repaid her
employer for the time taken off to attend medical appointments. The letter
contains bank details confirming $18,424.94
was repaid to Mrs Deering's employer
on 30 July 2020.
82. Attachment 4 to those submissions is her employer's letter to SIRA dated
29 July 2020, which states that it was agreed that Mrs
Deering was expected to
repay her employer for any time lost from work due to her attending medical
appointments related to the motor
83. Mrs Deering is entitled to weekly payments of statutory benefits to the
extent that she suffered a loss of earnings on those occasions
she attended her
treatment providers in relation to injuries she sustained in the motor accident,
subject to the limitations imposed
by sections 3.11 and 6.13(2) of the MAI
84. The Panel makes the following findings:
to the merit review decision by a single Merit Reviewer, the
Merit Review Panel sets aside the Merit Reviewer’s decision dated
December 2020 and
substitutes the following decision:
leave, which Mrs Deering used to attend medical appointments related to the
accident, was conditional on being repaid to her employer
and has been repaid.
Accordingly, Mrs Deering has incurred a loss of earnings pursuant to Schedule 1,
Clause 3 of the MAI Act.
Deering is entitled to weekly payments of statutory benefits to the extent that
she suffered a loss of earnings on those occasions
she attended her treatment
providers in relation to injuries she sustained in the motor
Mrs Deering was self-represented there is no order as to costs.
Terence O'Riain
Merit Reviewer on behalf of the Review Panel
Personal Injury Commission
Email correspondence with
insurer regarding original
IDR Certificate -
Reimbursement of Sick Leave – 15 May
DRS Merit Review dated 3
December 2020.
7.41 Internal
review required before miscellaneous claims assessment
(1) A dispute
this Division until the decision has been the subject of an internal
review by the insurer under
Division 7.3.
(2) A dispute about a decision
of an insurer may be referred for assessment under this Division
internal review of the decision by the insurer if—
(a) the Motor Accident Guidelines provide that an internal review is not
required for decisions
decision relates, or
(b) the insurer has failed to complete an internal review and notify the
claimant of the decision on the internal review as and when
required to do so,
or has declined to conduct a review.
(3) This section does not apply to a
dispute about a miscellaneous claims assessment matter of a
kind prescribed
by the regulations.
1 Merit review
The following matters are declared to be merit review matters for the purposes
(a) the amount of statutory benefits that is payable under section 3.4
(Statutory benefits for funeral
expenses) or under Division 3.3 (Weekly payments of statutory benefits to
injured persons)...
7.15 Review of merit review
decision by review panel
(1) A claimant or an insurer may apply to the
President to refer a decision of a single merit reviewer determining a merit
application to a review panel of merit reviewers for review.
application for the referral of a decision to a review panel may only be made on
the grounds that the decision was incorrect
in a material respect.
President is to refer the application to a panel of at least 2 merit reviewers,
but only if the President is satisfied that
there is reasonable cause to suspect
that the decision determining the
review was incorrect in a material respect having regard to the particulars set
application.
review panel may confirm the decision of the single merit reviewer, or set aside
the decision and make a decision in substitution
for the decision the review
panel set aside.
(5) Section 7.14 (Effect of merit review decision) applies to any new
decision made by a review panel under this section.
(6) An application under this section must be made within 28 days after the
parties to the merit
review were issued with a certificate referred to in section 7.13(4) as to the
merit reviewer’s determination.
Attachment 2 of Submissions
from Claimant.
IDR Certificate
page 2, [5]
Application w Supporting Documents Rachel Jane Deering
R1-Insurer’s Submissions-Rachel
Submissions from
Claimant, Attachment 1[2b], [8a]; Rachel Deering-Application for Review [11],
[14‑–15]; AD1
Cessation of weekly payments to injured persons
most at fault or with minor injuries after 26 weeks
(1) An injured
person is not entitled to weekly payments of statutory benefits under this
Division for any period of loss of earnings
or earning capacity that occurs more
than 26 weeks after the motor accident concerned
(b) the person’s only injuries resulting from
the motor accident were minor injuries.
Submissions from the
Deering-Application for
R1-Insurer’s
Submissions.
_Rachel Deering –
Application for Review-Additional
Submissions-unlocked.
Review of merit review decision by review
(1) A claimant or an insurer may apply to the President to
refer a decision of a single merit reviewer determining a merit review
application to a review panel of merit reviewers for review.
application for the referral of a decision to a review panel may only be made on
the grounds that the decision was incorrect
in a material respect.
The President is to refer the application to a panel of at least 2 merit
reviewers, but only if the President is satisfied that
there is reasonable cause
to suspect that the decision determining the review was incorrect in a material
respect having regard to
the particulars set out in the
application.
(4) The review panel may confirm the decision of the
single merit reviewer, or set aside the decision and make a decision in
substitution
for the decision the review panel set aside.
(5) Section
7.14 (Effect of merit review decision) applies to any new decision made by a
review panel under this section.
(6) An application under this section
must be made within 28 days after the parties to the merit review were issued
with a certificate
referred to in section 7.13(4) as to the merit
reviewer’s determination.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter