URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v Pacific Tissue Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 13 (19 September 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v Pacific Tissue Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 13
Hearing Date(s):
11 September 2025
Date of Orders:
19 September 2025
Decision Date:
19 September 2025
Paingakulam J
(1) I convict Pacific Tissue Pty Ltd of the offence as charged.
impose a fine of $150,000.
(3) Pacific Tissue Pty Ltd is to pay the
prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings in the agreed sum of $35,000.
Pursuant to s 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be paid to the
prosecutor.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — work health and safety — offences —
category 2 — worker’s hand crushed by machinery —
mechanisms designed to protect workers bypassed to achieve productivity gains
— worker not provided with copies of safety
documents — no
verification undertaken to ensure worker understood manual — no risk
assessment undertaken — guilty
plea — upper mid-range of objective
seriousness
SENTENCING — relevant factors on sentence —
objective seriousness — aggravating factors — mitigating factors
— deterrence — specific deterrence necessary despite the fact that
the pleaded risk giving rise to the offence has been
eliminated —
appropriate penalty
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety
Regulation 2017
Cases Cited:
Baumer v The Queen (1988) 166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Capral Aluminium Ltd v WorkCover Authority of New South
Wales (2000) 49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
Mahdi Jahandideh v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA 178
Markarian v The Queen (2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
Nash v Silver
City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd; Attorney General for New South Wales v Silver City
Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCCA
R v Borkowski
[2009] NSWCCA 102
v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
R v Thomson; R v Houlton
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
R v Wilkinson (No 5)
[2009] NSWSC
R v Youkhana
[2004] NSWCCA 412
SafeWork NSW v Hibernian Contracting
[2025] NSWIC 4
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
v The Queen (No 2) (1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Pacific Tissue Pty Ltd (Offender)
Representation:
M Scott (Prosecutor)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Holman Webb
Lawyers (Offender)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Tissue Pty Ltd (Pacific Tissue) manufactures paper products including hand
towels and toilet paper at a premises located in
St Peters, New South Wales (the
premises). In early 2023, it did so using an Ultra-Grande Compact Machine
(Ultra-Grande) which carried
out multiple processes, including unwinding,
embossing, perforating, rewinding, tail sealing, cutting and packaging. On 8
March 2023,
Ms Nixja Viscalya was undertaking work on the Ultra-Grande’s
Rewinder when her left hand was pulled into the roller and crushed.
sustained serious injuries to her left hand as a result of the incident.
Tissue appeared for sentence after pleading guilty to an offence that as a
person who had a work, health and safety duty pursuant
Health and Safety Act 2011
) it failed to comply with
that duty and thereby exposed Ms Nixja Viscalya to a risk of death or serious
injury contrary to s 32 of
risk particularised at paragraph 9 of Annexure A to the Summons is as
“The risk was the risk of workers, in particular Ms Viscalya, suffering
serious injury or death as a result of coming into
the Rewinder, in circumstances where guarding of the rewinder has been bypassed
and is ineffective,
whilst performing work at the premises.”
maximum penalty for this offence is a fine of 17,315 penalty units
($1,860,843).
prosecutor tendered an Agreed Statement of Facts. I have taken this document
into account in coming to an appropriate sentence.
What follows is a brief
summary of the facts relevant to the offence to permit an understanding of the
sentence imposed.
the time of the incident, Pacific Tissue employed approximately nine workers at
the premises. Those workers included the sole director
and secretary of Pacific
Tissue, Mr Robert Little, and Mr Sijith Poolakkil, the site supervisor.
employed was Ms Nixja Viscalya, a factory worker and machine operator. She began
working for Pacific Tissue in May 2022 as a
packer. She commenced working as a
machine operator just four weeks prior to the incident. Ms Viscalya was in
Australia on a student
visa and her proficiency in understanding written English
Ultra-Grande consisted of a series of machines in a production line, including a
machine known as the Rewinder. The Rewinder consisted
of approximately 10
exposed rotating rollers and was designed to convert large rolls of paper into
small toilet rolls.
Ultra-Grande, including the Rewinder, was surrounded by perimeter safety fencing
which included three access gates. Gate 3 provided
access to the Rewinder. Each
of the access gates was fitted with an interlock device to prevent workers from
accessing the machines
whilst they were operating. However, at the time of the
incident, all of the access gates, including Gate 3, were fitted with actuators
which bypassed the interlock devices. This meant that workers could open the
access gates and enter the fenced area while the machines
were operating.
Human Machine Interface (HMI) was the control panel for the Rewinder. It was
located within the perimeter safety fencing. As a
result, workers needed to
reach over the top of the access gate to access the machine controls. The
distance from Gate 3 to the operational
controls was at least 847 millimetres.
The HMI was set at 90 degrees to the gate with no possibility of adjusting the
The incident
the morning of 8 March 2023, Ms Viscalya was directed by her supervisor Mr
Poolakkil to undertake work on the Rewinder. This involved
producing 2ply toilet
rolls, a continuation of the product line from the previous day. Ms Viscalya was
also directed to supervise
a new employee who was undertaking packing work
approximately 10:29am, Ms Viscalya was working alone within the perimeter safety
fencing of the Rewinder when she noticed a spot
of glue on one of the exposed
rollers. Concerned that the glue might cause the machine to jam, she approached
the exposed rollers
and attempted to remove it. As she reached out to pinch off
the glue with her fingers, her left hand was pulled into the roller and
Viscalya was unable to release her hand from the roller and attempted to press
the emergency stop button located on the left-hand
side of the machine. This
required her to reach her right hand approximately 270 degrees around her body,
which took some time. It
also necessitated her withdrawing her left hand from
the roller which was both difficult and very painful.
Poolakkil arrived at the Rewinder moments later, having heard Ms
Viscalya’s screams. Mr Poolakkil immediately isolated the
power and opened
the electrical cabinet at the end of machine, cutting the cable drive to the
roller which had trapped Ms Viscalya’s
services were called to the premises. It took approximately one and a half hours
to free Ms Viscalya’s hand from the
Rewinder with the assistance of NSW
Police Rescue.
Viscalya was taken by ambulance to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital where she
underwent an emergency surgery to treat a crush avulsion
injury (degloving) to
her left hand. Between 10 March 2023 and 22 March 2023, Ms Viscalya underwent
four further surgeries. She was
discharged from hospital on 3 April 2023.
the incident, Ms Viscalya continues to suffer from post-traumatic stress
disorder. She attends a weekly consultation with
both a psychologist and a hand
therapist and a fortnightly consultation with an exercise physiologist. As of 8
November 2024, she
had not returned to work.
Legal obligations
and guidance material
Ultra-Grande was “plant” for the purpose of cl 203 of the
Health and Safety Regulation 2017
(NSW) (WHS Regulation). Accordingly, Pacific
Tissue was required to manage risks to health and safety arising from its
In particular, the guarding requirements set out in cl
208(2)–(3) of the WHS Regulation include making the bypassing or disabling
of the guarding, whether deliberately or by accident, as difficult as is
reasonably practicable. They also include ensuring that
any operator’s
controls are located so as to be readily and conveniently operated by each
person using the plant.
was also a significant amount of industry guidance material available to Pacific
Tissue. The SafeWork NSW Code of Practice,
“Managing the Risks of Plant in
the Workplace” dated December 2022 deals with guarding of machinery and
outlines the
guarding hierarchy. At Part 4.1, it provides that interlocked
guards should “remain locked whilst the plant is in operation”
if it is unlocked, it should “stop the operation of the machine when
“Guide to Machine Safety, SafeWork NSW” provides information to help
businesses to manage the risks involved with
using plant in the workplace.
Relevantly, it states that where a fixed guard is removed or an interlock is
defeated, this is usually
because of the need for frequent access to the guarded
area to rectify a problem. The guide recommends implementing a long-term
to the problem.
Australia Standard 4021.1601:2014, “Safety of Machinery: Design Controls,
Interlocks and Guarding – Guarding –
General Requirements for the
Design and Construction of Fixed and Movable Guards” specifies the general
requirements for the
design and construction of guards primarily to protect
persons from mechanical hazards. Relevantly, the standard requires instructions
to be provided directing the user to the correct operation of the guards and
their interlocks. It also requires warnings against
reasonably foreseeable
Australia Standard 4024.1201:2014, “General Principles for Design –
Risk Assessment and Risk Reduction” highlights
the importance of
conducting a risk assessment in relation to machinery. It requires risk
estimation to consider the possibility
of defeating or circumventing protective
measures and the incentive to do so. It also requires risk estimation to
consider the need
to maintain the protective measures in the condition necessary
to provide the necessary protection.
Systems of work prior to
the incident
the time of the incident, Pacific Tissue had the following systems of work in
(1) Guarding of the Rewinder, including perimeter fencing and interlocking
devices fitted to access gates within the fencing. However,
as noted, this
system had been disabled by the overriding of the interlocking devices.
(2) A Safe Work Procedure (SWP) titled “Paper Converting Machine 400 Sheet
Line (Log Saw & Rewinder)”. The document
was undated and was generic
in that it went across several machines. Its sole reference to safety was a
requirement to wait for machine
parts to stop moving before making adjustments
or reloading.
(3) A Safe Operating Procedure (SOP) for the Rewinder titled “Feeding
Paper from New Roll or Roll Breaks”. This document
was undated and
contained minimal safety information, but it did state that workers should not
have any contact with the Rewinder’s
moving parts.
Visacalya was provided with training which comprised of verbal instruction and
task observation over a three-month period prior
to being assessed as competent.
During this training, she was provided with a copy of the HMI manual. However,
the manual did not
contain information addressing the safe use of the Rewinder
such as information relating to hazards, risks and emergencies. No verification
was undertaken to determine whether Ms Viscalya, whose first language was not
English, understood the document. Ms Viscalya was not
provided with any
information or training in relation to the risks or hazards associated with
operating the Rewinder whilst the interlocking
devices to the access gates had
been overridden. She was also not provided with copies of the SOP and SWP
referred to above.
Tissue had not conducted any risk assessment to address the hazards of working
in an environment where the machinery guard
system had effectively been
overridden. Nor were there any controls in place to ensure that inexperienced
workers such as Ms Viscalya
were actively supervised when using the
Systems of work after the incident
the incident, Pacific Tissue decommissioned and scrapped the Ultra-Grande, which
included the Rewinder. Extra training sessions
were provided to staff which
focussed on the importance of interlocks.
Offender’s case
on sentence
Tissue relied on two affidavits of Robert James Little, Chief Executive Officer
and sole director of Pacific Tissue, sworn
29 August 2025 and 10 September 2025.
The following is a summary of his evidence, in addition to matters already set
out in the Agreed
Statement of Facts.
Little started Pacific Tissue in 2001 and has been in the paper manufacturing
and distribution industry since this time. He holds
a Bachelor of Business from
the University of Southern Queensland. He also holds a forklift licence. Prior
to 2001, Mr Little was
involved in other business ventures, including setting up
a distribution company in the mid-nineties.
Expression of
remorse and contrition
Little stated that Pacific Tissue acknowledges and deeply regrets the incident
that occurred on 8 March 2023, and the serious injury
sustained by Ms Viscalya
as a result. On behalf of Pacific Tissue, Mr Little accepted responsibility for
the failures giving rise
to the risk that resulted in Ms Viscalya’s
injury. He also acknowledged with deep regret the significant impact of the
on Ms Viscalya, her family and the workers and employees of Pacific
Tissue. Mr Little apologised unreservedly to Ms Viscalya, her
family, other
affected workers and the Court.
Little reached out to Ms Viscalya multiple times via text message offering
support. He also offered her an administrative role
during her recovery. Ms
Viscalya has not returned to work since the incident.
Pacific Tissue
Tissue operates out of a warehouse in Alexandria and specialises in the
production and packing of tissue paper products, including
toilet paper and
paper towel products. At the time of the incident, Pacific Tissue had six
operating lines producing various toilet
paper and hand towel products.
addition to Mr Little, Pacific Tissue currently employees five full-time
workers, including Ms Viscalya. Pacific Tissue’s
workforce has reduced
since the incident due to falling demand for its product and the high natural
employment attrition rate in
the manufacturing industry. Mr Little has always
paid himself last to ensure his employees are paid and there are
occasions where he doesn’t pay himself due to the
financial position of Pacific Tissue.
March 2023, Pacific Tissue entered into a contract for the supply of tissue
products that was anticipated to run for three years
and be worth $1.5 million.
However, this contract ended after only one year. Despite Mr Little’s
efforts to source alternative
contracts, Pacific Tissue currently has no major
contracts in place, and the company’s business has been adversely affected
over the previous eight years, particularly by competition from Chinese based
suppliers whose products are significantly cheaper.
Little’s evidence included the following details about Pacific
Tissue’s manufacturing operations at [23]–[29]:
“[23] In or around March 2023, following the Incident, I made the decision
to cease production of tissue paper roll products.
Since that time, Pacific
Tissue has ceased operating three production lines.
[24] Pacific Tissue currently operates three production lines, all producing
folded tissue products. Two of these lines manufacture
folded paper towels for
use in commercial washrooms, and the third produced folded tissue for similar
[25] Given the current financial position, operating costs and competition from
cheaper imports (particularly from China), Pacific
Tissue can only continue
operating at its preset capacity for a limited time, maybe 6-12 months. Based on
my current assessment of
Pacific Tissue, I anticipate reviewing the
company’s profitability and future financial outlook seriously in December
[26] It is my current intention to shut down one of the folded towel production
lines by the end of 2025 which will result in the
company operating only two
production lines moving forward.
[27] Whether Pacific Tissue will continue operating into 2026 will depend on
whether new work or another contract materialises.
[28] To date, no employees have been made redundant as a result of the contract
ending, however, due to uncertainties, I can’t
rule out the possibility of
redundancies in the future.
[29] Labour remains the company’s largest single outgoing cost, and
managing these expenses is a key factor in Pacific Tissue’s
financial planning. In the 2023/2024 financial year, employment costs made up
$535,282.00 (or approximately 33.7%) of Pacific
Tissue’s business
Little also gave evidence that the destruction of the Ultra-Grande meant that
Pacific Tissue ceased the production of toilet paper
in Australia. However, in
his second affidavit, Mr Little corrected that evidence and stated that he
anticipated that this would
occur later this year and that Pacific Tissue
continues to produce a “minimal amount” of folded toilet paper
whilst it has the required materials.
The injured
Little and Mr Poolakkil commenced structured on-the-job training with Ms
Viscalya on the Rewinder in November 2022. During this
period, Mr Little
personally spoke with Ms Viscalya on several occasions in relation to the
contents of the operating manual and
confirmed her understanding. Mr Little
states that she was able to competently answer questions regarding the
machine’s operation.
3 February 2023, Ms Viscalya was formally promoted to the position of machine
operator and her training on the Rewinder continued
following this promotion
under the supervision of Mr Poolakkil.
Systems of work prior to
the incident
Little gave evidence of the following systems of work in place at the time of
the incident, in addition to those set out in the
Agreed Statement of
(1) Safety policies which were communicated to all team members during their
induction and through ongoing certification training.
These policies covered the
operation of machinery, isolating and shutting down equipment prior to any
repairs, refraining from operating
machinery when unwell, mobile phone
restrictions, forklift safety, general awareness and personal requirements for
personal protective
equipment (PPE).
(2) A factory supervisor in Mr Poolakkil, who had held the role for more than
eight years. He was a qualified mechanical engineer
whose responsibilities
included staff supervision, training, advising and machine maintenance and
repair. Mr Poolakkil actively monitored
production, ensured compliance with
safety policies and procedures and provided supervision and guidance to workers.
(3) All new employees underwent an induction upon commencing employment. The
induction included an introduction to the team, completion
of relevant
employment and safety paperwork, a walkthrough of workplace safety procedures,
distribution of required PPE and a guided
tour of the workplace. New employees
would then be paired with an experienced team member for initial training
involving hands-on
training specific to the tasks they would be performing. New
workers typically began as packers and as their skills developed, they
progressed to machine operator training conducted under a buddy system until
they were assessed as competent.
(4) A strict policy which was communicated to all workers prohibiting the use of
mobile phones on the factory floor. Workers were
further required to wear
high-visibility vests, closed in shoes and ear plugs which were all provided by
Pacific Tissue. Further,
face masks and hair nets were made available if desired
by workers.
(5) Mr Little and Mr Poolakkil routinely conducted walkthroughs of the factory
floor and engaged with staff to identify and correct
hazards. They took the
opportunity to educate team members on the types of risks present and the
immediate corrective actions required.
(6) Maintenance checklists on the Rewinder were completed monthly by Mr
Poolakkil. In the month prior to the incident, the following
maintenance items
were recorded and addressed:
(a) replacing a missing log support;
(b) adjusting the tension of the HTD belt on the operator’s side;
(c) removing paper dust build-up from the ply using compressed air and a wire
(d) lubricating the perforation roll and the felts of the ply bond;
(e) clearing blocked holes on the vacuum roller using compressed air and a pin
(f) adjusting the tension of the HTD drive belt; and
(g) removing the build-up of paper dust on the grinding wheel and regrinding the
Systems of work after the incident
Little stated that after the incident, Pacific Tissue introduced enhanced safety
protocols, increased staff training and conducted
regular machine inspections
across all areas of its operations. All machinery was reviewed for safety
compliance, with modifications
or replacements being carried out as required.
Improvements were made to staff inductions, risk assessments and daily pre-start
new policies and procedures implemented by Pacific Tissue in the aftermath of
the incident were as follows:
(1) Despatch Procedures in or around June 2023;
(2) General Workplace Safety Policy in or around June 2023;
(3) Quality, Environmental and OHS System on or around 31 August 2023;
(4) Integrated Management System Hazard Identification Form on or around 31
August 2023;
(5) Induction Procedure and Induction Checklist on or around 12 October 2023;
(6) First Aid Plan on or around 30 October 2023;
(7) Emergency Plan on or around 8 November 2023;
(8) Training Record Form on or around 24 November 2023; and
(9) Cleaning Procedure on or around 7 December 2023.
Little stated that the company remains committed to ensuring that no employee is
exposed to unsafe machinery or working
conditions.
Consideration
have had regard to the objects of the
set out in s 3 and the
purposes of sentencing set out in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
have taken into account the maximum penalty for this offence:
Markarian v The
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25 at [31] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Callinan JJ (
Evidence of Mr
were a number of difficulties with Mr Little’s evidence. Firstly, the
evidence that he personally spoke with Ms Viscalya
on several occasions in
relation to the contents of the Rewinder operating manual and confirmed her
understanding of it contradicts
the evidence contained in the Agreed Statement
of Facts summarised at [
] above, and I reject it.
Mr Little gives evidence that Pacific Tissue entered into a three-year contract
in March 2023 which ended after a year (which
coincides with the destruction of
the Ultra-Grande in March 2024) and that, after that contract had ended, Mr
Little maintained the
production lines in the hope of attracting alternate
sources of work. Mr Little also gives evidence that he made a decision following
the incident in March 2023 to decommission the Ultra-Grande to eliminate the
risk of a similar incident occurring in the future.
Mr Little expressly states
that “[i]n or around March 2023, following the incident, I made the
decision to cease production
of tissue paper roll products”. It is
difficult to reconcile these aspects of Mr Little’s evidence.
is also difficult to discern how much of the modification of Pacific
Tissue’s business (and, in particular, the decision
to decommission the
Ultra-Grande) is a consequence of the already difficult financial context in
which it was operating and how much
was a response to the incident. In that
regard, I note the evidence that the Ultra-Grande continued to operate for a
further 12 months
after the incident. There is no evidence that modifications
were made to it during that time, for example, repositioning the HMI
could be operated from outside the safety perimeter. Contributing to this
difficulty is the fact that, as noted above,
Mr Little initially gave evidence
that Pacific Tissue ceased the production of toilet paper in Australia as a
consequence of the
destruction of the Ultra-Grande, but later revised that
evidence and accepted that it would make folded toilet paper until the
supplies of the necessary materials were exhausted. However, I
accept that the scope of Pacific Tissue’s business has reduced
time of the incident.
Objective seriousness
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
485–6, 490–1 and 496. At common law, the term “objective
circumstances” was used to describe the
circumstances of a crime. The
gravity of the offence was assessed by reference to its objective circumstances:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
task requires the Court to consider where the conduct of Pacific Tissue falls in
the range of conduct covered by the offence:
Baumer v The Queen
166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67 at 57. As Whealy JA said in
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
(Hulme and Harrison JJ agreeing at
[75]–[76]):
“This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate range of
sentences available which will reflect the objective seriousness
of the offence
committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to the
criminality of the offender will lie.”
objective seriousness of an offence is to be determined by reference to the
nature of the offending without reference to matters
personal to a particular
offender or class of offenders:
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death is a factor relative
to the gravity of the offence:
Capral Aluminium Ltd v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
). The question of
foreseeability of the risk is to be determined objectively.
Court arrives at the appropriate sentence through a process of
“instinctive synthesis” in which the sentencing judge
identifies all
the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discusses their significance and
then makes a value judgment as to
the appropriate sentence given those factors:
Court of Criminal Appeal examined the sentencing process with regard to the
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
General for New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
NSWCCA 96. Under the heading “Assessment of Risk”, Basten J
“[34] The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the
proposition that ‘[g]reater culpability attaches to the
failure to guard
against an event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the
occurrence of which is extremely unlikely’.
However, the truth of that
proposition depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential
consequences of the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the
availability of steps to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether
such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative
culpability depends on assessment of all those factors.”
at [42] his Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step‑by‑step
assessment of the various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall
evaluation of various factors, which may pull in different
directions.
Culpability in this case is reasonably high because, even if the pressure event
of the force which occurred might not
be expected to occur often, the
seriousness of the foreseeable resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be
taken to avoid it, which
were not even assessed, were straightforward and
involved only minor inconvenience and little, if any, costs.”
[53] his Honour dealt with the proper approach to considering the objective
seriousness of offences under the
“ ... It is important to note that the risk to be assessed is not the risk
of the consequence, to the extent that a worker
is in fact injured, but is the
risk arising from the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the
injury occurring.
To discount the seriousness of the risk by reference to the
unlikelihood of injury resulting is apt to lead to error. The conduct
question is the failure to respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more serious the potential injuries,
whether or not they are
likely to materialise. The objective seriousness of the conduct will also be
affected by the ease with which
mitigating steps could have been taken.”
parties submitted that this offence falls within the mid-range of objective
seriousness. In asking the Court to make that assessment,
the prosecutor pointed
to the following factors:
(1) The general risks of a worker having part of their body crushed or injured
by the exposed moving parts of an industrial machine
are well-known and
(2) The WHS Regulation includes regulations, referred to at [
] above, which are
specifically directed towards preventing persons working around guarded plant or
machinery from coming into contact
with moving parts of the plant or machine. In
addition, the Code of Practice, Standards and Guide referred to in the Agreed
of Facts, and which were available to Pacific Tissue at the time of
the incident, existed to assist companies engaged in manufacturing
operations to
assess and overcome relevant risks.
(3) The central issue in this matter is that Pacific Tissue had erected a
guarding fence around the Ultra-Grande, with gates to allow
for necessary access
and interlocking devices placed on those gates so that when they open the
machine would stop operating. However,
the company bypassed these interlocking
(4) The layout of the control panel for the Rewinder was such that a person of
small stature would have great difficulty reaching
the HMI and, even if they
could, the panel itself was turned at 90 degrees and was unable to be adjusted.
This meant that workers
such as Ms Viscalya needed to be inside Gate 3 to
operate the Rewinder.
Tissue accepted that the risk giving rise to the offence was foreseeable and
sought to demonstrate that it had made some endeavours
to mitigate that risk. In
that regard, it pointed to the “Safe Work Procedure –
Machine/Plant/Process: Paper Converting
Machine 400 Sheet Line (Logsaw &
Rewinder)” in place at the time of the incident, which identified the risk
coming into contact with moving machinery parts. This document also
provided control measures which included ensuring that hands,
hair, clothing and
jewellery were kept away from the machine and waiting for machine parts to stop
moving before adjusting or reloading.
Pacific Tissue also pointed to an SOP
“Rewinder – Feeding Paper from New Roll or Roll Breaks”; the
appointment
of a factory supervisor in Mr Poolakkil; an induction process for
new workers which covered policies concerning the operation of
machinery; a
buddy system which paired new workers with more experienced workers until they
were assessed a competent to work independently;
provision of personal
protective equipment; guarding around the perimeter of the Ultra-Grande;
technical and operating manuals for
the Ultra-Grande and, finally, a rewinder
maintenance checklist.
Tissue accepted that the likelihood of the risk materialising in Ms
Viscalya’s case was increased by the fact that she
couldn’t reach
the HMI from outside the perimeter gate surrounding the Rewinder. However, it
also pointed to the fact that
the Ultra-Grande had been operated without
incident by 14 different employees since its commissioning in 2009 until the
its plea of guilty, Pacific Tissue accepts that it could have taken the
following reasonably practicable steps to eliminate or
at least minimise the
reasonably foreseeable risk:
“(a) Undertaking a risk assessment in relation to the
work being done using the Rewinder to identify the hazards that could
to the risks to health and safety, including but not limited to:
(i) Assessing the risk of the Rewinder being operated while the
interlocking devices on the access gate had been bypassed.
(ii) Assessing the risk of the Rewinder’s control panel,
the Human Machine Interface (HMI), being positioned within the Rewinder’s
isolating fence and the risk associated with workers entering the access gate in
order to access and/or use the HMI;
(b) Maintaining adequate guarding of the Rewinder by:
(i) Requiring that interlock devices be fitted and maintained,
at all times, on all access gates to the Ultra-Grande, including
the Rewinder,
with the exception of when maintenance is being undertaken by authorised
workers; and
(ii) Restricting access to any interlock by-pass keys including
by arranging for all by-pass keys to be stored in a secured and
location, only accessible by maintenance workers;
(c) Re-positioning the HMI to a location outside the safety
fencing to allow workers to safely access/use the control panel, as
(d) Developing and enforcing an adequate safe work procedure or
a safe work method statement for using the Rewinder, including
prohibiting the
operation of the Rewinder when guarding or an interlocking barrier, such as
interlocking devices fitted to access
gates, was not in place;
(e) Providing workers, in particular Ms Viscalya, with adequate
instruction, information and training in the safe work procedures
or safe work
method statement for operating the Rewinder, having regard to their literacy
skills and, in Ms Viscalya’s case,
that she was not proficient in written
English; and/or
(f) Adequately supervising workers, in particular Ms Viscalya,
to ensure that they follow the safe work procedures or safe work
statement for operating the Rewinder, including to verify that no work is being
carried out while interlocks have been bypassed.”
Tissue accepts that these measures were straightforward and inexpensive to
implement, notwithstanding Mr Little’s evidence
that the Ultra-Grande
“could not easily be made compliant with current WHS standards, including
because of the cost of retrofitting
the machine” and that the
“primary reason” for ceasing to operate the Ultra-Grande line
included “the high
cost of upgrading safety systems”. Pacific Tissue
was well aware that measures had been taken to defeat the interlock system
it had in place to protect workers. The Agreed Statement of Facts records Mr
Poolakkil’s account that it was common knowledge
that bypass keys were
being used to override the interlocking device on the access gate where Ms
Viscalya was working, that the bypass
keys were always in place, that the
practice had been implemented since he began working at Pacific Tissue in 2010
and that he had
discussed it with Mr Little.
relation to the operation of the Rewinder, the practice was undoubtedly due to
the inability of workers such as Ms Viscalya to
operate the HMI from outside the
fenced perimeter. As submitted by the prosecutor, the provision of generalised
access to the restricted
area should never have been deemed an acceptable
solution to that problem.
addition, I note that there were three gates for which the interlock system had
been disabled, not just the one providing access
to the HMI. Such conduct
represents a deliberate disregard for the requirements of the WHS Regulation as
set out at [
Nonetheless, I accept that Pacific Tissue had made some attempt to address the
risk which arose from facilitating the access
of its workers to the machinery
while it was in operation.
Viscalya was 19 years old and had been assessed as capable of working
independently on the machines barely a month before the incident
Plainly, the dangers of the moving machinery parts had not been sufficiently
instilled in her before she was permitted
to work unsupervised in such a
context. Further, she was permitted to undertake work under those conditions
with no one in the immediate
vicinity to assist her when the incident did occur,
although Mr Poolakkil was in sufficient proximity to respond to her
potential consequences of the risk materialising included death. The serious
injuries suffered by Ms Viscalya were a manifestation
of the risk.
the above matters into account in the manner indicated, I find that the
objective seriousness of the offence falls within the
Aggravating factors
injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial: s
. In order for the aggravating factor to be established,
the Court must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the harm was greater
more deleterious than may ordinarily be expected for the subject offence:
[2004] NSWCCA 412
injuries sustained by Ms Viscalya, which required treatment in the form of
multiple surgeries, are set out in the Agreed Statement
of Facts. They have seen
her unable to return to work. In addition, the Agreed Statement of Facts records
that Ms Viscalya suffers
from post-traumatic stress disorder. The prosecutor
also relied on medical records to substantiate both the physical and mental
of the incident upon Ms Viscalya. The offence does not require an injury
to be sustained, but merely the creation of a risk of death
or serious injury. I
am satisfied that the injuries sustained by Ms Viscalya are sufficient to
establish the aggravating factor.
Mitigating factors
Tissue has no prior convictions: s 21A(3)(e)
Tissue is otherwise of good character: s 21A(3)(f)
Tissue has been operating since 2001, a period of more than 22 years without any
prior convictions at the time of the incident.
In his evidence, Mr Little set
out the manner in which the company has sought to support Ms Viscalya following
the incident, including
by offering her the opportunity to return to work in an
administrative role. Mr Little deposed to Pacific Tissue’s ethical
chain practices as demonstrated by its Forest Stewardship Council certification,
as well as its proven record of waste minimisation,
responsible resource use and
clean production methods. He also gave evidence of Pacific Tissue’s
collaboration with women’s
refuge Two Good for whom it acts as a
non-profit distributor.
that Pacific Tissue has operated for 22 years without incident, has taken
significant steps to reinforce its safety systems
in the wake of the incident
giving rise to these proceedings and has otherwise reduced the scope of its
business operations, I find
that it is unlikely to reoffend (s 21A(3)(g)
) and has good prospects of rehabilitation (s 21A(3)(h)
Tissue has provided evidence that it has accepted responsibility for its actions
and has acknowledged that its failures led
to the injury of Ms Viscalya. It has
also apologised unreservedly to both those persons affected by the incident and
the Court. I
have already made references to its endeavours in supporting Ms
Viscalya’s recovery. I am therefore satisfied that Pacific
shown remorse for the offence: s 21A(3)(i)
Tissue entered a plea of guilty on 4 August 2025 to the charge particularised in
the summons issued on 6 March 2025. The plea
of guilty was entered at the third
mention of proceedings. Pacific Tissue is entitled to a discount on penalty that
reflects the
utilitarian value of that early plea:
R v Thomson; R v
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
[2009] NSWCCA 102
. I accept the joint submission of the
parties that a discount of 25% is appropriate in the circumstances: ss 21A(3)(k)
Little gave unchallenged evidence that Pacific Tissue “at all times
assisted and fully cooperated” with the SafeWork
NSW investigation. He
deposed to the introduction of enhanced safety protocols, including the
introduction of 10 new policies and
procedures, increased staff training and
regular machine inspections across all areas of its operations. I am satisfied
with the decision of this Court in
SafeWork NSW v Hibernian
Contracting Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC 4
that the cooperation of
Pacific Tissue with the authorities is a matter which should afford it a modest
discount of the sentence
to be imposed upon it:
s 21A(3)(m)
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide for general deterrence
and reinforce to the manufacturing industry that
bypassing safety mechanisms
designed to protect workers from moving machinery to achieve productivity gains
is entirely unacceptable.
to specific deterrence, the Ultra-Grande has been decommissioned and destroyed.
However, the company is still engaged in paper
towel manufacturing. As such, the
prosecutor submitted that there is a role for specific deterrence in ensuring
that Pacific Tissue
assesses the risks involved, develops safe work methods to
address those risks and trains its workforce accordingly.
Tissue submitted that the need for specific deterrence in this case was
“close to nil” both because of the destruction
of the Ultra-Grande
and the restructure of its business so that it no longer produces rolled paper
products. In that regard, it relied
upon the evidence of Mr Little to the effect
that it has only two paper converting machines operating, the first of which
“a minimal amount of human intervention” and the second of
which is fully automated. In oral submissions, counsel for
Pacific Tissue placed
significant emphasis on the fact that the pleaded risk giving rise to the
offence set out at [
above, which concerned workers’ interaction with the Rewinder, had been
eliminated by Pacific Tissue’s subsequent actions.
accept that the cessation of the use of the Rewinder and the restructuring of
Pacific Tissue’s business such that it has only
one machine operator in
active employment both operate to mitigate the extent to which the sentence
imposed ought to reflect specific
deterrence. However, the offender’s
submission that the need for the sentence imposed to reflect specific deterrence
eliminated by the removal of the pleaded risk does not appear to be
supported by established authority. In
at [77], this Court held
that the relevance of specific deterrence in sentencing for work, health and
safety offences extends to an
employer’s obligations to its employees more
generally (emphasis added):
“In sentencing, a court may disregard the element of specific deterrence
if satisfied that the risk of re-offending is low
or non-existent. The court may
form such a view as a result of the rehabilitation of the offender:
(Court of Criminal Appeal, 19 December 1997, unreported) or because
the offender will not have the opportunity to commit a similar
offence in the
R v Macdonell
(Court of Criminal Appeal, 8 December 1995,
unreported).
However, we think it unlikely that the weight to be attached to
specific deterrence could be reduced to zero in case of offences under
At least where the offender continues to be an employer, risks to the safety of
its employees or contractors may exist or
be possible
. Breaches of the
duties imposed by the Act may occur both by commission and omission. Employers
are required to maintain constant
vigilance and take all practicable precautions
to ensure safety in the workplace. They must adopt an approach to safety which
and not merely re-active:
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales v
Atco Controls Pty Ltd
[1998] NSWIRComm 200
(1998) 82 IR 80
In view of the scope of
these obligations, in most cases it will be necessary to have regard to the need
to encourage a sufficient
level of diligence by the offender in the future
This is particularly so where the offender conducts a large enterprise which
involves inherent risks to safety: see
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
(Inspector Glass) v Kellogg (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWIRComm 53
Capacity to pay a fine
Court is required to have regard to
Fines Act 1996
before imposing a fine. An offender that seeks to have a fine reduced on the
basis of limited capacity to pay bears the evidentiary
onus of convincing the
Court that it should limit the amount of the fine. An offender’s capacity
to pay is relevant but not
Mahdi Jahandideh v The Queen
. A substantial fine may still be warranted due to the
seriousness of the offence and the need for general deterrence.
Little’s evidence concerning the financial viability of Pacific Tissue is
set out at [
]–[34] above. That evidence is plainly relevant
to Pacific Tissue’s capacity to pay a fine. Notwithstanding that evidence,
Pacific Tissue confirmed at hearing that it does not seek to have the sentence
moderated on the basis of its capacity to pay a fine
and I have proceeded
accordingly.
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of
Criminal Appeal recognised that a fine which may be crippling to a small
business may have virtually no impact on the
financial operations of a large
corporation and that the maximum penalty for the offence was
“undoubtedly” set having
regard to that circumstance. I accept that
Pacific Tissue is a small business and I have regard to that matter in
determining the
appropriate penalty.
appropriate fine is $200,000 which will be reduced by 25% to reflect the plea of
make the following orders:
(1) I convict Pacific Tissue Pty Ltd of the offence as charged.
(2) I impose a fine of $150,000.
(3) Pacific Tissue Pty Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the
proceedings in the agreed sum of $35,000.
(4) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be
paid to the prosecutor.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (315 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter