URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1092.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Horner v Corrective Services NSW [2025] NSWIRComm 1092 (22 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Horner v Corrective Services NSW
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1092
Hearing Date(s):
21 and 22 October 2025
Date of Orders:
22 October 2025
Decision Date:
22 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner O’Sullivan
(1) The applicant is to be reinstated to his former
position, pursuant to sub-section 89(1) of the
Industrial Relations Act
(2) Pursuant to sub-section 89(2) of the
Relations Act 1996
, the respondent is to pay the applicant any amount of loss,
remuneration, dating from the date of dismissal to his reinstatement,
other income received.
(3) Pursuant to sub-section 89(4) of
Industrial Relations Act 1996
, an order for continuity of employment.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Termination — Statutory rights
— Unfair dismissal – Granting of relief pursuant
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Cases Cited:
Burge v NSW BHP Steel Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWIRComm 117
Byrne v Australian
Airlines Ltd [1995] HCA 24
Dumas v Industrial Relations Secretary (on behalf
of Department of Communities and Justice)
[2019] NSWIRComm 1071
Neat Holdings
Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 110 ALR
Pastrycooks Employees, Biscuit Makers Employees & Flour and Sugar
Goods Workers Union (NSW) v Gartrell White (No. 3)
(1990) 35 IR 70
Commissioner of Police
[2001] NSWIRComm 226
Wang v Crestell Industries Pty
(1997) 73 IR 454
Western Suburbs District Ambulance Committee v
[1957] AR (NSW) 273
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Allan Horner (Applicant)
Corrective Services NSW (Respondent)
Representation:
Ms A Perigo (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Jaloussis of McNally Jones Staff Lawyers (Applicant)
Department of
Communities and Justice (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/248976
Publication Restriction:
Orders were made on 24 October 2025.
This decision has been edited
to comply with these restrictions.
EX TEMPORE DECISION
decision concerns an application for relief from an unfair dismissal of Mr Allan
Horner (the applicant) who commenced employment
with Corrective Services NSW
(the respondent) on 4 December 2017 and was dismissed by way of correspondence
dated 11 June 2025.
background to the application is set out in the following statement of agreed
facts filed by the parties:
“1. The Applicant was employed as a First-Class
Correctional Officer at the Shortland Correctional Centre.
2. The Applicant had never been subject to disciplinary action
in the course of his employment prior to the incident relied upon
to terminate
3. The Applicant had commenced employment with Corrective
Services NSW on 4 December 2017.
4. On 12 November 2024, the Applicant was performing duties in
the Immediate Action Team (IAT).
5. On 12 November 2024, an incident occurred at the Shortland
Correctional Centre involving the Applicant and a number of other
correctional
officers performing duties in the IAT (the incident).
6. Following the incident, the Applicant and the other members
of the IAT completed their incident/witness reports.
7. On 4 December 2024, the Applicant was notified of
allegations of misconduct arising from the incident on 12 November 2024.
8. The Applicant was represented by the Public Service
Association of NSW (the PSA) throughout the disciplinary process.
9. On 6 December 2025, the PSA sought access to any video
footage of the incident to assist the Applicant in responding to the
allegations.
10. On 6 January 2025, the Respondent provided the PSA with the
video footage of the incident.
11. The PSA provided the Applicant's response to the
allegations in a letter dated 6 February 2025.
12. By letter dated 17 April 2025, the decision maker advised
the Applicant that:
(a) he had formed the view that the Applicant had engaged in
misconduct in that;
(i) on 12 November 2024, the Applicant has used inappropriate
force against Inmate X. This conduct was aggravated and disproportionate
that Inmate X was restrained (finding one); and
(ii) on 12 November 2024, the Applicant had failed to provide
accurate information in an incident/witness report dated 12 November
(finding three).
(b) he proposed to terminate the Applicant's employment with an
opportunity to resign; and
(c) The Applicant had the opportunity to make a submission in
respect of the proposed outcome or seek an interview with him.
13. The allegation of the Applicant not affording the inmate
proper medical care after receiving advice from Justice Health officials
should attend hospital for injuries sustained during a use of force incident was
not sustained.
14. On 5 May 2025, following another request from the PSA, the
Respondent provided the PSA with the video footage of the incident.
15. The PSA provided the Applicant's response to the proposed
outcome in a letter dated 8 May 2025. The Applicant denied the allegation
he intentionally kneed the inmate in the face.
16. The decision maker considered the Applicant's response. By
letter dated 11 June 2025, the Applicant was advised that the decision
final decision was the sanction of termination of employment with the
opportunity to resign.
17. As the Applicant did not resign, his employment was
terminated on 24 June 2025.”
terms of the approach that I have taken with regards to determining this
application, this is set out as follows.
guiding consideration in relation to an application made pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW), is for the Commission to determine
whether the dismissal was harsh, unreasonable or unjust:
Burge v NSW BHP
Steel Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWIRComm 117.
leading authority as to what constitutes harsh, unreasonable or unjust is
contained in the following passage from the joint judgement
of McHugh and Gummow
Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd
(1995) 185 CLR 410 at
“It may be that the termination is harsh but not unjust or unreasonable,
unjust but not harsh or unreasonable, or unreasonable
but not harsh or unjust.
In many cases the concepts will overlap. Thus, the one termination of employment
may be unjust because the
employee was not guilty of the misconduct on which the
employer acted, may be unreasonable because it was decided upon inferences
could not reasonably have been drawn from the material before the employer, and
may be harsh in its consequences for the personal
and economic situation of the
employee or because it is disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct in
respect of which the
employer acted.”
is the applicant who bears the onus to prove whether the dismissal was harsh,
unreasonable or unjust:
Western Suburbs District Ambulance Committee v
[1957] AR (NSW) 273.
as the Dismissal is based on an allegation of misconduct, it is for the
respondent to establish that the alleged misconduct
in fact occurred:
Crestell Industries Pty Ltd
(1997) 73 IR 454
Pastrycooks
Employees, Biscuit Makers Employees & Flour and Sugar Goods Workers Union
(NSW) v Gartrell White (No. 3)
(1990) 35 IR 70
Commissioner of Police
[2001] NSWIRComm 226
. It is, therefore, for
the respondent to establish first, on the balance of probabilities having regard
to the seriousness of the
allegations, the matters alleged against the applicant
that it found substantiated:
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 110 ALR 449
the event that the Commission decides that the challenged dismissal was unfair
for the purposes of
of the Act, the approach to considering whether
reinstatement as a remedy under
of the Act is conveniently summarised in
the following passages from the Full
Bench in Dumas v Industrial Relations
Secretary (on behalf of Department of Communities and Justice )
NSWIRComm 1071:
“[24] The architecture of
of the Act creates a hierarchy of
remedy for unfair dismissals, with reinstatement being the primary remedy (along
with relief relating
to continuity of service and compensation for lost
remuneration before the reinstatement is given effect): Burge v NSW BHP Steel
[2001] NSWIRComm 117
; Leeds and Northup Australia Pty Limited v
(1997) 46 IR 11
[25] By the inclusion of the word “may” in
section 89(1)
legislature conferred a discretion upon the Commission to order the remedy of
reinstatement. The authorities have consistently
affirmed that the decision
whether to reinstate an employee unfairly dismissed is discretionary in nature:
see for example, Burge
at [34]; Perkins at page 188.
[26] In deciding whether to exercise its discretion to reinstate an employee,
the Commission must consider whether it is impracticable
to reinstate the
employee. As stated above, the Appellant argued that the word
“impracticable” means “practically
impossible”.”
Full Bench went on to find that the applicant’s argument about
“practically impossible” was not one that it
firstly, to the misconduct alleged by the respondent of the applicant for which
the respondent bears the onus, in satisfying
the Commission, is set out in the
reasons for dismissal dated 11 June 2025 as set out below:
“1. On 12 November 2024, First Class Correctional Officer (FCCO) Allan
Horner of the Shortland Correctional Centre (SCC) used
inappropriate force
against inmate X. This conduct was aggravated and disproportionate given that
inmate X was restrained.
This conduct is contrary to
subsection 7
Integrity (a) – (d) Trust (b)
Service (a) – (d), Accountability (b) – (d) of the
Government Sector
Employment Act 2013
, paragraph 2 of chapter 13.7 (Use of force) of the
Department of Communities and Justice Custodial Operations Policy and
Procedures,
clause 24 (Professional Conduct) of the Crown Employees
(Correctional Officers, Department of Justice – Corrective Services
Award, and paragraphs 4, 5.1, 6, 7, and 18.3 of the Department of Communities
and Justice’s Code of Ethical Conduct.
2. On 12 November 2024, FCCO Allan Horner of the SCC failed to provide accurate
information in an incident/witness report dated 12
November 2024. This conduct
is contrary to
subsection 7
Integrity (a) – (d), Trust (b) and (d),
Service (a), (b) and (d) and Accountability (b) and (c) of the
Government Sector
Employment Act 2013
, clause 24 (Professional Conduct) of the Crown Employees
(Correctional Officers, Department of Justice – Corrective Services
Award, clause 251 of the
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Regulation 2014
and paragraphs 4, 5.1, 6, 8.11, and 18.3 of the Department of Communities and
Justice Code of Ethical Conduct.”
over the page, turning firstly with “inappropriate use of force”,
the particulars set out in the letter of dismissal
of 11 June 2025
“In relation to finding one: I am of the view that your explanation for
the use of inappropriate force against inmate X is
not sufficient. You are seen
on Body-Worn Camera (BWC) footage using your knee on inmate X’s face
during the incident while
he was restrained in handcuffs and being restrained by
two other CSNSW staff members. I do not consider the force used by you during
this incident to be proportionate to the situation given that he was being taken
to ground by other CSNSW staff members. Further,
in your submission, you
submitted that you “bounced off” of Correctional Officer Stuart
Anniwell and that you did not
lift your leg in any attempt to knee inmate X in
the face. However, I have viewed BWC footage which clearly indicates that this
not the case and your knee did make contact with inmate X’s face while
he was restrained.”
Notwithstanding
the presence of four other correctional officers, as well as a nurse, during the
incident the respondent relied singularly
upon evidence from Mr Elguindy.
Elguindy, in his statement, stated that the use of excessive force constituted a
lifting of the applicant’s knee which made
upper torso. At no stage in his witness statement does he make reference to the
applicant’s
knee coming into contact with inmate’s face.
change in the particularisation of the use of excessive force post the dismissal
would provide a sound basis for a finding by
the Commission of a denial of
procedural fairness. However, for reasons that will become apparent, there is no
need for the Commission
to make such a finding.
to Mr Elguindy’s evidence, he was consistent in stating that the body worn
video footage captured by the officers present
clearly shows the applicant
lifting his knee into the prisoner and coming into contact, firstly in his
statement, with the prisoner’s
upper torso but in the letter of dismissal
particularisation, into the face.
for the respondent took the Commission to the video footage, which is known as
BWC 2 footage (“BWC” is an acronym
for Body Worn Camera), taken by
Mr Nadfulosi and at or around two minutes and 44 seconds into the footage and
BWC 2 footage of the
applicant, Mr Horner, at or around two minutes and 42
have taken the opportunity during the adjournment to watch both sets of these
BWC video footage referred to by the respondent over
a number of occasions. In
neither video, at or around the time stated, could I see the applicant’s
knee being raised. Also,
I could not see the applicant’s knee come into
addition, the footage from Mr Horner’s BWC, at times showed the
prisoner’s face following the incident and from my
viewing of the footage
there was no apparent injury to the face, nor the upper torso of inmate X.
video of both Mr Horner, the body worn video of Mr Horner and Mr Nadfulosi, also
included audio. Prior to and during the incident,
inmate X was very vocal. Prior
to the incident, he was complaining about a sore shoulder. Also, at the time
immediately before and
at the beginning of the incident, he was complaining
no stage during the incident or immediately after did inmate X complain of pain
to his face, nor upper torso. Nor did he remonstrate
nor complain that he had
been assaulted, nor that he had been kneed in the face, nor upper torso. This is
what one would have expected
had been the case, had inmate X been kneed to the
face or upper torso.
to the incident reports of the other officers who were present during the
incident which were annexed to Mr Elguindy’s
statement, none of these
contained any reference to the applicant using his knee on the prisoner.
relation to these incident reports, Mr Elguindy gave evidence which was to the
effect that he could not rely upon those statements,
and he relied solely upon
the BWC footage.
relation to the nurse who was present in the room during the incident, the
applicant pressed for the Commission to draw a
Jones v Dunkell
It was submitted that the nurse had told her supervisor that the applicant had
kneed inmate X in the face and the failure
by the respondent to explain why the
nurse was not called meant that the Commission could infer that the evidence she
may give would
not assist the respondent.
the evidence does not disclose that the nurse told anyone that the applicant had
kneed inmate X in the face. Thus, it is
not apparent that the respondent should
have called the nurse to give evidence or provide an explanation as to why she
was not called
and, thus, there is no basis for the Commission to draw any
inference of the
Jones v Dunkell
I deal with a submission from the respondent that the Commission should make
some form of credit finding against the applicant
in regard to the changing by
him of one word in his witness statement. At paragraph 46 of exhibit 1, prior to
the witness statement
being tendered it stated, “
Prior to my dismissal,
I was never given the opportunity to view the CCTV
”. Whilst in the
witness box and prior to the witness statement being tendered, the applicant
sought to have the word “
” was changed to
”, such that it read, “
Prior to my
suspension, I was never given the opportunity to view the CCTV
do not find that that is an adequate basis for the Commission to make a credit
finding against the applicant. The applicant’s
evidence whilst in the
witness box, showed that he was prepared to concede when concessions should be
made. Notwithstanding some
submissions about who was holding the prisoner at the
time the incident occurred, the Commission notes that at the time the prisoner
was standing up from the chair, immediately prior to the incident; he was being
held by only one of the Correctional officers and
not two as at the moment the
prisoner seems to move towards the ground a second officer comes in to grab the
inmate X and the footage
from the body worn video of Mr Horner, shows the second
Correctional officer grabs prisoner X from behind, and the body worn video
Nadfulosi shows that the applicant then comes in towards the side of Prisoner X
as he is falling to the ground.
I am not prepared to make a credit finding against the applicant, I am not
prepared to make a credit finding either against Mr
Elguindy. He was resolute in
terms of cross-examination that what he saw in the video footage was a knee. I
could not see it, it
was not apparently evident to me, but notwithstanding Mr
Elguindy’s evidence, I am not prepared to make any credit finding
him either.
for the respondent rightly conceded that if the Commission does not find that
the applicant kneed the prisoner in the head
or upper torso then the misconduct
in allegation 1 is not made out.
regard to the video footage, the demeanour of the prisoner immediately prior,
during and after the incident, as referred to
earlier in this decision, and the
absence of any objective evidence of an injury sustained by the applicant
consistent with being
kneed in the face or the upper torso, I find that the
respondent has not made out its onus in proving that the conduct necessary
support ground 1 has been made out.
now turn to ground 2. Firstly, I note that Mr Elguindy, whilst under
cross-examination, conceded to the effect that if the finding
of the Commission
was that there was no use of the knee by the applicant to the face or torso of
inmate X, then ground 2 falls away.
turning to the policy, in particular the use of force, reporting in part 13.7 of
the Custodial Operations Policy and Procedures,
at point 10.1 Mandatory
Reporting all Incidents, at pages 30 and 31 states as follows, and I am reading
from the third paragraph
under 10.1, from the third paragraph on
“A correctional officer must report a use of force to the Governor in
writing using the appropriate report from before ceasing
Officers must write their reports from their own recollection of events
independently from each other. Reporting officers should
have adequate
facilities meet this requirement (e.g. access to computers in separate
An officer wearing BWV may view their own footage to assist in writing an
accurate report in certain circumstances (refer to COPP
section 13.9 Video
evidence). It is not necessary for officers to detail every conversation or
action which is clearly recorded.
A reference to the relevant time markings will
suffice. The officer should state in their report that they have referred to BWV
(note “BWV” is an acronym for body worn video).”
particular interpretation of that requirement use of force reporting, there was
no need for the applicant, under the policy, to
detail every action during the
incident, as body worn video was available. This would apply even if he had
kneed the prisoner in
the face or upper torso because it would have been
captured by the body worn video. Having found that that this not occur, that is
a moot point.
incident report, in the view of the Commission, complies with policy
requirements as read above and, as there was no use of a
knee as alleged by the
respondent in allegation 1, there was no need for it to be contained within the
incident report.
the above, I am satisfied that the respondent has not made out its onus with
respect to ground 2.
the reasons already expressed, in particular that the respondent has failed to
make out the misconduct in allegations 1 and 2,
I therefore find that the
dismissal of the applicant was and is harsh, unreasonable or unjust, for the
purposes of s 84 of the Act.
now turn to remedy. The respondent submits that the applicant should not be
reinstated, re-employed or receive any compensation
by way of remedy. It was
submitted that the applicant’s actions rendered reinstatement
impracticable.
was submitted by the respondent, that the evidence in support of this came from
Mr Elguindy. I note that his evidence on this issue
was predicated on the
applicant having undertaken the conduct in allegation 1.
I have found that conduct did not occur, there is no basis for finding that
reinstatement is impracticable.
the above reasons and consistent with the Full Bench decision in Adonis, I make
the following orders:
(1) The applicant is to be reinstated to his former position, pursuant to
sub-section 89(1) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(2) Pursuant to sub-section 89(2) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
the respondent is to pay the applicant any amount of loss, remuneration, dating
from the date of dismissal to his reinstatement,
less any other income
(3) Pursuant to sub-section 89(4) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
an order for continuity of employment.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (263 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter