URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Laura (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 12; (7 April 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Laura (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 12
Hearing Date(s):
7 April 2025
Date of Orders:
7 April 2025
Decision Date:
7 April 2025
Guardianship Division
S L Handebo, Principal Member
Dr K J Banerjee, Senior Member
(Professional)
M Black, General Member (Community)
PROCEDURAL ORDERS
The request by Steve to adjourn the hearing
on 7 April 2025 is refused.
Laura is allowed to be legally
represented.
REVIEW OF REVOCATION OF ENDURING POWER OF
In relation to the enduring power of attorney made by
Laura on 3 June 2021 which appointed Steve and Nicole as attorney(s) the
determines, orders or declares:
not to carry out a review
of the revocation of the enduring power of
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
APPLICATION
The application for a financial management order is
dismissed after hearing.
Catchwords:
EVIDENCE – medical evidence as to person’s capacity –
person diagnosed with Alzheimer’s dementia – multiple
medical evidence – whether evidence is contradictory – where
subsequent evidence showing improvement in condition
– whether assessment
of a psychiatrist preferred to neuropsychologist – role of
neuropsychologist in assessing capacity
neuropsychologist qualified
to administer neuropsychological assessment of capacity – diagnosis of
Alzheimer’s dementia
does not automatically result in a lack of capacity
– evidence not contradictory.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT –
application for a review of revocation of enduring power of attorney –
Tribunal has discretion
to decide whether to undertake a review – Tribunal
permitted to undertake general survey of evidence produced before deciding
whether to exercise discretion – lack of medical evidence that subject
person lacked capacity to revoke enduring power of attorney
circumstances around application – evidence of publication of potentially
defamatory material by applicant –
complaints made by applicant against
various legal and medical professionals – multiple applications by
applicant – application
lacking in substance – application
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT – financial management
application – whether subject person incapable of managing affairs –
Alzheimer’s diagnosis does not automatically result in incapability to
manage affairs – Tribunal required to assess the
impact of diagnosis on
functional capacity – evidence that subject person able to articulate her
financial circumstances and
affairs – executive functioning largely intact
– Tribunal not satisfied that person incapable of managing her affairs
– application dismissed.
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(1)(a)-(b),
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NSW), r 31(2)
Court Security Act 2005
Guardianship Act 1987
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
Cases Cited:
[2015] NSWSC 498
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
[2003] NSWSC 819
[2013] NSWSC 1223
[2012] NSWSC 1006
Elizabeth Parker v Margaret Catherine Higgins & Ors
[2012] NSWSC 1516
Texts Cited:
Law Society of NSW, When a Client’s Capacity is in Doubt: A Practical
Guide for Solicitors,
https://www.lawsociety.com.au/sites/default/files/2018-03/Clients%20mental%20capacity.pdf,
Accessed 2 October 2025
Sydney University, Sydney Neuropsychology
Research Clinic,
https://www.sydney.edu.au/brain-mind/our-clinics/neuropsychology-
clinic.html#:~:text=
Neuropsychological%20assessments,-A%20neuropsychological%20assessment&text=
This%20provides%20the%20clinical%
20neuropsychologist,between%20brain%20function%
20and%20behaviour, Accessed 2
October 2025
Lise Berry and Dr Jane Lonie, Capacity, dementia and
neuropsychology,
https://lsj.com.au/articles/capacity-dementia-and-neuropsychology/#:~:text=What%20is%20your%20client
%20capable,are%20likely%20to%20remain %20intact.&text=d)%20Fluctuations%20in
%20cognitive%20function,disease%20or%20Primary%
20Progressive%20Aphasia,
Accessed 2 October 2025
Principal judgment
003: Financial Management Application
Laura (the person)
(applicant)
Nicole (attorney)
Christopher (attorney)
NSW Trustee and
004: Review Revocation of an Enduring Power of
Laura (the person)
Steve (applicant, attorney)
Christopher
Nicole (attorney)
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Representation:
Solicitors:
Mr M, solicitor for Laura
File Number(s):
NCAT 2024/00012703
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
these Reasons for Decision, to not disclose their identity, the parties and some
of the participants in the proceedings have been
given fictitious names].
is a 76-year-old widowed woman who resides in a low level residential aged care
facility in Sydney’s Upper North Shore.
Laura holds a Bachelor of
Architecture and a Master of Architecture from the University of Sydney and is
reported to have worked
full time as an architect until her retirement at the
age of 65 years old.
family include (but is not limited to) her son, Steve, her sister, Nicole, and
her brother-in-law, Christopher.
3 June 2021, Laura executed an Enduring Power of Attorney in which she appointed
Steve and Nicole as her attorneys on a joint and
several basis (“the 2021
EPOA”). A copy of the 2021 EPOA was in evidence before the Tribunal and on
the face of the document
it appears to have been validly executed. Nicole
accepted her appointment as attorney on 3 June 2021. Steve accepted his
appointment
as attorney on a later date, sometime in
17 August 2023, Laura executed a further Enduring Power of Attorney (“the
2023 EPOA”). Laura appointed Steve, Nicole
and Christopher as her
attorneys on a joint and several basis “with any two to sign”. A
copy of the 2023 EPOA was before
the Tribunal. Nicole and Christopher each
accepted their appointment on 17 August 2023. Steve has not accepted his
appointment under
this instrument. The Tribunal was informed that this
instrument has subsequently been revoked by Laura, however, there was no
of the revocation before the Tribunal and it was unclear whether each
of the appointed attorneys (including Steve, noting however
that his appointment
has not taken effect on account of his decision not to accept the appointment)
have been provided written notice
of the revocation.
23 August 2023, Laura executed a document revoking the 2021 EPOA. There was no
dispute that each of the named attorneys were provided
with notice of this
revocation.
is reported that on 27 November 2024, Laura executed further enduring
instruments, namely an Enduring Power of Attorney (“the
2024 EPOA”)
and an Enduring Guardianship, each appointing Nicole and Christopher.
19 November 2024, Steve submitted an application for a financial management
order. Subsequently, on 21 January 2025, Steve submitted
an application to
review the revocation of the 2021 EPOA.
Reasons for Decision relate to the applications submitted by Steve on 19
November 2024 and 21 January 2025.
RELEVANT PROCEDURAL
9 January 2024, Steve submitted an application for a financial management order.
This application was determined by a differently
constituted Tribunal on 14
March 2024. On this date, the Tribunal dismissed the application consequent to a
finding on the available
evidence that Laura is not incapable of managing her
Tribunal has had regard to the Tribunal’s previous Reasons for Decision
but is not bound by the findings made by the Tribunal
on 14 March 2024.
13 May 2024, Steve submitted a further application for a financial management
order. This application was listed for a Directions
Hearing on 15 August
2024 and was subsequently dismissed by the Tribunal (differently constituted) on
12 September 2024 pursuant
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (“CAT Act”) (namely on the basis that
the Tribunal determined that the application was lacking in substance).
19 November 2024, Steve submitted an application for a financial management
order. Subsequently, on 21 January 2025, Steve submitted
an application to
review the revocation of the 2021 EPOA.
23 January 2025, the Tribunal made Chambers Directions in relation to the filing
of evidence and service of the applications and
supporting evidence. The matter
was otherwise set down for Hearing.
THE HEARING
Hearing was listed on 7 April 2025 and was conducted from the Tribunal’s
Sydney Registry.
Hearing was attended by Laura, Steve, Nicole, Christopher and Mr M, solicitor
for Laura. Steve attended the Hearing by telephone,
and all other participants
attended the Hearing in person.
the commencement of the Hearing, the Tribunal explained to each of the
participants, in general terms, the following
restrictions
(1) The provisions of
Court Security Act
(2) The provisions of s 65 of the CAT Act; and,
(3) The provisions of
Guardianship Act
of the participants in the Hearing confirmed their understanding of the
restrictions referred to and agreed to comply with such
restrictions.
number of procedural issues were identified at the commencement of the Hearing
which required determination by the Tribunal. These
(1) An application made on behalf of Laura to be legally represented in the
proceedings; and,
(2) An application made by Steve for an adjournment of the financial management
application, noting that he sought to proceed with
the application to review the
revocation of the 2021 EPOA.
the reasons identified below, the Tribunal decided:
(1) To grant leave for Laura to be legally represented in the proceedings;
(2) To decline the request made by Steve to adjourn the Hearing of the financial
management application.
Tribunal initially reserved its decision and subsequently decided:
(1) Not to undertake a review of the revocation of the 2021 EPOA; and,
(2) To dismiss the application for a financial management order.
PROCEDURAL ISSUE – LEAVE FOR LAURA TO BE LEGALLY REPRESENTED
party to proceedings in the Tribunal is responsible for their own case and is
not entitled to be represented by any other person:
CAT Act, s 45(1)(a). A party
may be legally represented by an Australian legal practitioner if the Tribunal
grants leave to a particular
legal practitioner or to any legal practitioner:
CAT Act, s 45(1)(b). The Tribunal has discretion as to whether it will grant
and may refuse or revoke leave: CAT Act, s 45(2). If leave is granted,
the Tribunal may impose such conditions on the grant of leave
as it thinks fit:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW), r 31(2).
Proceedings
in the Guardianship Division are conducted in accordance with the
principles in
Guardianship Act
. These principles are
applicable when determining an application by a party for leave to be
represented by another person. The Guardianship
Division Procedural Direction on
Representation provides guidance as to the factors that may be considered by the
Tribunal when determining
whether to grant leave.
27 March 2025, the Tribunal received a written request from Laura (dated 24
March 2025) seeking leave to be legally represented
in the proceedings. Amongst
other things Laura identified that:
(1) This is the third application made to the Tribunal by Steve in approximately
twelve months;
(2) Laura does “not want to be declared mentally or financially
incompetent”;
(3) Laura does not trust Steve to be in charge of her financial affairs, and
reports that Steve “can be verbally aggressive
towards [her]”;
(4) Laura feels “very intimidated, oppressed and exhausted” by the
application and in the circumstances does “not
think that [she] can
adequately express [her] opinions and resist [Steve] without assistance”.
M made oral submissions in accordance with the written submissions referred to
above. In response to questions raised by the Tribunal
as to the possibility of
providing assistance in the capacity as a “McKenzie Friend” rather
than as an advocate, Mr M
outlined that as a McKenzie Friend he would not have
the ability to make submissions on legal and factual matters relevant to the
findings the Tribunal needs to make, which would be of particular assistance in
the particular circumstances of this matter.
did not express a concluded view on the issue of whether or not Laura should be
legally represented, though did not oppose
the application. Christopher
supported the application.
provided his conditional support for the application. He told the Tribunal that
he does not oppose Laura being legally represented
subject to Mr M disclosing to
the Tribunal the nature of his relationship with Dr Z and her legal
representative.
Although the
Tribunal was reluctant to require such disclosures, Mr M indicated a willingness
to address the issue raised by Steve.
Mr M indicated that he does not have a
relationship with Dr Z and is unaware whether she has a legal representative or
who that legal
representative may be.
all of the circumstances the Tribunal was satisfied that it would be in
Laura’s best interests to permit her to be legally
represented in the
proceedings. In reaching this decision the Tribunal had regard to, inter alia:
the difficulties Laura reports
in ensuring that she is able to adequately
express her views at Hearing; the absence of any objections to Laura being
legally represented;
and, the principles under
Guardianship Act
including but not limited to the need to ensure that Laura’s views are
taken into consideration.
PROCEDURAL ISSUE – REQUEST TO
ADJOURN THE HEARING REGARDING THE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT APPLICATION
Tribunal may adjourn proceedings to any time and place: CAT Act, s 51. When
considering whether to adjourn proceedings, the Tribunal
has regard to the
guiding principle of the CAT Act: which is to facilitate the just, quick and
cheap resolution of the issues in
the proceedings: CAT Act, s 36(1). The
Tribunal may also consider the principles in
Guardianship Act
including that the paramount concern is the welfare and interests of the person
who is the subject of the proceedings.
Tribunal is required to take such steps as may be reasonably practicable to
ensure that the parties understand the nature of proceedings
reasonable opportunity to be heard or otherwise have their submissions
considered: CAT Act, s 38(5). The Tribunal is also
required to ensure that all
relevant material is disclosed to the Tribunal to enable it to determine all of
the relevant facts in
issue in the proceedings: CAT Act, s 38(6).
sought that the financial management application be adjourned but proposed that
the review of the revocation of the 2021 EPOA
proceed. In support of this
request Steve outlined that he does not currently have visibility of
Laura’s bank accounts (due
to his appointment as attorney having
purportedly been revoked) and that an adjournment of the financial management
application would
be necessary to allow him to obtain relevant evidence of
Laura’s financial dealings (and/or the financial dealings undertaken
Laura’s attorneys). This application was premised on the assumption that
the Tribunal would determine that the revocation
of the 2021 EPOA was invalid,
and thereafter, Steve’s appointment under the 2021 EPOA would be enlivened
to give him the access
he seeks to Laura’s bank accounts.
was no suggestion from Steve that an adjournment would yield further medical
evidence in relation to Laura’s capacity.
adjournment request was opposed by each other
party to the
proceedings.
Tribunal notes that this is the third financial management application made by
Steve within a period of twelve months. The current
application has been pending
for over four months. Steve has had sufficient time to gather evidence in
support of his application,
including if necessary, requesting the issue of a
summons in accordance with NCAT Procedural Direction 2. He did not avail himself
of these processes.
outlined above, the Tribunal is required to ensure that all relevant
material is disclosed to the Tribunal to enable it to determine
the relevant facts in issue in the proceedings: CAT Act, s 38(6)
Although the Tribunal acknowledges that Steve raises concerns about certain
financial dealings, on the papers the critical issue in
this matter is the
threshold issue of Laura’s capability to manage her own affairs. There was
no suggestion that an adjournment
of the Hearing would result in the
availability of further or better evidence in this regard.
the event that the adjournment was not granted and the Tribunal was ultimately
satisfied that Laura was incapable of managing her
affairs, it remained open to
the Tribunal to revisit the issue of whether an adjournment should be granted
(i.e. adjourning the proceedings
on a part heard basis) if such action became
necessary to ensure that sufficient evidence were available to finally determine
application.
Tribunal was not convinced that an adjournment of the proceedings would yield
any evidence that would have a material impact on
the issues the Tribunal was
required to consider. The Tribunal did not consider that Steve had had
insufficient ability to prepare
his case in advance of the proceedings.
all of the circumstances the Tribunal was not satisfied that an adjournment of
the proceedings would be consistent with either
the guiding principle under the
CAT Act or the principles under
Guardianship Act
. The Tribunal
concluded that it was manifestly in Laura’s best interests for the Hearing
to proceed as scheduled.
the avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal notes that at no time during the Hearing
was there evidence presented or submissions made
which would warrant the
Tribunal reconsidering the issue of an adjournment (and whether it was necessary
to adjourn the Hearing on
a part-heard basis due to the unavailability of
necessary evidence).
RELEVANT LEGAL PRINCIPLES
Review of Revocation of Enduring Power of Attorney
Tribunal may, on the application of an interested person, decide to review the
revocation of a reviewable power of attorney, or
not to carry out such a review:
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
Susan Elizabeth Parker v Margaret Catherine Higgins & Ors
, Slattery J stated at [80]:
“On an application for
review such as this the Court must first
exercise a discretion under
Powers of Attorney Act
whether or not to conduct a
review. In my view the Court does not have to
conduct a full review of all documents associated with the operation of the
power of attorney to do this. Something short of a full review must be
able to justify the exercise of the
discretion as to whether or not the
Court should conduct a full
review. In the circumstances of this case the
Court can glean sufficient information to exercise the
discretion by
undertaking a general survey of what... (a party)...has produced.”
a consequence of reviewing the revocation of a reviewable power of attorney, if
the Tribunal decides to conduct a review, the Tribunal
may decide whether or not
to make an order under
Powers of Attorney Act
The Tribunal may make a number of orders relating to the revocation of a power
of attorney including the following:
declaring that the principal did or did not have mental capacity to revoke a
power of attorney
declaring that the power of attorney remains valid (either in whole or in part)
if the Tribunal is satisfied:
(i) The principal did not have the capacity necessary to revoke it; or
(ii) the revocation is invalid for any other reason, for example, the principal
was induced to make the revocation by dishonesty
or undue influence.
on a review of the revocation of the enduring power of attorney, the Tribunal
decides not to make an order under
Powers of Attorney Act
may, if it considers it appropriate in all of the circumstances to do so, decide
to treat the application for review as an application
for a financial management
order under
Guardianship Act
Management Application
Guardianship Act
provides that the Tribunal may make a
financial management order in respect of a person only if the Tribunal has
considered the person’s
capability to manage his or her own affairs and is
satisfied that:
(1) The person is not capable of managing those affairs; and
(2) There is a need for another person to manage those affairs on the
person’s behalf; and
(3) It is in the person’s best interests that the order be made.
[2012] NSWSC 1006
, White J assessed the history of case law in
relation to financial management and noted that initially the issue of
capability was
approached by referring to hypothetical or abstract notions of
the ordinary affairs of man. However, the Court now assesses the person’s
own capacity to do what they are proposing to do [58]. White J used a
“rational appreciation” of assets test to determine
capability to manage his or her affairs. He adopts the reasoning of Barrett J in
[2003] NSWSC 819
, who said that the task of the Court in these
circumstances:
“... is to make a judgment as to the capacity and ability of the person
concerned to cope with the ordinary routine affairs
of living, particularly so
far as they concern the person’s property...the requisite judgment is to
be made in the light of
objective physical facts concerning the relevant
person’s property, money and other assets and the way the person is able
look after them. If there is a lack of capacity, the reason for it does not
matter [26].”
[2013] NSWSC 1223
, Justice Lindsay confirmed that the question
focuses attention on the special circumstances of the person. His Honour stated,
“Of central significance is the functionality of management capacity of
the person said to be incapable of managing his or
her affairs, not: (a) his or
her status as a person who may, or may not, lack ‘mental capacity’
or be ‘mentally
ill’; or (b) particular reasons for an incapacity
for self-management.”
test for determining a person’s capability to manage his or her affairs
has been described as follows (
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC
, [307]-[308]):
“Is a person reasonably able to manage his or her own affairs in a
reasonably competent fashion, without the intervention of
a [financial manager]
charged with a duty to protect his or her welfare and interests?
[A] focus for attention is whether the person is able to deal with (making and
implementing decisions about) his or her own affairs
(person and property,
capital and income) in a reasonable, rational and orderly way, with due regard
to his or her present and prospective
wants and needs, and those of family and
friends, without undue risk of neglect, abuse or exploitation.”
considering whether the person is “able” in this sense,
consideration may be given to:
past and present
experience as a predictor of the future course of events
support systems
available to the person, and
the extent to
which the person, placed as he or she is, can be relied upon to make sound
judgments about his or her welfare and interests:
see Lindsay J in
[2015] NSWSC 498
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under the
Guardianship Act
, the Tribunal must act with the interests of the person
concerned as the paramount consideration and in accordance with the other
principles set out in
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
provides that, if the Tribunal makes a
financial management order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage
the person’s
estate or may commit the management of the estate to the
NSW Trustee and Guardian.
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, the Court
said that the dominant consideration in making orders about financial managers
was the welfare of the person. The President
of the Court of Appeal emphasised
the Court’s broad discretion in deciding who should be financial manager
but also set out
possible considerations as to the competing advantages of the
then Protective Commissioner and a family member as the manager of
The NSW Trustee and Guardian now exercises the role of the Protective
Commissioner.
THE MEDICAL EVIDENCE
Tribunal was provided with a number of medical reports in relation to the issue
of Laura’s capacity, including the following:
(1) Report from Dr Y, Consultant Neurologist at Sydney Adventist Hospital, dated
8 April 2021 (“the Dr Y Report”).
(2) Report from Dr Z, Clinical Neuropsychologist at a University health centre,
dated 7 September 2023 (“the 2023 Dr Z Report”).
(3) Report from Dr Z dated 13 June 2024 (“the 2024 Dr Z Report”).
2023 Dr Z Report was in evidence before the Tribunal at the time the Tribunal
dismissed the first financial management application
on 14 March
The Tribunal understands that
the Dr Y Report was not presented to the Tribunal in support of the earlier
application, and at that
time the 2024 Dr Z Report had not yet been
turns on the Tribunal’s assessment of the available medical evidence,
including the extent (if any) to which the evidence
may conflict, and in the
event of conflicting evidence, which evidence should be preferred by the
Tribunal. In these circumstances
it is prudent to recount in some detail the
nature of the medical evidence presented to the Tribunal.
Y’s Report, prepared in April 2021, outlines the following:
“The MRI scan of the brain showed mild age-related cortical cerebral
atrophy and a mild degree of white matter ischaemic change.
There was no
disproportionate temporal lobe or hippocampal atrophy.
On the perfusion study, there were mild perfusion defects in the associated
parietal cortices bilaterally extending into the precuneus
bilaterally. The
reduced patterns of perfusion in this distribution are
suggestive of mild
Alzheimer’s disease
. There is also a
cerebral vascular
due to areas of mildly reduced cerebral perfusion reserved at a
number of sites...” (emphasis in original)
Y outlines a number of cognitive screening tools he administered with Laura,
(1) The Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination (ACE) in which Laura scored
(2) A Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) in which Laura scored
(3) A Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA) in which Laura scored
(it is reported that this
assessment was administered “previously” without clear indication as
to when this assessment
was administered).
Y notes that “there was primarily ready forgetfulness and difficulties
with tasks requiring abstraction and executive function”.
Y makes various recommendations, including referral to a Dr X, Old Age
Psychiatrist, and various other supports (including a
neuropsychologist).
The 2023 Dr Z Report
Tribunal notes that Dr Z’s assessment of Laura was undertaken on
7 September 2023 (approximately two weeks after her revocation
of the 2021
Z’s report outlines that Laura was referred to her by Dr X “for
comprehensive neuropsychological testing and assessment
of capacity to manage
her financial affairs”. The introductory paragraph of her report
acknowledges a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s
disease and references a MOCA
undertaken in January 2023 with a score of 24/30.
Z notes that Laura has been under Dr X’s care since April 2021 and was
formally diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease
in August 2021 (when Laura was
commenced on Donepezil).
and Nicole (who accompanied Laura to her appointment) reported to Dr Z that
Laura was experiencing memory problems, which were
getting worse, and they
each denied any changes in Laura’s language, concentration,
problem-solving or decision-making.
Z reports that Laura was able to provide a concise and accurate summary of her
financial circumstances, demonstrate an appropriate
understanding of the nature
of a power of attorney, and clearly articulated her reasoning for the decision
to revoke the 2021 EPOA
and execute the 2023 EPOA.
Z reports having conducted various neuropsychological tests during her
assessment of Laura (as outlined in detail in her report).
the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination (ACE-III) Laura scored
75/100 (below the cutoff of 88/100 for dementia). It is reported
on this assessment Laura lost the most points in the domains of
attention/orientation, memory and fluency.
Z reports the following with respect to Laura’s executive
functioning:
“[Laura] performed within the Average to High Average range on tests of
executive function. She demonstrated preserved reasoning
skills on tests of
special reasoning (High Average) and abstract verbal reasoning (Average). On the
spatial reasoning test, [Laura]
was easily able to use feedback to adapt her
responses according to the changing demands of the test. [Laura] also
demonstrated intact
mental flexibility on alternating semantic fluency test
(Average). [Laura] showed intact planning and organisational skills in her
approach to copying a complex geometric figure.”
Z offers the following opinion:
“The neuropsychological profile of this 75-year-old woman revealed
impairments in orientation, verbal memory, and verbal fluency.
There was some
fluctuation in [Laura’s] attention, but no impairment per se, and she
demonstrated otherwise preserved cognition
in the areas of working memory,
language skills (apart from verbal fluency), visuospatial and constructional
skills, visual memory,
and executive function. [Laura’s] score of 75/100
on the ACE-III was in keeping with the comprehensive neuropsychology results.
The history, presentation, and neuropsychology results supported [Laura’s]
diagnosis of
early-stage Alzheimer’s disease
(emphasis added).”
relation to Laura’s capacity to manage her financial affairs, Dr Z reports
the following:
“[Laura] understood the role of Power of Attorney and Enduring Power of
Attorney and gave a reasonable account of her current
financial position and
assets. [Laura] provided a consistent and detailed account of the changes she
recently made to her Power of
Attorney, and her reasons for the changes, at both
the start and the end of the assessment, with a three-hour interval between the
accounts. Formal testing demonstrated that [Laura’s] reasoning and
decision-making skills remained intact in the Average to
High Average range, and
she was able to appropriately adapt her responses when the information, or
situation, changed. Based on these
findings, it was my opinion that [Laura]
retained capacity to understand and weigh up information, options, and
consequences required
for financial decision-making capacity.
At this stage, [Laura] does not have a level of cognitive impairment that would
require her Enduring Power of Attorney to be enacted,
but she does require some
support and assistance with day-to-day financial matters due to her
unreliable verbal memory. [Laura] is
currently supported by her sister [Nicole]
and [Nicole’s] son-in-law with paying bills and managing her financial
[Laura] was insightful regarding her memory problems and aware that
she needed assistance to keep track of her money and bill payments.
[Laura] was
appreciative of the current supportive family arrangement in this regard.”
The 2024 Dr Z Report
assessment was conducted on 13 June 2024 and was instigated by Laura in the
context of having engaged a new legal representative
who had requested an update
review of Laura’s “cognitive capacity to make her own decisions
regarding legal matters”.
report outlines a number of neuropsychological tests administered, and a
comparison of the results against Laura’s previous
results in 2023.
this occasion, Laura showed an improvement on the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive
Examination (ACE-III), returning a score of 84/100
(compared to 75/100 on
previous testing) with continued impairments in the domains of memory, verbal
fluency, and orientation.
relation to Laura’s executive functioning Dr Z reports:
“[Laura] continued to demonstrate very robust executive functioning
skills, with improvement on some tests compared to the
previous assessment.
She demonstrated excellent reasoning and problem-solving skills on tests of
spatial reasoning/problem-solving
(High Average to Superior performance) and
abstract verbal reasoning (High Average). Her capacity for mental switching and
multi-tasking
was Average, and her verbal generativity on tests of letter
fluency was Average. Consistent with the previous assessment, [Laura]
demonstrated intact planning and organisational skills in her approach to
copying a complex geometric figure.”
Z offers the following opinion:
“The neuropsychological profile of this 75-year-old woman revealed
impairment in verbal memory and mild reductions in orientation
and semantic
(category) fluency. This occurred against a background of otherwise preserved
cognition, including attention, working
memory, processing speed, naming,
comprehension, visuospatial and constructional skills, visual memory, and
executive functions (reasoning
skills, problem-solving, mental flexibility,
letter fluency, and planning/organisational abilities). [Laura’s] score of
on the ACE-III dementia screening tool remained below the dementia
cut-off (<88) but had improved compared to the previous assessment
scored 75/100. [Laura] also showed improvement on neuropsychology tests of
verbal memory, attention, orientation, and verbal
fluency compared to the
previous assessment.
The history, presentation, and cognitive profile remained consistent with the
diagnosis of early-stage Alzheimer’s disease.
It is possible that the mild
improvements in some aspects of [Laura’s] cognition compared to the
previous assessment are secondary
to the improvement in her self-reported
anxiety and stress compared to the previous assessment.”
respect to Laura’s “capacity to manage financial affairs, make own
decisions, and instruct a lawyer” Dr Z concludes
as follows:
“[Laura] understood the role of a Power of Attorney/Enduring Power of
Attorney and Guardian/Enduring Guardian. She gave a detailed
and accurate
account of her current appointments of family members in these positions, her
reasons for choosing these people, and
her reasons regarding her current
decision to add her brother-in-law [Christopher] as a third Guardian/Enduring
Guardian. Her reasoning
remained consistent and logical at the start of the
assessment and at the end of the assessment, with a three-hour interval between
these discussions. Formal testing demonstrated that [Laura’s] reasoning
and decision-making skills remained entirely intact,
and in the High Average to
Superior range. Based on all these findings, it remained my opinion that Laura
retained capacity to understand
and weigh up information, consider options and
consequences, and make her own decisions. It was also my opinion that [Laura]
capacity to instruct a lawyer and make her own decisions regarding
Power of Attorney/Enduring Power of Attorney and Guardianship/Enduring
Guardianship (emphasis in original).
[Laura’s] cognitive impairment remained mild and specific to her verbal
memory. She does not have a level of cognitive impairment
that would require
enactment of Enduring Power of Attorney or Enduring Guardian. [Laura] has
insight regarding her memory difficulties
and appreciated the ongoing support
provided by her sister [Nicole] and [Nicole’s] son-in-law [Mr W] who
assist her with day-to-day
financial matters.”
Steve’s Arguments About Conflicting Medical Evidence
relies on the Dr Y Report in formulating his arguments that Laura has lacked
capacity since at least 2021. Although not articulated
in these terms,
Steve’s argument appears to be grounded as follows:
(1) The Dr Y Report supports Steve’s assessment that Laura lacked capacity
as early as 2021.
(2) Dr Y and Dr Z’s assessments are contradictory.
(3) Dr Y’s assessment should be preferred to Dr Z’s in circumstances
where Dr Z is not a medical doctor.
provided to this effect includes the following:
(1) In his application form for review of the revocation of the 2021 EPOA, Steve
states the following:
“Medical evidence from [Dr Y] (dated 08/04/2021) shows my mother lacked
capacity prior to the revocation. His report documents:
● MMSE score of 22/30 (below standard threshold of
● Montreal Cognitive Examination score of 22/30 (below
normal threshold of 26/30)
● Diagnosis of mild Alzheimer's disease with cognitive
● My mother suffered a serious stroke on 10/05/2022,
further impacting her cognitive abilities.
Given her progressive Alzheimer’s diagnosis in 2021 and subsequent stroke
in 2022, my mother lacked the required mental capacity
to legally revoke the
original 2021 power of attorney in August 2023 based on the work of [Dr
(2) In his application for a financial management order Steve states the
“Medical Evidence:
● [Dr Y’s] 2021 report confirmed Alzheimer’s
● Recent cognitive assessments show scientifically
impossible improvements
● New medical evidence justifies fresh
consideration”
(3) In an email to the Tribunal dated 19 December 2024 Steve states the
“... I have a medical doctor who stated that my mother required help back
in 2021. NCAT has repeatedly dismissed my hearings
based on [Dr Z]. [Dr Z] is
NOT a medical doctor! This is how confident I am that her work is rubbish
[provides a link to a website
– link omitted from these Reasons for
Decision].”
(4) In a further email to the Tribunal dated 20 December 2024, Steve states
the following:
“Medical Evidence of Exploitation:
● [Dr Y’s] 2021 report shows clear, objective
evidence of cognitive decline:
○ Diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease with brain scan
○ Multiple cognitive test scores showing impairment
○ MMSE: 23/30
○ Montreal Cognitive: 22/30
○ ACE: 82/100
● [Dr Z’s] reports appear problematic:
○ Claims of improvement despite Alzheimer’s being a
degenerative condition
○ Potentially using your mother as a recurring revenue
○ Medical opinions that conflict with objective earlier
○ No explanation for how cognitive improvement is
possible post-stroke”
(5) The website referred to in Steve’
December 2024 emails states
the following:
“Breaking! Alzheimers dementia can be reversed by [Dr Z] and [a University
health centre]!
Incredible news! The brilliant [Dr Z] and [a University health centre] have
achieved what was thought impossible, reverse the devastating
regression of
Alzheimer’s dementia!”
(6) In his oral submissions at Hearing, Steve outlined (in summary) the
(a) He relies on the medical facts contained within the Dr Y Report, which
supports that Laura did not have capacity as early as
(b) He reports that Dr Z has falsely claimed that she can cure Alzheimer's
(c) He contends that the “I’ve been right this entire time...
medical facts align with my assessment”.
The Role of a Neuropsychologist in Assessing Capacity
assessing the available medical evidence, and Steve’s arguments in
relation to same, it is important for the Tribunal
to comment on the role of
neuropsychologists in assessing capacity.
Law Society of NSW has released a publication called “
Client’s Capacity is in Doubt: A Practical Guide for
section “When to Refer and to Whom” the guide notes that there are a
number of different professionals who
may be involved in a capacity assessment
“[t]he critical question in making a referral is how much
experience does the medical professional have in the area of mental
assessment of older people or people with a possible mental illness/
intellectual disability/ acquired brain injury?
” The guide outlines a
number of different types of experts and summarises the expertise of such
experts. It includes the following:
“Neurologist: A scientist who specialises in the study of the structure,
functioning and diseases of the nervous system.
Neuropsychologists: A psychologist skilled in conducting assessments that
determine the presence or nature of brain dysfunction,
for example after a head
injury or where dementia is suspected. The assessment is conducted through
interview, observation and psychological
testing and generally involves the
administration of tests of memory, concentration, other thinking skills and
Sydney Neuropsychology Research Clinic provides useful information about the
role of neuropsychological assessment and
intervention.
This includes the
“What is a Clinical Neuropsychologist?
A clinical neuropsychologist is a psychologist who has undergone specialised
training in administering and interpreting neuropsychological
tests. They
understand the types of neuropsychological profiles that are associated with
certain conditions (e.g., Traumatic Brain
Injury, Dementia, Stroke, etc) and
understand the complex interplay between brain function and behaviour.
Neuropsychological assessments
A neuropsychological assessment is an assessment of one’s cognitive
skills; that is, their ‘thinking skills’. An
assessment involves
various standardised neuropsychological tests to evaluate different areas of
thinking: overall intelligence,
attention, memory and learning, language,
perception, higher-level ‘executive functions’ (e.g., planning,
organising,
concept-formation), social cognition and mood. The results from the
testing are compared to average population scores (i.e., ‘normative
data’) and are used in combination with information about the
individual’s medical history, and psychosocial background,
education and
work history, and current environment. This provides the clinical
neuropsychologist with comprehensive information
cognitive strengths and weaknesses.
What is a neuropsychological assessment used for?
A neuropsychological assessment can be used to assist with diagnosis and to
provide understanding of a person’s cognitive strengths
and weaknesses
following injury to the brain or changes in the brain arising from medical
conditions (e.g., neurodegenerative disease,
surgery). It is also important for
informing treatment programs and tailoring them to the individual. An assessment
can also be conducted
for medicolegal purposes, and to provide information on an
individual’s capacity to manage their affairs such as finances and
an article written for the Law Society
Capacity, dementia and neuropsychology
” Lise Berry and Dr
Jane Lonie outline the following:
“It may surprise lawyers to learn that some specialist medical
practitioners, such as geriatricians, neurologists and old age
psychiatrists,
who are frequently called upon to provide opinion pertaining to legal capacity
in the elderly, are not trained in
cognitive (neuropsychological) assessment
beyond administration of brief, low-level cognitive screening measures
(comprising general
questions relating to the date, current prime minister, and
later recall of three objects). Nor have they had clinical training in
of techniques to enhance cognitive performance (ie cognitive rehabilitation).
Without the use of objective formal assessment measures (which allow for
detailed examination and precise quantification of a client’s
abilities and disabilities in relation to their age peers), clinicians are
wholly reliant on information of a qualitative
or observational nature in
arriving at what is then ultimately a subjective opinion as to a client’s
cognitive capacity. The
objective assessment of a client’s cognitive
ability is especially important where the question of capacity arises within a
context of wider family conflict. In these situations, information provided by
family members may be incongruent or incomplete, making
it impossible to rely on
subjective accounts of a client’s capabilities.
As a discipline, geriatric neuropsychology is uniquely placed to assess capacity
in the elderly, combining a knowledge base of neurodegenerative
disease with
extensive training in the administration and interpretation of
standardised/objective cognitive and functional tests
and the application of
rehabilitative strategies to maximise cognitive function and client involvement
in decision making.”
most cases the role of a neurologist and a neuropsychologist are complementary.
Each professional has their own skills and training
relevant to their respective
disciplines, and each can offer unique insights.
Assessment of
the Medical Evidence
to Steve’s firm belief, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the Dr Y Report
is inconsistent with either the 2023 Dr
Z Report or the 2024 Dr Z Report.
the face of the Dr Y Report, Dr Y did not diagnose Laura with Alzheimer’s
dementia. Dr Y reviewed the results of Laura’s
MRI and offered an opinion
that the results were “
suggestive of mild Alzheimer’s
” (emphasis in original).
Y administered a number of
cognitive screening tools
, but nowhere
in his report does Dr Y suggest that he has undertaken a detailed assessment of
Laura’s capacity. Furthermore,
Dr Y makes no comment in his report of the
impact of Laura’s cognitive impairment on her capacity to execute an
enduring instrument
or her ability to manage her financial affairs. Dr Y
appropriately makes referrals for Laura to be assessed and assisted by other
practitioners, inclusive of a psychiatrist and a neuropsychologist.
Tribunal is satisfied that Dr Z, as a clinical neuropsychologist, is
appropriately qualified to assess the impacts of Laura’s
cognitive decline
on her capacity to execute an enduring instrument and her ability to manage her
own affairs.
to Steve’s assertions, in neither of Dr Z’s reports does she suggest
(either explicitly or implicitly) that she
has found a cure for
Alzheimer’s dementia. Dr Z explicitly acknowledges in her reports that
Laura has been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s
dementia, and she does not
express any views inconsistent with such diagnosis.
Y, as a neurologist, is not qualified to administer a neuropsychological
assessment. The capacity
undertaken by him identifies
the need for further assessment, and that assessment was undertaken
comprehensively in 2023 and 2024
by Dr Z, who holds appropriate qualifications
to undertake that assessment.
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s dementia does not, of itself, equate to a lack of
capacity. It is the impact of the cognitive decline
associated with such
diagnosis that is relevant in assessing the issue of capacity. Capacity is
decision specific and may fluctuate
from time to time.
Y’s report, at its highest, identifies the likelihood of a diagnosis of
Alzheimer’s dementia and identifies initial
concerns with respect to an
emerging cognitive impairment.
to Dr Y’s assessment, Laura was treated by Dr X, Old Age Psychiatrist, who
diagnosed her with Alzheimer’s dementia
and referred her for a
comprehensive neuropsychological assessment.
Z’s assessments were comprehensive, involved the administration of
neuropsychological testing as well as necessary psychosocial
assessment,
considered Laura’s capacity in a decision specific context, and provides
useful comparative analysis over a period
the Tribunal finds that Dr Y’s report does not, in any way, contradict Dr
Z’s reports. The reports are complimentary
with different focuses
attributable to their different disciplines.
completeness, however, in the event of any discrepancies between
Dr Y’s evidence and Dr Z’s evidence the Tribunal
prefers the
evidence of Dr Z in circumstances:
(1) Where Dr Z is, objectively, more qualified to make an assessment of capacity
(whereas Dr Y is more qualified to make a diagnosis);
(2) Where Dr Z’s assessments relied on more comprehensive testing;
(3) Where Dr Z’s reports are more recent (including relatively
contemporaneous with the revocation of the 2021 EPOA); and,
(4) Where Dr Z’s assessments of capacity are focussed specifically on
Laura’s capacity to manage her financial affairs
(the 2023 Dr Z Report)
and her capacity to make changes to her enduring instruments (the 2024 Dr Z
REVIEW OF REVOCATION OF THE 2021 EPOA
outlined above, the Tribunal is not obliged to carry out a review of the nature
sought by Steve. The Tribunal has a broad discretion
in considering whether or
not to undertake a review, and it is permissible for the Tribunal to undertake a
general survey of the
evidence produced to inform itself whether or not a full
review should be conducted.
application made by Steve to review the revocation of the 2021 EPOA is made in
circumstances where he asserts that Laura lacked
capacity to revoke the 2021
discussed above, the medical evidence does not support a finding that Laura, as
at the time of the revocation, lacked capacity
to do so. The revocation was made
in close proximity to Laura’s attendance on Dr Z in 2023. Dr Z’s
evidence has been
discussed in detail above, and based on this evidence, the
Tribunal accepts that Laura had the requisite capacity required to revoke
2021 EPOA as at the time of revocation in 2023.
is important to note that this application is not made in a vacuum, and the
Tribunal has had regard to the circumstances surrounding
the application.
the course of the Hearing, Mr M made submissions to the effect that “any
person who does not agree [with Steve] is public
enemy”. This was a
reference to Steve’s conduct to those who disagree with his firm and
unshakable view that Laura lacks
capacity (and has done so since at least 2021)
and is being exploited by others.
was evidence before the Tribunal of Steve’s very public opposition to
those that do not share his views with respect to
the above (including
publication of potentially defamatory material on various websites which are
said to be attributable to Steve).
Such evidence includes:
(1) Complaints and/or public
on the actions of two
accountants engaged to assist Laura, namely Mr V and Mr U (with Mr U also
subject to a formal complaint to
CPA Australia);
(2) Complaints and/or public
on the actions of two
legal representatives engaged by Laura, namely Mr M, and Mr T (with Mr T
apparently subject to a formal complaint
to the Law Society of NSW);
(3) Complaints and/or public
complaints having been made to Dr Z’s employer, a University health
centre, and the Health Care Complaints
Commission, and with Dr Z being required
to apply for an Apprehended Violence Order against Steve;
(4) Complaints made to Bank A, and subsequently to the Australian Financial
Complaints Authority, with respect to the bank’s
refusal to act on advice
from Steve following the revocation of the 2021 EPOA.
was also evidence before the Tribunal of Nicole having successfully obtained a
no contact Apprehended Violence Order against
Ultimately,
when viewed in the context of Steve’s conduct referred to above, and in
circumstances where there is no objective
evidence to support Steve’s
assertion that Laura lacked capacity to revoke the 2021 EPOA. Steve’s
application is essentially
lacking in substance. The Tribunal is not satisfied
that Steve has demonstrated a sufficient basis to warrant the Tribunal
a review of the revocation of the revocation of the 2021 EPOA. The
application is dismissed accordingly.
completeness the Tribunal notes that had the Tribunal exercised its discretion
to undertake a review of the revocation of the
2021 EPOA, the evidence referred
to herein would have otherwise supported an order being made pursuant to
Powers of Attorney Act
declaring that Laura had capacity
to revoke the 2021 EPOA.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT APPLICATION
declined to make any further submissions in support of his application for the
appointment of a financial manager apart from
his complaints detailed above
regarding Dr Z’s evidence and his assertion that Dr Y’s evidence
supported a finding that
Laura lacks capacity to manage her own affairs. Steve
was prompted by the Tribunal on multiple occasions to provide further
submissions
in support of his application, re-iterating that his adjournment
request had been declined, but he did not take advantage of the
opportunity to
is no doubt on the available evidence that Laura lives with Alzheimer’s
dementia and associated cognitive impairment.
diagnosis does not, of itself, make her incapable of managing her affairs. The
Tribunal is required to consider the
impact of Laura’s diagnosis on her
functional capacity to reasonably manage her affairs.
her diagnosis, Dr Z’s reports outline that Laura’s cognitive decline
is primarily in the domain of memory recall
rather than executive function.
During each assessment with Dr Z Laura was able to provide a relatively accurate
account of her financial
circumstances and the supports she has in place to
manage her affairs.
Tribunal was able to engage well with Laura during the Hearing and she readily
provided answers to the Tribunal’s questions
to help understand
Laura’s appreciation of her financial circumstances. Without the need to
refer to any notes or otherwise
seek input from other people in the room, Laura
was able to clearly articulate her understanding of her financial circumstances,
which included the following:
(1) Laura owns real property (her former home at [Address removed for
publication.]) which is valued at approximately $2.4 million.
The property is
rented out at $730 per week. Although Laura was unable to comment with precision
on the nature of the outgoings for
the property, she appropriately outlined that
the property is managed by an agent who is responsible for taking care of those
(2) Laura paid a RAD to an aged care facility approximately five years ago,
valued at $625,000.
(3) Laura has a bank account with Bank B with a balance of approximately
$130,000, and another with Bank A (a term deposit) with
a balance of
approximately $580,000.
(4) Laura holds a share portfolio valued, in total, at about $778,000.
told the Tribunal that she receives informal support from Nicole to manage her
affairs. Most payments are set up to be paid
by direct debit, and for any
expenses which are not set up in this manner, Laura forwards the bills to Nicole
to attend to payment
of her bills. Laura also receives professional accounting
assistance to manage her affairs.
account of her affairs was consistent with the documented evidence before the
Tribunal and otherwise confirmed as accurate
by Nicole (who is also one of
Laura’s attorneys with visibility over her financial affairs).
on 27 November 2024, prepared a Statutory Declaration for the purpose of
ensuring that her views can be appropriately considered
(both with respect to
the current application and any subsequent applications that may be made to the
Tribunal). In this Statutory
Declaration, Laura clearly and unambiguously
outlines the following:
(1) She agrees with her diagnosis of Alzheimer’s dementia, reporting a
deterioration in her memory.
(2) She denies any present difficulties in managing her own financial affairs
other than with respect to attending to internet banking.
(3) She outlines clearly her opposition to Steve managing her affairs, and the
rationale behind her decision-making process [which
the Tribunal considers
unnecessary to outline in detail herein]. Laura also notes the following:
“While I have criticised [Steve] in this statutory declaration I do so
with deep regret and only out of necessity because of
[Steve’]s actions to
date. He is my son and I love him.”
considering whether or not Laura is incapable of managing her affairs, the
Tribunal finds as follows:
(1) The medical evidence available to the Tribunal confirms that Laura lives
with diagnosis of Alzheimer’s dementia with identified
deficits in her
cognitive functions.
(2) Notwithstanding the identified deficits, Laura’s executive functioning
remains largely intact at the present time, though
experiences ongoing
difficulties with respect to memory recall.
(3) Laura has a reasonable appreciation of her financial circumstances and is
able, with appropriate formal and informal supports,
to manage her financial
affairs in a reasonably competent fashion.
(4) Laura is able to demonstrate insight with respect to the impacts of her
cognitive impairment and provide clear and unambiguous
reasoning regarding her
decision for Steve to have no involvement in the management of her financial
all of the circumstances the Tribunal is not satisfied that Laura is incapable
of managing her affairs. In circumstances where
this threshold issue has not
been established, the application for a financial management order must be
to the above finding it is unnecessary for the Tribunal to consider
the other limbs of the test provided for in
Guardianship Act
, or the matters raised in
Guardianship
. Notwithstanding this, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to make
brief comment on these matters, in the event that the Tribunal
has reached an
incorrect conclusion on the threshold issue of whether Laura is incapable of
managing her affairs.
considering whether there is a need for another person to manage Laura’s
affairs, and whether it is in her best interests
for a financial management
order to be made, the Tribunal is satisfied that there are appropriate formal
arrangements in place, through
the appointment of Nicole and Christopher as
Laura’s attorneys. Accordingly, if the Tribunal had found Laura to be
of managing her affairs, the Tribunal was otherwise satisfied that the
application ought to be dismissed on these discretionary grounds.
Furthermore,
in the event that the Tribunal had determined that a financial management order
should be made for Laura, the Tribunal
was not satisfied that Steve should be
appointed to such role.
reaching this conclusion the Tribunal notes the following:
(1) Laura has very firm objection to the appointment of Steve to manage her
affairs. Although the Tribunal is not bound by Laura’s
views, the Tribunal
is obliged to take Laura’s views into account in making any decisions
Guardianship Act
The evidence provided by Laura
outlines a rational explanation for her views in opposition to Steve’s
appointment.
(2) Steve has fixed views about the management of his mother’s financial
affairs, is not receptive to competent medical advice,
and is dismissive and
obstructive with respect to legal determinations relating to this issue. It is
evident to the Tribunal that
this lack of objectivity would impact Steve’s
ability to make dispassionate decisions about Laura’s finances.
written evidence to the Tribunal outlines that, on account of
Steve’s abuse, several professionals have declined to continue
with Laura.
(3) The Tribunal has an obligation, to the extent possible, to ensure
that Laura is protected from neglect, abuse and exploitation:
Guardianship Act
The appointment of Steve as Laura’s
financial manager would be inconsistent with this obligation. In reaching this
the Tribunal finds that Steve’s conduct towards his mother is
entirely inconsistent with the expectations of an appointed financial
In support of this conclusion the Tribunal notes, inter alia, the text messages
provided to the Tribunal by Laura which
are purported to have been sent to her
by Steve on 7 October 2024 (“Annexure EWU 3” to the statement
prepared by Laura
dated 27 February 2025), some of which are extracted below:
“I don’t care if I see you again, I will destroy [Nicole], [Mr W],
[Mr U] and [Mr T] for the pain in misery they have
put me through. A pain in
misery which you are f**** exacerbating” (sic; censorship in original).
I’m sick of you and your f*** dementia. You’re a fool and
you’ve got f** dementia and you have no idea what the
f** going on you
just keep talking at the same f*** s** over and over again” (censorship in
F*** dementia f** you” (censorship in original).
You make me want to f**** kill myself (censorship in original).
I f**** hate everything because of you (censorship in original).
You kill Dad and now you’re going to kill me.
I don’t know why he [dad] put up with you, I can’t stand being
around you. You always want to start a fight and I f****
(censorship in original).
You f**** failure” (censorship in original).”
not expressed in these words, Laura also raised concerns about a possible
conflict of interest in Steve’s appointment
as her financial manager. At
Hearing, Laura expressed a view to the Tribunal with words to the effect of
my son is upset that I am spending his inheritance
Statutory Declaration (at [10(vi)]) Laura also states “[
Steve] wants to
be totally in control of my finances. He is not able to co-operate with others.
It is my opinion that he thinks that
I am spending his
inheritance
her statement dated 27 February 2025, Laura also states the following (at
paragraph [20]):
“[Steve] has expressed concern about amounts totalling $25,000 that have
been withdrawn from my account. [Steve] has not disclosed
that I have given him
lump some (sic) amounts during that period. I had a (strikethrough in original)
separately been making payments
of $1000 per week to [Steve]. These payments
commenced in June 2024. [Steve] took me to my bank so that the payments could be
by direct debit from one of my bank accounts. I stopped payments to [Steve]
in January this year after [Steve] made his current application.”
observations about Steve’s concerns about her “spending his
inheritance” are not without merit. In
a document submitted to the
Tribunal on 16 January 2025 titled “Summery of events” (sic) Steve,
when addressing concerns
also Steve’s accountant), states the following:
“Concerned, I asked my accountant for an explanation, especially
considering my future inheritance and my mother’s memory
challenges.”
CONCLUDING COMMENTS
Tribunal has no doubt that Steve will be deeply saddened by the outcome of his
applications, and very likely will not agree with
the Tribunal’s
is evident to the Tribunal that Laura has much love for her son, and that Steve
has much love for his mother. It is also evident
to the Tribunal that
Steve’s continued applications to the Tribunal have the unintended effect
of further jeopardising the
relationship between Laura and Steve.
Tribunal urges Steve to reflect on the Tribunal’s Reason’s for
Decision, consider the detrimental impact his actions
are having on his
relationship with his mother, and consider whether the significant effort he has
expended in progressing these
applications could be more appropriately expended
on repairing his relationship with Laura before her cognitive decline progresses
to a point where such repair may no longer be
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
The date recorded for
Steve’s acceptance of his appointment on the file copy of the 2021 EPOA is
unclear – it identifies
that Steve accepted his appointment on the 29th
day of a month in 2022, but it is unclear on account of the poor copy quality
the acceptance occurred in May, June or August. Nothing turns on the
date of acceptance.
particular [40]-[50] of the Reasons for Decision for the orders made on 14 March
2024 in relation to the Tribunal’s
The Tribunal
considered this necessary on account of written evidence before the Tribunal
suggestive that particulars of previous
proceedings, including unauthorised
audio recordings of the proceedings, may have been improperly published
Dr Z’s role in
relation to Laura is discussed further
Noting that the NSW
Trustee and Guardian is a statutory party to the applications but did not
participate in the Hearing.
[22]-[26] of the Reasons for Decision for the 14 March 2024
The Tribunal notes that
scores below 88/100 may be an indication of cognitive impairment, and scores
below 61/100 may indicate moderate
The Tribunal notes
that scores below 24/30 may be an indication of cognitive impairment, and scores
between 10-21/30 may indicate
The Tribunal notes
that scores below 26/30 are suggestive of mild cognitive impairment, and scores
below 22/30 may indicate cognitive
impairment.
https://www.lawsociety.com.au/sites/default/files/2018-03/Clients mental
capacity.pdf
https://www.sydney.edu.au/brain-mind/our-clinics/neuropsychology-clinic.html#:~:text=Neuropsychological
assessments,-A neuropsychological
assessment&text=This provides the clinical
neuropsychologist,between brain function and
https://lsj.com.au/articles/capacity-dementia-and-neuropsychology/#:~:text=What
is your client capable,are likely to remain intact.&text=d)
Fluctuations in
cognitive function,disease or Primary Progressive
Including: [Website
removed for publication]
Including: [Website removed for publication] and [Website removed for
publication]
[Website removed for publication]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (387 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter