URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2024/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alice (a pseudonym) [2024] NSWCATGD 29; (10 December 2024)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Alice (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWCATGD 29
Hearing Date(s):
10 December 2024
Date of Orders:
10 December 2024
Decision Date:
10 December 2024
Guardianship Division
R H Booby, Principal Member
Dr B McPhee, Senior Member
(Professional)
D R Sword, General Member (Community)
Special Medical Treatment
The Tribunal consents to the
following special medical treatment being provided to
hysterectomy by laparotomy under a general anaesthetic and
any necessary treatment that would normally be provided in association
directly consequent upon the above treatment.
This consent is
effective for a period of four month(s) from the date of this
Guardianship
1. A guardianship order is made
2. Rose, of [Address removed for publication.], is
appointed as the guardian.
3. Charlie, of [Address removed for
publication.], is appointed as the alternative guardian.
a continuing guardianship order for a period of 12 months from 10 December
5. This order will not be reviewed at the end of the above
6. This is a limited guardianship order giving the
guardian(s) custody of Alice to the extent necessary to carry out the functions
FUNCTIONS: Rose
7. Rose has the following
a) Health care
To decide what health care
Alice may receive.
b) Medical/Dental consent
substitute decisions about proposed minor or major medical or dental treatment,
where Alice is not capable of giving a valid
8. The condition of this order
a) Standard Condition
In exercising this role, the
guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring Alice to an understanding of
the issues and to obtain
and consider her views before making significant
Catchwords:
CONSENT TO MEDICAL TREATMENT – application for hysterectomy with
retention of ovaries – 33-year-old woman with a large
uterine fibroid
– potential malignancy – proposed treatment is special medical
treatment – treatment would render
person infertile –whether person
is able to consent to treatment – person has a general understanding of
procedure but
lacks depth – person incapable of giving consent –
condition poses serious risk to person’s health – alternative
strategies available but less suitable – consent to treatment provided
– effective for a period of four months.
GUARDIANSHIP
– application for a guardianship order for person – whether person
is “in need of a guardian –
satisfied that due to lifelong
intellectual disability person is “in need of a guardian” –
person also unable to
obtain medical treatment without guardianship order - who
should be the guardian – person’s mother meets the requirements
be appointed – person’s mother appointed for a period of 12
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
Cases Cited:
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
[2011] NSWSC 257
[2003] NSWSC
[2019] NSWCATAP 64
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
001: Guardianship Application
Alice (the person)
(applicant)
Charlie (joined party)
Public Guardian
002: Consent to
Special Medical Treatment
Alice (the person)
(applicant)
Charlie (joined party)
Representation:
P Im as separate representative for Alice
File Number(s):
NCAT 2024/00295734
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
is 33 years old and lives with her mother, Rose and her father, Charlie, in
Northwest Sydney, NSW.
9 August 2024, the Tribunal received an application from Rose seeking a
guardianship order for Alice. On 30 September 2024, the
Tribunal received an
application from Rose seeking consent for medical treatment for Alice. The
proposed treatment was a hysterectomy
with retention of ovaries, for the purpose
of removing a significantly enlarged uterine fibroid.
1 November 2024, the Tribunal ordered that Alice be separately represented.
Peter Im was the separate representative.
SPECIAL MEDICAL
The Hearing
participated in the hearing along with her parents and Dr Z, Gynaecologist and
Specialist Laparoscopic and Robotic Surgeon.
WHAT MUST BE
medical treatment is defined in
Guardianship Act
(NSW), as including:
33 Definitions
any treatment that is intended, or is reasonably likely, to have the effect of
rendering permanently infertile the person on whom
it is carried out ...
If a person is incapable of giving informed consent to special
medical treatment, then only the Tribunal may provide consent:
Guardianship Act
s 36(1)(b).
Guardianship Act
, a person is incapable of giving consent
to the carrying out of medical treatment if the person
(1) is incapable of understanding the general nature and effect of the proposed
treatment, or
(2) is incapable of indicating whether or not he or she consents or does not
consent to the treatment being carried out.
Guardianship Act
requires that the Tribunal
give consent
to the carrying out of special treatment unless it is satisfied that the
treatment is necessary to (a) save the patient’s
life or (b) to prevent
serious damage to the patient’s health:
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
imposes a further consideration on the Tribunal in
of that Act. That section directs that if consent is to be given to medical or
dental treatment, the Tribunal must be satisfied that
it is “appropriate
for the treatment to be carried out” and must have regard to the views of
the patient, the person
who is proposing that medical treatment be carried out
on the patient and any persons responsible for the patient.
Tribunal must also take into account matters set out in
Guardianship Act
(1) the grounds on which it is alleged that the patient is a patient to whom
this Part applies;
(2) the particular condition of the patient that requires treatment;
(3) the alternative courses of treatment that are available in relation to that
(4) the general nature and effect of each of those courses of treatment;
(5) the nature and degree of the significant risks (if any) associated with each
of those courses of treatment; and
(6) the reasons for which it is proposed that any particular course of treatment
should be carried out.
summary, therefore, the issues for determination by the Tribunal are as
(1) Is the treatment proposed by the applicant “special medical
treatment”?
(2) Is Alice incapable of giving consent to the proposed special treatment?
(3) Is the treatment necessary to save Alice’s life or is the treatment
necessary to prevent serious damage to Alice’s
(4) Is the proposed special treatment the most appropriate form of treatment for
promoting and maintaining Alice’s health and
well-being?
Is the proposed treatment ‘special treatment’?
a Health Professional Report Form for Special Medical Treatment, Dr Z describes
the procedure as a hysterectomy with retention
of the ovaries. In a letter dated
1 February 2024 addressed to Dr Y at a medical centre, Dr Z indicates that as
the treatment would
render Alice infertile, consent would be required from the
Tribunal if Alice were unable to provide her own consent.
regard to the nature of the proposed treatment and the opinion of Dr Z, we were
satisfied that the treatment would render Alice
permanently infertile.
Is Alice incapable of providing consent to the proposed
Guardianship Act
provides that a person is incapable of
giving or withholding consent to medical or dental treatment if the
(1) is incapable of understanding the general nature and effect of the proposed
treatment; or
(2) is incapable of indicating whether or not he or she consents or does not
consent to the treatment being carried out.
her application for guardianship, Brena reports that Alice has an intellectual
disability and that doctors have refused to treat
Alice without the appointment
of a guardian.
her application for consent to medical treatment, Rose indicates her view that
Alice is able to consent to the treatment having
discussed the matter with her
psychologist, Ms X.
were provided with a number of reports compiled when Alice was a child. These
reports include a diagnosis of microcephaly with
developmental delay and
a report dated 11 June 2024, Ms X indicates the following:
(1) Alice has been diagnosed with a moderate intellectual disability as well as
an expressive and receptive language disorder and
(2) During sessions with Alice they discussed the need for the proposed
procedure, the procedure itself, and post procedure issues.
Alice understood why
the procedure was required and expressed a willingness to undergo the procedure
to reduce her pain. She asked
if she would be “put to sleep” during
the procedure and asked how painful the procedure would be and how long she
need to be in hospital. In a subsequent session after more than one month,
Alice was able to describe the procedure and the reason
it was needed, the
difference in her body before and after the surgery and options if, in the
future, she wanted to raise a child.
She also discussed her chances of carrying
a pregnancy to full term if she did not undergo the surgery as well as how the
would change her life.
(3) Based on her sessions with Alice, Ms X considered it likely that Alice could
consent to the procedure. However she discussed
with Rose the advantages of
obtaining a second opinion.
a letter dated 6 June 2024 addressed to Dr Y, Dr Z states that he had advised
Rose that a hysterectomy was the preferred treatment
for Alice, but that,
because of her intellectual disability, Alice was not able to consent to the
treatment. As it would take time
to finalise an application to the Tribunal, he
had referred Alice to Dr W, an Interventional Radiologist, to consider uterine
embolisation as a temporary measure. During the hearing, Rose said that
Dr W had refused to make an appointment for Alice because
Rose was not appointed
as Alice’s guardian.
a letter dated 7 November 2024 to the Tribunal, Dr Z comments that, given
Alice’s intellectual disability “I suspect
she has limited
understanding of her condition and, therefore, she cannot provide informed
consent”. However he notes that
she had indicated that she would prefer a
“definitive procedure such as a hysterectomy”.
the hearing, Dr Z said that when he discussed the proposed procedure with Alice,
she seemed to understand about the condition
to be treated and some aspects of
the procedure, but she lacked a depth of understanding.
the hearing, Alice was able to describe the procedure in general terms. However
her focus was on relief from the pain of the
fibroid. Her description of the
procedure itself was limited and she could not outline the risks of the
procedure. She said that
she thought she needed her mother to be her guardian to
make difficult decisions for her.
said that she believes that Alice is able to make her own medical decisions and
that when the procedure has been outlined, she
has understood what had been
said, but she later forgets the detail.
Im said that he considered it likely that Alice understands the general nature
and effect of the treatment but was unable to understand
some of its more
complex aspects. He noted that as he was a male, Alice might not have felt able
to discuss private medical details
were satisfied that Alice has some understanding of the procedure. However we
noted that Dr Z and Dr W had not been willing to
accept her consent to the
proposed procedure or the proposed interim procedure. Despite the views
expressed by Ms X we considered
Alice’s understanding of the procedure to
be lacking in detail.
were satisfied, on balance, that Alice’s understanding of the nature and
effect of the treatment was insufficient to provide
consent to this procedure,
involving, as it does, major surgery, significant post operative care needs and
resultant infertility.
What is the particular condition of the
patient that requires treatment?
the Health Professional Report Form and letters to Dr Y and to the Tribunal, Dr
Z describes a fibroid measuring 131mm by 121mm
that was causing Alice to have
dysmenorrhea with heavy menstrual bleeding and anemia. He also notes that
enlarged fibroids cause
pressure on internal organs resulting in bowel and
bladder dysfunction including obstructed voiding and urinary retention, and that
Alice experiences urinary difficulty with occasional incontinence.
a letter to the Tribunal dated 13 November 2024 Dr Y, Alice’s GP,
describes Alice as having severe dysmenorrhea and an iron
deficiency requiring
iron infusions, as well as nocturnal urinary frequency due to pressure from the
results of an ultrasound performed on 14 November 2024 indicate that
Alice’s uterus was markedly enlarged as the result
of a fibroid measuring
195mm x 145mm x 137mm that had increased in size since January 2024.
Z commented that the changes indicated by the MRI raised a question of
malignancy that, whilst unlikely, could not be discounted
and could not be
assessed pre-operatively.
Why is it proposed that the treatment
should be carried out?
Z indicated that the treatment was the most appropriate treatment to remove the
fibroid and resultant pain, pressure on organs
and excessive bleeding, as well
as to minimise the risk resulting from the possibility that the fibroid was
What are the alternative options for treatment that
are available?
Z advised the following:
(1) Alice has been started on progesterone to manage bleeding. Medical and
hormonal treatments such as progesterone could assist
to manage some of the
symptoms of Alice’s condition, but the symptoms would re-emerge if
treatment was discontinued. Those
methods would also be ineffective in treating
the effects of pressure exerted by the fibroid on internal organs. In addition,
of these medications are known to adversely affect bone density.
(2) As an interim measure he had suggested uterine artery embolisation that
could assist to reduce the symptoms and would be of assistance
for the later
surgery. Embolisation would reduce the size of the fibroids but was not an ideal
treatment where there was a risk of
cancer. (As noted above, Dr W had refused to
make an appointment for Alice to discuss this proposal).
(3) Endometrial ablation could also reduce the bleeding but due to the
enlargement of Alice’s uterus this was not a preferred
(4) Myomectomy would remove the fibroid whilst leaving the uterus intact.
However this was not advisable due to Alice’s enlarged
uterus and because
of the possibility that the fibroid could be cancerous. If that were the case,
myomectomy would risk dissemination
of the cancer cells and would not prevent
regrowth within the uterus.
Z explained that there are three main surgical approaches to hysterectomies,
being vaginal, abdominal (laparotomy) and laparoscopic.
In Alice’s case,
the fibroid is too large to allow a vaginal procedure. A laparoscopic
hysterectomy involving keyhole surgery
is sometimes possible but is not
appropriate for Alice’s condition because the fibroid would need to be cut
into smaller pieces
for removal and this would increase the risk of spread of
possibly cancerous cells. Dr Z advised that in Alice’s case the
appropriate
procedure was a laparotomy by way of a surgical incision into the
abdominal cavity.
Im submitted that having regard to the views and information provided by Dr Z,
alternative treatments were not appropriate and
that the proposed treatment was
the most appropriate treatment for Alice’s condition.
accepted and placed weight on the views of Dr Z as a specialist practitioner and
we were satisfied on his evidence that alternative
treatments had been
considered and were not appropriate to Alice’s circumstances.
Are there any risks associated with the proposed
Z referred to risks including pain, bleeding, infection possible damage to
surrounding organs and the usual risks of a general
anesthetic.
are satisfied that the risks of the procedure are not greater than is reasonable
having regard to Alice’s diagnosed condition
and the effects of the
fibroid and its increase in size and the possibility that it could be
Is the proposed treatment necessary to save the
patient’s life or prevent serious damage to health and how will the
treatment promote and maintain the patient’s health and
Im submitted that the medical evidence clearly indicated that the proposed
treatment was necessary to prevent serious damage to
Alice’s health and to
promote and maintain her health and welfare. He also submitted that consent to
the treatment was appropriate,
having regard to the objects of
Guardianship Act
, including that people are not deprived of necessary
treatment merely because they lack the ability to consent to the treatment.
are satisfied that if the fibroid is cancerous, its removal and the removal of
the uterus is required to prevent growth and would
therefore be lifesaving.
are also satisfied that even if the fibroid is not cancerous, its removal is
necessary to prevent serious damage to Alice’s
health that results from
dysmenorrhea with heavy bleeding and anemia and to relieve pressure on
Alice’s organs with resultant
bowel and bladder issues. We are satisfied
that alternative methods of performing a hysterectomy are inappropriate and that
case of Alice, the procedure needs to be by way of a laparotomy.
Consent to treatment
reached the decisions noted above, we consented to the hysterectomy by
laparotomy under a general anaesthetic and any necessary
treatment that would
normally be provided in association with or directly consequent upon the above
response to a question as to when the surgery might be conducted having regard
to public hospital operating schedules, Dr Z indicated
that it was unlikely that
the condition would be triaged as one requiring surgery within 30 days but was
hopeful that it would be
assessed as requiring treatment within three months.
Accordingly, we made the consent effective for a period of four month(s) from
the date of this order.
GUARDIANSHIP APPLICATION
What did we have to decide?
questions we must decide are:
(1) Is Alice someone for whom we could make an order because [she] is a
“person in need of a guardian”?
(2) Should we make a guardianship order?
(a) what functions should the guardian be given?
(b) who should be the guardian?
(c) how long should the order last?
Is Alice a ‘person in need of a guardian’?
Guardianship Act
provides that the Tribunal may make a
guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that [she] is “a person
a guardian”.
person in need of a guardian is “a person who because of a disability
is totally or partially incapable of managing his or
her person”:
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
defines a person with a disability as a
person who is:
(a) intellectually, physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) of advanced age;
(c) a mentally ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act
(d) otherwise disabled;
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one or more major life activities
to such an extent that he or she requires supervision
or social habilitation
(i.e. services to be able to function in the community).
Consideration
accepted the medical evidence outlined in the section of these Reasons dealing
with the application for consent to special medical
treatment and we are
satisfied that Alice has a lifelong intellectual disability and as a result she
is not able to manage her self-care
or to make important complex decisions about
her medical treatment. We are satisfied that as a result she is at least
partially unable
to manage her person.
Should we make a
guardianship order?
deciding whether to make, or not to make, a guardianship order, we must consider
each of the matters set out in
Guardianship Act
(a) the views (if any) of:
(i) the person, and
(ii) the person’s spouse, and
(iii) the person’s carer, and
(b) the importance of preserving the person’s existing family
relationships, and
(c) the importance of preserving the person’s particular cultural and
linguistic environments, and
(d) the practicability of services being provided to the person without the need
for the making of such an order.
decision to make or to decline to make a guardianship order under
Guardianship Act
is a discretionary one, informed by the mandatory
considerations listed in
of that Act and the general principles set out
of that Act:
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
. The matters set
Guardianship Act
have no hierarchy or
at [34]. We are not limited to considering those
Guardianship Act
provides that, in exercising functions under
that Act with respect to people who have disabilities, we must observe the
principles:
(1) the welfare and interests of such persons should be given paramount
consideration;
(2) the freedom of decision and freedom of action of such persons should be
restricted as little as possible;
(3) such persons should be encouraged, as far as possible, to live a normal life
in the community;
(4) the views of such persons in relation to the exercise of those functions
should be taken into consideration;
(5) the importance of preserving the family relationships and the cultural and
linguistic environments of such persons should be
recognised;
(6) such persons should be encouraged, as far as possible, to be self-reliant in
matters relating to their personal, domestic and
financial affairs;
(7) such persons should be protected from neglect, abuse and exploitation;
(8) the community should be encouraged to apply and promote these principles.
The views of the subject person
told us that she wanted her mother to make decisions that she is not able to
make for herself.
The views of the carer
said that she accompanies Alice to her medical appointments and consults with
her doctors and allied health practitioners. She
said that she consented to Ms X
conducting the assessment of Alice’s ability to consent to the proposed
special medical treatment.
is indicated in the section of these Reasons dealing with the consent for
special medical treatment, Rose said that despite a referral
from Dr Z, Dr W
refused to make an appointment for Alice because she lacked a guardian.
The importance of preserving the person’s existing family
relationships and particular cultural and linguistic environments
her report, Ms X speaks of the closeness between Rose and Alice. We accept
that evidence which is consistent with the views of
Alice and her mother.
On the basis of this evidence, we are satisfied that making a guardianship order
appointing Rose as the guardian
would not adversely affect Alice’s family
relationships or cultural and linguistic environment.
practicality of services being provided without a guardianship order
Guardianship Act
establishes that a person who provides
care and support for a person with a disability is a ‘person
responsible’ who is
able to provide substitute consent for medical
treatment of a person unable to provide his or her own consent. Rose would
to be a ‘person responsible’ for Alice. However as noted
above, Rose told us that her status as a substitute medical
decision-maker for
Alice was not recognised by Dr W, a specialist practitioner to whom Alice had
been referred. We are satisfied
that despite the provisions of
Guardianship Act
it has not been practical for Alice to receive medical
services that she requires in the absence of a guardianship order. Having
to this matter we are satisfied that there is a need to appoint a guardian
to provide or refuse consent to medical treatment
for Alice. As that
decision-maker requires access to health care information about Alice
and may need to transmit that information
to medical and allied health
practitioners, we are satisfied that the guardian should also be provided with a
health care function.
Who should be the guardian?
proposes that she be appointed as the guardian. To appoint Rose, we must be
satisfied that she meets the requirements of
Guardianship
. She must:
(1) have a personality generally compatible with the personality of the Alice;
(2) have no undue conflict of interest (particularly financial) between their
interest and those of the Alice; and
(3) be able and willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, we must
consider whether the proposed guardian is able, having
regard to the
circumstances, to exercise the functions in accordance with the principles set
Guardianship Act
[2019] NSWCATAP 64
[2011] NSWSC 257
, the Supreme Court
noted the importance of the proposed guardian being able to demonstrate insight
and explain plans for how to act
as guardian objectively and without conflict of
Public Guardian cannot be appointed as a person’s guardian if there is an
individual who can be appointed:
Guardianship Act
Commenting on
that provision, in
[2003] NSWSC 1170
, the Supreme Court
“[T]he proper meaning to be given to the section is to read it as saying
that the Public Guardian should not be appointed in
circumstances in which an
order can properly be made in favour of another person. That requires not only
that the person be willing,
reliable and responsible, but that the appointment
will result in the policy considerations and principles set forth in the Act
given effect.”
were satisfied that Rose understands Alice’s needs and is ready and able
to make the decisions set out in the order. There
was no evidence of any
conflict of interest between Rose and Alice and no evidence of any lack of
compatibility in their personalities.
We were satisfied that Rose meets the
requirements to be appointed as the private guardian for Alice.
How long should the order last?
initial guardianship order can be made for a period of up to one year.
We made the order for 12 months. Upon review, the ongoing
need for the
order will be considered.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (287 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter