URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2008/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cheng [2008] NSWPB 7 (12 November 2008)
[2008] NSWPB 7
Heath Care Complaints Commission v Wang Kin
12 November 2008
The complaint of professional misconduct alleged; the supply of large
quantities of pseudoephedrine single ingredient tablets in 1997;
false and misleading information to NSW Health Department officers during the
course of their investigation in to the
supply of pseudoephedrine products from
his pharmacy; and the inappropriate disposal of approximately 3,125
pseudoephedrine tablets
by flushing them down the pharmacy’s toilet. It
was further alleged that the supply of the single ingredient pseudoephedrine
tablets from his pharmacy was not in accordance with recognised therapeutic
standards and that he knew or ought to have known that
such products were liable
to abuse. The pharmacist denied the supply of single ingredient pseudoephedrine
products to Dennis and
Tracy Watkins but admitted that the tablets were flushed
down the toilet – this method of disposal was taught during his course
Brighton Polytechnic (UK) as a safe disposal method.
Board is satisfied to the Briginshaw standard that the pharmacist provided false
and/or misleading information to NSW Health Department
officer visiting his
pharmacy. However, the Board is not satisfied to the Briginshaw standard that
the pharmacist provided false
or misleading information in his response to the
notice issues under
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
Board is not comfortably satisfied that the disposal of tablets in the manner
alleged constitutes professional misconduct in the
circumstances of this case
including, the pharmacist’s distressed state, the involvement of a number
of people including the
pharmacist in charge and family members in the disposal
of the tablets, his education concerning destruction of drugs in the U.K.
the absence of specific legislative guidance. Additionally, the pharmacist in
charge at the relevant time had not expressed any
concern to him about the
method of disposal.
Board is satisfied that the pharmacist’s pharmacy supplied Dennis Watkins
with about $8,000 value of Sudafed tablets on
or about 20 June 1997 and that a
further supply of Stephen Hunter Chemists’ Own pseudoephedrine tablets
occurred on 25 June
199. The Board is satisfied that these supplies amount to
professional misconduct by the pharmacist.
conduct, the subject of the complaint, occurred over 10 years ago at a time when
the profession was only just becoming aware that
pharmacies were being targeted
as a source of pseudoephedrine for the illicit manufacture of amphetamines. The
pharmacist had sold
his pharmacy business in August 1998 and has not continued
to work as a pharmacist nor has he engaged in continuing professional
Accordingly the Board does not consider that there is any useful purpose in
ordering de-registration or a period of suspension.
pharmacist is severely reprimanded; required to notify the Board in writing of
his resumption of practice; to be supervised in
his practice for a period of 12
months and in conjunction successfully complete the Pharmacy Graduate Training
Course or equivalent
program; to undertake an oral assessment and complete
educative and ethics course and maintain professional memberships.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on 27 February 2007, 28
February 2007, 1 March 2007 and 2 March 2007 into a complaint of professional
misconduct made under the provisions of the
Pharmacy Act 1964
Act”) by the Health Care Complaints Commission ("the Complainant"),
against Wang Kin Cheng (aka John Cheng) ("the
Respondent") of 9 Bruce Avenue,
Killara, a pharmacist registered in New South Wales.
The Complaint dated 2 August 2004 (“the
Complaint”), alleges that the Respondent:
(a) demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, experience, skill, judgment or
care in the practice of pharmacy;
(b) engaged in conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy that is improper or
The particulars of the Complaint are:
or about 20 June 1997 the Respondent supplied 990 packets of pseudoephedrine
tablets, where pseudoephedrine is the sole active
ingredient, commonly known
as Sudafed tablets to known persons:
(a) in a quantity and/or for a purpose
that did not accord with the recognised therapeutic standard;
(b) when he knew or by exercising reasonable judgment ought to
have known, the substance supplied was liable to abuse.
or about 23 June 1997 the Respondent supplied 860 packets of pseudoephedrine
tablets, where pseudoephedrine is the sole active
ingredient, commonly known as
Stephen Hunter Chemist Own Pseudo ephedrine tablets to known persons:
a quantity and for a purpose that did not accord with the recognised
therapeutic standard; and
(b) when he knew or by exercising
reasonable professional judgment ought to have known, the substance supplied was
liable to abuse.
Respondent provided false and/or misleading information to an officer of the
New South Wales Health Department in that:
(a) on 9 December 1997 he
stated that the total stock of Pseudoephedrine tablets at Kariong Pharmacy at
that time was 89 packets;
or alternatively
(b) on 23 December 1997
he stated in his response to a notice issued under
and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
that the total stock of pseudoephedrine
tablets at Kariong Pharmacy on 9 December
1997 was 3191 packets
23 December 1997 the Respondent disposed of approximately 3,125 boxes of
pseudoephedrine tablets by an inappropriate method, that
is, by flushing the
tablets down the toilet at Kariong Pharmacy.
The following documents were submitted to the Board
in evidence on behalf of the Complainant:
Exhibit 1 - Two folders containing
the following documents:
to Pharmacy Board dated 2 August 2004.
to Respondent from Mr K Pehm, Deputy Commissioner, HCCC dated 28 May 2004 re
section 40(1)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
to Mr Glenn K Walsh, Solicitor for the Respondent from Ms Angela O’Gorman,
Senior Investigation Officer, HCCC dated 15
October 2001 regarding the complaint
by the PSB against the Respondent with the following attachments:
Declaration by Bruce Lindsay Battye, Principal Pharmaceutical Adviser.
to Ms A Adrian, Commissioner, HCCC from Mr John Lumby, Chief Pharmacist,
Director, PSB dated 16 November 2000 re papers, reports,
statements and
transcripts relating to supply of pseudo ephedrine tablets by the
Respondent.
Photographs
of pharmacy premises.
by Ian Anderson, Pharmaceutical Adviser, Inspections/ Investigations, PSB dated
22 December 1997 re inspection of Kariong Pharmacy.
Handwritten
list of members of “Power” buying
Peer Review (plus information
provided to peer)
from Mr Chris Waters, Manager, Complaint Resolution Team - Northern, HCCC to Mr
David North dated 5 August 2003 requesting
peer review.
of complaint from John Lumby, Chief Pharmacist and Director, PSB dated 16
November 2000 to Ms Amanda Adrian, Commissioner,
from Bruce Battye, Principal Pharmaceutical Adviser, Inspections &
Investigation, PSB dated 17 August 2000.
letter to Mr Cheng from John Lumby, Acting Chief Pharmacist, Manager, PSB
dated 5 December 1997.
by Ian Anderson, Pharmaceutical Adviser, NSW Department of Health, dated 9
December 1997.
by Ian Anderson, Pharmaceutical Adviser, dated 22 December 1997 with
attachments.
by S/C Paul Willingham, Crimes Agencies, dated 12 December 1997 with
attachments.
from Mr Michael Hardie, Inspector, Pharmacy Board to Bruce Battye, PSB dated 24
December 1997.
of conversation with Evelyn Yeoh by Ian Anderson, Pharmaceutical Adviser dated
10 February 1998.
from Mr John W K Cheng to John Lumby, Acting Chief Pharmacist, NSW Health
Department dated 6 January 1997 (sic) date stamped
7 January 1998.
by Bruce Battye, Principal Pharmaceutical Adviser, Inspections/ Investigations,
PSB dated 16 March 1998.
by Bruce Battye, Principal Pharmaceutical Adviser, Inspections/Investigations,
PSB dated 27 September 1999.
of judgment in the District Court, NSW Criminal Jurisdiction - 99/11/1055
John Wang Kin Cheng
from Glenn K Walsh, Solicitor to Mr Bruce Battye, PSB dated 29 June 2000.
of police brief - Operation Gymea.
Declaration from Bruce Battye, PSB dated 14 June 2001.
from Glenn K Walsh, Solicitor, to HCCC dated 20 December 2000 regarding factual
errors and false statements in the letter of
Mr Battye dated 16 November 2000 to
from Glenn K Walsh, Solicitor, to HCCC dated 18 October 2001.
from HCCC to Glenn K Walsh, Solicitor, to HCCC dated 29 November 2001 re
responses to the particulars requested by the HCCC
on 15 October 2001.
from Glenn K Walsh, Solicitor, to HCCC dated 29 November 2001 re responses to
the particulars requested by the HCCC on 15 October
to Glenn K Walsh, Solicitor, from HCCC dated 20 August 2002.
from Glenn K Walsh, Solicitor, to HCCC dated 11 September 2002.
to Glenn K Walsh, Solicitor, from HCCC dated 1 August 2003.
from Ms Rochelle Dunlop, Investigation Officer, HCCC to Mr David North, Peer
Reviewer, dated 22 April 2004 re allegation that
Respondent inappropriately
disposed of approximately 3125 boxes of pseudoephedrine tablets.
from Mr David North, peer reviewer to Ms R Dunlop, HCCC dated 22 May 2004 re
standard or acceptable manner of disposal of scheduled
medications in 1997.
Review report and curriculum vitae
by Mr Ian Dean dated 2 November 1999.
Supplementary
statement of Mr Ian Dean dated 14 February 2005.
of Mr Arthur Loveday dated 17 February 2005.
of Mr Michael Hardie dated 17 February 2005.
of Ms Evelyn Yeoh Pharmacist dated 27 January 2005.
of Mr Troy Carl Kaizik dated 14 February 2005.
of Det Senior Constable Paul Willingham dated 10 February 1998 and 18 January
Sheet - Tracie Narelle Watkins re Charges -
knowingly take
part in the manufacture of methyl amphetamine (large commercial quantity);
knowingly take
part in the supply of a prohibited drug - ecstasy (commercial quantity)
Transcripts of proceedings in District Court of New South Wales
Criminal Jurisdiction:
v John Wang Kin Cheng (Matter No. 99/11/1044) before Judge G Woods Monday 8
November 1999 to Friday 19 November 1999 inclusive:
Certification
of transcript
to Proceedings
articles regarding the illegal use of pseudoephedrine
drug tops list for speed merchants”, Sydney Morning Herald, Monday 24 June
dealers hit pharmacies”, Pharmacy Trade, June 1996.
“Pseudoephedrine
used to manufacture ‘Speed’”, Guild Bulletin 1996.
Code of Professional conduct
of Professional Conduct, Pharmacy Practice Handbook, February 1998
Listening Device Material
Tape Number
24 June 1997
24 June 1997
11:01 - 11:15
299A(page 6)
24 June 1997
14:58 - 15:01
26 June 1997
11:51 - 11:53
26 June 1997
14:09 - 14:10
26 June 1997
15 July 1997
9:30 - 9:33
15 July 1997
15:35 - 15:37
16 July 1997
16 July 1997
16 July 1997
11:49 - 11:56
The following documents were submitted to the Board in evidence on behalf
of the Respondent:
Exhibit A - Letter from David North to Mr Waters dated 15
August 2003.
Exhibit B - Statement made by Edmond Chan on 23 February
Exhibit C - Outline of evidence of John Cheng dated 28 February
Exhibit D - Hand drawn diagram of the Kariong Pharmacy.
Exhibit E -
Letter from Dr Joseph Tiong dated 5 February 2007 and D C Williams dated 14
February 2007.
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT
Section 19A of the Act relevantly defines “professional
misconduct”, in relation to a pharmacist, as including:
(a) any conduct that demonstrates a lack of adequate:
(i) knowledge,
(ii) experience,
(iii) skill,
(iv) judgment, or
by the pharmacist in the practice of pharmacy, and
(g) any other improper or unethical conduct of the pharmacist relating to the
practice of pharmacy.
There is no category of “unsatisfactory professional conduct”
under the Act. This is in contrast to the position under
section 37 the
Practice Act, 2006
(which is not applicable to this Complaint) and to protective
legislation governing other health professionals.
The term Professional Misconduct implies fault beyond mere errors of judgment
or carelessness on the part of a pharmacist. It includes
a deliberate departure
from accepted standards or such serious negligence as, although not deliberate,
would portray indifference
and an abuse of the privileges which accompany
registration as a pharmacist:
[No. 2] NSWLRJ 197
at 200 - 202.
When looking at the issues of “improper or unethical behaviour”
in relation to a pharmacist, one of the matters the Board
will have regard to is
the Code of Professional Conduct (“the Code”). The Code establishes
a set of fundamental principles
to guide pharmacists in discharging their
responsibilities. The Principles statements in the Code capture the
philosophical concepts
which form the foundation of the Code. The Obligations in
the Code are more detailed statements to inform pharmacists of standards
professional behaviour they are required to meet.
The sections of the Code of particular relevance to the Complaint are:
Principle ONE
The primary concern of the pharmacist must be the health and well being of
both clients and the community.
Obligations
1.1 A pharmacist must at all times act in a manner which promotes and
safeguards the interests and welfare of clients and the community.
1.2 A pharmacist must not purchase, sell or supply any medicinal product
where there is reason to doubt its safety, quality or efficacy
or where there is
clear, new evidence that demonstrates or places doubt on previously established
product safety or where a product
may impose a hazard to the patient’s
1.3 A pharmacist must exercise professional judgment to prevent the supply of
products likely to constitute an unacceptable hazard
to health or the supply of
unnecessary and/or excessive quantities of medicines and other products,
particularly those which have
a potential for abuse or dependency.
1.4 A pharmacist must ensure that all reasonable care is taken when disposing
of medicinal products and chemicals.
1.5 A pharmacist shall accept responsibility for their own professional
activities and for all activities undertaken under their direct
supervision.
Principle TWO
A pharmacist must at all times uphold the reputation of the profession and
adhere to the legislation applicable to the practice of
Obligations
2.1 A pharmacist must act according to the laws and regulations governing the
profession and adhere to the code of professional conduct.
2.2 A pharmacist must act with honesty and integrity having due regard for
standards of behaviour accepted with the profession and
reasonably expected by
the community and other health professionals.
2.3 A pharmacist offering services directly to the public must do so in
premises which reflect the character of the profession.
STANDARD OF
The standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction
is the civil standard, however, because of the seriousness
of the allegations
and the gravity of the consequences, the Board must be comfortably satisfied
that the particulars of the Complaint
have been established:
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
The jurisdiction exercised by the Board is protective, not punitive. There
are dual reasons for this. In
New South Wales Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
; (1960) 104 CLR at 201-202, the High Court
Although it is sometimes referred to as the “penalty of
disbarment” it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that the abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
THE RESPONDENT
The Respondent
graduated from Brighton Polytechnic in England with an honours degree in
pharmacy. After graduation he completed a
year of pre-registration work in
London before being registered as a pharmacist by the Royal Pharmaceutical
Society of Great Britain
on 23 July 1984.
The Respondent was first registered as a pharmacist in New South Wales on
11 September 1985 under reciprocal arrangements and remains
so registered.
On 17 August 1985 the Respondent completed four weeks of supervised practice at
a pharmacy in Kogarah. As part of
the registration requirements the Respondent
also successfully completed an examination relating to the
Pharmacy Act
Act and the related Regulations. The Respondent then spent a period of time in
Hong Kong working as a pharmacist until he
returned to Australia as a migrant
under a special skills category. On the Respondent’s return to Australia
he worked for a
pharmacist in Moree for a period of 10 months. In 1987 the
Respondent set up the Kariong Pharmacy ("the Pharmacy") which he operated
he sold it on 13 August 1998.
OUTLINE OF THE RESPONDENT’S CASE
Particulars 1 and
The Respondent denies that he supplied the drugs specified in Particulars 1
and 2 to Dennis and Tracey Watkins.
However, the Respondent admits that if the Board finds that he did supply the
drugs as alleged this behaviour would amount to professional
misconduct within
the meaning of
section 19A
Pharmacy Act, 1964
In relation to the telephone intercept transcripts contained in Exhibit 1,
the Respondent admits that they accurately record what
he said to Dennis and
Tracey Watkins.
The Respondent also admits that he was asked by Dennis Watkins to sell a
large quantity of Sudafed to him.
In his Outline of Evidence (Exhibit C) the Respondent says that Mr Watkins
told him he intended to re-sell the Sudafed to truck drivers.
He understood that
some truck drivers needed to take tablets to stay alert during long distance
driving. The Respondent admits that
when he said “I’ve got 1000
boxes” he was referring to Sudafed tablets. The Respondent states that
Dennis Watkins
suggested that he pack them in nappy boxes because it was such a
large order. The Respondent also admits that when he said to Dennis
“I should have some more Hunter coming in” he was referring to
Stephen Hunter Chemists Own brand pseudoephedrine
Notwithstanding these admissions on the part of the Respondent, the
Respondent states that following the making of this initial agreement
Dennis Watkins with these tablets he reconsidered and decided not to proceed
with the supply of the tablets.
Particular 3
In his Outline of Evidence the Respondent admits that on 9
December 1997 Martin Power and Ian Anderson of the Pharmaceutical Services
Branch of the Department of Health attended at his pharmacy. The Respondent
states that whilst Mr Power and Mr Anderson were at the
pharmacy he continued to
serve customers and was asked various questions, but he does not have a clear
recollection of all the questions
and answers he provided.
The Respondent further states that he identified the tablets that were in the
main part of the Pharmacy and he was not asked whether
he had any tablets in the
storage areas. The Respondent states that on that day the storage areas were
very untidy and he did not
know how many tablets might be in those areas.
The Respondent states that the period of time spent in custody (from 10
December 1997 until his release on bail on 22 December 1997)
was one of the most
traumatic experiences of his life. The Respondent states he was distressed and
confused by the experience. In
relation to his response to the
Notice, the Respondent states that he attempted to accurately disclose the
quantity of tablets that were in the pharmacy on 9 December
1997 based upon the
stock count performed by Arthur Loveday and Evelyn Yeoh.
Particular 4
In his Outline of Evidence, the Respondent rejects the
suggestion that he inappropriately disposed of 3,125 boxes of pseudoephedrine
tablets. The Respondent states that upon his release from custody he instigated
a search of the Kariong Pharmacy premises to locate
all pseudoephedrine tablets.
The Respondent states that he asked his brother, David Cheng, his sister Eppie
Cheng and others to collect
all the tablets and push them out of their foil
blister packs into a bucket. Arthur Loveday arrived as this was being done. The
states that water was then poured into the bucket to dissolve the
tablets. The empty packaging was placed in cardboard cartons.
The Respondent states he arranged for the empty packets to be counted and a
written record was made by both the number, and capacity,
of the packets. This
stock count was signed by Arthur Loveday and Evelyn Yeoh, the duty
pharmacist.
The Respondent states that the tablets were flushed down the toilet in the
Pharmacy and that the empty packaging was placed in a cardboard
disposal bag
which was located at the rear of the premises in an area which was open to the
There is no dispute between the parties that tablets were flushed down the
The Respondent further states that during his studies at Brighton Polytechnic
he was taught that this method of disposal of tablets
was an acceptable and safe
method and that during the time that he practised in New South Wales he was
never informed that this method
was inappropriate.
Buying Group
In his Outline of Evidence the Respondent states that he was
a member of a Buying Group comprised of a number of pharmacists that
to obtain the best discounts from pharmaceutical suppliers by buying in bulk.
The Respondent states that the person with
the best relationship with a
particular supplier would usually buy on behalf of the group. The Respondent
states that a list of the
members was provided to Mr Anderson of the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch when he attended at the Pharmacy on 9 December
ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE BEFORE THE BOARD
The evidence in
this case is both direct and circumstantial.
Turning to Particular 1, the direct evidence includes the telephone
intercepts of the Respondent speaking to Dennis and Tracey Watkins
Respondent admits accurately record what he said to Dennis and Tracey Watkins).
The circumstantial evidence includes the
telephone intercepts of Dennis and
Tracey Watkins speaking to other people.
In the first telephone call between the Respondent and Dennis Watkins on 20
June 1997 at 9.29 am the Respondent called and offered
Dennis Watkins “990
boxes” at $7,670.50. Dennis Watkins told the Respondent he had
[the Board infers that he is referring to $3,000]
I’ll bring the rest back, I’ll get the rest on Monday
” leaving a balance of just under $5,000 still to be paid]. The
Respondent also said to Dennis Watkins “
I should have, ah, some more
come in. Hunter coming in
" [The Respondent admits the reference to Hunter is
a reference to Stephen Hunter Chemists Own pseudoephedrine tablets]. Dennis
then said that he would be over in about half an hour. The Respondent
Sudafed. Yeah
At 9.31 on 20 June 1997 Dennis Watkins called “Les”. Dennis
Watkins says to Les during that telephone conversation “That
across the road’s got 11,000” and that “Yeah. I said I am
getting what I can, what money I’ve
got today I’ll get to
The transcript continues:
Dennis: ....
he just rang me up and told me then, you know. He’s got
a, 900, 970 boxes or something.
Well I need them before Sunday morning if I can get em
Yeah, well. I can get em anyhow. But what I was gonna do, is get
him the (ind) that money today
And I'll get, I'll get the money put in. I'll get Keith to put, like,
say five lots of - is that 11 including what you've got or besides
what you've
Mate, besides. But he's gettin in more on, but know, apart from
that he's gettin more next week, so do you want them all?
Yeah. Yeah, that's, that's right, get them as well
At 11.46 on 20 June 1997 the Respondent again called Dennis Watkins. The
Respondent said “
I got 1,000 boxes. Totally
.” Dennis asked
How much money?
” and the Respondent replied
The transcript of the telephone conversation then
Have you got a back door?
Respondent:
I haven’t. The back door’s all full up. But what I do, I pack it
into nappy box for you, yeah?
Respondent:
put it in the nappy box for you.
Respondent:
Nappy box. You know, nappy? Baby
Respondent:
I put it all inside a big
Respondent:
Okay. But you when you come there you ask me for nappy yeah?
(ind) When. When you aren’t busy?
Respondent:
No. It doesn’t matter, like just be pretending to buy
nappy and I load it into your car. Okay?
I’ll come over
in 10 minutes?
Respondent:
The Board notes that the above conversation, notwithstanding the admissions
made by the Respondent as to the accuracy of the transcript,
is inconsistent
with the Respondent’s statement that it was Dennis Watkins who suggested
that the Sudafed tablets should be
packed into nappy boxes. It is quite clear
from the transcript that it was in fact the Respondent who made the suggestion
Watkins that they should be packed into nappy boxes and he went to
some great length to explain how and why this should be done.
The Board also
notes that both of the telephone calls referred to above were made by the
Respondent to Dennis Watkins.
There is nothing recorded between the 20 June and the next telephone
conversation three days later. The Respondent’s evidence
is that after the
above telephone conversation he decided not to proceed with the supply of
Sudafed to Dennis Watkins as agreed and
Dennis Watkins did not come and pick up
a nappy box full of Sudafed.
However, on Monday, 23 June 1997, the Respondent again called Dennis Watkins
and informed him:
“I got 860 packet of Hunter coming in
Either tomorrow or
”. Dennis Watkins asked:
" and the Respondent replied: "
". Dennis Watkins
later says: "
I'll get the money now. 6,837
?" The Respondent has admitted
that the reference to Hunter in the transcript is a reference to Stephen Hunter
Chemists Own brand
pseudoephedrine tablets. The Respondent also said during this
telephone conversation: “
That’s Hunter and then I should have
another lot of Sudafed coming in
The Board notes that the Respondent refers to "another lot of Sudafed" and
infers, having considered the telephone conversations both
before and after this
one, that the parties are not discussing the Sudafed that was agreed to be
supplied on 20 June 1997, but a
further supply.
On Tuesday, 24 June 1997 Dennis Watkins telephoned the Respondent at 6.01 pm.
Dennis Watkins asked: “
Did those things come?
” The Respondent
yet. Should be any time
haven’t arrived. I hope, I hope tomorrow morning
.” There was
also discussion during this telephone conversation about making up a cream.
On Wednesday, 25 June 2007 at 5.52 pm Dennis Watkins had a telephone
conversation with someone named Dave. Dennis Watkins said “
gotta go and
see the bloke across the
road too ‘cause they’re not there
.” Dave says: “
They’re not there?
No. he’s waitin’ for ‘em to come in.
He’s ordered them
“...thought they’d be here
today but (ind) don’t even know it, but, see the...I’m sure
he’ll get ‘em
The Board notes that the Respondent’s Pharmacy, which was located at
the Shopping Centre on the Corner of Langford and Mitchell
Drives, Kariong was a
very short walking distance from the Watkins residence on Gilford Street.
On Thursday, 26 June 2007 there are a number of telephone conversations where
there are "popping sounds" in the background and conversations
At 10.54 am Dave telephoned Tracey Watkins and said: “
Tell Dennis to
jump in the car and bring some over and we’ll pop ‘em
On 26 June 2007 at 1.42 pm there was a telephone conversation between Tracey
Watkins and Dave, during which they discussed having
chemist’s own
pseudoephedrine
Between 26 June 1997 and 16 July 1997 there are various telephone calls
concerning the obtaining of money to pay for the pseudoephedrine.
In particular, there is a telephone conversation between Dennis Watkins and
Dave on 9 July 1997, where Dave says: “
It’s been over 10
” and Dennis Watkins says: “
even go near the chemist shop now - it’s embarrasin’
on 12 July 1997, there is a telephone conversation between Dave and Tracey
Watkins where Tracey says “
so - he still hasn’t got any money to
pay for those Chinamen
On 16 July 1997 Tracey Watkins telephones the Respondent and says to him
Can you put a hold on those things for a little while?
On 2 July 1997, the Otto garbage bin for Dennis and Tracey Watkins’
premises at 4 Gilford Street, Kariong, was searched, videoed
and photographed by
police in the early hours of the morning. This search revealed empty Sudafed and
Chemist Own brand packets of
Pseudoephedrine HCL products for over 19,000
tablets. A large cardboard carton with the Respondent’s pharmacy delivery
docket was also located.
In relation to the boxes found in the Watkins’ Otto bin, the batch
number on each of the three outer cartons including the carton
with a label
“Kariong Pharmacy”, was B36781 with an expiry date of July 2001. All
65 Sudafed packets in one plastic bag
of the exhibit were examined by the Board
and each one was Batch 36781, expiry date July 2001. A random sample of
approximately half
of the 79 packets in a second plastic bag of the exhibit was
examined and again each was Batch 36781, expiry date July 2001. The
strips from which the Sudafed had been “popped” were all identified
as Batch 36781, expiry July 2001. The consistency
of batch number and expiry
date increases the likelihood that the supply had come from the one source.
On 24 June 1997 the Respondent was invoiced by Stephen Hunter Pty Limited
$3,585 in relation to the purchase of Stephen Hunter Pseudoephedrine
Relief Tabs. On the same date the Respondent was invoiced by Sigma $3,264.07 and
a further $1,847.51 in relation to the purchase
of Sudafed tablets.
The first Sigma invoice shows that the Respondent was invoiced for 227
Packets of Sudafed 90s and 101 packets of Sudafed 30s. The
second invoice is
invoice G125405 which relates to the cardboard box found in the Watkins' Otto
bin - it is the same invoice number.
That invoice is for 61 packets of Sudafed
90s and 187 packets of Sudafed 30s and together with the other Sigma invoice it
seen that in respect of Sudafed 30s and Sudafed 90s the Respondent had
ordered two gross of each from Sigma. They add up to 288 packets
Whilst there was in evidence a statement from a shop owner, Mr Edmond Chan,
which suggests that members of the public had access to
the Respondent's bin
where he threw out cardboard boxes, it is a very big co-incidence in light of
the other circumstantial evidence
that the G125405 box made its way into the
Watkins' Otto bin when it did.
The Stephen Hunter invoice dated 24 June 1997 shows that the Respondent was
invoiced for 288 packets of Chemist's Own pseudoephedrine
packets of 30s and 288
packets of Chemist's Own pseudoephedrine packets of 60s. It also appears that if
you order from Stephen Hunter
you get some packets for free. In this regard,
this invoice shows that the Respondent received 240 packets of Chemist's Own
pseudoephedrine
packets of 30s and 240 packets of 60s for free. In total the
Respondent appears to have received 528 packets of each.
Having regard to the invoices referred to above and the invoices for later in
the year, it seems that the Respondent, if his version
of events is to be
accepted, must have had some of those tablets in his possession prior to June
1997. For example, the Sudafed 90s
which the Respondent says he destroyed on 23
June 1997 are significantly greater in number than all the 90s that he ordered
June 1997 (a total of 360 packets of 90s). The Board further notes that
the last order of 90s prior to 23 December 1997, was on
4 December 1997 from
Faulding, when he purchased 36 packets of 90s. The question is therefore begged
as to why the Respondent continued
to order Sudafed when it seems he already had
substantial quantities in stock.
Further, although the Respondent gave evidence that he was part of a buying
group, he no longer had any records relating to distribution
to the buying
group, and he did not have any recollection of any relevant distributions to the
The Board is satisfied to the Briginshaw standard that if you look at all of
the conversations that were intercepted, as well as the
other circumstantial
evidence such as the box from Kariong Pharmacy that was found in the
Watkins’ Otto bin, that Dennis Watkins
did receive a supply of Sudafed
pseudoephedrine tablets worth about $8,000 on or about 20 June from the
Respondent and that he received
a further supply of Hunter Chemists Own brand
pseudoephedrine tablets from the Respondent on or about 25 June 1997 and that,
circumstances, such supplies amount to professional misconduct on the
part of the Respondent.
On 9 December 1997 Martin Power and Ian Anderson, officers of the
Pharmaceutical Branch of the Department of Health, inspected the
Respondent’s Pharmacy and assisted police in the execution of a search
warrant. In his statement dated 11 December 1997, Mr
Anderson states that the
Pharmacy was extremely untidy and cluttered. He further states that the
Respondent was issued with a
notice requiring him to account for his
receipt, and where known, his supply of pseudoephedrine tablets.
Mr Anderson reports that on 9 December 1997 the current stock at the Pharmacy
was 4 Sudafed 30s; 11 Sudafed 60s, 36 Sudafed 90s; and
38 Steven Hunter Brand
Pseudoephedrine tablets 30s, being a total stock of 89 packets. The Respondent
initialled the page on which
Mr Anderson had noted these quantities.
It is the Respondent’s case that he allowed the officers to carry out
their search of the Pharmacy premises while he served
customers. He states that
he does not recall what he was asked by the officers. He also states that he did
not consider that it was
necessary to direct the officers to a store room where
he kept some drugs and sundries. The Respondent was asked during
cross-examination
if he knew on that date where all the pseudoephedrine would be
in the pharmacy, to which the Respondent answered: "Honestly, I did
clue where all the tablet is because I am very untidy. I store things
everywhere. Some may be in the front, some in the
back, some in the
storeroom".
On 10 December 1997 the Respondent was arrested and placed in custody. The
Respondent was released on bail on 22 December 1997.
On 23 December 1997, being the day following his release from custody, the
Respondent replied to the
notice stating that the total stock of
pseudoephedrine tablets at Kariong Pharmacy on 9 December 1997 was 3,191
packets. This count
was carried out by the Respondent's duty pharmacist.
The check count revealed the following:
tablets 30s 605
Stephen Hunter 30 904
Stephen Hunter 30 11
Total packets 3,191
The Board notes that there is a significant discrepancy between 89 packets
and 3,191 packets. Moreover, the Board notes that only
5 days prior to the
officers' visit, on 4 December 1997, the Respondent ordered 144 packets of
Sudafed 30s, 36 packets of Sudafed
60s and 36 packets of Sudafed 90s, being a
total of 216 packets.
Particular 4 is concerned with an allegation that the Respondent disposed of
approximately 3,125 (3,191 packets less 66 full packets
in the shop) boxes of
pseudoephedrine by an inappropriate method, that is, by flushing them down the
Ms Yeoh states that on 23 December 1997 the Respondent's brother, David Cheng
and a representative from Butler's Sales Brokers, Arthur
Loveday, were at the
shop. She further states that whilst her notes of 6 February 1998 indicate John
Cheng's mother, sister and friend
were also at the shop, Ms Yeoh cannot recall
exactly who was there.
Ms Yeoh states that she was not aware there was a storeroom at the front of
the shop until a few days after she started working at
the Pharmacy. She thought
it was a most unusual place to have a storeroom. She states that she did not
look in the storeroom and
was not aware there were apparently large quantities
of single ingredient pseudoephedrine tablets in the storeroom until about 6
on 23 December 1997 when David Cheng brought some nappy cartons containing empty
packets of single ingredient pseudoephedrine
tablets and two buckets containing
white tablets out to the dispensary where she was working.
Ms Yeoh states that David Cheng said to her that the tablets had been removed
from the packets in the nappy boxes and they were going
to be destroyed. He
asked her to count the empty packets. Ms Yeoh states that she told him she could
not count them as they were
all loose and it would take her too much time, so
everyone started bundling up the empty boxes into lots of ten.
Ms Yeoh states that after they were bundled up she counted them and she
noticed that Arthur Loveday also counted them. Ms Yeoh counted
3,191 packets,
however, only 66 of those packets were full, the rest were empty. Ms Yeoh did
not count the actual tablets that were
in the bucket.
Ms Yeoh states that the tablets and the empty cartons were at the shop when
she left the premises on 23 December 1997, however, she
did not see any tablets
In his statement Mr Loveday states that he spent about two or three hours
pushing tablets out of their foil blister packs into water.
Mr Loveday further
states that the empty packets were put into some empty cardboard cartons. He
counted the empty packets to make
a stock-count of the tablets that had been put
in the bucket of water. Mr Loveday also states that he did not see what finally
to the tablets in the bucket.
The Respondent gave evidence before the Board that he asked for the tablets
to be put in water and to flush them down the toilet.
The only people that could
have done this were the family members present on the day. There was no evidence
before the Board from
any of those people. There was no direct evidence before
the Board as to who it was that ultimately destroyed the tablets or how
tablets were destroyed.
It was put to the Respondent in cross-examination that he wrote that the
stock was destroyed in the presence of Ms Yeoh and Mr Loveday
because he thought
that Mr Lumby would believe that that is what happened and that it was an
acceptable action to take because there
were independent witnesses and Ms Yeoh
was a pharmacist. The Respondent denied this was the case and said that he
genuinely believed
that what he wrote in the letter was true and that he
honestly cannot recollect now what happened.
There was no dispute between the parties at the hearing that tablets were
flushed down the toilet.
The Respondent was also cross-examined about whether he knew that 3,191
boxes, including 915 boxes of Sudafed 90s, were worth more
than $25,000. The
Respondent answered: "It did not even cross my mind at that time how much it
worth. I don't even have a thought
The Respondent was also asked why he did not return the stock to the
wholesalers, to which he responded: "It didn't cross my mind.
I do not recollect
what I'm doing."
The Respondent was then asked why he destroyed the stock, to which he
answered: "At that time in my mind I hate the medicine, I hate
Sudafed. I hate
pseudoephedrine because I was in the detention centre. I don't know what I'm
thinking. I'm unwell. I do not recollect
what happened."
Mr Loveday states in his statement that the Respondent told him he was
destroying the tablets because he didn't want to be accused
of doing something
In all of the circumstances, the Board is satisfied to the Briginshaw
standard that the Respondent provided false and/or misleading
information to an
officer of the New South Wales Health Department in that on 9 December 1997 he
stated that the total stock of pseudoephedrine
tablets at Kariong Pharmacy at
that time was 89 packets and that such conduct amounts to professional
misconduct. In particular,
the Board cannot accept that the Respondent, who was
an experienced pharmacist and businessman, could have been so untidy or unaware
of this stock holdings at that time to have innocently understated such a
significant amount of his pseudoephedrine stock, in circumstances
where he was
being called upon by officers of the Department of Health to make such a
disclosure.
However, the Board is not satisfied to the Briginshaw standard that the
Respondent provided false or misleading information in his
response to the
notice dated 23 December 1997 in which it was stated that the total
stock of pseudoephedrine tablets at Kariong Pharmacy on 9 December
3,191 packets.
Particular 4 relates to the method by which the Respondent destroyed the
pseudoephedrine tablets on 23 December 1997. As previously
stated, there is no
dispute between the parties that the tablets were flushed down the toilet. There
is no direct evidence as to
the actual quantity of tablets that were in the
bucket and came to be flushed down the toilet.
The peer reviewer, Mr David North, was cross-examined at the hearing before
the Board about what he considered to be a "small quantity".
In this regard, he
gave evidence that a small quantity was anything larger than a therapeutic dose,
and further: "so to put a couple
of tablets down the sink would be considered no
problem, but as soon as you are starting to put down what would be considered
levels you are starting to think of large quantities. I think that's
the way the mind of a pharmacist works. I think, as I sort of
say, it was
accepted to put down a few odd tablets and partial packs to dispose of but large
quantities I don't think that was considered
to be acceptable, particularly in
one go anyway."
Mr North also said in his statement that up to 100 tablets would be
acceptable. In cross-examination on this point Mr North said:
"I think I was
saying a mixture of tablets of that quantity. I wasn't talking about emptying
bottles of 100 straight down. I think
it would be a case if you had one packet
of 100 and it was out of date and you needed to get rid of it, maybe that would
be acceptable,
but if you had 10 packets of100 I think you have got to draw the
line. That is not acceptable. So maybe 100 is a little bit underestimating
common sense has got to prevail and I think that we do have a responsibility as
far as disposing of medications and even back
at that stage."
Mr North gave evidence that there was no requirement in 1997 that registered
pharmacists in New South Wales run "green" practices.
The only requirement was
that they comply with the necessary legislation and regulations.
Mr North was not aware of any specific legislation or regulations at that
time that would provide guidance. However, he gave evidence
that there was a
pilot scheme being run for the collection of unwanted medicines.
Mr Cheng gave evidence that the method that he adopted of destruction of the
tablets by placing them in water and later flushing them
down the toilet was a
method he had been taught whilst studying in the United Kingdom.
Ms Yeoh states that as a pharmacist she was concerned that it may have been
inappropriate to destroy the tablets. She states that
she was not sure of the
correct method of destruction and was worried about the security of the tablets.
Ms Yeoh states that as she
left the pharmacy she said to David Cheng: "Don't do
anything to the tablets. I will ring up the Pharmacy Board tomorrow and find
what to do with them".
Ms Yeoh states that the following day she rang the Pharmacy Board and spoke
to Mr Hardie, one of the Pharmacy Board inspectors.
In all of the circumstances, the Board cannot be satisfied as to the actual
number of tablets that actually came to be flushed down
the toilet. However,
having regard to the evidence of Mr Loveday in which he states that he spent two
to three hours pushing tablets
out of the foil blister packs into the buckets of
water, the Board is comfortably satisfied that the number of tablets that were
in the buckets was a very large number of tablets.
However, the Board is not comfortably satisfied that such conduct amounts to
professional misconduct in the circumstances of this
case. In making this
determination, the Board has had regard to the Respondent's evidence that he was
extremely distressed upon his
release from custody and may not have been acting
rationally, the involvement of Ms Yeoh, Mr Loveday and the Respondent's family
in the stock count and ultimate destruction of the tablets, the Respondent gave
as to his education concerning the destruction of
drugs in the United Kingdom,
and the absence of specific guidance by way of legislation or regulations at the
relevant time. In particular,
the Board has had regard to the fact that Ms Yeoh
was the pharmacist in charge at the relevant time and there is no evidence
the Board that Ms Yeoh expressed any concern to the Respondent about the
method of disposal of the tablets. There is also no evidence
before the Board
that anyone else expressed any concern to the Respondent about the method of
Whilst a strike-off or period of suspension are orders available to the
Board, the Board does not consider that there is any useful
public purpose in
making such orders in the present case. The conduct, the subject of the
complaint, occurred more than 10 years
ago in 1997. The Respondent sold his
pharmacy on 13 August 1998 and has not worked as a pharmacist in New South Wales
time. He is currently working as a pyjama designer in a business that
operates in Hong Kong and China, and he spends most of his
time in those
countries, only returning to Australia from time to time.
The Board has also had regard to the character references that were in
evidence from D. C. Williams and Dr Joseph Tiong. It is clear
character references that the Respondent was a popular and esteemed member of
the Kariong community, even winning "Business
of the Year". It is the Board's
view that the conduct the subject of the Complaint most likely represents a
short term lapse of judgment
on the part of the Respondent, perhaps motivated by
greed. There were only two supplies which occurred over just a few days. The
Board has also had regard to the fact that the conduct occurred in 1997, being a
time when the profession was only just becoming
aware that pharmacies were being
targeted as a source of pseudoephedrine for the illicit manufacture of
amphetamines. In all the
circumstances, the Board has determined to make an
order that:
1. The Respondent be severely reprimanded.
The Board also
has the power to make orders pursuant to
of the Act that address its
concerns in relation to the Respondent’s current knowledge of matters
appropriate for a registered
pharmacist and to place conditions on his
registration relating to his practice as a pharmacist. In particular, the Board
the Respondent gave evidence at the hearing that he did not attend
any continuing education seminars and failed to read any professional
or publications during the time he worked as a pharmacist in New South Wales.
There is also no evidence before the Board
that the Respondent has done anything
to update himself as to matters of pharmacy since he ceased to work as a
pharmacist in New
South Wales.
Accordingly, the Board has determined to
make the following further orders which will become effective only in the event
Respondent seeks to return to work as a pharmacist in New South Wales
(as the Board is of the view that such orders would be unduly
onerous and
unnecessary if the Respondent does not return to work as a pharmacist in New
South Wales):
Kin Cheng is required to notify the Board in writing of his proposed resumption
of practise as a pharmacist in New South Wales
(including providing details of
the name of the proposed employment pecuniary interest arrangements and the
address of the relevant
pharmacy) not less than 14 days prior to the resumption
of pharmacy practise.
Kin Cheng is required to be supervised in his practise as a pharmacist at all
times by a pharmacist registered in New South Wales
for a period of twelve
months from the resumption of practise date.
Kin Cheng is required to successfully complete a course in ethics at the St
James Ethics Centre, as approved by the Board, not
less than 6 months after the
resumption of practice date.
Kin Cheng is required to successfully complete, in conjunction with the
supervised practise in Order 3 above, the Pharmacy Graduate
Training Course or
equivalent Intern Training Program, as approved by the Board.
Kin Cheng is required to undergo an oral assessment of his current knowledge of
matters appropriate for a registered pharmacist,
such assessment to be carried
out by a panel of two pharmacists from the pool used to assess graduate
pharmacists after their intern
year, with such assessment to take place on a
date to be nominated by the Board, but not more than two months after the
of practise date. If the assessment is carried out prior to the
months prior to
the resumption of practise date.
Kin Cheng is required to complete at least 20 hours of Board approved Continuing
Professional Education (“CPE”) per
year, for three years from the
resumption of practise date, at least 10 hours per year of which must be face to
face contact activity.
Kin Cheng is required to provide the Board with a written declaration as to the
date/s and description of CPE activities undertaken
(as per order 7 above) at
the end of every 6 months over the relevant three year period.
ever Wang Kin Cheng is registered as a pharmacist he is to do all things
necessary to obtain and maintain membership of the
Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia. Proof of membership is to be provided to the Board within 28 days of
his resumption of practise
date and on renewal of membership each subsequent
ever Wang Kin Cheng holds a pecuniary interest in the business of a pharmacist
he is to do all things necessary to obtain and
maintain membership of the
Pharmacy Guild of Australia. Proof of membership is to be provided to the Board
within 28 days of obtaining
any such pecuniary interest in a pharmacy and on
renewal of membership each subsequent year.
Board directs that a copy of these findings and orders is to be retained in the
registration file of Wang Kin Cheng to which reference
will be made in the event
that Wang Kin Cheng should notify the Board of his proposed resumption of
practise as a pharmacist in New
South Wales in the future.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10 are to be completed at Wang Kin Cheng's own expense.
For the purpose of the above orders, the "resumption of practise
date" is the first date upon which the Respondent returns to practise
pharmacist in New South Wales, whether as an employee, contractor or pecuniary
interest holder, from the effective date of these
The effective date of these orders is one month after Wang Kin Cheng has been
notified by registered post of these orders at his address
as it appears on the
register of pharmacists in New South Wales.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (230 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter