URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Meksass v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPICMR 12; (11 April 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
Meksass v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
[2025] NSWPICMR
George Meksass
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
MERIT REVIEWER:
Bianca Montgomery-Hribar
DATE OF DECISION:
11 April 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; merit review;
costs dispute; other costs and expenses; medico-legal report; report not served
or relied upon in proceedings before
the Commission;
sections 8.4
considered; principles of statutory interpretation;
AAI Limited v Moon
considered and applied; whether costs reasonable and necessary;
– costs incurred in connection with the claim; costs reasonable and
necessary; claimant entitled to recover costs from insurer
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
the purposes of
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
and expenses incurred by the claimant in respect of Dr Rastogi’s report
dated 14 March 2024 are reasonable and necessary.
claimant is entitled to recover up to 16 monetary units from the insurer in
Dr Rastogi’s report dated 14 March 2024.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
30 January 2023, George Meksass (claimant) was involved in a motor vehicle
accident (accident). He made a claim for statutory benefits
in accordance with
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(MAI Act) on Allianz Australia
Insurance Limited (insurer).
5 July 2023, the insurer denied liability for statutory benefits after 26 weeks
on the basis that the claimant’s injuries
were threshold injuries for the
purposes of the MAI Act. This decision was upheld on internal review.
1 February 2024, the claimant lodged an application with the Personal Injury
Commission (Commission) seeking review of the insurer’s
threshold injury
14 March 2024, the claimant attended upon Dr Richa Rastogi who provided a
medico-legal report. Dr Rastogi opined that the claimant
had no current
psychological injury attributed to the accident. This report was not served on
the insurer, nor relied upon by the
claimant in any dispute before the
Commission.
11 July 2024, the claimant was assessed by Medical Assessor Surabhi Verma
pursuant to Division 7.5 of the MAI Act. Medical Assessor
Verma certified that
the claimant had an adjustment disorder caused by the accident, being a
threshold injury for the purposes of
the MAI Act.
claimant filed an application for review of Medical Assessor Verma’s
assessment. On 24 October 2024, a delegate of the President
of the Commission
determined not to refer the application to a Review Panel.
claimant sought payment of his costs in relation to his statutory benefits claim
from the insurer pursuant to s 8.10 of the MAI
Act. The insurer has paid those
costs, save for the costs of Dr Rastogi’s report dated 14 March 2024. The
insurer says that
the claimant is not entitled to the costs of Dr
Rastogi’s report as it was not used in the psychological medical
under Division 7.5 of the MAI Act.
Accordingly,
a dispute has arisen between the claimant and the insurer as to whether he is
entitled to recover the costs of Dr Rastogi’s
report from the insurer
under the MAI Act.
1(aa) of Schedule 2 of the MAI Act provides that “whether for the purposes
of section 8.10 (Recovery of costs and expenses
in relation to claims for
statutory benefits) the costs and expenses incurred by the claimant are
reasonable and necessary”
is a merit review matter.
Relevant legislation
8 of the MAI Act regards costs and fees.
8.4 provides for the maximum fees recoverable by health practitioners for
medico-legal services and states:
“(1) The regulations may
make provision for or with respect to fixing maximum fees for the provision by
health practitioners
of the following services—
(a) provision of any medical report for use in court proceedings in connection
with a claim,
(b) provision of any medical report for use in the assessment of a claim under
Division 7.6, in a medical assessment by a medical
assessor under Division 7.5
or in a merit review under Division 7.4,
(c) appearance as a witness in court proceedings, or in proceedings in the
Commission or before a medical assessor or merit reviewer,
in connection with a
(2) A health practitioner is not entitled to be paid or recover any fee for
providing a service that exceeds any maximum fee fixed
under this section for
the provision of the service.
(3) In determining any matter to be prescribed under this section, the
Minister is to consult with the Australian Medical Association
appropriate bodies. The validity of a regulation is not affected by a
contravention of this subsection.”
8.10 provides for the recovery of costs and expenses in relation to claims for
statutory benefits and states:
“(1) A claimant for statutory
benefits is (subject to this section) entitled to recover from the insurer
against whom the claim
is made the reasonable and necessary legal costs, and
other costs and expenses, incurred by the claimant in connection with the claim.
Other costs and expenses include the cost of medical and other tests and
(2) The regulations may make provision for or with respect to fixing the
maximum costs and expenses recoverable by a claimant under
this section
(including any matters for which no costs and expenses are recoverable from the
(3) A claimant for statutory benefits is only entitled to recover from the
insurer against whom the claim is made reasonable and
necessary legal costs
incurred by the claimant if payment of those costs is permitted by the
regulations or the Commission.
(4) The Commission can permit payment of legal costs incurred by a claimant
but only if satisfied that—
(a) the claimant is a person under legal incapacity, or
(b) exceptional circumstances exist that justify payment of legal costs
incurred by the claimant.
(5) An insurer is not entitled to recover from a claimant for statutory
benefits any legal costs, or other costs and expenses, of
the insurer in
relation to the claim.”
8.1 contains definitions for Part 8 and relevantly provides:
“(1) In this Part—
includes a court arbitrator or arbitrators.
medical report
includes any medical certificate or opinion.
(2) Except as provided by this Part, expressions used in this Part have the
same meaning as they have when used in relation to legal
costs in the legal
profession legislation (as defined in
Legal Profession Uniform
Law Application Act 2014
3 of the Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017 (Regulation) pertains to
medico-legal fees and expert witnesses. Clause
27 of Division 3 of the
Regulations is titled “Application of Division” and provides
“This Division applies in
respect of fees for the provision of medical
reports, and appearances as witnesses, by health practitioners”.
28 of the Regulation is titled “Maximum fees recoverable by medical
practitioner (section 8.4(1))” and states:
maximum fees for providing a service specified in Schedule 2 in relation to any
motor accident are the fees set out
in that Schedule for that service, except as
otherwise provided by this Part.
(2) A reference in that Schedule to a
means, if the
Motor Accident Guidelines require medical reports to be in a particular form, a
report in that form.
(3) A claimant may not claim an amount set out in item 5 or 6 (relating to
reports by treating medical practitioners) of Schedule
2 in respect of an
initial report by a treating medical practitioner unless the claimant has
requested in writing that the insurer
provide the report to the claimant and the
insurer has failed to do so within a reasonable time.”
2 of the Regulation is a table that sets out the maximum fees for medico-legal
also draw attention of the parties to the guiding principle contained in
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(the PIC Act). That principle is that
the Commission and the parties must co-operate and facilitate the just, quick
and cost effective
resolution of the real issues in the proceedings. In the
context of this case I especially underscore sub-s 42(4) which exhorts the
Commission and the parties to resolve issues together in such a way that the
cost to the parties and the Commission is proportionate
to the importance and
complexity of the subject matter of the proceedings. I also briefly note the
objects of the MAI Act include,
at s 1.3(2)(g), ‘to encourage the early
resolution of motor accident claims and the quick, cost effective and just
of disputes’.
On the papers
52(3) of the PIC Act provides:
“(3) If the Commission is
satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with
proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling
legislation without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
the preliminary conference on 10 April 2025, the parties agreed to the dispute
being determined on the basis of the documents before
me and the submissions of
the parties, and without holding a formal hearing.
considered s 52 of the PIC Act, Procedural Direction PIC2 and the documents
before me, I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information available to me to
allow me to determine the issues in dispute ‘on the papers’ and
without holding a formal
hearing, and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
SUBMISSIONS AND EVIDENCE
parties both relied on written submissions for the purposes of the merit review
application. These submissions have been considered.
I have also considered the
oral submissions made by the parties at the preliminary conference on 10 April
2025. Extracts of the parties’
submissions are included in the below
of the parties also filed a bundle of documents. I have considered each of the
documents contained in the bundles.
is not in dispute that Dr Rastogi is a medical expert who has provided a
medico-legal report in connection with the claim. It is
also not in dispute that
the claimant did not serve a copy of Dr Rastogi’s report on the insurer,
nor did the claimant seek
to rely on it in any proceedings before the
Commission.
issue in dispute is whether the claimant is entitled to recover the costs of Dr
Rastogi’s report from the insurer.
summary, the claimant submits that he is entitled to recover the costs of Dr
Rastogi’s report from the insurer by virtue
of s 8.10 of the MAI Act, as
these costs were reasonable and necessary and incurred by him in connection with
insurer submits that s 8.4 of the MAI Act specifically limits the costs
associated with medico-legal fees to those reports that
are “used in the
proceedings”, and the claimant is prevented from recovering the costs of
Dr Rastogi’s report from
the insurer as the medical report was not used in
the medical assessment under Division 7.5. The insurer submits that the claimant
should bear the cost of a report that the claimant chooses not to use.
the reasons set out below, I disagree with the insurer’s position.
Relevant principles of statutory construction
the plurality stated in
Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission
“question of construction is determined by reference to the text, context
and purpose of the Act” citing
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
Grain Growers Limited v Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (NSW),
Beazley P stated (with whom Bathurst CJ and Leeming JA agreed)
that “the starting point and end point is with the text of the
provision”, citing the comments of the High Court in
when the plurality stated:
“This Court has stated on many
occasions that the task of statutory construction must begin with a
consideration of the text
itself. Historical considerations and extrinsic
materials cannot be relied on to displace the clear meaning of the text. The
which has actually been employed in the text of legislation is the
surest guide to legislative intention. The meaning of the text
may require
consideration of the context, which includes the general purpose and policy of a
provision, in particular the mischief
it is seeking to remedy.” (footnotes
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection,
Kiefel CJ, Nettle
and Gordon JJ stated:
“The starting point for the
ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision is the text of the statute
whilst, at the
same time, regard is had to its context and purpose. Context
should be regarded at this first stage and not at some later stage and
be regarded in its widest sense. This is not to deny the importance of the
natural and ordinary meaning of a word, namely
how it is ordinarily understood
in discourse, to the process of construction. Considerations of context and
purpose simply recognise
that, understood in its statutory, historical or other
context, some other meaning of a word may be suggested, and so too, if its
ordinary meaning is not consistent with the statutory purpose, that meaning must
be rejected.” (footnotes omitted)
legislation made under an Act should not be taken into account for the purpose
of interpretation of the Act itself; although
it may be useful to read the Act
and regulations together in order to identify the nature of the legislative
scheme they comprise:
AAI Ltd v Moon
(2020) 92 MVR 271
[2020] NSWSC 714
) at [19], referring to
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales
Police Force v Fine
(2014) 87 NSWLR 1
[2014] NSWCA 327
Education Services Pty Ltd v Ketchell
(2008) 236 CLR 101
[2008] HCA 38
Webster v McIntosh
[1980] FCA 156
at 606 citing
Great Fingall Consolidated Ltd v Sheehan
[1905] HCA 43
(1905) 3 CLR 176
[1905] HCA 43.
What is the proper statutory construction of
ss 8.4 and 8.10?
, Wright J considered the proper construction of ss 8.3 and 8.10 of
the MAI Act. While that case regarded legal costs, it provides
analysis of the MAI Act and in particular, s 8.10.
respect of s 8.10 of the MAI Act, the Court in
noted at [80]-[82]:
“[80] Section 8.10(1) establishes the general position that a
claimant for statutory benefits such as Mr Moon is entitled to
recover from the
insurer, GIO, legal costs that:
(1) have been “incurred” by Mr Moon in connection with his claim
for statutory benefits; and
(2) are ‘reasonable and necessary’,
but this is expressly stated to be ‘subject to’ the other
provisions of s 8.10.
[81] I shall consider the other provisions of s 8.10 to which subs (1) is
subject, before returning to consider ‘incurred’
‘reasonable and necessary’.
[82] As to the general nature of the entitlement conferred by s 8.10, it can
be noted that it is not similar to the awarding of costs
in court proceedings.
There is nothing in s 8.10 or any other provisions of the MAI Act that suggests
that a claimant’s entitlement
to recover legal costs under s 8.10 depends
on whether or not the claimant was successful before the DRS. Further, by virtue
8.10(5), whatever the outcome, an insurer is not entitled to recover from a
claimant for statutory benefits any legal costs of the
insurer in relation to
the claim.”
addition to not requiring the claimant to be successful, there is nothing in the
text of s 8.10 to suggest that a claimant’s
entitlement is limited by a
requirement that the relevant medical report be relied on in the proceedings or
served on the insurer.
There is also no reference in s 8.10 to s 8.4 of the MAI
the words of s 8.10 provide an entitlement to a claimant for statutory benefits
to recover reasonable and necessary legal
costs and other costs and expenses,
subject to that section. Other costs and expenses are expressly stated to
“include the
cost of medical and other tests and reports”.
distinct from s 8.10 which confers an entitlement on a claimant, s 8.4 of the
MAI Act is a regulation making provision. It enables
regulations to be made in
respect of medico-legal services and provides for the fixing of maximum costs
recoverable by health practitioners
for the provision of the services specified
in sub-sections (1)(a) to (c).
8.4 says nothing about the recovery of those costs from the insurer. It is a
separate and distinct provision to s 8.10 of
the MAI Act.
to the wording used in s 8.3,
section commences “[t]he regulations may make provision for or with
respect to fixing maximum fees for the provision by
health practitioners of the
following services...”.
can see no basis for the insurer’s submission that s 8.4 operates to
restrict the claimant’s entitlement under s 8.10
by limiting the
“other costs and expenses” to those subcategories in s 8.4(1)(a) to
find that s 8.4 does not operate to limit the claimant’s entitlement in s
8.10 of the MAI Act.
established that s 8.4 does not restrict the claimant’s entitlement to
recover only costs in respect of the services
set out in sub-sections (1)(a) to
(c), I need to be satisfied that the cost of Dr Rastogi’s report was
reasonable and necessary
and incurred by the claimant in connection with the
Were the costs incurred by the claimant in connection
with the claim?
Rastogi was engaged by the claimant’s solicitors, on the claimant’s
behalf, to prepare a medico-legal report in respect
of his statutory benefits
Rastogi’s report notes the claimant was examined regarding his claim
arising from injuries from a motor vehicle accident
sustained on 30 January
2023. Dr Rastogi’s report sets out a history of injury by reference to the
accident. The questions
addressed by Dr Rastogi are focused on the accident. I
find the report was prepared in connection with the claim.
report of Dr Rastogi is listed as a disbursement of C&M Lawyers dated 11
February 2025 in respect of the claim. While the
invoice issued by Dr Rastogi is
not included in the bundle of documents before me, there appears to be no
dispute that the costs
of the report are liable to be paid by the claimant.
, “incur” is “to become liable for or
subject to”, and regards an actual liability to pay. It is not necessary
that the claimant has actually paid the costs, an actual liability to pay is
sufficient:
at [109]-[112].
find that the costs of the report were incurred by the claimant in connection
with the claim.
Is the cost of Dr Rastogi’s report
reasonable and necessary?
costs are ‘reasonable and necessary’ is determined on a case-by-case
fact that the claimant’s application under Division 7.5 was not successful
is not determinative of this issue:
a medical report has been served on the insurer or relied on in proceedings
before the Commission is a relevant factor in
determining whether the cost is
reasonable and necessary. However, it is not the only factor required to be
considered.
the claimant submits that the application for personal injury benefits dated 5
April 2023 lists “anxiety state and depression
PTSD” under the
injuries related to the motor accident. The claimant also submits that his
general practitioner’s (GP)
notes of 17 May 2023 include “PTSD
symptoms” and that the claimant complained of suffering psychological
injuries in
the first conference with his solicitors.
claimant submits that, on 7 February 2024, the claimant’s solicitors
received the clinical notes of Ms Charmine Moubarak,
the claimant’s
treating psychologist. These notes are said to report severe depression and
extremely severe stress levels,
and the claimant submits that “the
clinical entry dated 20 September 2023 shows symptoms related to the diagnosis
of Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder”.
claimant says that, having regard to the notes of the claimant’s GP and
treating psychologist, which record post-traumatic
stress disorder and
depression, the independent medical report of Dr Rastogi was commissioned on 21
September 2023 in connection
with the claim. The claimant submits that this
report was sought to provide information about the claimant’s
psychological
injuries and work capacity.
insurer submits that, as at 14 March 2024, the claimant held an expert
psychiatric opinion of Dr Rastogi which was evidence of
the fact he did not have
a diagnosable psychiatric injury, but still allowed the psychiatric threshold
injury dispute to proceed
before Medical Assessor Verma on 11 July 2024.
I accept the insurer may criticise the claimant for pursuing the medical
assessment in circumstances where the claimant held
a medico-legal report
opining that the claimant did not have a psychological injury, whether the
claimant was correct to pursue the
Division 7.5 medical assessment is not the
issue before me. The issue before me is whether the costs of Dr
report are reasonable and necessary for the purposes of s
8.10 of the MAI Act.
insurer’s liability notice dated 5 July 2023 relevantly
“In the most recent certificate of fitness, dated 15
June 2023 by Dr Ashraf Aboud, you were diagnosed with ‘neck pain,
back and Rt knee pain (medial meniscal extrusion) and PTSD.’
With respect to your Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, we do not have evidence
to support this diagnosis meets the DSM-5 criteria as
required by Section 5.10
and 5.11 of the Motor Accident Guidelines. Your psychological injury is
therefore assessed as a 'threshold’
injury as per section 5.12 of the
Guidelines.”
on the insurer’s reasons for decision in the liability notice dated 5 July
2023, I consider it was reasonable and necessary
for the claimant to obtain a
medico-legal report in circumstances where he is reported to have symptoms of
psychological illness,
but the insurer has determined his psychological injuries
are threshold injures on the basis that there was no evidence to support
also note that Medical Assessor Verma’s assessment states that the
claimant reported he started experiencing mental health
symptoms soon after the
accident, and said he discussed a mental health with his GP. Medical Assessor
Verma provided a summary of
relevant documentation that was before her.
Relevantly, Medical Assessor Verma’s summary notes:
(a) the certificate of capacity dated 17 August 2023 from Dr Aboud mentions a
diagnosis of “PTSD”;
(b) the IME by Dr Peter Conrad dated 4 October 2023 concludes “At this
stage he needs conservative treatment including the
modalities of medication,
medical supervision, physiotherapy and psychological counselling...”;
(c) a mental health plan by Dr Ashraf Aboud dated 25 August 2023 notes symptoms
of mixed anxiety and depression for which the claimant
was referred to
psychologist Charmaine Moubarak; and
(d) clinical notes of Charmaine Moubarak, psychologist, dated 20 September 2023
notes she undertook DASS scoring where the claimant
scored 11 in depression, 4
in anxiety and 17 in stress.
those documents are not before me, they are all noted to pre-date Dr
Rastogi’s report. The summary provided by Medical
Assessor Verna of those
documents suggest that obtaining a medico-legal report from a psychologist or
psychiatrist would be reasonable
and, in circumstances where the insurer had
decided that the claimant’s psychological injuries were threshold injuries
on a lack of evidence, necessary.
also note that Medical Assessor Verma came to a different conclusion than Dr
Rastogi on the claimant’s psychological injury
and found that the claimant
had an adjustment disorder.
accept the insurer’s submission that the report of Dr Rastogi was not used
in the medical assessment under Division 7.5. While
this is a factor that weighs
against a finding that the report was reasonable and necessary, I do not
consider this is determinative
of whether the claimant is entitled to recover
the costs of this report.
balance, based on the considerations outlined above, I find it was reasonable
and necessary for the claimant to incur the costs
associated with Dr
Rastogi’s report.
accept the insurer’s submission that it would be contrary to the intention
of the legislation to allow claimants to “shop
around for favourable
opinions from any number of doctors, not use any of those opinions, yet claim
those medico-legal report fees”.
However, this submission does not reflect
the current circumstances. The claimant is only seeking the recovery of costs
for one medico-legal report in relation to his psychological injuries.
He did not seek to obtain a second medico-legal report after
he decided not to
rely on or serve Dr Rastogi’s report. I do not consider that obtaining one
medico-legal report that was not
served or relied upon amounts to “forum
shopping”. Further, to be entitled to recover the costs of any
medico-legal report
fees, the claimant must show they are reasonable and
What is the maximum amount provided by the
Regulations?
report of Dr Rastogi is report prepared by a specialist who had not previously
treated the claimant, and the appointment was not
jointly agreed by the parties.
An examination of the claimant was undertaken. Schedule 2 Item 7(b) of the
Regulation applies.
Accordingly,
pursuant to s 8.10(2) of the MAI Act, cl 28(1) and Schedule 2 of the Regulation,
the maximum amount payable by the insurer
for Dr Rastogi’s report is 16
monetary units.
the purposes of s 8.10 of the MAI Act the costs and expenses incurred by the
claimant in respect of Dr Rastogi’s report
dated 14 March 2024 are
reasonable and necessary.
claimant is entitled to recover up to 16 monetary units from the insurer in
respect of Dr Rastogi’s report dated 14 March
[2016] HCA 19
[2009] HCA 41
[2017] HCA 34
discussion in
Najjarine v Hakanson
[2009] NSWCA 187
, where the Court of
Appeal discussed the predecessor of s 8.3, being
Motor Accidents
Compensation Act 1999
(NSW) and noted the section “authorises
regulations making provision for maximum costs for legal services provided to a
or an insurer, and excludes entitlement of a legal practitioner to be
paid an amount that exceeds any maximum costs so fixed”:
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (465 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter