URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/79.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Inspector Sandra Shaw V Stoneworx Granite & Marble Pty Ltd (Acn 105 414 060) [2006] NSWCIMC 79 (13 June 2006)
reproduction, except under authority from the Crown, of the contents of
transcript for any purpose other than the conduct of these proceedings is
prohibited.
Coram: G A Miller
Acting Chief Industrial Magistrate
13 June 2006
INSPECTOR SANDRA SHAW
STONEWORX GRANITE & MARBLE PTY LTD (ACN 105 414 060)
OHS Act 2000, Section 8(1)
The Defendant has pleaded guilty to an offence under section 8(1) of the
Occupational Health & Safety Act 2000
(NSW) (“the
The particulars of the charge against the Defendant are:
“The Defendant being an employer at Unit B4, 23-25 Windsor Road,
Northmead, in the State of New South Wales (“the Site”)
October 2004 did fail to ensure the health, safety and welfare at work of all
the employees of the Defendant employer and,
in particular, Mr Adham Abboud, in
that the Defendant failed to provide a safe system of work which would ensure
that the slabs of
marble, granite and stone could be accessed and moved in a
manner that would not pose a risk of falling and the Defendant failed
adequate storage for slabs of marble, granite and stone in the warehouse storing
them on A frames which did not allow
a minimum of seven (7) degree angle for the
The maximum fine liable to be imposed on the Defendant in relation to section
8(1) is $550,000 in light of the fact that the Defendant
does not have any prior
convictions. The jurisdictional limit of this Court is $55,000.
The facts relevant to the charge are as set out in the Agreed Statement of
Facts as follows:
1. At all material times the Defendant, Stoneworx Marble & Granite Pty
Limited (ACN: 105 414 060) (“the Defendant”)
was a company duly
incorporated with a registered office located at c/- Coulton Isaac Barber, Suite
6, 5-7 Ross Street, North Parramatta
in the State of New South Wales.
2. At all material times the Defendant was undertaking non-metallic
mineral produce manufacture at 23-25 Windsor Road, Northmead in
the State of NSW
(“the site”).
3. At all material times the Defendant was an employer in the State of New
South Wales.
4. At all material times Adham Abboud was employed by the Defendant as a
stonemason and installer, installing granite bench tops in
kitchens. Mr Abboud
commenced working for the Defendant on 4 July 2003. He had worked with the
principal of the company for some
time prior. He was 32 at the time of the
incident. He was was 32 years old at the time of the incident.
5. On 12 October 2004 at approximately 1 pm, Mr Adham Abboud had placed a
wedge between two slabs of stone, ready for a forklift to
lift using a crane
clamp. The wedge allowed room for the clamp to be inserted on top of the slab.
The wedge between the slabs of
stone caused the slabs to fall. Mr Abboud was
alone at the time. Slabs which were stored behind Mr Abboud fell on him. The
which fell were stored against an A frame which did not comply with a
seven degree angle of storage for slabs.
6. Mr Abboud sustained a head injury, right hand fracture, multiple facial
lacerations and post traumatic stress disorder. Mr Abboud
was totally unfit for
a period of seven (7) weeks. He returned to suitable duties on 9 December 2004
and pre-injury duties on 14
March 2005.
7. Prior to the accident, there was a procedure where slabs of stone were
stored against an A frame. When moving the slabs, the first
slab is pulled
forward and a wedge inserted between the first and second slab. This will
reduce the level of angle of the slab.
The crane clamp is then placed on top
of the slab and lifted via a jib on the forklift.
8. Mr Abboud had been fully trained in the procedure for moving and
accessing slabs of stone when he first commenced employment with
9. A system of strapping the slabs to the A frame had been implemented
some time prior to the incident. This procedure was not always
followed and not
always effective as the strap had to be removed to access the slabs.
10. Following the accident, new A frames were purchased to comply with a
seven degree angle for storage of the slabs and the work
area was cleaned up
giving better access to the slabs.
11. All A frames which did not meet the seven degree angle were removed.
Off cuts and smaller pieces of stone had been put on timber
A frames and a
system had been introduced where straps were attached to the A frame allowing
the slab to be moved within the confines
of the strapping to place the wedge and
crane clamp. The strap is not removed until the slab is actually being
APPROACH TO SENTENCING AND FORMULATION OF PENALTY
OBJECTIVE SERIOUSNESS OF OFFENCE - NATURE AND QUALITY OF OFFENCE
In the assessment of penalty one of the matters to be considered is the
objective seriousness of the offence charged, sometimes referred
nature and quality of the offence. See
Lawrenson Diecasting Pty Limited v
[1999] NSWIRComm 343
In considering the objective seriousness of the offence the Court considers,
amongst other relevant matters peculiar to the facts
of the particular offence,
three questions. See
Inspector Adrian Reynolds v Jones Lang Lasalle Pty
, [2005] CIM’s Ct, Miller CIM,
4 May 2005.
1. Whether risk obvious or reasonably foreseeable
Whether the risk to health and safety that has been proven against the
Defendant was known to the Defendant or was obvious or reasonably
foreseeable
and, if so, whether the Defendant took steps to either eliminate the risk,
prevent persons being exposed to the risk
or mitigate the risk. If the risk was
known, obvious or foreseeable and no steps were taken to eliminate or ameliorate
the risk or
to ensure that employees were not exposed to the risk to safety, the
offence may be considered to be more serious than otherwise
might be the case:
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (2000)
49 NSWLR 610; 99 IR 29 at [81]-[82];
Inspector Gregory Maddaford v Graham
Gerard Coleman & Anor
NSWIRComm 317
Powercoal Pty Ltd & Anor
NSWIRComm 297
The Full Bench in
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority
(Inspector Mayo-Ramsay)
(2000) 49 NSWLR 610, stated that:
“the existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk of injury will
necessarily result in the offence being more serious in nature.”
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales v Goodman Fielder Mills Limited
(unreported, Marks J, 13 November 1994)
, the Court stated that:
“Once senior management became aware of the problem or once
circumstances existed which should have resulted in management appreciating
there was a problem, the degree of culpability of the Defendant increases
accordingly.”
In this case, there was an obvious and foreseeable risk of injury as a result
of the Defendant’s failure. Prior to the incident
date, not all A frames
used at the Defendant’s warehouse provided the necessary seven degree
angle of lean (see later). Also,
whilst a system of strapping the slabs to the A
frames had been implemented, this procedure was not always followed.
However, while Mr Abboud, the injured worker was a stonemason and installer
of benchtops, he had been trained by Mr Joseph Douehi
in all aspects of the
factory’s operation. The procedure prior to the accident is at paragraph
11 of the Douehi affidavit.
It seems to me the existence of a strapping system and a reasonably
comprehensive training regime prior to the accident indicate that
this is not a
case of recklessness or neglectful lack of concern for a safe system of work.
The strapping system was not rigorously
enforced, and the injury arose from a
combination of circumstances which were not easily foreseeable given the narrow
range of storage
angles involved. It was the combination of a shallow angle,
the lack of the strap at that time, and the usual method of preparing
transport which contributed to the instability resulting in the accident,
although it is admitted by the defendant that
had the storage angle been
greater, the accident would very likely not have occurred.
The risk posed by angle of storage while foreseeable, was addressed in the
policy that more than one person was to be available when
more than a single
slab was to be moved, and with the provision of strapping material. Further, the
fact that nothing had occurred
previously to indicate a problem, provides a
basis for assuming a low likelihood of injury or slab breakage, in the
circumstances
The breach is not one where in my opinion there was a known and perceived
danger, unchecked, and left in place. (
Insp Hannah v Wonar Pty Ltd (1992) 34
An attempt had been made to deal with the possibility by the
provision of strapping, but this was not applied on the day. It is not
of a penalty in the high range. The angle of storage of 7 degrees was the issue
addressed in the improvement notice and
was arguably not an obvious issue (JD
11(f)) provided there was an angle of lean. No one was able to advise where the
standard of
7 degrees was derived from. There is no evidence of any slabs
falling previously.
2. Whether feasible measures available to eliminate/prevent exposure to
Whether there were feasible measures available to eliminate or prevent
exposure to the risk and, if so, whether the Defendant implemented
measures. Failure to implement available measures may, again, support a
conclusion that the offence is to be judged more serious
than it otherwise might
Inspector Hannah v Wonar Pty Ltd (unreported, Fisher CJ,
CT90/1214, 30 June 1992)
Lawrenson Diecasting at 476, (Inspector
Ankucic) v McDonalds Australia Ltd
[2000] NSWIRComm 277
Department of Mineral Resources of New South Wales (McKensey) v Kembla
Coal and Coke Pty Limited
[1999] NSWIRComm 353
at para 27, the Court held:
“The existence of simple and straight forward remedial steps which
could have been taken by the Defendant to avoid the accident
are relevant, in my
view, to assessing the seriousness of the offence in this case.”
In this case, there were feasible measures to eliminate the risk, which were
to ensure that the slabs were stored in A frames providing
an angle of at least
seven degrees.
The actions taken by the Company after the Prosecutor issued an Improvement
Notice were steps that could have been taken before the
accident. These are set
out at paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Agreed Statement of Facts. For example, the
racks which had an inappropriate
storage angle have been replaced, and the
already comprehensive instruction has been made formal, and there is an enforced
and effective
strapping regime in place. The Defendant also cleaned up the
storage area, permitting better and safer access the slabs.
The steps to remedy the matter while in a sense were simple, involved the
discarding of storage racks, the purchase of new ones, and
then the devising of
a strapping system which would contain any falling slabs, were they to
overbalance in the wedging operation,
yet still permit that operation to take
place. Now the strap is only removed when the slab is transported (SOF 13).
There has been
some ingenuity applied to a problem by the defendant which was
only addressed by WorkCover in terms of the storage unit.
The combination of the modified storage and the strapping, couples with the
training (including first aid) has minimised the CHANCE
of the type of accident
which occurred ever taking place again.
(Benbow v Planada Holdings Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWIRComm 275)
, and has ameliorated the potential for other
accidents, and has provided the basis for a more effective and educated response
ANY accident if it occurs (JD 20).
3. Injury/death a manifestation of degree of seriousness of the
Whilst the consequence of an accident will not, of itself dictate the
seriousness of the offence or the amount of penalty, whether
the occurrence of
death or serious injury manifests the degree of seriousness of the risk to
health and safety to which persons may
have been subjected:
Rodney Morrison v
Powercoal Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWIRComm 416
and the cases referred to
Whilst not determinative of the seriousness of an offence or the level of
penalty, an offence which results in serious injury (or
has the potential to
result in serious injury) manifests the degree of seriousness of the relevant
detriment to safety;
Capral Alumunium
WorkCover Authority of New
South Wales (Inspector Ankucic) v McDonald’s Australia Ltd (2000)
Page v Walco Hoist Rentals Pty Ltd (No 2)
In this case, the injuries sustained by Mr Adham Abboud
(“Abboud”) were serious and were as follows: head injury, fracture
to the right hand, multiple facial lacerations and post traumatic stress
disorder. The court is unaware of the weight of the slab
that fell on Mr
GENERAL DETERRENCE
The Court in
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Farrell) v
Morrison (No 2)
[2002] NSWIRComm 27
at 326 emphasised that:
It is “the fundamental duty of this Court” to ensure that any
penalty imposed is severe enough to “compel attention
to occupational
health and safety issues so that persons are not exposed to risks to their
health and safety at the workplace”:
v Samaras Industries
Pty Limited
(1996) 82 IR 384
(at par74).
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
49 NSWLR 610; 99 IR 29 at [71] to [80] the Full Bench recognised that
in the industrial context, it would be rare that a sentencing
court need not
impose a sentence that includes an element of general deterrence.
The present matter is not such a rare case and it is appropriate that the
penalty reflects an element of general deterrence. The proper
stability of goods
stacked has long been recognised as a safety issue: see for example the former
s. 38 of the repealed
Shops and Industries Act 1962
SPECIFIC DETERRENCE
In relation to specific deterrence, the attitude of the Defendant to
questions of workplace safety and any steps taken to improve
safety following an
accident may be relevant. The propensity to re-offend must be considered when
determining the weight, if any,
to be attached to specific deterrence. It is a
well established principle that specific deterrence is a matter
should normally be given weight of some substance in the sentencing
process”: Capral Aluminium
In this case, since the accident the Defendant has shown a commitment to
Occupational Health & Safety. However, the defendant
company continues to
be an employer in the same business with employees exposed to similar risks as
those faced by Mr Abboud and
some consideration should be given to specific
deterrence.
In relation to the issue of deterrence, Stoneworx is a relatively young small
company, but it has not but for this accident, had any
other claim on its
workers compensation or other insurances. In this industry, it is very likely
that workplace accidents would be
commonplace but for training and proper
systems. Given the unsought and thoughtful approach of the director to safety
and the ongoing
welfare of his fellow workers, the defendant is unlikely in the
circumstances to re-offend.
The combination of the modified storage and the strapping, coupled with the
training (including first aid), has minimised the chance
of the type of accident
which occurred ever taking place again.
(Benbow v Planada Holdings Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWIRComm 275)
, and has ameliorated the potential for other
accidents, and has provided the basis for a more effective and educated response
any accident if it occurs (JD 20).
Further, the company has by keeping in regular contact with WorkCover and
involving all the workers in a formal safety dialogue every
fortnight observed
its “positive obligation to inform itself of circumstances of safe
WorkCover Authority (Insp Gregory Thomas Dawson v Waugh and
Thora Sawmilling Pty Ltd
(1995) 59 AR 89
Consequently, if the purpose of a penalty is to discourage the offender from
re-offending, then the injury, the inevitable increase
in insurance premiums,
the additional costs and implementation of a safety program has to some degree
had that effect. This is not
a defendant which requires a strong message to
ensure improvement, and the Court is satisfied that this matter was an
aberration.
PENALTY FOR OFFENCE
Having determined the relative seriousness of the offence, the penalty to be
imposed by the Court is that which approximately correlates
upon the scale of
penalties set by the legislature from zero to maximum:
WorkCover Authority of
NSW (Inspector Victor Page) v Walco Hoist Rentals Pty Limited (No 2)
[2000] NSWIRComm 39
Camilleri's Stock Feeds Pty Limited v Environment
Protection Authority
32 NSWLR 683
at 698 – 699.
The penalty should be assessed by reference to the maximum penalty and not to
the jurisdictional limit:
WorkCover v Spicer Axle Pty Ltd
NSWIRComm 278
(3 August 2005) at [14]
The High Court has confirmed in
that in determining the
penalty to be imposed the Court should adopt the “instinctive
synthesis” approach and consider
the objective and subjective features
together in arriving at a fine to be imposed. A specific deduction of 25% for
an early plea
of guilty can then be applied.
A number of Industrial Relations Commission decisions of single judges have
and confirmed that an overall penalty should be
determined by the Court taking into account objective and subjective features,
then, if applicable up to 25% can be deducted for the utilitarian value of a
plea of guilty: see for example,
Inspector Seneviratne v Caltex Petroleum
Distributors Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWIRComm 192
Inspector Brett Martin v
Encore Tissue Pty Limited
NSWIRComm 271
Inspector Yeung v Howie Herring & Forsyth Pty Limited
http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/disp.pl/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2005/349.html?query=%22boland%22+and+%222005%22+and+%22markarian%22
- disp37#disp37
NSWIRComm 266
Inspector Vosu v Ace-Semi Trailer Sales Pty Ltd
NSWIRComm 222
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Katf) v
Skilled Warehousing (NSW) Pty Ltd and APC Socotherm Pty Ltd
NSWIRComm 296
South Sydney Junior Rugby League Club Limited v
Inspector Bestre
NSWIRComm 116.
Inspector Yeung v Howie Herring & Forsyth Pty Limited &
http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/disp.pl/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2005/349.html?query=%22boland%22+and+%222005%22+and+%22markarian%22
- disp37#disp37
NSWIRComm 266
, Boland J stated:
I do not consider it is any longer appropriate to take the approach of
determining an amount of penalty based on the relevant objective
considerations
and deducting from that amount allowances for the individual subjective
CRIMES (SENTENCING PROCEDURE) ACT 1999
(“CSP Act”)
As well as considering the objective and subjective circumstances of the
offence the Court, in sentencing an offender is required
to take into account
prescribed aggravating and mitigating factors. See sections 3A, 21A, 22, 22A
and 3 of the CSP Act and see also
Morrison v Powercoal Pty Ltd & Anor.
NSWIRComm 61
. The Court is not required to increase
or reduce the sentence for the offence merely because a specified aggravating
factor is relevant or known to the Court (see s 21A (5) of the CSP
As a result of the incident, Adham Abboud suffered the following injuries:
head injury, fracture of the right hand, multiple facial
lacerations and post
traumatic stress disorder. Mr Abboud was unfit for work for 7 weeks. He
returned to work on suitable duties
on 9 December 2004 and to his pre-injury
duties on 14 March 2005. The injuries sustained demonstrate the potential risk
injury from a falling slab of stone incorrectly stacked or
incorrectly stored or improperly restrained.
In this case, the penalty to be imposed would be in the mid range of
penalties imposed by the Court.
SUBJECTIVE FACTORS
Subjective factors, being factors peculiar to the offender, will also be
considered in the determination of penalty. See
Lawrenson Diecasting Pty
Limited v WorkCover
[1999] NSWIRComm 343
Relevant subjective factors prescribed by s 21 A(3) of the CSP Act may
(a)whether the injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence
was not substantial; (e) whether the offender does not
have any record (or any
significant record) of previous convictions; (f) whether the offender was a
person of good character (see
McDonalds v (Inspector Ankucic)
[2000] NSWIRComm 277
at 454); (i) whether the offender has shown remorse for the offence by
making reparation for any injury, loss or damage
other manner (see
also McDonalds at 429); (k) a plea of guilty by the offender (see also
Thomson; R v Houlton (2000)
49 NSWLR 383 at 418); and, (n) assistance by the
offender to law enforcement authorities (see also
at 429). See
in particular:
Inspector Adrian Reynolds v Jones Lang Lasalle Pty Ltd
In addition, the Court may consider the means of the Defendant (e.g., whether
it is a large corporation operating in an inherently
dangerous industry or a
small "one man" company: See
Capral Aluminium
Callaghan v CI & D Manufacturing Pty Ltd (No 2)
1. In this case, the Defendant entered a plea of guilty on the second mention
of the matter, being the first mention after service
of the Prosecution Brief,
and accordingly the Prosecution does not dispute that the Defendant is entitled
to the discount identified
in the guideline judgment of
R v Thompson; R v
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383 up to a maximum of 25%. Although there is no
requirement that the maximum 25% discount be granted for an early
plea, in the
Prosecutor’s submission there is no relevant matter which would prevent
the Court granting the maximum 25% discount
to the Defendant. I accept the plea
was made at an early stage and had an utilitarian benefit.
2. The industrial record of the Defendant is relevant. See
(NSW) (Inspector Mansell) v Anytime Industrial Services Pty Limited
110IR34. The Defendant does not have any prior convictions recorded. The
Defendant is therefore entitled to the leniency that
would normally be given in
the absence of a prior criminal record:
(1974) 1Cr App R (S) 27;
WorkCover (NSW) (Inspector Barnard) v Rail Infrastructure Corporation
[2002] NSW IRComm 107
at para 31. There has been no prior
conviction. The defendant had been operating for nearly 2 years without
when the accident
occurred, and has operated in the hazardous industry for 12
years prior.
3. Remorse or contrition: remorse or contrition are inevitably evidenced by
what actions the company or person takes – they
are not merely feelings,
but are reflected in activity. The company acted immediately to care for the
injured worker and his family,
reported the accident, and has since sought in
various ways to ensure that he returns to a safe workplace. It put him back to
when he was fit enough on reduced duties, and finally reemployed him on
full duties.
4. Defendants demonstrated commitment to OH & S;
The defendant is entitled to receive due credit for excellent statistics in
its safety performance to this point, and the changes
made since the accident
manifests a responsible attitude supported by an effective safety program:
WorkCover Authority (Insp Chadwick) v BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd
(2000) 98 IR
The existence of a settled safety procedure and instructions is a
factor which may mitigate the seriousness of the offence: see
5. Actions taken by the defendant prior to and after the breach;
Insp Callaghan v Saunders Constructions Pty Ltd (IC(NSW), Maidment J, No
CT 1062 of 1993, 26 November 1993, unreported)
the court said:
Commendable though it is to introduce appropriate occupational health and
safety measures after the event it needs to be remembered
that the legislation
is not directed at ex post facto measures, it requires positive preventative
steps being taken.”
The defendant has taken positive preventative steps in relation to both
safety and instruction, although both areas have improved
since the notice. The
objectives of the deterrence mandated by the Act have largely been achieved
without the need for a substantial
monetary penalty.
The Defendant has co-operated with the WorkCover Authority.
Given the particular circumstances of this matter, particularly the
aberrational nature of the breach , the unlikelihood of re-offending
particularly with the new toast rack system now being introduced, the favourable
prior safety record and consequent lack
of antecedents and the actions of the
employer following the accident, a sentence in the lower mid range would be
appropriate. A
discount of 25% for the early plea has been applied.
Accordingly:
The defendant is convicted and fined $15,000.
There is a moiety of the fine to the prosecutor.
The defendant is to pay to the prosecutor costs agreed at $3,068.98.
The above monies are to be paid to the Downing Centre Local Court within 28
Acting Chief Industrial Magistrate
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (91.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter