URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2007/369.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TOMKO v PALASTY (NO. 2) [2007] NSWCA 369 (14 December 2007)
NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL
CITATION: TOMKO v PALASTY (NO. 2)
[2007] NSWCA 369
FILE NUMBER(S):
DATE(S): 3 December 2007
JUDGMENT DATE: 14 December
John TOMKO – Appellant
John PALASTY -
JUDGMENT OF: Hodgson JA Ipp JA Basten JA
COURT JURISDICTION: Court of Appeal
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): CA
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Registrar Schell
COURT DATE OF DECISION: 3 September 2007
SC/I J Stanley – Appellant
G O Blake SC - Respondent
SOLICITORS:
Denis & Company – Appellant
Ziman and Ziman -
CATCHWORDS:
EXTENSION OF TIME – length of delay
– reason for delay – whether applicant has fairly arguable case
– prospects
of success – prejudice to
respondent[<br>][<br>]PROCEDURE – review of decision of
Registrar to refuse extension
of time to file cross-appeal – where primary
appeal dismissed before hearing of review of Registrar’s decision –
Supreme Court Rules 1970
, r 18 [<br>][<br>]REVIEW
– power to review decision of Registrar – exercise of discretionary
no requirement to demonstrate error in decision of Registrar
– review not restricted to material before Registrar –
Supreme Court Act
</i>] 1970 (NSW), ss 46 and 121 –
Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), r 49.19[<br>][<br>]WORDS &
PHRASES – “at any time” – “cross-appeal”
LEGISLATION CITED:
[<i>Bankruptcy
Act</i>] 1966 (Cth), s 296
[<i>Civil Procedure Act</i>]
2005 (NSW), Schedule 6, cl 9, Schedule 7
Supreme Court
</i>] 1970 (NSW), ss 46, 75A, 119, 121
Supreme Court Rules 1970
, rr 2, 5, 6, 18, 56,
Uniform Civil Procedure
, rr 36.15, 36.16, 45.20, 49.19
CASES CITED:
Brown Male Fashions Pty Ltd v Philip Morris Inc</i>]
[1981] HCA 39
(1981) 148 CLR
[<i>CDJ v VAJ</i>]
[1998] HCA 67
(1998) 197 CLR 172
Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations
Commission</i>]
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
[<i>Colpitts v Australian
Telecommunications Commission</i>]
(1986) 9 FCR 52
[<i>Comalco
Aluminium Ltd v Ohtsu Tyre & Rubber Co (Aust) Pty Ltd</i>]
[<i>Commercial Union Assurance Co of Australia Ltd v Ferrcom
Pty Ltd</i>]
(1991) 22 NSWLR 389
[<i>Commonwealth v Hospital
Contribution Fund of Australia</i>]
[1982] HCA 13
(1982) 150 CLR 49
[<i>Ellis v
Leeder</i>]
[1951] HCA 44
(1951) 82 CLR 645
[<i>Emmett v Hornsby Shire
Council</i>]
[2002] NSWCA 75
[<i>Gallo v Dawson</i>]
[1990] HCA 30
64 ALJR 458
[<i>Henderson v Henderson</i>]
[1843] EngR 917
(1843) 3 Hare 100
[<i>House v The King</i>]
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR
[<i>In Re the Will of FB Gilbert (dec’d)</i>]
[1946] NSWStRp 24
SR(NSW) 318
[<i>Jackamarra v Krakouer</i>]
(1998) 195 CLR
[<i>Lawteal Pty Ltd v Ofo</i>]
[2006] NSWSC
[<i>Palata Investments Ltd v Burt & Sinfield Ltd</i>]
[1985] 1 WLR 942
[<i>Pioneer Park Pty Ltd (In liq) v Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Limited</i>]
[2007] NSWCA 344
[<i>Port of
Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd</i>]
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR
[<i>Preston v Harbour Pacific Underwriting Management Pty
[2007] NSWCA 247
[<i>Re Brindle; Ex parte FB & FA
McMahon Pty Ltd</i>]
[1992] FCA 203
(1992) 35 FCR 506
[<i>Re Greenhill; Ex parte
(1988) 83 ALR 295
[<i>SAAP v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs</i>]
[2005] HCA 24
[<i>Strata Consolidated (Australia) Pty Limited v
Bradshaw</i>]
[2000] NSWCA 225
[<i>Tomko v Palasty</i>]
[2007] NSWCA 258
[<i>Wentworth v Graham</i>]
[2002] NSWCA 397
(2002) 55 NSWLR
[<i>Wentworth v Wentworth</i>]
(1994) 35 NSWLR
[<i>Westpac Banking Corporation v Abemond Pty Ltd</i>]
(NSWSC, 3 November 1994, unrep)
[<br>]Ritchie’s [<i>Uniform
Civil Procedure NSW</i>], [SCA
(1) Dismiss
the application to review the Registrar’s decision made on 3 September
2007.[<br>][<br>](2) Dismiss
the application for an extension of
time to appeal from the judgment and orders of the District
Court.[<br>][<br>](3)
Set aside subpoenas issued on behalf of Mr
Palasty to the extent they remain unanswered.[<br>][<br>](4) Mr
to pay Mr Tomko’s costs of the motion to review the
Registrar’s decision and related applications disposed of by this
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
CA 40021/07
14 December 2007
John TOMKO v John PALASTY (NO. 2)
Mr Tomko brought proceedings against Mr Palasty in the District Court,
seeking to recover two amounts said to have been lent to Mr
Palasty. In a
judgment delivered by Gibb DCJ on 15 December 2006, Mr Tomko succeeded with his
claim in relation to the second loan,
but not the first. He appealed against so
much of the judgment as denied his claim in relation to the first loan. Mr
Palasty did
not appeal.
Some months prior to the hearing of Mr Tomko’s appeal. Mr Palasty
sought an extension of time in which to file a cross-appeal.
His application
was dismissed by the Registrar on 3 September 2007. Mr Tomko’s appeal was
heard by the Court of Appeal on
17 September 2007 but the Court as then
constituted was not informed of the attempted cross-appeal, nor was it informed
of any intention
to take steps subsequently taken by Mr Palasty on 25 September
2007 to appeal from the decision of the Registrar. The Court delivered
on 27 September 2007, dismissing Mr Tomko’s appeal. The present
proceeding involves an application by Mr Palasty
to review the decision of the
Registrar not to extend time for filing a cross-appeal.
The Court held, dismissing the application
(per Basten JA, Hodgson and Ipp JJA agreeing)
1 Only a respondent to an appeal can bring a cross-appeal. Once an appeal is
disposed of by a final judgment of the Court, there
is no longer an appeal on
foot and a cross-appeal cannot be filed: [2], [30].
2. The fact that a registrar is exercising the powers of a judge of appeal does
not make her or him a judge of appeal within the
Supreme Court Act
(NSW). The power to review a decision of a
registrar is properly found in
Supreme Court Act
49.19 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW): [4],
Strata Consolidated (Australia) Pty Ltd v Bradshaw
[2000] NSWCA 225
Preston v Harbour Pacific Underwriting Management Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA
, referred to.
3. A review of a decision of a registrar is not an appeal subject to
Supreme Court Act
. A review does not require demonstration of error
and is not restricted to a reconsideration of the material before the primary
decision maker. Authorities with respect to the conduct of appeals against the
exercise of discretionary powers, such as
House v The King
, do not in
terms apply to a review. However, a court may be more inclined to intervene in
relation to a decision which finally determines
a party’s rights, or where
fresh evidence, changed circumstances or error in the decision under review is
demonstrated: [6],
[10], [50], [52].
In Re the Will of F B Gilbert (dec’d)
[1946] NSWStRp 24
(1946) 46 SR (NSW) 318
Wentworth v Wentworth
(1994) 35 NSWLR 726
Wentworth v Graham
[2002] NSWCA 397
(2002) 55 NSWLR 638
Comalco Aluminium Ltd v Ohtsu Tyre & Rubber Co
(Aust) Pty Ltd
(1983) 8 ACLR 330
, considered.
4. Mr Palasty failed to provide a satisfactory explanation for the delay in
seeking to proceed with an appeal or cross-appeal: [80].
The Court cannot be
satisfied that there would not be real prejudice to Mr Tomko if an extension of
time were granted: [85].
Gallo v Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
(1990) 64 ALJR 458
, considered.
5. Mr Palasty’s appeal was so closely connected to Mr Tomko’s appeal
that it would be unreasonable to allow Mr Palasty
to pursue his appeal in
separate and subsequent proceedings. Even if the motion to review the decision
of the Registrar were technically
still on foot, the attempt to revive the
application for an extension of time within which to cross-appeal after the
hearing of the
appeal, without advising the Court or Mr Tomko, at or before the
hearing of the appeal, constituted an abuse of process:
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
(per Basten JA, Ipp JA agreeing)
6. In an application for an extension of time, it is generally neither necessary
nor appropriate for the applicant to do more than
demonstrate a fairly arguable
case: it is not necessary to demonstrate in any detail the prospects of success.
However, in the present
case reasonable prospects of success were demonstrated:
Jackamarra v Krakouer
(1998) 195 CLR 516
Palata Investments Ltd v
Burt & Sinfield Ltd
[1985] 1 WLR 942
(per Hodgson JA, Ipp JA agreeing)
7. Where a person is seeking an extension of time, there may be circumstances
where it is appropriate to go further into the merits
of the case than to ask
whether or not the case is fairly arguable. If there is a reasonable
explanation for delay and no great
prejudice to the opponent, a fairly arguable
case is sufficient. If the explanation for delay is less than satisfactory, or
if substantial
prejudice is shown, it may be relevant that the person seeking
the indulgence shows that his or her case has more substantial merit:
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
CA 40021/07
14 December 2007
John TOMKO v John PALASTY (NO. 2)
HODGSON JA:
I agree with the orders proposed by Basten
JA, and subject to what I say below, I agree substantially with his reasons.
2 I agree that it is only a respondent to an appeal who can
bring a cross-appeal; and that once an appeal has been disposed of, there
longer a respondent to the appeal. Accordingly, I agree that what Mr. Palasty
now needs is an extension of time to bring an
3 In my opinion, the basis on which a registrar’s decision
may be reviewed is still relevant. I do not think Mr. Palasty can
now be in any
better position than he would have been in if he had sought the relief he needed
before the Registrar, which relief
in any event differs more in form than in
substance from the relief which he sought before the Registrar.
4 I agree that
Strata Consolidated (Australia) Pty. Limited
v. Bradshaw
[2000] NSWCA 225
, to the extent that it decides that
Supreme Court Act 1970
applies in the case of a registrar exercising the
powers of a judge of appeal, should not be followed. That was an ex tempore
in which there was no consideration of alternatives or of contrary
argument; and in my opinion, it is open to a subsequent bench
of three judges,
in a reserved judgment and upon consideration of alternatives and contrary
arguments, to express firm disagreement.
In my opinion, the circumstance that a
registrar is exercising the powers of a judge of appeal does not make him or her
of appeal within the meaning of
He or she remains a registrar,
whose decision is subject to review under
Supreme Court Act
and/or r.49.19 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
5 I agree that the view expressed by Basten JA in
Park Pty. Limited (In Liquidation) v. Australia & New Zealand Banking Group
[2007] NSWCA 344
, on the basis of limited argument, that the review
of a registrar’s decision with respect to an order for security for costs
is constrained by the principles stated in
House v. The King
[1936] HCA 40
, is not strictly correct.
6 I agree that a review of a decision of a registrar is not an
appeal, subject to
Supreme Court Act
; and that in such a review a
court must exercise its own discretion.
7 In my opinion, this discretion extends to a discretion as to
whether, and if so how, to intervene; and in my opinion, there is an
person seeking to have a court set aside or vary a registrar’s decision to
make out a case that the court, in the
interests of justice, should exercise its
discretion to do so.
8 In the case of a decision on practice or procedure, this will
normally require at least demonstration of an error of law, or a
House v. The
error, or a material change of circumstances, or evidence satisfying
the strict requirements for fresh evidence. Even then, a court
may not think
that the interests of justice require intervention. This could be so, for
example, if the error of law is a deficiency
of reasons and the result is on its
face not an unreasonable one.
9 In the case of a decision which finally determines a
party’s rights, or which (albeit one of practice or procedure) has a
decisive impact on those rights, a court may be more willing to intervene. It
may permit further evidence to be led which does not
satisfy the strict
requirements for fresh evidence, if it is satisfied that the interests of
justice require this. It may decide
to substitute its own discretionary
decision for that of the registrar, even though no
House v. The King
error is shown, again if it is satisfied that the interests of justice require
this. To that extent, the review may be considered
a de novo hearing.
10 In my opinion, this approach is consistent with the position
that such reviews are not appeals and involve the exercise of discretion
reviewing body; and with the policy considerations referred to by Jordan CJ in
In Re the Will of Gilbert
[1946] NSWStRp 24
(1946) 46 SR(NSW) 318
at 323. It is also
consistent with the general principles concerning interlocutory applications:
they do not finally decide matters,
and successive applications can be brought
for the same orders; but generally, a later application for orders that have
been refused will be summarily dismissed unless a change of
circumstances is shown or there is evidence satisfying the strict requirements
for fresh evidence.
11 I am inclined to think the same approach applies to the
review of a decision of a single judge of appeal under
12 I agree with Basten JA that the circumstances of delay and
the deficiencies in the explanations offered are very powerful considerations
against Mr. Palasty.
13 In my opinion, it is particularly significant that the Court
hearing Mr. Tomko’s appeal was not informed of any proposal
for an appeal
or cross-appeal by Mr. Palasty. Such an appeal or cross-appeal, if it had any
merit, would have raised possible faults
in the judgment below which were not
canvassed by Mr. Tomko’s appeal; and may have put the overall soundness of
the judgment
in quite a different light. Although the issues in Mr.
Tomko’s appeal were different from those in Mr. Palasty’s appeal
cross-appeal, they relate to just one judgment concerning one set of
circumstances with the same group of participants. In those
circumstances, in
my opinion it was quite wrong to seek dismissal of an appeal, without drawing
the Court’s attention to the
fact that there were aspects of the judgment
that the respondent intended to attack as being unsound.
14 In my opinion, there may be circumstances where it is
appropriate to go further into the merits of the case of a person seeking
indulgence such as this, than to ask whether or not the case is fairly arguable.
If such a person has a reasonable explanation
of delay and the opponent does not
have a strong case of prejudice, then a fairly arguable case is sufficient.
However, if the explanation
for the delay is less than satisfactory, or if the
opponent has a substantial case of prejudice, then it may be relevant that the
person seeking the indulgence shows that his or her case has more substantial
merit than merely being fairly arguable.
15 In the present case, Mr. Palasty may have had a point which
could be regarded as being more than just fairly arguable, arising
from the way
the case was pleaded and the way the primary judge addressed the question of
whether Mr. Palasty had shown that he had
reasonable grounds for making a
representation as to the future. However, the primary judge in her judgment
referred to a statement
of issues which raised the question, and we have been
provided with no material about that statement of issues on which we could
any view as to whether or not it was provided in circumstances which were
adequate to fairly put the matter before the Court.
We have also not been
provided with any material that would enable us to form even a prima facie view
as to whether the judge’s
approach to the question of evidence of
reasonable grounds was erroneous, in the light of the way the case was conducted
before her.
In those circumstances, it is not possible for this Court to come
to any view that Mr. Palasty has any more than a fairly arguable
16 In all these circumstances, a case is not made out for
extending the time for the bringing of an appeal by Mr. Palasty.
: Subject to the additional remarks of Hodgson
JA (with which I agree), I agree with Basten JA.
: On 15 December 2006 Gibb DCJ gave judgment
in favour of Mr Tomko in proceedings brought by him against Mr Palasty in the
Court. In those proceedings, Mr Tomko had sought to recover two loans
said to have been made to Mr Palasty. In the alternative
to the claim in
contract in relation to the second loan, Mr Tomko alleged an entitlement to
damages in the amount of the loan, based
on a misleading or deceptive
representation made to him by Mr Palasty shortly before the second loan was
advanced, to the effect
that he, Mr Palasty, would organise for a mortgage to be
given by the company which he controlled, which was purchasing land for
development.
19 Mr Tomko appealed on the basis that he should have recovered
the amount of the first loan, in addition to the amount which he recovered
respect to the second loan. Mr Palasty did not appeal.
20 Mr Tomko had argued in the District Court that he was
entitled to recover the amount of each loan from Mr Palasty, on the basis
it had been made to Mr Palasty personally. The trial judge dismissed these
claims, holding that both loans were made to a company
controlled by Mr Palasty,
and not to Mr Palasty. However, Mr Tomko succeeded in his claim with respect to
misleading or deceptive
conduct in relation to the second loan. He obtained a
judgment against Mr Palasty in the amount of $480,852. Mr Tomko appealed
against so much of the judgment as denied his claim in relation to the first
loan. That appeal was heard by this Court on 17 September
2007. Judgment was
delivered on 27 September 2007 dismissing the appeal with costs: see
[2007] NSWCA 258.
Unbeknownst to the Court as then constituted, Mr
Palasty had, some months prior to the hearing of Mr Tomko’s appeal,
a wish to cross-appeal in relation to the judgment against him in the
District Court. That fact was not revealed to the Court as
constituted to hear
Mr Tomko’s appeal: see
[2007] NSWCA 258
. However, as now appears,
Mr Palasty had taken a number of steps, the details of which will be noted
below, to obtain an extension
of time within which to file a cross-appeal. A
notice of motion seeking an extension of time in that regard was heard by the
on 3 September 2007, 14 days before Mr Tomko’s appeal was
scheduled for hearing. The Registrar dismissed the application.
21 No step was taken to review the decision of the Registrar
until 25 September 2007, eight days after the hearing of Mr Tomko’s
appeal. Two days later, on 27 September 2007 judgment was handed down
dismissing Mr Tomko’s appeal. The present proceeding
involves an
application to review the decision of the Registrar not to extend time for
filing a “cross-appeal”.
Preliminary issue
22 At a directions hearing on 23 November 2007, attended by counsel for both
parties, the Court noted that the utility of the present
application was open to
doubt. There was no appeal on foot and the cross-appeal had not yet been
commenced. Mr Palasty was invited
to consider whether his application was in
truth an application for an extension of time within which to appeal. The Court
that he might wish to consider his position in that respect so as to
avoid yet further delay in the resolution of the outstanding
issue. Further,
the appeal having been dismissed, he was invited to consider whether the present
application might be treated as
an abuse of process, in a sense analogous to
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
Palasty having allowed Mr Tomko’s appeal to proceed to final judgment
without the determination of the issues he sought
to raise in relation to the
same judgment of the District Court.
23 On 30 November 2007 a further written submission was filed on
behalf of Mr Palasty, addressing the issues raised at the directions
and, recognising the possibility that the motion seeking review of the
Registrar’s decision, if brought in reliance
(NSW), was out of time, seeking an extension of time in which
to seek review. No application was made to seek an extension of time
which to appeal.
24 Mr Blake SC, for Mr Palasty, contended that it was still open
to Mr Palasty to cross-appeal for three reasons, although it is not
clear whether they were cumulative or independent of each other. The first
asserted that, because an extension of time
had been sought before Mr
Tomko’s appeal was dismissed, there remained “a judicial function to
perform”. Secondly,
it was contended that, because the rules imposed no
limit on the time within which this Court could extend time to cross-appeal,
there was no limit and the fact that the primary appeal had been dismissed
should not be treated as an implied limitation on the
power. Thirdly, perhaps
supportively of the first reason, or in recognition of the possibility that it
might be necessary to reopen
the Court’s appeal judgment, it was noted
that the earlier judgment had not been entered.
25 The provisions relating to cross-appeals are contained in
Supreme Court Rules 1970
, r 18 and read as follows:
“18 (1) Where a respondent to an appeal from any decision
wishes to cross-appeal from the whole or any part of the decision
entitled to do so as of right, he or she shall file and serve on each necessary
party a notice of cross-appeal.
(2) A notice of cross-appeal must be filed and served by a
respondent within the earlier of:
(a) 14 days after service on the respondent of a notice of
appeal with or without appointment;
(b) 14 days after leave to cross-appeal is given; or
(c) such extended or abridged time as the Court of Appeal may
(3) Subject to subrules (1), (2), (4) and (5), the provisions of
these rules relating to a notice of appeal apply to a notice of
cross-appeal.
(4) Rules 5 and 6(2)-(4) do not apply to a cross-appeal.
(5) Times in rules 42(4) and (5) and rule 47(1) shall run from
the date of filing of the notice of appeal with appointment rather
than the date
of filing of the notice of cross-appeal with appointment.”
26 There is a question as to the date by which the notice of
cross-appeal should have been filed and served.
identifies at least
four possible dates, being 14 days after service of a notice of appeal without
appointment; 14 days from service
of a notice of appeal with appointment; 14
days after a grant of leave to cross-appeal, or by the date fixed by the Court.
in sub-r (2) to “the earlier of” those dates is inapt; if
it had referred to the “earliest” then the notice
of cross-appeal
was required by 23 January 2007. Because time was not sought to be abridged,
nor was leave required, the only other
relevant date was the date on which the
notice of appeal with appointment was filed and served, 14 days from which date
been 19 April 2007.
27 Apart from the question of time, there is a separate issue as
to whether a notice of cross-appeal without appointment could properly
pursuant to r 18. Because the provisions of the rules relating to notices of
appeal apply to notices of cross-appeal (sub-r
(3)) r 6(1), providing for a
notice of appeal with or without appointment, is applicable. For reasons which
will be noted below,
it is highly implausible that the rules contemplated that a
notice of cross-appeal without appointment (allowing a further three
within which to file a notice of cross-appeal with appointment) was contemplated
as a process available after a notice of
appeal with appointment had been filed.
The better view is that Mr Palasty was required to file a notice of cross-appeal
appointment within 14 days after service of the notice of appeal without
appointment and, if he did not wish to avail himself of
that liberty, then he
was required to file within the same time a notice of cross-appeal with
appointment. He did neither.
, r 5 provides that the Court may extend time for an
appeal “at any time”: r 5(4). Sub-rules 6(2)-(4) deal with the
where a notice of appeal without appointment has been filed and
served, allowing a three month period, which cannot be extended.
which is automatically treated as discontinued on expiration of the three month
period can only be reinstituted by seeking
an extension of time under r 5.
29 The requirement for an appellant to file a notice of appeal
with appointment within three months after filing one without appointment
contained in r 6(2). The discontinuance which follows a failure to comply with
r 6(2) is found in r 6(4). Those provisions do
not apply in relation to a
cross-appeal: r 18(4). Whether that means that there is no provision for a
cross-appeal without appointment
or whether there is simply a lacuna in relation
to what happens when a cross-appeal without appointment is not followed by a
cross-appeal
with appointment need not be resolved. However, it is clear from
the provisions relating to call-over times that a cross-appeal
appointment cannot be filed after a notice of appeal with appointment: see r
30 It is also clear from the language used consistently in
that the moving party on an appeal is an ‘appellant’ and the
other party is the ‘respondent’. Only a “respondent”
can commence a cross-appeal: r 18(1). No person is aptly so described unless
there is an appeal on foot. Once an appeal is disposed
of by a final judgment
of the Court, there is no longer an appeal on foot for the purposes of the rules
relating to cross-appeals.
31 Although questions of costs may be dealt with after judgment
has been delivered, judgments may in certain circumstances be set
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
, 36.15 and 36.16) and applications for particular
orders setting aside a judgment or seeking variation of a costs order may be
by a motion entitled in the appeal, it does not follow that the appeal
proceedings are on foot for other purposes. Nor does the
fact that the
respondent had filed an application for extension of time before judgment was
delivered allow a different conclusion.
There may well be steps taken in a
proceeding which have not been followed to fruition, such as the issue of a
subpoena not called
on. Unless the judgment is reopened, those steps should be
taken as having lapsed, because they no longer have utility.
32 In the present case, there is no longer any appeal on foot
and there is no application to reopen the judgment in Mr Tomko’s
For that reason the present motion should be dismissed. However, and despite
not having availed himself of the opportunity
to seek such relief in the
alternative before the hearing of the present motion, Mr Palasty did seek, as a
fall-back position, leave
to apply for an extension of time within which to file
an appeal. Despite failure to comply with the formalities, that application
should be treated as having been made and any formalities waived.
Nature of challenge to decision of Registrar
33 If the conclusion reached above is correct, there is no occasion to
consider the power of review of the decision of the Registrar.
However, the
matter was fully argued and in case the conclusion reached above is thought to
be wrong, it is appropriate to address
the question.
34 The real issue in this regard is the scope of the available
challenge to a decision of the Registrar on an interlocutory application
from the point of view of the Court, the proper approach to be adopted by the
Court in considering a challenge. The starting
point in seeking to address that
question is the source of the Court’s power.
, Division 2 of the
Supreme Court Act
for the appointment of Registrars, including the Registrar of the Court of
Section 121
makes provision in relation to powers and other
matters, in the following terms:
“121 (1) In this section
means a registrar, taxing officer,
or other officer of the Court.
(2) An officer may exercise such powers of the Court as are, by or under this or
any other Act, conferred upon the officer.
(3) A judgment given or an order made by an officer may be set aside or varied
by the Court.
(4) Subject to subsection (3), a judgment given or an order made or direction
given by an officer shall have effect as a judgment
or order or direction of the
Court, whether or not the judgment, order or direction is within the powers
mentioned in this section
of the officer.
(5) An officer shall constitute the Court for the purpose of the exercise of the
powers mentioned in subsection (2).”
36 Under the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
certain powers are
conferred on the Registrar, subject to exceptions not presently relevant, by
adoption of the powers conferred
on a judge of appeal by sub-ss 46(1) and (2) of
Supreme Court Act
. Those powers include orders “concerning the
institution of an appeal” or any other order “in any appeal”,
not involving the determination or decision of the appeal:
disputed that the powers thus conferred on the Registrar included the power to
grant or refuse an extension of time within
which to file a cross-appeal.
37 There may be an issue as to whether
judge of appeal to deal with an application to set aside or vary a judgment
given by the Registrar of the Court of Appeal.
, r 4 may have that
effect. Mr Palasty contended that it did, because, pursuant to the transitional
provision in Schedule 6, cl 9
Civil Procedure Act
reference in
, r 4 to powers of the Court “under this Part”
included the corresponding provisions in the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(“the UCPR”), the otherwise relevant provisions of
been repealed. At least since the amendment to UCPR r 49.19 on 7 September
2007, it is apparent that the power given by that
rule is a corresponding
provision to the repealed
, r 3. In any event, that question is of no
present relevance, given the constitution of the Court. However, the terms of r
are significant and should be noted:
“49.19 If in any proceedings a registrar gives a direction or certificate,
makes an order or decision or does any other act,
the court may, on application
by any party, review the direction, certificate, order, decision or other act
and make such order,
by way of confirmation, variation, discharge or otherwise
as the court thinks fit.”
38 The alternative source of power was that said to arise under
Supreme Court Act
which provides:
(4) The Court of Appeal may discharge or vary a judgment given by a Judge of
Appeal, or an order made or direction given by a Judge
of Appeal.”
39 Although
makes no reference to a judgment or order of
a registrar, there is authority for the proposition that it extends to such a
because the powers of the registrar are identified by reference to the
powers conferred on a judge of appeal sitting alone. In Ritchie’s
Uniform Civil Procedure
, the note at [SCA s 46.15] indicates
that the judgment of Sheller JA in
Emmett v Hornsby Shire Council
is authority for the proposition that the power to review a decision of
a registrar arises under
That is not so. His Honour relied upon
, r 4 as the source of power to review the decision of the Registrar
dismissing an appeal for want of prosecution.
40 Authority for the proposition that
permits review of
the decision of a registrar, because he was exercising powers identified under
, r 58 as the powers of a judge of appeal, may be found in
Consolidated (Australia) Pty Ltd v Bradshaw
[2000] NSWCA 225 (Heydon
Sheller and Beazley JJA agreeing) at [3]. However, the logic of that position
is not self-evident:
does not confer on the Court a power to discharge
or vary a judgment or order made in relation to the subject matter of sub-ss (1)
and (2), but rather orders made by a judge of appeal. The fact that the powers
of a registrar are identified by reference to the
subject matter of
(2), does not make a decision by a registrar in respect of such a matter a
decision of a judge of appeal. I noted doubts as
to the logic of
Consolidated
in that respect in
Preston v Harbour Pacific Underwriting
Management Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 247
(Hoeben J agreeing, Ipp JA
expressing no opinion). In the present case Mr Palasty invited this Court to
conclude that
Strata Consolidated
was wrongly decided in that respect and
that the relevant power to review a decision of the Registrar does not arise
In my view, that submission should be accepted.
41 The present relevance of the source of power derives from the
consequences said to flow from the source. In
Wentworth v Wentworth
(1994) 35 NSWLR 726
this Court considered an application to discharge or
vary an interlocutory order restraining certain dealings in shares pending
determination
of an appeal. The reasons of the Court were variously expressed
by Mahoney, Handley and Powell JJA, but broadly speaking adopted
the principles
of constraint applicable in relation to discretionary interlocutory decisions,
in accordance with
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
In Re the Will
of FB Gilbert (dec’d)
[1946] NSWStRp 24
(1946) 46 SR (NSW) 318
Adam P Brown Male
Fashions Pty Ltd v Philip Morris Inc
[1981] HCA 39
(1981) 148 CLR 170:
see, eg, Handley JA
at 733. Because that approach had been adopted in relation to review of a
decision of a judge of appeal sitting
alone, pursuant to
, the Court held
Strata Consolidated
that the same principles must apply in relation to
review of a decision of a registrar, because that review arose under
[3], per Heydon JA.
42 It does not follow that, because the right of review is
properly found in
and r 49.19, rather than
, that the principles
governing the review are not those stated in
Strata Consolidated
although the point was not argued, this Court suggested in
Pioneer Park Pty
Ltd (In liq) v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited
[2007] NSWCA
that the differences in language between the three provisions did
not suggest any differences in the scope of review. The relevance
principles of constraint are, however, expressly called into question by Mr
Palasty in the present matter and should accordingly
be addressed. The first
step in the argument is to note that none of the relevant provisions uses the
term “appeal”.
In particular, r 49.19 provides that the Court may
“review” the order of the Registrar. As originally enacted, UCPR
included procedures for applications for review in
Division 5 which tended to equate a review with an appeal and, indeed, used the
term “appeal”: see, eg, r 45.20(2), as enacted in Schedule 7 of the
Civil Procedure Act
. These references were removed by the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules
(Amendment No. 15) 2007, published on 7 September 2007:
Government Gazette No. 116, p 6934. Consistently,
Supreme Court
, which uses the term “appeal” to refer to an appeal from a
decision in proceedings in the Court expressly excludes “an
application
for the variation or discharge of an order of a judge of appeal or of the
Registrar”: r 2(4), although that language
picks up the language of s
43 The term “review” may be said to have “a
quite amorphous meaning” as noted by Burchett J in
Australian Telecommunications Commission
(1986) 9 FCR 52
at 63-64. The
meaning will often depend upon the statutory context. In
Re Greenhill; Ex
(1988) 83 ALR 295
, Gummow J thought that the term had been
deliberately used in the
Bankruptcy Act
(Cth) rather than the term
appeal “with an eye to the complex history that has attended the question
of the exercise of the
judicial power of the Commonwealth other than by
judges”: at 296(50) referring to
Commonwealth v Hospital Contribution
Fund of Australia
[1982] HCA 13
(1982) 150 CLR 49
at 63-64, to which may now be added
reference to
Harris v Calladine
[1991] HCA 9
(1991) 172 CLR 84.
limited to reconsideration of the material
before the primary decision-maker:
Re Brindle; Ex parte FB & FA McMahon Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 203
(1992) 35 FCR 506
509 (Hill J). It may be found to have a similar meaning in an administrative
context: see, eg,
SAAP v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2005] HCA 24
(2005) 228 CLR 294
Comalco Aluminium Ltd v Ohtsu Tyre & Rubber Co
(Aust) Pty Ltd
(1983) 8 ACLR 330
, McLelland J held that a review of a
registrar’s decision to dismiss a summons for the winding up of a company,
could be by
way of a hearing
, on evidence a substantial part of
which had not been before the registrar. McLelland J referred to his earlier
decision of 12 September
1983 (unreported) in which he considered the principles
on which an application to review the decision of a registrar should be
approached.
However, that decision was largely limited to the question whether
the review was a form of appeal subject to
Supreme Court
, or whether it should be treated as a de novo hearing, not subject to
such constraints. His Honour considered that a review under
not an “appeal” and therefore approached the matter in the way
described in the reported judgment.
45 A similar approach has been generally adopted in the
Divisions in this Court: see particularly the judgment of Hall J in
Pty Ltd v Ofo
[2006] NSWSC 365
- [60]. The views expressed in a
number of the unreported decisions referred to by his Honour are succinctly
summarised by Santow
Wentworth v Graham
[2002] NSWCA 397
(2002) 55 NSWLR 638
stating, after referring to his own earlier decision in
Westpac Banking
Corporation v Abemond Pty Ltd
(NSWSC, 3 November 1994, unrep):
“... [T]he consideration that the registrar’s decision involves a
matter of practice and procedure remains a relevant
consideration in the
exercise of the power of review. Accordingly, it is proper for the court to
exhibit a natural inhibition against
the unrestrained substitution of the
reviewing court’s views in a matter of practice and procedure for those of
the original
46 That a “review” of the decision of the registrar
pursuant to r 49.19 is not an appeal means that principles of restraint
expressly adopted in relation to appeals do not, in terms, apply: c.f.
Wentworth v Wentworth
at [41] above. Further, the requirement to
demonstrate error, which is an essential part of the appellate process, is also
not applicable:
Coal & Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian
Industrial Relations Commission
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
[1998] HCA 67
(1998) 197 CLR 172
. To introduce those constraints as applicable
in the case of a procedure identified expressly as a “review” would
to impose constraints inconsistent with the language of the rule.
47 Nevertheless, the policy identified by Jordan CJ in
the Will of FB Gilbert (dec’d)
[1946] NSWStRp 24
(1946) 46 SR (NSW) 318
force. In referring to appeals in respect of points of practice or procedure,
his Honour stated:
“... [I]f a tight reign were not kept upon interference with the orders of
Judges of first instance, the result would be disastrous
to the proper
administration of justice. The disposal of cases could be delayed interminably,
and costs heaped up indefinitely if
a litigant with a long purse or a litigious
disposition could, at will, in effect transfer all exercises of discretion in
interlocutory
applications from a Judge in Chambers to a Court of
48 That is no doubt a factor which may be taken into account on
a review, but it must bear a good deal less weight than on an appeal
process of review is not to be subverted. Even in relation to an appeal, as
Jordan CJ noted in
, a distinction should be drawn between
“an exercise of so-called discretion which is determinative of legal
rights” and
a simple matter of practice and procedure, a distinction
approved in
Ellis v Leeder
[1951] HCA 44
(1951) 82 CLR 645
at 653 (Dixon, Williams and
49 A further factor which might influence the way in which a
review was permitted to be conducted in this Court is the fact that,
an appellate court, it is ill equipped to hear oral evidence, especially if it
is likely to be extensive. However, that
concern does not arise in the present
case because, although further evidence was tendered, it was in documentary form
and was received
largely without objection. Consistently with a process of
review, it was also appropriate for the parties to re-tender the material
had been before the Registrar. If there are circumstances in which the Court
might seek to limit the tender of further material,
they did not arise in the
present case and need not be considered further.
50 It follows, in my view, that Mr Palasty was correct in
contending that the matter must proceed by way of review; that
Supreme Court Act
is inapplicable; that he was under no obligation to
demonstrate error on the part of the Registrar, and that the Court must exercise
its own discretion on the material before it.
51 To the extent that that approach is inconsistent with earlier
authority, and particularly
Strata Consolidated
Wentworth v
, that authority should not be followed. Because the approach
adopted in those cases was explicitly based upon a jurisdiction invoked
, rather than
, r 3 or its corresponding provision in the UCPR, r
49.19, it provides only indirect authority with respect to the scope of the
Although the approach now proposed is also inconsistent with the approach
Pioneer Park
, the challenge to
Strata Consolidated
mounted by the respondent Bank in that case relied only upon the proposition
that it was inconsistent with the investiture of federal
52 It follows that the proper approach to an application in
relation to a decision of the Registrar is as follows:
(1) the application should be treated as a “review”, pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
(2) a review, unlike an appeal, does not require demonstration of error, nor is
it restricted to a reconsideration of the material
before the primary
decision-maker;
(3) authorities with respect to the conduct of appeals against the exercise of
discretionary powers, such as
House v The King
, do not in terms apply to
(4) nevertheless, similar policy considerations may arise in relation to a
review, including:
(a) a court may be less inclined to intervene in relation to a decision
concerned with the management of an on-going proceeding,
as opposed to one which
terminates the proceeding or prevents its
commencement;
(b) different factors may need to be addressed in relation to breach of time
limits in relation to the commencement of proceedings,
as compared with breach
of time limits for steps to be taken in the course of proceedings properly
commenced, and
(c) a court may be more inclined to intervene on a review based on fresh
evidence, changed circumstances or where error is demonstrated
in the decision
under review.
53 Although on review this Court should exercise afresh the
power to extend time, it does not follow that the reasoning of the Registrar
should be ignored, or that variations in the material presented to him and the
evidence adduced in this Court are irrelevant. However
because the matter now
before this Court must be treated as an original application for an extension of
time within which to appeal,
arguably those matters should be entirely put to
one side. As a result of the reluctance of Mr Palasty to embrace an application
in this form, little attention was paid to these issues. The preferable course
is to put them to one side and treat the matter as
an application for leave to
appeal out of time.
Merits of application
54 The first step in considering this matter is to identify the power under
which the Court is invited to act. The relevant limitation
is that contained in
, r 5(1), requiring that an appeal be instituted within 28 days after the
date of judgment in the Court below. This Court is entitled
to extend time
under sub-r (1) “at any time”. That is in contrast to the power of
the Court below to extend time only
on application made within 28 days of its
own decision. Accordingly, this Court has the power to make the order
55 The approach to such an application requires acknowledgment
of the proposition that “the respondent to the application has
right to retain the judgment” which is proposed to be the subject of
appeal: see
Jackamarra v Krakouer
(1998) 195 CLR 516
at [4] (Brennan CJ
and McHugh J). In such cases, consideration must be given to four factors of
general relevance, namely:
(1) the length of the delay;
(2) the reason for the delay;
(3) whether the applicant has a fairly arguable case, and
(4) the extent of any prejudice suffered by the respondent to the
application:
Palata Investments Ltd v Burt & Sinfield Ltd
[1985] 1 WLR 942
946, referred to with approval, in such a context, in
56 Speaking more generally, Kirby J noted that there might be
other factors relevant to the grant of an extension of time in particular
As his Honour stated, after reference to the factors identified in
Investments
, at [66] (7):
“But they are by no means exhaustive. Several others have from time to
time been thought relevant. These include whether
the delay was intentional or
contumelious; or merely the result of a bona fide mistake or blunder; and
whether the delay is that
of the litigant or of its lawyers, with which the
litigant should not be saddled. It may also be relevant, where the default is
that of a party’s legal representatives, to take into account any
considerations personal to the party which might have affected
its ability to
safeguard its own interests, for example, by applying pressure to its lawyers.
Similarly, the extent to which any
such prejudice may be remedied by an
appropriate costs order is another consideration that has sometimes been treated
as relevant.”
57 Each of the judgments in
affirmed the need,
at least on an application for an extension of time within which to lodge an
appeal, to take account of the prospects
of success. The appropriateness of
that course was not in dispute in the present proceedings. On the other hand,
it may be necessary
to consider whether demonstrating an arguable case is simply
a precondition to the grant of an extension of time or whether the demonstration
of a stronger case constitutes a positive element to be put in the balance
against aspects of delay or default.
58 There is a danger in placing too much emphasis on the
prospects of success: to do so invites the parties to treat the application
dress rehearsal for the full appeal: see
at [9]. In my view,
it is not necessary, or appropriate, for the applicant to do more than
demonstrate a fairly arguable case: it
was not necessary nor appropriate to
demonstrate in any detail the prospects of success. For present purposes it is
sufficient to
say that a number of grounds are fairly arguable and one at least
has reasonable prospects of success.
59 The factors which weigh against a grant of further time in
the present case are the length of the delay, the failure to adequately
the delay and the prejudice suffered by Mr Tomko. Each of these will be briefly
addressed below. However, there is a further
and significant feature of this
case which weighs heavily against an extension of time, namely the fact that Mr
Tomko’s appeal
was allowed to proceed to a hearing and then judgment
without the Court being advised of any outstanding application by Mr Palasty
challenge the judgment below.
60 The length of delay may be assessed in two ways. If Mr
Palasty had been minded to appeal against the judgment of 15 December 2006,
had 28 days within which to appeal, or if in doubt as to the propriety of an
appeal, to file and serve what is known as a “holding
appeal” or, as
identified in the rules, an appeal without appointment. He would then have had
a further three months to consider
whether or not to proceed. (That was the
process adopted by Mr Tomko.)
61 If Mr Palasty had decided to appeal, he was required to file
a notice of appeal with or without appointment by 12 January 2007.
filed a notice of appeal without appointment, he then had a further three months
within which to file a notice of appeal
with appointment, which would have
allowed him until 12 April 2007. If, on the other hand, Mr Palasty had sought
to exercise a right
of cross-appeal, then he was required to commenced his
cross-appeal either by 23 January 2007, being 14 days after Mr Tomko filed
notice of appeal without appointment, or, at the latest, by 19 April 2007, being
14 days after Mr Tomko filed his notice of appeal
with appointment. On any
view, his first attempt to commence a cross-appeal was four months out of
62 The first formal step taken in an attempt to cross-appeal was
the service on 20 August 2007 of a motion seeking an extension of
time. Even in
that respect, Mr Palasty had stumbled, because, although the motion was filed on
7 August and was returnable on 20
August, it was not served until 20 August and
accordingly the application was stood over for hearing on 3 September 2007, when
motion was dismissed by the Registrar.
63 In seeking to explain the delay, Mr Palasty’s
solicitor, Mr Derek Ziman filed an affidavit dated 18 August 2007 sworn, it
be observed, only two days before the return date on the motion. Mr Ziman
stated that he had first become aware of the matter
on 15 February 2007 when
apparently not served with
a bankruptcy notice until five days later, Mr Palasty
was apparently aware of Mr Tomko’s intention prior to receipt of the
notice. Part of the conversation recounted by Mr Ziman involved the following
statement by Mr Palasty:
“How can Tomko bankrupt me when he is appealing the decision? Surely it
is not final until after the appeal?
I want to cross-appeal. I’ll pay the full amount into Court in the
meantime if necessary. I want you to brief Alex Radojev
to apply for a stay of
the judgment.”
64 At that stage, Mr Ziman was aware that another solicitor,
Roland Barros, had been acting for Mr Palasty in the District Court proceedings.
Mr Ziman stated that on 12 March 2007 Mr Barros had sent him the pleadings in
the District Court and a copy of a notice of appeal
without appointment. Mr
Barros, however, appears to have continued to act in relation to the appeal
until 2 April 2007, when he
stated that his instructions had been withdrawn:
letter to Mr Ziman of 4 April 2007. On 5 April Mr Ziman received a copy of the
notice of appeal with appointment from Mr Tomko’s solicitors, Dennis &
Co. This, he stated, he immediately sent to Mr
Palasty by email, noting that
the call-over date was 24 May and requesting that he call “urgently”
to arrange a meeting
to discuss the matter. The email also sought instructions
to send a copy to “Alex”, presumably Mr Radojev, although
did not say whether he had briefed Mr Radojev, and if so when.
65 Mr Palasty had apparently told Mr Ziman in early April that
there was a dispute with Mr Barros over fees. Mr Ziman’s affidavit
confirmed the dispute and noted that he had not obtained the files from Mr
Barros until the fees sought had been paid (under protest),
the files being
delivered on 28 May 2007. Mr Ziman also stated that he sent the red appeal book
to senior counsel, asking for advice
on the grounds of a possible cross-appeal,
on 14 June 2007. On 3 July he wrote to Mr Tomko’s solicitor seeking
file a cross-appeal out of time.
66 Mr Tomko’s solicitor, Mr Dennis, replied on 6 July
noting that no appearance had yet been served on him in relation to the
on behalf of Mr Palasty. He also advised that his client refused consent to the
request to file a cross-appeal out of time.
67 Mr Ziman stated that he received advice from senior counsel
to pursue a cross-appeal, together with a draft notice of cross-appeal,
July 2007. On 17 July, a copy of the draft notice was sent to Mr Dennis for him
“to consider”. It may have been
intended that this constitute a
further request for consent to filing of the notice out of time and, when no
response had been received
by 3 August, Mr Ziman wrote again. That request
received a reply of the same date reiterating opposition and asking:
“Why has your client left this matter for so
68 There was no response to that inquiry but on 20 August 2007
Mr Fagan, a solicitor in the employ of Dennis & Co noted that on
2007 a copy of the notice of motion seeking an extension of time was received,
under cover of a letter dated 14 August
2007. On the same day, Dennis & Co
responded noting that the copy of the motion had been received some two hours
after the time
for its hearing and without any supporting affidavit.
69 There was further correspondence between Dennis & Co and
Mr Ziman, but it was (understandably) not attached to Mr Ziman’s
of 18 August 2007: no further affidavit was prepared by Mr Ziman.
70 At that stage, it may be remarked that the explanation for
the delays which had occurred and were continuing to occur was far from
complete. No evidence had been filed from Mr Palasty himself and no evidence
from Mr Barros, although it may be inferred that he
and Mr Palasty were no
longer on amicable terms.
71 When the matter came before this Court, an affidavit sworn by
Mr Palasty on 18 October 2007 was read on his behalf. The affidavit
number of issues. Thus paragraphs 5 and 6 identified health problems.
“5. Throughout the trial I had health problems relating to my
cardiovascular system. At one stage I was admitted to Baulkham
Hills Private
Hospital. There, my treating doctors identified a blockage in one of my
arteries. It required an invasive
6. As I recall it steps were taken in early October for the appointment of a
tutor to protect my interests. On 23 October 2006 my
direct involvement in the
trial of this matter ceased. I had been hospitalised (NorthSide Clinic)
overnight on 22 October and remained
there for between two and three weeks. I
was diagnosed with severe depression.
7. Following the conclusion of the hearing I remained under the care of a
psychiatrist – Dr Joe Dunn. I saw him weekly for
around three months,
trying different types of medication. Finally we settled on Luvox, which
stabilised my depressive episodes.”
72 The evidence as to Mr Palasty’s health was not
supported by any medical report, nor stated with any precision as to dates
his apparent incapacity. Despite the fact that he was successful with respect
to at least half (if not more) of the issues raised
at trial, he was ordered to
pay the plaintiff’s costs. Further, her Honour made an order in the
following terms:
“I order that the defendant (as was) pay the costs incurred and thrown
away by reason of his inability to testify or otherwise
to advance his case
because of illness, relevantly on and from the adjournment on Wednesday, 23
August 2006.”
Her Honour also noted, in an introductory passage to her reasons:
“Mr Palasty collapsed during cross-examination such that, after a series
of adjournments, the proceedings were continued with
the defendant represented
via his tutor, Judith Katerine Palasty, who was appointed by Justice Young in
separate proceedings, and
took carriage of the matter on Monday, 23 October
73 Despite this material, no complaint was made in the draft
notice of cross-appeal of any lack of procedural fairness at the trial
must be assumed that whatever arrangements were made to cope with Mr
Palasty’s health problems were appropriate. Although
the evidence did not
condescend to such detail, it may be noted that the proceedings in the District
Court ran from 21-24 August,
from 18-22 September and from 23-24 October 2006.
It should also be noted that the draft document which was the subject of the
application
for an extension of time, although headed “Notice of
Cross-Appeal”, did no more than identify the dates of the proceedings
the grounds of appeal. Not only are the formal parts not completed, but, more
significantly, no orders were included. The grounds
contain no complaint based
on Mr Palasty’s problems during the trial.
74 The problems which caused Mr Palasty to be admitted to
hospital apparently continued until approximately mid-November. Thereafter
only evidence of health problems is a period of weekly appointments with a
psychiatrist which may have continued to mid-February
2007: his affidavit is too
vague for any precise dates to be identified. He stated that following
publication of the judgment in
December 2006, “I formed the attitude that
I had to be very careful about an appeal”. There is a clear implication
he gave consideration to an appeal at that time. What he does not say,
however, is that he was incapacitated or significantly disabled
by ill-health
during the period following delivery of judgment on 15 December 2006.
75 The affidavit continued:
“While I was seeing my psychiatrist I was going to work – at 22
Hunter Street, Parramatta – on an irregular basis.
Until about April 2007
I had difficulties dealing with family matters, and going out with my family. I
had great difficulty addressing
the commercial matters that I had been involved
in for a number of years. I stopped drinking alcohol for around 8 months
the hearing. My doctor in Chatswood (Dr Flood, a heart specialist)
told me my heart condition meant I should avoid stress. I remember
being scared
through the opening part of 2007 about having a relapse and returning to
suicidal thoughts and actions, which had begun
to occupy my mind while I was at
Baulkham Hills Private Hospital.”
76 Mr Palasty then referred to the email of 5 April 2007 from Mr
Ziman and stated that at about that time he had begun to work “full
weeks” at his office. He stated that there were seven full-time staff in
the office and that he “resumed ultimate responsibility
for projects
emerging from that office of which he identified “six major
projects”. One project, which was at a nearby
address in Parramatta,
involved a four-level office development. Three others involved travel to sites
at or near Goulburn and a
fifth was an industrial development in St Marys. Mr
Palasty also stated:
“In the first half of 2007 I received around 50 email messages each day.
Additionally, many of the emails addressed to other
office staff needed my
review and response.”
77 Mr Palasty referred to a fee dispute with Mr Barros, of which
he said he became aware on 17 April, which resulted in payment of
“under vehement protest” on 25 May. However, it seems unlikely that
that dispute was a surprise to him. Mr
Ziman had recounted the conversation of
mid-February 2007 in the course of which he had offered to attempt to mediate
the dispute
between Mr Palasty and Mr Barros, to which Mr Palasty had
“No. There will be a dispute over fees I have been charged over a long
78 Taken as a whole, this evidence is almost wholly silent as to
the following matters:
(a) what advice, if any, Mr Palasty obtained in relation to the possibility of
appeal in December 2006 – January 2007;
(b) what instructions, if any, he gave to his then solicitor, Mr Barros, in
relation to an appeal, prior to withdrawing instructions
(c) what advice he obtained and what instructions he gave, when served with a
bankruptcy notice based upon the judgment debt, on
20 February
(d) what instructions he gave in relation to obtaining a stay of the
(e) whether Mr Radojev (or other counsel) was briefed to advise in relation to
the appeal and a possible cross-appeal before 14 June
(f) what advice he received, if any, in relation to the matters which were
required to be addressed in support of an application
for leave to cross-appeal
out of time.
79 Counsel for Mr Tomko submitted that, to the extent that Mr
Palasty failed to address relevant matters in his evidence and in that
from his solicitor, Mr Ziman, it should be inferred that the missing evidence
would not assist him: see
Commercial Union Assurance Co of Australia Ltd v
Ferrcom Pty Ltd
(1991) 22 NSWLR 389
at 418-419 (Handley JA). What seems
clear is that the delay was not caused by inadvertence (he referred to his
that he should be “very careful” in relation
to an appeal, in December 2006; Mr Ziman referred to his statement that
wanted to cross-appeal, on 15 February 2007) nor to his lack of access to legal
advice (until 2 April 2007 Mr Barros and, from
15 February 2007, Mr Ziman were
receiving instructions from him) nor to any specific degree of incapacity to
make a decision due
to ill health. Further, on 13 March 2007 Mr Ziman swore an
affidavit in the Federal Court bankruptcy proceedings, as solicitor for
Palasty stating that he “has given notice of an intention to appeal the
relevant judgment”. (That assertion was not
supported except by reference
to his conversation with Mr Palasty.) The affidavit also stated that it was
settled by counsel for
Mr Palasty, though not counsel briefed (or to be briefed)
in relation to the appeal. In those circumstances, Mr Tomko submits that
Court should infer “a conscious decision by Palasty not to seek a review
until after he learned that Tomko’s appeal
had not been well received by
the Court”.
80 In these proceedings, Mr Palasty seeks an indulgence by way
of an extension of time. It is not in dispute, nor could it be, that
burden of persuading the Court that there are proper grounds to grant his
request: see
195 CLR 540 (Kirby
J). He does so in
circumstances where an extension of time will “put at risk a vested right
of” Mr Tomko. It is sufficient
for present purposes to conclude,
therefore, that he has failed to provide any satisfactory explanation for the
delay in seeking
to proceed with an appeal or a cross-appeal. There are a
number of adverse inferences which might be drawn, short of a deliberate
manipulation of the system. One might be genuine vacillation on Mr
Palasty’s part, possibly caused in part by ill-health and
partly by a
reluctance to commit further funds to the litigation. Another explanation might
in part be the failure of his legal
advisors to appreciate the importance of
adhering to timetables in relation to litigation. There may be other competing
inferences.
In the absence of any need to choose a preferable explanation,
there is no need to make such a finding.
81 This evidence may be compared with that considered by McHugh
Gallo v Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
(1990) 64 ALJR 458.
In some respects, that case is
distant from the present. First, the applicant required an extension of the 21
days permitted for
an appeal from a single judge in the High Court, by a period
of more than 16 months. The present applicant requires an extension
months, but not of that order. Secondly, Ms Gallo’s claim was doomed to
fail: at p 460. Nevertheless, in one respect
the assessment undertaken by
McHugh J is pertinent. Thus, although the applicant was not legally
represented, she did not assert
that she was unaware of the 21 day time limit.
His Honour stated (at p 459, col 2):
“Indeed, the terms of her affidavit suggest that she made a conscious
decision not to appeal until she had satisfied herself
that she could succeed in
an appeal. I doubt that I would have considered the applicant’s
explanation for the delay to be
a sufficient reason for enlarging the time for
lodging her appeal ... even if I had thought that the applicant had real
of succeeding in her proposed appeal. A case would need to be
exceptional before a court would enlarge by many months the time for
appeal simply because the applicant had refrained from appealing until he or she
had researched the issues involved.
... It would make a mockery of O 70, r 3
if, months after the time for appealing has expired, the unsuccessful party
could obtain
an extension of time on the ground that he or she had delayed
appealing because that person wanted to research the issues involved.
legal knowledge is a misfortune, not a
privilege.”
Those comments apply with greater force in the case of a party with ready access
to legal advice through existing legal representation.
Prejudice to Respondent to application
82 When the courts
speak of a vested right in a judgment, they refer, in a circumstance such as the
present, to an enforceable right
to payment of a judgment debt. Again for
reasons which were never explained, Mr Palasty did not seek a stay of the
judgment but
simply failed to make payment, even when served with a bankruptcy
notice. Accordingly, Mr Tomko has been kept out of his money,
without legal
excuse, for a period of almost one year by the date of hearing of this
application. Although he apparently told his
solicitor in February that he
would pay the money into Court, he did not do so.
83 Before the Registrar, Mr Tomko asserted prejudice based on
the fact that he was incurring interest charges in the range of $4,800
per month on a bank facility arranged to allow him to make the advances which
were the subject of the dispute. His house
was mortgaged to secure the bank
facility and was at risk. His wife earned a livelihood as a personal trainer,
with a purpose-built
gym in the family home, which was therefore also at risk.
Mr Palasty’s response was to issue subpoenas to the National Australia
Bank seeking information in relation to the banking facilities provided to Mr
Tomko; to Mr Tomko’s wife, seeking documentation
relating to her business
and to the Mosman Council, seeking material relating to any permission to allow
Mr Tomko’s wife to
operate her business from her home. Mr Tomko filed a
motion seeking to set aside the subpoenas, which is also before this Court,
which has been rendered moot, by agreement that, in the circumstances, there is
no utility in pursuing the material sought to
be obtained. The issue of the
subpoenas was, nevertheless, indicative of an inclination to cast doubt on,
rather than meet, potential
84 In apparent recognition of the strategic risks involved in
challenging the factual premises on which prejudice was alleged, by
letter dated
10 October 2007, Mr Ziman advised that his client was prepared, without
prejudice, “to effect payment of the monthly
mortgage costs in respect of
that portion of the mortgage that would have been paid” had there been no
cross-appeal. Mr Palasty
also offered “to effect payment of the costs of
your client’s counsel for the hearing of the cross-appeal”,
to meet a complaint that because the appeal and the cross-appeal
could no longer be heard together, additional costs would be incurred.
that offer, there was no evidence that anything was done to give effect to the
proposals. Before this Court, counsel for
Mr Palasty merely offered security
for costs of the appeal, although he did indicate that his client was willing to
submit to such
further orders as the Court might consider appropriate in the
circumstances, if an extension of time were granted.
85 Even now, Mr Palasty does not seek a stay of the judgment
below, nor has he made arrangements to pay any amount into Court, or
provide security for payment of the judgment. Nor, in the only affidavit which
he has filed in these proceedings (in this
Court), did he indicate any
willingness to make any payments of the kind variously proffered by his
solicitor and counsel from time
to time. In these circumstances, the Court
cannot be satisfied that, apart from the risk of losing his judgment, Mr Tomko
face real prejudice flowing from the further delay and legal costs
which would be incurred if an extension of time were granted.
86 In my view the matters set out above are sufficient to
conclude that an extension to time to appeal should not be granted in the
present case. If, contrary to the view expressed at [32] above it is still
possible for Mr Palasty to cross-appeal, I would refuse
an extension of time to
cross-appeal, for the same reasons.
Abuse of process
87 There are other matters which support that conclusion. Some are entitled
to less weight than others. For example, some, but limited,
weight might be
given to the history of failure to comply with Court timetables in relation to
the defence of Mr Tomko’s appeal.
The Registrar described Mr
Palasty’s conduct in that regard as having “thumbed his nose at the
directions which have
been given to respond to the prosecution of this
appeal”. These included the failure to serve the notice of motion seeking
an extension of time until it was too late for it to proceed on the return date,
together with the failure to file and serve the
supporting evidence in a timely
88 Of greater concern, however, is the fact that Mr Palasty
allowed Mr Tomko’s appeal to come on for hearing and be disposed
without advising the bench as then constituted that there were outstanding
proceedings relating to a proposed cross-appeal.
The motion before the
Registrar should have been disposed of on 20 August 2007, which, had it
occurred, would have given ample opportunity
for a review of that decision to be
initiated prior to the hearing of the appeal on 17 September. That it was not
disposed of in
a timely fashion was entirely Mr Palasty’s fault. Even so,
the motion was determined by the Registrar on 3 September, 14 days
hearing of the appeal. Had the review properly been one carried out, in
accordance with existing authority, pursuant
, Mr Palasty had only 14
days to file an application to vary or discharge the order:
decision to proceed would therefore have needed to be made prior to the hearing
of the appeal on 17 September. Whether
he had 14 days or 28 days, knowing that
the hearing of the appeal was imminent, and indeed had been a reason for refusal
of the application
before the Registrar for leave to cross-appeal out of time, a
decision should have been made prior to the hearing of the appeal as
steps Mr Palasty intended to take. If he had sought advice in that regard, it
would have been inexcusable for his counsel
not to have told him that steps
needed to be taken prior to the hearing of the appeal. If he received that
advice, he did not act
upon it. If he did not receive advice because he did not
seek it, that would be inexcusable in the circumstances.
89 To allow Mr Tomko’s appeal to proceed without
attempting to bring his cross-appeal on for hearing at the same time, or even
advise the Court that such an application was outstanding, was tantamount to an
abuse of process. It may be that this Court would
have treated any application
made at the hearing of the appeal as a strategy to disrupt the proceedings and
avoid a timely resolution
of Mr Tomko’s appeal. If that were the fear,
and it would not have been an unreasonable fear, it would have been the result
of his own delay, and a consequence he should have been willing to confront. In
the result, a matter which should have been dealt
with at the same time as the
appeal is now sought to be dealt with separately and subsequently. Although the
circumstances are different,
they invite the application of the principles set
Henderson v Henderson
[1843] EngR 917
(1843) 3 Hare 100
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
602-604 in relation to an application for extension of time in which to appeal.
, there were two defendants to a claim by the plaintiff, Mr
Soterales. They sought contribution from each other, but the Authority
to claim an indemnity which, in the later proceedings, it claimed it was
entitled to as against Anshun. The Court held that
the claim for indemnity was
so closely connected with the subject matter of the plaintiff’s claim
against the Authority and
Anshun that it was unreasonable not to rely upon it in
those proceedings, with the result that it could not be relied upon in
proceedings.
90 In the present case, if Mr Tomko’s appeal had
succeeded, the judgment in the District Court would have been set aside and
would have been awarded a judgment in a larger amount. In that situation, it is
doubtful that any cross-appeal could have been
raised in relation to the
District Court judgment, which had been superseded by the judgment of this
Court. Mr Palasty would then
have had to seek leave to reopen the judgment of
this Court. He did not seek to justify his present position on the basis that
would have been entitled to take that step in any event. However, the result
is that his present “cross-appeal” constitutes
a challenge to the
judgment of the District Court which can only be available (if at all),
fortuitously, because Mr Tomko’s
appeal failed. This is sufficient to
illustrate, if the matter were in doubt, that his appeal is so closely connected
with Mr Tomko’s
appeal that it would be unreasonable to allow him to
pursue his appeal in separate and subsequent proceedings. The fact that he
sought, unsuccessfully, to commence these proceedings prior to the determination
of Mr Tomko’s appeal was probably seen
as a basis for avoiding rejection
of the application on these grounds. This risk was also no doubt the reason why
he was unwilling
to accept an invitation to make a separate application for an
extension of time within which to appeal. Such a fresh application
constituted an abuse of process and should, if reluctantly but informally made
at the hearing, be rejected. Even if the
motion to review the decision of the
Registrar were technically still on foot, the attempt to revive the application
for an extension
of time within which to cross-appeal after the hearing of the
appeal and without advising the Court or Mr Tomko constituted an abuse
process and, at the very least, a powerful discretionary reason for now refusing
the application.
Conclusions
91 The application to review the decision of the Registrar made on 3
September 2007 should be dismissed. It could not be entertained
following the
determination of the appeal. At least it required, as a precondition to its
consideration, reopening of the judgment
given on 27 September 2007 in this
Court. No such application was made.
92 If the application were to be treated as a fresh application
for an extension of time within which to appeal, it should be refused,
accordance with the criteria identified in
. It should also be
refused because it constitutes an abuse of process.
93 The subpoenas now lack utility and, to the extent that they
have not been answered, should be set aside.
94 Mr Palasty should pay Mr Tomko’s costs of the further
proceedings in this Court of the motion to review the Registrar’s
and any related applications disposed of by this judgment.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter