URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v The Danebritt Group Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 21 (14 November 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v The Danebritt Group Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 21
Hearing Date(s):
5 September 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Paingakulam J
(1) I convict The Danebritt Group Pty Ltd of the offence as charged.
I impose a fine of $90,000.
(3) The Danebritt Group Pty Ltd is to pay the
prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings as agreed or assessed.
Pursuant to s 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be paid to the
prosecutor.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — work health and safety — offences —
category 3 — risk of other persons being struck by collapse
that was not securely fixed to a wall — workers not provided instructions
on how to assemble and fit cabinet in
English — worker did not use all
L-brackets provided —
section 10(1)(a)
application — not an
appropriate matter for disposal pursuant to
— relevant factors on sentence — De Simoni principle — pleaded
risk could lead Court to De Simoni error
— pleaded risk amended —
both parties bear a responsibility to ensure that material tendered on sentence
does not offend
De Simoni rule — evidence that permitted an inference that
the workers were exposed to a risk of serious injury or death
disregarded
SENTENCING — relevant factors on sentence —
aggravating factors — mitigating factors —deterrence — reduced
need for specific deterrence
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Cases Cited:
Barton v The Queen
[2009] NSWCCA 285
Baumer v The Queen (1988) 166 CLR
51; [1988] HCA 67
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Ltd v Nash (2016) 93 NSWLR
[2016] NSWCCA 37
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Capral Aluminium
Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (2000) 49 NSWLR 610;
NSWIRComm 71
Markarian v The Queen (2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
Nash v Silver
City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd; Attorney General for New South Wales v Silver City
Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCCA
R v Borkowski
[2009] NSWCCA 102
v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
R v Thomson; R v Houlton
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
R v Wilkinson (No 5)
[2009] NSWSC
SafeWork NSW v Coplex Construction Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 165
NSW v Hibernian Contracting Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC 4
SafeWork NSW v Menai Civil
Contractors Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC 8
Schultz v Tamworth City Council
The Queen v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383
[1981] HCA 31
Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
Veen v The Queen (No 2) (1988) 164 CLR
[1988] HCA 14
Wong v Melinda Group Pty Limited
(1998) 82 IR
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Hopkins) v Profab
Industries Pty Ltd
(2000) 49 NSWLR 700
[2000] NSWIRComm 142
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
The Danebritt Group Pty Ltd (Offender)
Representation:
E Kerkyasharian (Prosecutor)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Wotton Kearney
File Number(s):
2024/431763
Publication Restriction:
Danebritt Group Pty Ltd trading as Woodland Fitouts (Danebritt) was engaged by
Luxottica Retail Australia Pty Ltd (trading as
OPSM Lismore) (Luxottica) as the
principal contractor to carry out an interior fit out at OPSM Lismore (site). As
part of this fit
out, workers engaged by Danebritt installed a Ray-Ban wall
display cabinet at the site on 18–19 November 2022. On 24 November
Luxottica workers Ms Olivia Simmons and Ms Norilyn Capage were stocking the
cabinet when it pulled out from the wall, falling
on top of them.
appeared for sentence after pleading guilty to an offence that as a person who
had a work health and safety (WHS) duty pursuant
Health and Safety Act 2011
) it failed to comply with
that duty contrary to s 33 of the
risk particularised at paragraph 9 of Annexure A to the Amended Summons was as
“The risk was the risk to other persons, in particular Ms Simmons and Ms
Capage, suffering serious injury or death as a result
of being struck by the
collapse of a cabinet that was not securely fixed to a wall.”
the outset of the hearing, and in recognition that the offence is a s 33
offence, the prosecutor sought and was granted leave to
amend that paragraph to
delete the words “suffering serious injury or death” on the basis
that they offend the principle
The Queen v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR
[1981] HCA 31
). Accordingly, for the purposes of the s 33
offence, the risk pleaded was as follows:
“The risk was the risk to other persons, in particular Ms Simmons and Ms
Capage, as a result of being struck by the collapse
of a cabinet that was not
securely fixed to a wall.”
has entered a plea of guilty to a charge particularised in that manner and I am
satisfied that the pleaded risk, as amended,
is able to be taken into account
without contravening the rule in
its plea of guilty, Danebritt accepts that it could have taken the following
reasonably practicable steps to eliminate or at least
minimise the reasonably
foreseeable risk:
“(a) Assemble the cabinet by using all components supplied with the
cabinet such as the L-Brackets.
(b) Sufficiently securing the cabinet to the wall by using all of the L-brackets
supplied with the cabinet.”
maximum penalty for this offence is a fine of 5,770 penalty units
($620,101).
The evidence
NSW tendered a Revised Statement of Agreed Facts (RSAF) with the consent of
Danebritt. That RSAF included paragraphs 26–28
which read as
“[26] The Incident was captured on CCTV footage.
[27] At approximately 10:54am the footage shows Ms Simmons and Ms Capage
stocking the display draws of the base unit of the Cabinet.
[28] At approximately 11:01am the wall display units fell on top of Ms Simmons
and Ms Capage trapping them underneath. Nearby workers
and members of the public
come (sic) to the immediate assistance of the women. It took approximately eight
men to lift the cabinets
and free the women.”
Notwithstanding
that the facts were purportedly agreed, Danebritt in effect maintained an
objection to these paragraphs on the basis
that they offend the principle in
. When asked whether the RSAF was in fact agreed, counsel
responded as follows:
“It is a statement of agreed facts in the sense that that was the
condition upon which the summons was amended. But the principles
Honour has to apply in dealing with it still exist, and so we do have, for the
same reason, I’m pretty sure it’s
been taken in respect of this,
have an issue with these paragraphs that can be dealt with, I think, in the same
way that your Honour
is proposing to deal with them. If your Honour is of the
view that your Honour can’t have regard to them, doesn’t matter
whether or not they’re agreed, your Honour can’t have regard to
response to that objection, the prosecutor did not press the final two sentences
of paragraph 28. Accordingly, for the purposes
of sentence, paragraph 28 reads
as follows:
“[28] At approximately 11:01am the wall display units fell on top of Ms
Simmons and Ms Capage trapping them underneath.”
was said by the prosecutor that this is consistent with the risk pleaded in the
Amended Summons. The risk pleaded in the Amended
Summons says only that Ms
Simmons and Ms Capage were
struck by the falling cabinet
. That is a very
different proposition to having the cabinet fall
on top of them, trapping
them underneath it
authorities concerning the tender of material which would contravene the
principal in
were set out in
SafeWork NSW v Menai Civil
Contractors Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC 8
. In short, where the prosecutor
has accepted a plea of guilty to an offence less serious than warranted by the
facts, the agreed
facts tendered on sentence should not contain any facts that
would have rendered the offender liable to a more serious penalty, and
result in a degree of artificiality in the fact-finding exercise.
cannot take into account the fact of the wall display units falling on top of Ms
Simmons and Ms Capage, trapping them underneath,
without inferring a risk of
serious injury or death. Even without the reference to the weight of the
cabinet, the fact of Ms Simmons
and Ms Capage being
underneath it
signifies that it was of considerable weight. Accordingly, for the purposes of
sentence, I disregard the words “on
top of Ms Simmons and Ms Capage,
trapping them underneath”. The artificiality in that approach is a
consequence of the charge
pursued by the prosecutor.
addition, Paragraph 13(a) of the RSAF provided as follows:
“13. The cabinet was supplied to Luxottica who in turn supplied it to
Danebritt, in crates and consisted of:
(a) Three separate wall display units that were pre-fabricated but required to
be assembled together. Each unit weighed approximately
view of the risk pleaded by the prosecutor, which includes persons being struck
by the collapse of the cabinet, I cannot take into
account the weight of the
wall display units (being a combined total of 600 kilograms).
the responsibility to ensure that the material tendered on sentence does not
offend the rule in
lies primarily with the prosecutor,
Barton v The Queen
[2009] NSWCCA 285
per Howie J at [18] makes clear that
both parties
bear this responsibility. The practice by an offender of
pleading guilty to the terms of a summons or agreeing to the tender of a
statement of agreed facts and then submitting to the Court that some of the
content of that “agreed” document is contrary
to established
principle and should be disregarded is to be deprecated.
Prosecution Sentence Tender Bundle contained the following material in addition
to the Amended Summons and the RSAF:
(1) ASIC Report: The Danebritt Group Pty Ltd;
(2) Prior Convictions Report: The Danebritt Group Pty Ltd;
(3) a series of photographs of the incident scene taken by SafeWork Inspector
Michael Kranendonk;
(4) Woodland Shopfitting Site Supervisor Guidelines;
(5) OPSM Fitout Package Plans;
(6) Safe Work Method Statement: Shopfitting;
(7) install instructions for the wall unit the subject of the incident; and
(8) Inspection Test Plan.
coming to an appropriate sentence, I have had regard to the evidence before the
Court, except for that material which expressly
states or permits an inference
that Ms Simmons and Ms Capage were exposed to a risk of serious injury or death.
What follows is a
summary of the evidence relevant to the offence to permit an
understanding of the sentence imposed.
is a Queensland based company. Its business involves the design and construction
of interior fit outs for retail, hospitality
and office spaces, and its sole
director is Mr Michael Casablanca. At the time of the incident, Danebritt
employed approximately
52 workers and had been in business for approximately 19
operated an optometry practice at the site. On 25 October 2022, Danebritt
commenced work as the principal contractor to
carry out an interior fit out at
the site. Danebritt’s project manager was Mr Bradley Greinke. The site
supervisor was Mr Beat
Schlatter, who had been employed by Danebritt for 12
years and had 30 years’ experience in the industry. Also working at the
site was Mr Jordan Maestracci, a fourth-year apprentice slated to complete his
apprenticeship with Danebritt in May 2023.
The installation of
the cabinet
part of the fit out, Danebritt was required to install a Ray-Ban display cabinet
sourced by Luxottica from a Chinese manufacturer
in prefabricated form. This was
unusual for Danebritt as it ordinarily designed and supplied its own cabinetry.
The cabinet consisted
of three separate prefabricated wall display units and a
base unit with four separate display drawers. Also supplied were 15–20
L-brackets and a single page instruction sheet that was written in
“Chinese” characters, with 2D images and measurements
Chinese characters.
Maestracci and Mr Schlatter discussed that Mr Maestracci would install the
cabinet. However, Mr Maestracci was unable to understand
the instruction sheet,
and either during or just prior to installation, asked Mr Greinke to provide
additional instructions in English.
In response, Mr Greinke provided Mr
Maestracci with a diagram of a different cabinet which was similar to the
instruction sheet that
came with the cabinet. Mr Greinke also took steps to
obtain a complete copy of the manufacturer’s instructions from Luxottica,
but these were not provided until after the incident.
Maestracci had installed Ray-Ban cabinets in the past. However, neither Mr
Maestracci nor Mr Schlatter had previously installed
this model of cabinet, nor
one as large as this. Mr Maestracci installed the cabinet on 18 and 19 November
2022, with Mr Schlatter
monitoring his progress and remaining available to
assist if required. Mr Maestracci constructed each wall display unit separately
and affixed them together. He then fixed each display unit to a plasterboard
wall using four of the L-brackets supplied with the
cabinet. No modifications or
reinforcements were made to the wall prior to installation. When he had finished
installing the cabinet,
Mr Maestracci attempted to ensure the safety and
stability of the cabinet by pulling on it.
site was handed over to Luxottica on 22 November 2022. On 24 November 2022, Ms
Simmons and Ms Capage were stocking the display
drawers of the base unit of the
cabinet when it fell off the wall.
inspection of the plasterboard wall as part of a subsequent SafeWork NSW
investigation located only one screw hole in the wall
for the far side
cabinetry. There were no screw holes apparent where Mr Maestracci said the
centre and right brackets were installed.
The cabinet’s installation
instructions, provided to Danebritt by Luxottica on or about 1 December 2022,
specified the need
for the wall to be reinforced prior to installation. They
also required 24 L-brackets to be used to affix the cabinet to the
Systems of work prior to the incident
Danebritt’s
“Site Supervision Guidelines” required workers to reflect on fit out
drawings and measurements and communicate
with the project manager if any issues
arose that were not consistent with the scope and drawings. The architectural
drawings for
the fit out provided to Danebritt by Luxottica required the custom
Ray-Ban units to be fixed to both the ceiling and the floor and
contractor to ensure their structural integrity and stability. Mr Maestracci
stated that he was unaware of this requirement
despite having read the OPSM
Plans and having gone through them with Mr Schlatter.
had a Safe Work Method Statement (SWMS) for shopfitting which was revised in
March 2022 and signed by Mr Maestracci and
Mr Schlatter on 1 November 2022. It
required frames to be secured and adequately braced to take loads such as
cabinets and mirrors.
In failing to reinforce the plasterboard wall prior to the
installation of the cabinet, Mr Maestracci did not adhere to either
Danebritt’s
SWMS or the OPSM Plans.
Systems of work after
the incident
now requires clients to provide an electronic copy of installation instructions
prior to work commencing. An Inspection
Test Plan now requires the project
manager to acknowledge that installation instructions have been supplied in
English, and for the
joinery to be installed as per the supplied instructions
and plans. It also requires the site supervisor and project manager to check
quality of the joinery once installation is complete. The client, the site
supervisor and the project manager all sign off on
the Inspection Test Plan
after conducting a walkthrough of the site on completion of the installation
Offender’s case on sentence
relied on the affidavit of Mr Michael Casablanca, sworn 21 August 2025. The
following is a summary of his evidence in addition
to matters already set out in
Casablanca is the sole director of Danebritt, which currently trades under the
name Woodland Fitouts. He founded the company in
April 2004. As Managing
Director, Mr Casablanca has ultimate responsibility for Danebritt’s
operations and performance. He
has 30 years’ experience in the
construction industry and 20 years’ experience as a registered builder,
restricted to
shopfitting. He has been a member of the Interior Fit Out
Association and Master Builders Queensland since 2004. Membership of both
organisations involves attending multiple safety seminars and receiving safety
notifications and updates.
Expression of remorse and
Casablanca, on behalf of Danebritt, expressed deep regret that Danebritt had
breached its duty and committed the offence charged
and apologised to the Court
and all impacted parties.
Casablanca stated that the incident has affected him and all his staff. At the
time of the incident, he was responsible for safety
matters. He has sought to
ensure that Danebritt has taken appropriate action in response to the incident
and will continue to do
so to ensure a similar breach does not happen again. He
said that no other incidents have occurred since the incident the subject
current proceedings.
Safety systems in place at the time of the
Casablanca stated that Danebritt takes pride in fostering a culture which
encourages all workers to take responsibility for safety
concerns and raise them
with senior management. Specific Workplace Health and Safety Management Plans
and SWMS are put in place for
each project before new work commences. A
“Safety Folder” on site included Project Manager Guidelines, the
site Safety
Plan and insurance details, induction forms, site information such
as emergency contacts, Toolbox minutes, a plant and equipment
register and a
staff sign in and out register. A management software system prompted daily site
audits and WHS checks.
Systems of work after the incident
Immediately
after the incident Mr Casablanca directed Danebritt management to implement
short term recurrence prevention measures.
These included holding formal
meetings with all workers regarding safety procedures and conducting workshops
between future clients
and the Danebritt site team to ensure workers are
competent to fit and install joinery supplied by clients. They also included
progress photographs to be taken during installation and provided to
site supervisors, project managers and clients.
term prevention strategies included requiring workers to attend a pre-start
meeting before works begin to discuss plans and
installation instructions.
Safety management tools have been moved to an automated system, and a dedicated
Workplace Health and Safety
Manager (WHS Manager) has been employed. Workers
installing joinery are now required to sign the installation instructions to
that they were followed and upload a photographic record of the
installation process to the project management software.
Casablanca works with the WHS Manager to ensure that Danebritt’s
recruitment process includes a discussion of safety issues,
ongoing training is
provided to staff, the company’s Site Supervisor Guidelines and Project
Manager Guidelines are updated
at least annually, there are regular site
supervisor meetings and project management meetings where WHS updates are
distributed and
to ensure that WHS plans are developed for each site. They also
ensure that all project sites are inspected regularly, and random
audits occur.
engaged WHS consultants both before and after the incident. Prior to the
incident consultants made recommendations on safety
measures, conducting audits
and undertaking WHS gap analysis. Since the incident, they have also assisted
with the implementation
of the new WHS management software. Danebritt’s
total safety spend following the incident is $150,000 to $175,000
Other mitigating factors
Casablanca stated that, as part of the tender process, Danebritt must declare
any convictions. Declaring a
conviction would disqualify the
company from winning tenders from those clients who have strict requirements in
that regard. Furthermore,
a conviction may impact the company’s ability to
qualify for a CM3 certification, which would in turn impact its capacity to
qualify for and win business.
Danebritt’s
community involvement includes the provision of financial support to Ronald
McDonald House Charities South East
Queensland, the Children’s Hospital
Foundation and A Brave Life. In addition, Danebritt hosts a monthly barbecue
during which
workers make donations to raise funds for local community
Maestracci had been assessed by Mr Schlatter as a competent fourth-year
apprentice who was more than capable of undertaking tasks
performed by a
qualified tradesman.
Oral evidence
cross-examination, Mr Casablanca was unable to recall an incident that occurred
on 10 April 2025 in which an electrician had suffered
an injury, which was
referred to in a document annexed to his affidavit from which details had been
redacted. The incident ultimately
turned out to be very minor, but Mr Casablanca
was unable to give any detail about it despite having viewed the unredacted
when affirming his affidavit less than three weeks earlier.
pressed about Danebritt’s engagement of WHS consultants, Mr Casablanca was
unable to give any specifics of their engagement
beyond a six-month contract
entered into in early 2020, stating only that he was confident that they were
engaged and that the current
WHS consultant, Pillar Consulting, provides
services on an ad hoc basis. He could not recall the last time that Pillar
was engaged.
pressed about Danebritt’s employment of a dedicated WHS Manager, Mr
Casablanca conceded that the relevant employee had
previously worked for
Danebritt in another role, and that their “dedicated” WHS Manager
role includes human resources
administration. He further conceded that his
understanding that site inductions were occurring was based on the forms
provided to
him on which the “induction given by” field was left
blank and on which one employee had ticked “No” to the
“Do you know where to obtain first aid?”. He also conceded that Mr
Maestracci had signed in and out at the site
for two days prior to the date
shown on his induction form.
Casablanca was shown the management plan for the site. He identified changes as
being those pages which stated the project and
site location details. He was
unable to explain why the management plan contained a clause dealing with
excavation and trenches,
given that they were not relevant to the fit out of the
Lismore OPSM store. Finally, he conceded that while a
was a relevant consideration and a required field in the CM3 database, it was
not a matter that would automatically disqualify
Danebritt from winning a
tender, that not every tender required Danebritt to declare any prior
convictions and that there were smaller
projects undertaken by Danebritt which
did not require a tender process at all.
re-examination, Mr Casablanca stated that the CM3 database is used by 60 to 70%
of Danebritt’s clients, including most shopping
centres. He clarified that
the worker injured in the April 2025 incident was an employee of an electrical
subcontractor, not Danebritt.
He also explained that, at the time of the
incident giving rise to the subject offence, Danebritt used a project management
called Nexvia to manage records, including records of inductions. Mr
Casablanca and the relevant project manager would review the
Nexvia software
every few days to ensure inductions were happening. It was the site
supervisor’s job to upload information
for review on Nexvia.
Casablanca clarified that when he said he had employed a “dedicated”
WHS Manager, he meant someone “to oversee
and manage the daily workplace
health and safety requirements of the company”. He maintained that there
were ongoing relationships
in place with WHS consultants. Danebritt would meet
with the consultants and use the information provided to improve their safety
requirements and culture, not just to meet safety regulations. They also made
improvements as a result of feedback from workers and
had a strong culture of
continuous improvement.
Consideration
have had regard to the objects of the
set out in s 3 and the
purposes of sentencing set out in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
have taken into account the maximum penalty for this offence:
Markarian v The
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25 at [31] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Callinan JJ (
Court arrives at the appropriate sentence through a process of
“instinctive synthesis” in which the sentencing judge
identifies all
the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discusses their significance and
then makes a value judgment as to
the appropriate sentence given those factors:
Factual issues
issue in these proceedings was the extent to which it ought to be accepted that
Danebritt attended to safety matters both prior
to and after the incident.
Central to that determination is an assessment of Mr Casablanca’s
evidence. A summary of that evidence
is set out above. It was unreliable in
several respects. In cross-examination, Mr Casablanca gave detail about the
project management system which was used to manage site
safety documentation, about which no mention was made in his evidence-in-chief.
Further, a number of the admissions that he made in cross-examination
significantly undermined his evidence-in-chief.
to Mr Casablanca’s affidavit were 15 Site Induction Record Forms for the
site. None of the forms were signed by a person
said to have conducted the
induction session. The date of induction for all but one form (to which I will
return), where it was recorded,
ranged from 27 October 2022 to 10 November 2022.
Many of the forms did not record an induction date at all. Only one form
a blue card number. One worker filled out the form to indicate that he
did not know where to obtain first aid. His answers to the
remaining questions
on the form are such that this answer is unlikely to have been inadvertent.
First aid information is a basic
component of any site induction. Accordingly,
that circumstance leaves open no reasonable possibility other than that the
had not been inducted to the site before filling out the Site Induction
Record Form.
induction form appears to be dated 3 July 2024, well after the incident but
prior to the commencement of the subject proceedings.
It is unlikely that such
a dating error would have occurred if the form was completed in 2022. That is
not sufficient, either considered
in isolation or together with the many undated
forms, for me to make a finding beyond reasonable doubt that it was completed
retrospectively
to manufacture a paper trail. It may be an induction form from a
subsequent OPSM Lismore project. Accordingly, I make no finding
circumstances which led to its completion. However, because the forms were not
signed by the person conducting the induction,
several of them were undated and
one worker indicated that he did not know where to obtain first aid on site, I
find beyond reasonable
doubt that the practice at the site was for Site
Induction Record Forms to be filled out by the workers as part of their
onboarding,
without a requirement to participate in any site induction before
they did so. That is not to say that no site induction was occurring.
to the extent that it was occurring, it was independent of the requirement for
workers to fill out the Site Induction Record
Maestracci’s form states that he was inducted onto the site on 27 October
2022. As noted above, the sign in and out register
for the site records Mr
Maestracci as having worked on site on 25 and 26 October 2022. When
cross-examined about that fact, Mr Casablanca
explained that “there
wouldn’t have been an induction on every day that he entered the
premises” but stopped short
of conceding, as is obvious, that Mr
Maestracci was permitted to work on site for at least two days before completing
a Site Induction
Record Form.
Casablanca’s evidence in cross-examination to the effect that the only
site-specific material on the WHS management plan
for the site was those parts
of the plan recording site details and contacts for the project significantly
undermines his evidence-in-chief
that it was Danebritt’s practice to
develop a specified WHS management plan for each site. That the content about
safety procedures
to be implemented at the site was generic was demonstrated by
the inclusion of material about excavating trenches in the OPSM Lismore
that Mr Casablanca was unable to explain, having accepted its irrelevance to the
Casablanca’s evidence-in-chief about the engagement of Bramwell Partners
as WHS consultants “[b]etween July 2019 to
April 2023” was also
problematic. It is clear from the documentation annexed to Mr Casablanca’s
affidavit that there
was a contractual arrangement in place from 23 January 2020
for a 6-month period commencing February 2020, engaging Bramwell Partners
eight hours per month with a defined scope of works. When cross-examined about
that issue, Mr Casablanca was unable to say precisely
how Bramwell Partners was
engaged after that point. He did say “[t]hat’s not to say that they
weren’t engaged on
one-on-one scenarios after that”. When pressed
“with the same engagement” (eight hours per month) and doing
exactly the same things. That is very different to being
engaged for
“one-on-one” scenarios, which is itself different from the tenor of
Mr Casablanca’s evidence-in-chief
that there was a continuous engagement
over an almost four-year period.
the evidence as a whole, while I accept that Bramwell Partners may well have
been engaged by Danebritt after August 2020, I am
unable to make a finding, on
the balance of probabilities, about the extent of that engagement.
difficulty with Mr Casablanca’s evidence-in-chief was his assertion about
having appointed a dedicated WHS Manager.
It is worthwhile setting that evidence
out in full:
“Following the breach, I have sought to bolster [Danebritt’s] focus
on safety by employing a dedicated Workplace Health
and Safety Manger, who is
remunerated at $100,198.00 (inclusive of superannuation). The role of the
Workplace Health and Safety Manager
is to promote a safe and healthy working
environment for all staff and ensure [Danebritt] complies with all relevant
work, health
and safety regulations. The role of the Workplace Health and Safety
Manager also involves performing workplace health and safety
audits in the
factory, office and on project sites, as well as reporting workplace health and
safety issues to me. A copy of the
job description of the Workplace Health and
Safety Manager role is exhibited at page 28 ...”
job description itself states that it is for a “WH&S Manager/HR
Coordinator”. The HR duties include conducting
exit interviews, assisting
with staff performance reviews and conflict resolution and “Apprentice
administration”. In
cross-examination, it emerged that the incumbent in
the position, who commenced in the role on 5 June 2025, more than two and a half
years after the incident, was a person who until that point was employed by
Danebritt doing administration, including WHS administration.
However, the
employee concerned had then completed her Certificate IV in workplace health and
safety and had become responsible for
the day-to-day auditing of tasks and
implementation of changes identified by Pillar Consulting.
Casablanca stated that the incumbent received a pay rise when she assumed the
role but was unable to quantify it, even in approximate
terms. He affirmed that
the role was “solely work health and safety” before volunteering
that it also included a number
of human resources tasks, a matter reflected in
the provided job description, but denied that the WHS Manager was required to
some of the human resources tasks listed in it, such as conflict
resolution and conducting performance reviews, beyond taking minutes
performance review meetings. I do not accept Mr Casablanca’s evidence
that the role was a “dedicated” WHS role.
While Mr Casablanca sought
to explain the intent of that evidence in re-examination, I accept the
prosecutor’s characterisation
of that position as “window
dressing”, particularly in view of its commencement in June 2025, a few
short weeks before
the sentence hearing.
re-examination, Mr Casablanca addressed Danebritt’s safety culture as
“The fact that we continually, before the incident, engaged with a
consultant, that we met with a consultant, we would have
meetings with the
consultant, and then from the information provided - the consultant, we would
continue to improve our workplace
health and safety and our occupational health
and safety requirements. And it wasn’t just to meet regulations; it was to
our culture. So that’s why we had toolbox meetings. That’s
why we asked people from the floor to bring incidents forward,
how we could be
better. That was at our factory - one-month factory meetings that we conducted
which I was the chair of those meetings.
That was why we created guidelines,
project manager guidelines, site supervisor guidelines. That’s why I was
involved in meetings.
That’s why it was on agenda as part of the toolbox meetings that was
regularly happening not just on the actual sites but site
supervisor meetings
with those site supervisors with site and safety being an agenda part of that
and bringing that information up
forward for those - for how we could
continually improve as well as the apprentices - as well as having separate
communication with
the - separate meetings with the apprentices so they felt
comfortable in an environment to bring anything forward that they may have
that they couldn’t do in other surroundings. So I think safety was a big
part of our culture and the - it wasn’t
just about ticking and flicking.
It was the continual improvement of safety which we have shown that - over the
number of years,
we have continually have done that.”
accept that Danebritt had safety systems in place, and processes designed to
facilitate continuous improvement in that regard. However,
the totality of the
evidence before the Court does not permit a finding that Danebritt had a strong
safety culture at the time of
the incident.
it is necessary to address Mr Casablanca’s evidence about the potential
impact of a conviction on Danebritt. In his
evidence-in-chief, he was
unequivocal in his belief that a conviction would, of itself, have an adverse
impact on Danebritt’s
business. Danebritt is required to tender for new
business, it “must declare” any conviction at the pre-qualification
stage and doing so “would likely disqualify” Danebritt from winning
certain tenders as “certain clients have strict
requirements in this
respect”. Further, a WHS conviction “can impact” the ability
to qualify for a CM3 certification,
which would in turn impact its capacity to
qualify for and win further business.
Cross-examination
of Mr Casablanca about those claims revealed that while a
conviction was a relevant consideration and a required field in the CM3
Danebritt from
winning a tender. That evidence suggests that such a conviction would not in
fact impede Danebritt from achieving
a CM3 qualification necessary to tender for
so many of the shopping centre projects which are a significant proportion of
its business.
Further, it was also conceded that not every tender required
Danebritt to declare any prior convictions. Therefore, while I accept
conviction may well impact Danebritt’s reputation in the industry, I do
not accept that it will prevent it from getting
a CM3 qualification and thereby
prevent it from gaining work from what is presently 60% to 70% of its client
Objective seriousness
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
485–6, 490–1 and 496. At common law, the term “objective
circumstances” was used to describe the
circumstances of a crime. The
gravity of the offence was assessed by reference to its objective circumstances:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
task requires the Court to consider where the conduct of Danebritt falls in the
range of conduct covered by the offence:
Baumer v The Queen
CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67 at 57. As Whealy JA said in
BW v The Queen
(Hulme and Harrison JJ agreeing at
[75]–[76]):
“This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate range of
sentences available which will reflect the objective seriousness
of the offence
committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to the
criminality of the offender will lie.”
objective seriousness of an offence is to be determined by reference to the
nature of the offending without reference to matters
personal to a particular
offender or class of offenders:
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death is a factor relative
to the gravity of the offence:
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
. The question of foreseeability of the
risk is to be determined objectively.
Court of Criminal Appeal examined the sentencing process with regard to the
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
General for New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
NSWCCA 96. Under the heading “Assessment of Risk”, Basten J
“[34] The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the
proposition that ‘[g]reater culpability attaches to the
failure to guard
against an event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the
occurrence of which is extremely unlikely’.
However, the truth of that
proposition depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential
consequences of the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the
availability of steps to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether
such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative
culpability depends on assessment of all those factors.”
at [42] his Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step
by step assessment of the
various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall evaluation of various
factors, which may pull in
different directions. Culpability in this case is
reasonably high because, even if the pressure event of the force which occurred
might not be expected to occur often, the seriousness of the foreseeable
resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be taken to avoid
it, which were not
even assessed, were straightforward and involved only minor inconvenience and
little, if any, costs.”
[53] his Honour dealt with the proper approach to considering the objective
seriousness of offences under the
“ ... It is important to note that the risk to be assessed is not the risk
of the consequence, to the extent that a worker
is in fact injured, but is the
risk arising from the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the
injury occurring.
To discount the seriousness of the risk by reference to the
unlikelihood of injury resulting is apt to lead to error. The conduct
question is the failure to respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more serious the potential injuries,
whether or not they are
likely to materialise. The objective seriousness of the conduct will also be
affected by the ease with which
mitigating steps could have been taken.”
prosecutor submitted that this is an objectively serious offence having regard
to the weight and dimensions of the cabinet, the
obvious risk of it falling and
the equally obvious risk of harm if it did. Danebritt was aware of the need to
ensure the structural
integrity of the cabinet. It was provided architectural
drawings for the fit out that included an admonition that it was responsible
this. Using the L-brackets supplied was a simple and obvious measure. Further,
when Mr Maestracci asked for further instructions,
he was given a diagram
relating to another cabinet. The fact that this was not a typical installation
undertaken by Danebritt should
have resulted in extra care being taken to ensure
the structural integrity of the cabinet. In addition, the measures implemented
after the incident were neither complicated nor expensive.
sentence, the prosecutor contended that if I did not take into account the
weight of the cabinet due to that being a matter which
was consistent with an
offence under s 32 of the
, then the removal of that fact
(together with anything else that might be consistent with a s 32 offence) would
leave this offence
at the top of the range for a s 33 offence.
submitted that the objective seriousness of the offence was at the lower end of
matters that come before the Court because
of its narrow scope and the safety
systems which it had in place at the time of the incident. Danebritt also
contended that Mr Casablanca’s
evidence demonstrates a reasonable,
educated and informed belief that the controls the company had in place were
sufficient. The
incident ought rightly to be characterised as a one-off failure
in an otherwise comprehensive and effective safety system.
measures which Danebritt accepts that it could have taken to prevent the
incident which occurred are set out at [
] above. While there are two measures pleaded, the
essence of both of them is making use of all of the L-brackets supplied with the
cabinet for the purposes of installation. Of itself, that is a rudimentary step
that could have been taken without difficulty. I
accept that some delay would
have been occasioned to the project as a result of waiting for English
instructions to be procured from
the supplier.
is self-evident that the intention was for most, if not all of the L-brackets
supplied with the cabinet to be used to install it.
The provision of
instructions for a different cabinet, presumably to avoid any delay to the
project, was not the way to resolve Mr
Maestracci’s self-identified need
for assistance in order to proceed with the installation. That fact, together
with some of
the other deficiencies in Danebritt’s practices, addressed
above in the context of the reliability of Mr Casablanca’s
evidence, is
such that I cannot find, even on the balance of probabilities, that Danebritt
had a robust safety system in place at
the time of the incident. Nor do I find
that it’s attitude to safety was a casual one. I am simply unable to make
any finding
in that regard.
instability of the installed cabinet when such a small proportion of the
supplied L-brackets were used (at best four out of at
least 15) was entirely
foreseeable. So much is demonstrated by Mr Maestracci’s attempt to test
the stability of the installation
by pulling down on it, a process which exposed
him to the risk of the cabinet collapsing and which did not account for the
weight that the cabinet would need to hold once it was filled. Given
the gross underutilisation of the supplied L-brackets, there
was at least a
reasonable possibility that the risk would materialise.
have already indicated that consideration of the weight of the cabinet would
cause me to fall into
error and that I have no regard to it.
The prosecutor submitted that the better course, for the purpose of assessing
objective seriousness
was to take into account that the risk not guarded against
was the risk involving a 600kg object being secured to a wall without
considering a risk to an individual. However, the pleaded risk was a risk to
persons being struck by the cabinet. I am required to
assess the objective
seriousness of the offence in the context of that pleaded risk. Accordingly, I
cannot take into account the
weight of the cabinet.
accept that the incident was a one-off event in the context of a company that
has operated without conviction for over 20 years.
That does not, of itself,
place it at the low end of the range:
SafeWork NSW v Coplex Construction Pty
[2023] NSWDC 165
–[54]. As submitted by the prosecutor, the
unique nature of the installation job was such that it should have been afforded
greater attention than a more routine installation conducted by Danebritt. The
response to Mr Maestracci’s request for better
instructions is also a
significant problem for Danebritt. Mr Maestracci should have been prevented from
installing the cabinet until
proper instructions were able to be obtained.
Having said that, I accept that if, as he says, Mr Maestracci had been through
OPSM Plans, he would have seen that the cabinet was required to be affixed
to both the ceiling and the floor. Accordingly, while
he may have told the
regulator that he had not been told how to affix the cabinet, I do not accept
that to be the case. Further,
I accept that the scope of the measures which
Danebritt accepted by its plea that it should have implemented was very
the above matters into account in the manner indicated, I find that the
objective seriousness of the offence falls within the
Aggravating factors
are no aggravating factors as contemplated by s 21A(2)
prosecutor did not contend otherwise.
Mitigating factors
has no prior convictions: s 21A(3)(e)
is otherwise of good character: s 21A(3)(f)
. This is demonstrated
by its response to the incident, including the development of an Inspection Test
Plan and the engagement of
WHS consultant Pillar Consulting to provide
additional expertise as required. In addition, Danebritt has a history of
local charities and community activities as set out above at [
“one-off” nature of the incident, its impact on Danebritt’s
management and the measures that Danebritt has put
in place since the incident
enable me to find that it is unlikely to reoffend (s 21A(3)(g)
and has good prospects of rehabilitation (s 21A(3)(h)
has shown remorse for the offence: s 21A(3)(i)
. It has provided
evidence that it has accepted responsibility for its actions. I am prepared to
accept that evidence on balance,
notwithstanding some of the other problems with
Mr Casablanca’s evidence to which I have referred.
entered a plea of guilty on 16 June 2025 to a charge particularised in an
Amended Summons filed in Court on that date. The
original summons, which charged
the same offence in the alternative (albeit particularised differently) was
dated 19 November 2024
and first returnable on 10 March 2025. The plea of guilty
was entered at the third mention of proceedings. Danebritt is entitled
discount on penalty that reflects the utilitarian value of that early plea:
v Thomson; R v Houlton
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
v Borkowski
[2009] NSWCCA 102
. The prosecutor did not take issue
with Danebritt’s submission that it should be afforded a discount on
sentence of 25% in
recognition of its early guilty plea. I accept that a
discount of 25% is appropriate in the circumstances: ss 21A(3)(k) and 22
submits that its cooperation with the authorities is a matter which should
operate in mitigation of the sentence to be imposed
s 21A(3)(m)
. The only evidence to that effect is a bare
statement from Mr Casablanca that Danebritt assisted SafeWork NSW with its
investigation.
I have already addressed the difficulties that I have with some
aspects of Mr Casablanca’s evidence. Further, the absence of
Casablanca’s evidence on this issue, I could not
find on the balance of
probabilities anything more than bare compliance with a regulatory notice or
notices, the absence of which
would render the offender liable to prosecution.
As stated in
SafeWork NSW v Hibernian Contracting Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC 4
, that is not a matter that would ordinarily attract a discount on
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide for general deterrence.
There is nothing in the circumstances of either
the offence or Danebritt that
would permit a finding that Danebritt is not a suitable vehicle for general
deterrence or that the
role of general deterrence in the sentencing exercise
should be minimal.
are two matters which would support a finding that specific deterrence is a
matter of reduced weight in this sentencing exercise.
The first is
Danebritt’s absence of prior convictions after almost 20 years. As
submitted by Danebritt, that is not achieved
without meaningful attention being
given to safety matters. The other is Danebritt’s response to the
incident, which provides
me with confidence that a similar incident will not
occur in the future. As contended by Danebritt, the Court may place less weight
on specific deterrence if it is satisfied that the risk of reoffending is low
and may form such a view as a result of the rehabilitation
of the offender:
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
(2016) 93 NSWLR 338;
that are the safety concerns which have emerged from the evidence. These include
the fact that induction forms were being
filled out by workers in the absence of
any meaningful instruction and that workers were permitted to work on site,
potentially for
multiple days, prior to the forms being completed. On balance,
and accepting that this process will have operated as a salutary lesson,
prepared to find that specific deterrence, while still relevant, is a matter of
reduced significance in the sentencing process.
application
seeks dismissal of the charge pursuant to s 10(1)(a) of the
support of that submission, it points to the consideration given to the
competency of Mr Maestracci to perform work and the discussion
of that matter
with him beforehand, as well as the availability of Mr Schlatter to monitor Mr
Maestracci’s work and to assist
if required. It also points to the fact
that Mr Maestracci had been through the architectural drawings with Mr Schlatter
his failure to reinforce the plasterboard wall prior to installation of
the cabinet was a failure to adhere to Danebritt’s
SWMS and the
architectural plans. Further, it must have been plain to Mr Maestracci that he
had used only a very small number of
the L-brackets supplied to him for that
purpose, and his concern about the stability of the cabinet was demonstrated by
his attempt
to satisfy himself of that matter on 19 November 2022 by pulling on
it, at which time it remained in place.
also relies on the evidence of Mr Casablanca, which I have addressed above, that
a conviction would have an adverse impact
on Danebritt’s business due to
the tendering process to which it is subject. It nonetheless acknowledged that
the dismissal
of charges under s 10 in the WHS context is extremely rare and a
matter of discretion. It pointed to
Wong v Melinda Group Pty Limited
(1998) 82 IR 118
) as an example of where such an order
has been made.
prosecutor submitted that the dismissal of the matter pursuant to s 10(1)(a)
would amount to appealable error. In particular,
it contended that Danebritt
attempts to distinguish the conduct of Mr Maestracci from that of the body
corporate, when, pursuant
, they are the same.
agree that this is not an appropriate matter for disposal pursuant to s 10(1)(a)
. There is established authority that s 10(1)(a) (and its
predecessor s 556A of the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW)) should only be applied
in the WHS context in exceptional circumstances. In
WorkCover Authority of
New South Wales (Inspector Hopkins) v Profab Industries Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWIRComm 142
, this Court considered long standing authority
Schultz v Tamworth City Council
(1995) 58 IR
before concluding as follows at [26]:
“Nevertheless, in occupational health and safety offences before this
Court the exercise of the discretion under s 556A (cf
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW)) must be considered as extraordinary
and highly exceptional. When a defendant seeks its exercise cogent reasons must,
view, be provided by the defendant for such exercise and also by the
judge acceding to that submission...”
determining this question, I am required to have regard to the matters set out
, where they are relevant. I have had regard to
Danebritt’s early plea of guilty, and lack of criminal antecedents. The
was not and not asserted to be trivial.
defendant’s reliance upon
is misplaced. The culpability for
the incident in that matter was largely attributed to uncharged entities over
which the offender
had no control and occurred in the context of an offender who
had demonstrated a concern for safety over many years, including in
relation to
prevention of the incident which occurred. That is not this case. Here, the
moral culpability of Danebritt is significant
in circumstances where Mr
Maestracci asked for proper installation instructions and was instead at least
permitted, if not required,
to work with a single page diagram relating to a
different cabinet. Further, given my concerns about the reliability of Mr
Casablanca’s
evidence, I do not accept his uncorroborated evidence about
the extent of the impact of a conviction on Danebritt’s ability
work into the future.
Capacity to pay a fine
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) requires the Court to have regard to the
means of Danebritt before imposing a fine. In
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of Criminal Appeal recognised that a
fine which may be crippling to a small business may have virtually no impact on
financial operations of a large corporation and that the maximum penalty for
the offence was “undoubtedly” set having
regard to that
circumstance. At just over 50 employees, Danebritt is not a large company, but
nor is it very small. I have regard
to such matters to the extent that I am able
in circumstances where there was no evidence before the Court concerning the
position of Danebritt and no submission made concerning
Danebritt’s capacity to pay a fine.
appropriate fine is $120,000, which will be reduced by 25% to reflect the plea
make the following orders:
(1) I convict The Danebritt Group Pty Ltd of the offence as charged.
(2) I impose a fine of $90,000.
(3) The Danebritt Group Pty Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the
proceedings as agreed or assessed.
(4) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be
paid to the prosecutor.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (327 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter