URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1320.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KEKATOS LAWYERS PTY LTD trading as Kekatos Lawyers v Dana Rahme [2025] NSWSC 1320 (10 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
KEKATOS LAWYERS PTY LTD trading as Kekatos Lawyers v Dana Rahme
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1320
Hearing Date(s):
4 September 2025
Date of Orders:
10 November 2025
Decision Date:
10 November 2025
The Court makes the following orders and directions:
(1) On or before
4pm Wednesday 12 November 2025, the plaintiff shall file and serve draft orders
and submissions in support thereof,
not exceeding two pages, as to the
disposition of the motion in accordance with this judgment.
(2) On or before
4pm Friday 14 November 2025, the defendant shall file and serve any alternative
draft orders and submissions in support
thereof, not exceeding two pages, as to
the disposition of the motion in accordance with this judgment.
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE – Abuse of process – Whether cross-claim should
be struck out – Whether cross-claim should be dismissed
or permanently
stayed – Whether defendant should be estopped from pursuing matters set
out in cross-claim – Where pleadings
are contrary to previous arguments
successfully pursued in this Court – Whether
section 93C(3)
Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
(NSW) creates an issue estoppel in
relation to question of whether valid costs agreement exists – Operation
of s 199(2)(a)
of Legal Profession Uniform Law 2014 (NSW) – Abuse of
process established
Legislation Cited:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Legal Profession Act 2004
Legal Profession Uniform Law 2014 (NSW)
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Application Act 2014
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
Cases Cited:
Bingham v Bevan
(2023) 111 NSWLR 287
[2023] NSWCA 86
Doyle v Hall
[2007] NSWCA 159
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner of
Railways (NSW)
(1964) 112 CLR 125
[1964] HCA 69
Grunwick Processing
Laboratories Ltd v Advisory Conciliation & Arbitration Service
Gunns Ltd v Marr
[2005] VSC 251
Judd v McKeon
[1926] HCA 33
(1926) 38 CLR
Kekatos Lawyers Pty Ltd v Rahme
[2023] NSWSC 528
Kuligowski v MetroBus
(2004) 220 CLR 363
[2004] HCA 34
McGuirk v University of New South Wales
[2009] NSWSC 1424
Meckiff v Simpson
[1968] VicRp 7
[1968] VR 62
Owners - Strata Plan No
82089 v Omaya Holding Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 992
Rahme v Benjamin & Khoury
(2019) 100 NSWLR 550
[2019] NSWCA 211
Rahme v Benjamin & Khoury
Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2019] NSWCA 239
Rahme v Kekatos Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA
Rahme v Satouris
[2018] NSWSC 1753
Reichel v Magrath
[1889] UKLawRpAC 20
(1889) 14 App Cas
Tomlinson v Ramsey Food Processing Pty Limited
(2015) 256 CLR 507
Wentworth v Rogers (No 5)
(1986) 6 NSWLR 534
Texts Cited:
Dennis Pearce, Statutory Interpretation in Australia (10th ed, 2024,
LexisNexis Australia)
Gino Dal Pont, Law of Costs (4th ed, 2018, LexisNexis
Procedural rulings
KEKATOS LAWYERS PTY LTD trading as Kekatos Lawyers (Plaintiff)
Rahme (Defendant)
Representation:
Q Rares (Plaintiff)
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
Kekatos Lawyers (Plaintiff)
Solon Lawyers
(Defendant)
File Number(s):
2023/139994
Publication Restriction:
28 April 2023, Kekatos Lawyers Pty Ltd trading as Kekatos Lawyer ABN 604 211 789
(“the plaintiff”) filed a Summons,
in which the plaintiff sought to
secure the payment of legal costs incurred by Dana Rahme (“the
defendant”) by claiming
a lien over money paid into the Supreme Court by
Benjamin & Khoury Pty Ltd (“B&K”).
9 August 2023, the plaintiff sought leave to amend the Summons, which was
granted by Lonergan J on 15 November 2023. On 8 December
2023, the plaintiff
filed an Amended Summons. The amendments sought to secure the payment of further
legal costs due from the defendant
to the plaintiff.
11 December 2023, the defendant filed a Cross-Summons seeking orders and
declaratory relief. However, the parties agreed that the
Cross-Summons should
proceed by way of pleadings and directions were made by consent on 8 April 2024
with respect to the filing of
the Statement of Cross-Claim, Defence to the
Cross-Claim and Reply to the Defence of the Cross-Claim.
19 April 2024, the defendant filed a Statement of Cross-Claim (“the
CC”) seeking, in the broad, damages for breach
of contract, duty of care,
fiduciary duty and statutory consumer protections by the plaintiff. I will
detail, later in this judgment.
defence to the CC was filed by the plaintiff in accordance with the
Court’s timetable. However, on application by the plaintiff,
December 2024 Registrar Hedge ordered that:
“Any Motion seeking to strike out cross claim to be FILED AND SERVED by 20
December 2024.”
18 December 2024, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion (“the
motion”) seeking the following orders:
(1) That pursuant to r 14.28 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) (“UCPR”), the whole of the CC be struck out.
(2) That the defendant be estopped from pursuing the matters set out in the
(3) That the CC be dismissed or summarily dismissed.
(4) That the CC be permanently stayed.
(5) That the defendant pay the plaintiff’s costs of the motion.
judgment concerns the determination of the motion.
the outset of the hearing, the Court addressed the fact that the motion appeared
to expand into something beyond what was contemplated
by the Registrar when
leave was granted on 18 December 2024. That is, leave was granted for the
plaintiff to file and serve any motion
seeking to strike out the CC. However,
the motion also sought an estoppel, dismissal, or summary dismissal and
permanent stay of
answer to this, the plaintiff submitted that one basis for the strike out
application was that the CC is an abuse of process, and
if the CC is struck out
on the basis of abuse of process, then the only consequential order that arises
is either a permanent stay
or dismissal. Essentially, the plaintiff submitted
that the orders sought for the CC to be dismissed, summarily dismissed or
permanently
stayed arise on that basis.
contest before the Court on the motion went forward on that basis, and
accordingly, I propose to determine whether to grant any
such form of relief for
an abuse of process.
Background to the Amended Summons
matter has a significant and complex procedural history. There are a multitude
of proceedings which have come before and been
determined by this Court. To the
extent relevant for the purpose of determining the motion, I set out a brief
procedural history,
2015 the defendant and her husband, Mr Gabriel Rahme (collectively, “the
Rahmes”), retained the services of the
to bring proceedings in
the Supreme Court against B&K, Paul Satouris, and Solon Lawyers:
[2018] NSWSC 1753
(“the substantive proceedings”). In
2018 the substantive proceedings were expanded to include a claim against Dieb
Khoury, the sole director of B&K.
pause at this juncture, to note that, in what are unusual circumstances, Solon
Lawyers are now the instructing solicitors for the
defendant. While the issue
was not raised by the parties, there appears to be, at least at first glance,
some conflicts of interest
with that arrangement. However, I do not propose to
pass upon that topic any further, given it is not an issue to which I have been
directed, except to note that it may explain the significant level of animosity
between the instructing solicitors in this matter,
which the Court was,
unfortunately, witness to. I note that such conduct is far from the conduct
which is expected of officers of
this Court.
Rahmes settled the claims against Paul Satouris and Solon Lawyers, on terms
which involved no order as to costs. Hence, what remained
in the substantive
proceedings was the claim against B&K and Mr Khoury.
substantive proceedings were heard in late 2018 by Emmett AJA. The Rahmes claim
failed at first instance before Emmett AJA. However,
on appeal (“the
appeal proceedings”) the defendant succeeded against B&K:
Benjamin & Khoury Pty Ltd
(2019) 100 NSWLR 550
[2019] NSWCA 211
Rahme v Benjamin & Khoury Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2019] NSWCA 239.
plaintiff acted for the defendant in the appeal proceedings.
Court of Appeal gave judgment for the defendant against B&K in the sum of
$302,040.30 including interest, and also ordered
that B&K pay:
(1) the costs of the defendant (but not Mr Rahme) of the proceedings in the
court below on an ordinary basis; and
(2) the costs of the defendant in the Court of Appeal on an ordinary basis.
judgment in the appeal proceedings, the defendant sought assessments of her
ordered legal costs against B&K, on a party-party
basis. As part of those
cost assessment proceedings, the defendant asserted that she had a liability to
pay legal costs to the plaintiff,
pursuant to the written costs agreements. The
defendant asserted the quantum of costs which she asserted was owed to the
which mirrored an itemised tax invoice dated 9 April 2020, issued by
the plaintiff to the defendant for legal costs incurred in the
substantive
proceedings and the appeal proceedings.
assessments of the defendant’s party/party costs were finalised, and those
assessments were registered as judgments of this
necessary step in the determination of those assessments was a finding of a
liability for the defendant to pay legal costs to the
plaintiff, and a
quantification of those costs.
The costs agreements relied on by
the plaintiff
plaintiff tendered as evidence on the motion, two written costs agreements:
(1) a written costs agreement dated 2 June 2015 between the Rahmes and the
plaintiff, which was the costs agreement for the substantive
proceedings
(“the trial costs agreement”); and
(2) a written costs agreement which is undated, between the Rahmes and the
plaintiff, which was the costs agreement for the appeal
proceedings (“the
appeal costs agreement”),
(collectively, “the written costs agreements”).
written costs agreements contained the following identical terms:
B Professional Fees (if hourly agreement)
We will charge you fees for the work we do based on hourly rates. The hourly
rates charges by our professional staff are set out
below. The hourly rates
quoted are exclusive of GST.
F Estimate of Costs Payable and Recoverable on Litigation Outcome
We are required by the Act to provide you with an estimate of the range of costs
that my able recovered by you if you are successful
in the litigation and the
range of costs that you may be ordered to pay if you are unsuccessful in the
litigation. It should be appreciated
that an order by a court for the payment of
costs in your favour will not necessarily cover the whole of your legal
Based on our instruction, our estimates of the range of costs which may be
recoverable or payable are:
(a) All courts have a discretion in respect of awarding costs. Costs are
normally awarded in favour of the successful party .in proceedings.
courts such as Small Claims Division of the Local Court and or claims less than
$20,000 in the Local Court the amount of
costs you can recover are very
(b) The amount of costs that the court may award you (if successful) or order
you to pay (if unsuccessful) will also be influenced
by whether or not an Offer
of Compromise or a Calderbank settlement offer has been made in the proceedings.
If such a settlement
offer is made and not accepted, 8nd at the hearing of the
matter the maker of the offer achieves an outcome as favourable or more
favourable than that set out in the offer, then (whilst always having a
discretion) the court may (in the case of a Calderbank offer)
or is likely to
(in the case of an Offer of Compromise) award costs on an indemnity basis from
the date the offer was made against
the party who not accept the offer.
(c) The estimated ranges of costs are prepared bearing in mind that only a
certain percentage of your total legal costs are recoverable
or may be payable.
Simply put, even if you win and obtain an order that the other party pays your
costs, you wilt still be out of
pocket with respect to legal costs charged by us
in the solicitor /client basis.
(d) If you win at first instance, you may still face the prospect of meeting the
costs of defending your verdict, if the other side
appeals. If you lose at first
instance, you may be advised to appeal.
(e) Any costs estimated provided with respect to an appeal are very uncertain as
the costs associated· with an appeal will depend
upon many factors
including initial trial length, findings by the court of first instance, nature
of appeal to be run and which party
is appealing. The possible costs associated
with winning or losing on appeal are more not dealt with in this document, but
advised to you should the relevant circumstances arise.
(f) Even if you are successful in proceedings and have a costs order in your
favour it may still be necessary to seek-to enforce
such cost~ order through the
court system. This can be time consuming and costly. The possible costs
associated with such potential
enforcement proceedings are not dealt with in
this document, but will be advised to you should the relevant circumstances
(g) Courts and costs assessors take into account whether a successful party is
entitled to an input tax credit in respect of legal
costs already paid, when
assessing costs recoverable by the successful party.”
written costs agreements also contained the following “General Terms of
Business”, which were contained in a Schedule
(“the general
“2 Acceptance of offer
You may accept the Costs Disclosure and Costs Agreement by: a) signing and
returning this document to us or; b) continuing to instruct
us. Upon acceptance
you agree to pay for our services on these terms.
3 Interest Charges
Interest at the maximum rate prescribed in Regulation 110A of the
Profession Regulation 2005
(“the Regulation”) (being the Cash
Rate Target set by the Reserve Bank of Australia plus 2%) will be charged on any
unpaid after the expiry of 30 days after a tax invoice is given to you.
Our tax invoices will specify the interest rate to be, charged.
4 Recovery of Costs
Legal Profession Act 2004
") provides that we cannot take
action for recovery of legal i:osts until 30 days after a tax invoice (which
complies with the
) has been delivered to you.
10 Termination by us
We may cease to act for you or refuse to perform further work, including:
(a) while any of our invoices remain unpaid;
(b) If you do not within 7 days comply with any request to pay an in respect of
disbursements or future costs;
(c) If you fail to provide us with clear or timely instructions to enable us to
advance your matter, for example, compromising our
ability to comply with Court
directions, orders or practice notes;
(d) If you refuse to accept our advice;
(e) if you indicate to us or we form the view that you have lost confidence in
(t) If there are any ethical grounds which we consider require us to cease
acting for you, for example a conflict of interest
(g) for any other reason outside our control which has· the effect of
compromising our ability to· perform the work required
within the required
timeframe; or
(h) If in our sole discretion we consider it is no longer appropriate to act for
We will give you reasonable written notice of termination of our services. You
will be required to pay our costs incurred up to the
date of termination.
11 Termination by You
You may terminate our services by written notice at any time. However, if you do
so you will be required to pay our costs incurred
up to the date of termination
(Including if the matter is litigious, any cancellation fees or other fees such
as hearing allocation
fees for which we remain responsible).
Without affecting any lien to which we are otherwise entitled at law over funds.
papers and other property of yours in our possession:
(a) we shall be entitled to retain by way of lien any funds, property or papers
of yours, which are from time to time in our possession
or control until all
costs, disbursements, interest and other moneys due to the firm have been
(b) our lien will continue notwithstanding that we cease to act for you.”
Pleadings in the Amended Summons
Amended Summons noted that as of 27 April 2023, the amount of $579,449.00, paid
into the Supreme Court by B&K, was currently
held in the Supreme Court
(“the held funds”).
substance, in making the claims under the Amended Summons, the plaintiff relied
upon the written costs agreements as constituting
the retainer between the
plaintiff and the defendant for the substantive proceedings and appeal
proceedings.
Amended Summons sought, inter alia, an order to the effect that:
(1) The plaintiff holds an equitable right to the entirety of the held funds, or
in the alternative, to such amount as the Court
(2) The plaintiff holds a lien over the entirety of the held funds, or in the
alternative, to such amount as the Court deems fit.
(3) The quantum to which the right over the held funds extends to are the costs
of the plaintiff in relation to its retainer with
the defendant in the
substantive proceedings, the appeal proceedings, and costs incurred with respect
to the Caveat Retainer.
(4) That money be paid out of the held funds to the plaintiffs in the amount
determined in cost assessment.
(5) The held funds remain in Court, until determination of the Notice of Motion
dated 8 August 2023 in both the trial and appeal
cost assessment proceedings
between B&K and the defendant, and the Amended
Pleadings in the CC
CC contained 28 pages of purported pleadings and particulars, with a vast array
of different claims made against the plaintiff.
I set out below, in broad terms,
the main contentions advanced by the defendant in this respect.
CC pleaded that the retainer between the parties (“the oral
retainer”) was made orally on a no-win-no-pay and pay-if-paid
whereby the plaintiff agreed to accept as the costs for the performance of its
retainer, the net amount recovered by the Rahmes
as ordered costs (but not
damages) in the event they were successful in the substantive proceedings. The
same terms were said to
apply in relation to the plaintiff’s engagement to
conduct the appeal proceedings.
CC pleaded that the oral retainer contained the following express
(1) That the Rahmes would receive any damages recoverable from B&K or Solon
Lawyers without any deduction for the professional
costs or disbursements of the
(2) That the plaintiff would act for the Rahmes to recover such costs as were
payable by B&K, Paul Satouris, Solon Lawyers and
Mr Khoury and accept, as
its professional costs, the net amount payable to the Rahmes as their recovered
ordered costs from those
defendants, that is, the net amount recoverable by the
Rahmes or either of them after all countervailing costs orders made in their
favour or against them (where they were partially successful against one but not
both defendants) were assessed and paid.
CC pleaded that the oral retainer also contained the following implied
(1) That the plaintiff would co-operate with the Rahmes to take, or otherwise to
not impede them taking, all necessary steps to recove
any damages and ordered
costs payable to them by B&K, Paul Satouris, Solon Lawyers and/or Mr Khoury.
(2) That operation of the pay-if-paid terms of the oral retainer and the first
implied term of the oral retainer as executory promises
by the plaintiff to the
Rahmes would survive termination of the retainer to conduct the substantive
proceedings.
summary, the CC pleaded that those express and implied terms gave rise to a duty
of care and fiduciary duty owed by the plaintiff
to the defendant, and that the
plaintiff had breached those duties, the terms of the oral retainer, as well as
a number of statutory
provisions relating to solicitor conduct by:
(1) Demanding payment of its legal costs from the defendant in an email dated 3
November 2020.
(2) Applying money received on trust on behalf of the defendant toward the
payment of professional costs, disbursements and counsel
fees without the
defendant’s informed consent.
(3) Lodging an application for assessment of the defendant’s ordered costs
of the substantive proceedings and the appeal proceedings.
(4) Representing that the defendant had entered into a statutorily compliant
costs agreement with the plaintiff.
(5) Claiming various liens over, inter alia, the ordered costs and damages
payable to the defendant.
(6) Asserting that B&K had a duty to account to the plaintiff in respect of
the ordered costs and damages payable to the defendant.
CC also pleaded that the plaintiff acted in contravention of s 18 of the
Australian Consumer Law
(Sch 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth)) as a result of the representations made by the plaintiff with
respect to the costs agreement.
the purposes of the present proceedings, what is at least implicit in the CC, is
a denial by the defendant of the existence of
the written costs agreements as
having legal effect. So much is clear from the CC that the retainer between the
parties was only
oral and that it was conditional, with, in broad terms,
no-win-no-pay and pay-if-paid terms.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
court has the power to strike out the whole or parts of a pleading pursuant to r
14.28 of the UCPR, which provides as follows:
(1) The court may at any stage of the proceedings order that the whole or any
part of a pleading be struck out if the pleading--
(a) discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence or other case appropriate
to the nature of the pleading, or
(b) has a tendency to cause prejudice, embarrassment or delay in the
proceedings, or
(c) is otherwise an abuse of the process of the court.
(2) The court may receive evidence on the hearing of an application for an order
under subrule (1).
the motion sought a strike out of the CC on the basis of subs (a), (b) and (c),
the submissions of the plaintiff proceeded on
the basis that the pleading was
both an abuse of process, and, embarrassing in the sense described in r 14.28(b)
of the UCPR.
pleading is embarrassing where it “is unintelligible, ambiguous, vague or
too general, so as to embarrass the opposite party
who does not know what is
alleged against him”:
Meckiff v Simpson
[1968] VicRp 7
[1968] VR 62
Winneke CJ, Adam and Gowans JJ);
Gunns Ltd v Marr
[2005] VSC 251
(per Bongiorno J);
McGuirk v University of New South Wales
[2009] NSWSC 1424
”) at [30] (per Johnson J).
particular principle has been elaborated on a number of times, and I note the
following more recent statement of principle from
Owners - Strata Plan No
82089 v Omaya Holding Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 992
to [72] (per McGrath
J), which the plaintiff relied upon:
“[70] Pleadings not only inform the opponent of the case to be met but
also facilitate the just, quick and cheap determination
of the real issues in
the proceedings.
[71] These matters were emphasised by Adamson J (as her Honour then was) in
Dickens v New South Wales (No 3)
[2018] NSWSC 485
[36] The importance of pleadings ought not be underestimated. A statement of
claim serves a number of functions. It indicates, to
the Court and to the
defendant or defendants, the basis of the plaintiff’s claim for relief.
The statement of claim must set
out, in numbered paragraphs, the material facts
on which the plaintiff relies (UCPR rr 14.6 and 14.7). Where the rules require
certain matters be particularised (such as allegations of fraud or states
of mind), the statement of claim must contain those particulars.
It is an aspect
of natural justice that the defendant be apprised of the case it has to meet by
a properly pleaded statement of claim:
rrest v Australian Securities and
Investments Commission
(2012) 247 CLR 486
[2012] HCA 39
(French CJ,
Gummow, Hayne and Kiefel JJ). Where unparticularised allegations of fraud and
intention are made, there can be a tendency
for the deficient pleading to amount
to an abuse of process. Pleadings must be consistent, except where allegations
are expressed
to be in the alternative: UCPR 14.18. A pleading must not be
“embarrassing” in any of the senses set out by Tamberlin
Shelton v NRMA Ltd
[2004] FCA 1393
51 ACSR 278
‘Embarrassment’ in this context refers to a pleading that is
susceptible to various meanings, or contains inconsistent
allegations, or in
which alternatives are confusingly intermixed, or in which irrelevant
allegations are made that tend to increase
[38] Where a statement of claim is deficient, in that it does not identify the
connection between allegations of fact and causes
of action alleged; contains a
discursive narrative, the relevance of which can only be the subject of
conjecture; and makes generalised
allegations which could not sensibly be the
subject of a response in the defence, it cannot be allowed to stand, if
objection is
taken. Although there are occasions where a defendant, for forensic
reasons, might not take objection to a deficient pleading and
prefer to conduct
the proceedings on that basis, a defendant who approaches the Court to enforce
its rules regarding a pleading is
entitled to have the Court require compliance:
Northam v Favelle Favco Holdings Pty Ltd
(Unreported, Supreme Court of
New South Wales, Bryson J, 7 March 1995).
[39] The matters to be taken into account in determining which order to make are
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW), the overriding purpose
of which is “to facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the
real issues in the proceedings”:
A properly pleaded statement of
claim is, in my view, a prerequisite for the just, quick and cheap resolution of
the real issues
in the proceedings.
[72] The concept of whether a pleading is embarrassing has also been the subject
of extensive judicial consideration, drawn together
McGuirk v The
University of New South Wales
[2009] NSWSC 1424
, Johnson J at
[32]–[35], as follows:
[32] A pleading may be embarrassing even though it contains allegations of
material facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action,
if the material facts
alleged are couched in expressions which leave difficulties or doubts about
recognising or piecing together
what is referred to:
Northam v Favelle Favco
Holdings Pty Limited
(Bryson J, 7 March 1995, BC9504276 at 5–6).
[33] Although the pleading of a conclusion may, in some circumstances constitute
a material fact, nevertheless, the pleading will
be embarrassing if allegations
are made at such a level of generality that the defendant does not know in
advance the case it has
Charlie Carter Pty Limited v Shop
Distributive and Allied Employees Association
[1987] FCA 135
(1987) 13 FCR 413
417–418. In such a case, the appropriate remedy is to strike out the
pleading rather than to order the provision of particulars,
as it is not the
function of particulars to take the place of the necessary averments in a
Trade Practices Commission v David Jones
(Aust) Pty Ltd
[1985] FCA 228
at 112–114.
[34] Rule 14.28 UCPR provides that pleadings that involve non-compliance are
liable to be struck out as an embarrassment. However,
generally the Courts
recognise that a wide range of discretionary considerations arise where there is
a failure to comply with the
technical requirements of the pleading rules:
Beach Petroleum NL v Johnson
(1991) 105 ALR 456
at 466. In many
instances, the appropriate order may be to strike out the offending pleading,
but grant leave to amend:
Rubenstein v Truth & Sportsman Ltd
[1960] VicRp 75
at 476; H 1976
Nominees Pty Ltd v Galli
[1979] FCA 74
(1979) 30 ALR 181
[35] It is not the function of the Court to draw or settle a party’s
pleading. The Court is confined to the function of ensuring
that pleadings are
within the rules and fulfil the functions for which they exist. Objectionable
matter that is so mingled with other
matter may lead to the conclusion that the
pleading as a whole would tend to embarrass the fair trial of the action ought
Turner v Bulletin Newspapers Co Pty Ltd
(1974) 131 CLR 69
at 72 87–88 and 97–98;
Gunns Limited v Marr
Fleet v Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals NSW
[2005] NSWSC 926
as was accepted by the plaintiff, where a pleading defect can be cured by
amendment, the court ought to grant leave to amend
the pleadings rather than
exercise the power to strike out:
Wentworth v Rogers (No 5)
at 536-537 (per Kirby P, with whom Hope and Samuels JJA agreed).
also accept, as was submitted by the defendant, that the power to summarily
dismiss a matter should be used sparingly, where it
is clear that the cause of
action is so obviously untenable that it cannot possibly succeed:
Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner of Railways (NSW)
(1964) 112 CLR 125
[1964] HCA 69
(per Barwick CJ). Hence, the test is not whether the claim
is arguable, but whether the claim is clearly incapable of success.
respect of the doctrines of abuse of process and estoppel, the plaintiff relied
on the following statement of principle by the
High Court in
Tomlinson v
Ramsey Food Processing Pty Limited
(2015) 256 CLR 507
[2015] HCA 28
”) at [22] – [26] (per French CJ, Bell,
Gageler and Keane JJ):
“[22] Three forms of estoppel have now been recognised by the common law
of Australia as having the potential to result from
the rendering of a final
judgment in an adversarial proceeding. The first is sometimes referred to as
"cause of action estoppel".
Estoppel in that form operates to preclude assertion
in a subsequent proceeding of a claim to a right or obligation which was
in the proceeding and which was determined by the judgment. It is
largely redundant where the final judgment was rendered in the
exercise of
judicial power, and where res judicata in the strict sense therefore applies to
result in the merger of the right or
obligation in the judgment. The second form
of estoppel is almost always now referred to as "issue estoppel". Estoppel in
operates to preclude the raising in a subsequent proceeding of an
ultimate issue of fact or law which was necessarily resolved as
reaching the determination made in the judgment. The classic expression of the
primary consequence of its operation is
that a "judicial determination directly
involving an issue of fact or of law disposes once for all of the issue, so that
afterwards be raised between the same parties or their privies". The
third form of estoppel is now most often referred to as "
estoppel", although it is still sometimes referred to as the "extended
principle" in
Henderson v Henderson
. That third form of estoppel is an
extension of the first and of the second. Estoppel in that extended form
operates to preclude
the assertion of a claim, or the raising of an issue of
fact or law, if that claim or issue was so connected with the subject matter
the first proceeding as to have made it unreasonable in the context of that
first proceeding for the claim not to have been made
or the issue not to have
been raised in that proceeding. The extended form has been treated in Australia
as a "true estoppel" and
not as a form of res judicata in the strict sense.
Considerations similar to those which underpin this form of estoppel may support
a preclusive abuse of process argument.
[23] The present significance of the recognition of those three forms of
estoppel is that each has the potential to preclude assertion
of a right or
obligation, or the raising of an issue of fact or law, between parties to a
proceeding or their privies. Absent a principled
basis for distinction –
and none has been suggested – one principle must govern the identification
of privies for the
purpose of all forms of estoppel which result from the
rendering of a final judgment in an adversarial proceeding.
[24] To explain contemporary adherence to the comparatively narrow principle in
Ramsay v Pigram
, it is appropriate also to explain the relationship
between the doctrine of estoppel and the doctrine of abuse of process as it has
since come to be recognised and applied in Australia. The doctrine of abuse of
process is informed in part by similar considerations
of finality and fairness.
Applied to the assertion of rights or obligations, or to the raising of issues
in successive proceedings,
it overlaps with the doctrine of estoppel. Thus, the
assertion of a right or obligation, or the raising of an issue of fact or law,
in a subsequent proceeding can be simultaneously: (1) the subject of an estoppel
which has resulted from a final judgment in an earlier
proceeding; and (2)
conduct which constitutes an abuse of process in the subsequent proceeding.
[25] Abuse of process, which may be invoked in areas in which estoppels also
apply, is inherently broader and more flexible than
estoppel. Although
insusceptible of a formulation which comprises closed categories, abuse of
process is capable of application in
any circumstances in which the use of a
court's procedures would be unjustifiably oppressive to a party or would bring
the administration
of justice into disrepute. It can for that reason be
available to relieve against injustice to a party or impairment to the system
administration of justice which might otherwise be occasioned in circumstances
where a party to a subsequent proceeding is not
bound by an estoppel.
[26] Accordingly, it has been recognised that making a claim or raising an issue
which was made or raised and determined in an earlier
proceeding, or which ought
reasonably to have been made or raised for determination in that earlier
proceeding, can constitute an
abuse of process even where the earlier proceeding
might not have given rise to an estoppel. Similarly, it has been recognised that
making such a claim or raising such an issue can constitute an abuse of process
where the party seeking to make the claim or to raise
the issue in the later
proceeding was neither a party to that earlier proceeding, nor the privy of a
party to that earlier proceeding,
and therefore could not be precluded by an
estoppel.” (footnotes omitted)
plaintiff also relied on the decision of
Kuligowski v MetroBus
[2004] HCA 34
(per Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby,
Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ) as authority for the proposition that:
“The doctrine of estoppel extends to the decision of any tribunal which
has jurisdiction to decide finally a question arising
between parties, even if
it is not called a court, and its jurisdiction is derived from statute or from
the submission of parties,
and it only has temporary authority to decide a
matter ad hoc.”
reliance was also placed on the decision of
Reichel v Magrath
[1889] UKLawRpAC 20
App Cas 665
”). This case concerned two proceedings,
whereby the appellant sought to put on a defence (in the second proceeding) that
the case he lost when he was the plaintiff in the first proceedings.
The Privy Council held that the defence was an abuse of process
controversy had already been resolved. Lord Halsbury LC made the following
remarks (at 668):
“My Lords, I think it would be a scandal to the administration of justice
if the same question having been disposed of by one
case, the litigant were to
be permitted by changing the form of the proceedings to set up the same case
again. It cannot be denied
that the only ground upon which Mr. Reichel can
resist the claim by Mr. Magrath to occupy the vicarage is that he (Mr. Reichel)
still vicar of Sparsholt. If by the hypothesis he is not vicar of Sparholt
and his appeal absolutely fails, it surely must be in
the jurisdiction of the
Court of Justice to prevent the defeated litigant raising the very same question
which the Court had decided
in a separate action.
I believe there must be an inhere jurisdiction in every Court of Justice to
prevent such an abuse of its procedure and I therefore
think that this appeal
must likewise be dismissed.”
is also necessary to set out those sections of the
Legal Profession Uniform
Uniform Law
Legal Profession
Uniform Law Application Act 2014
Uniform Law Application
”) which the parties relied on.
Uniform Law
provides as follows:
199 Costs assessment
(1) Assessments of legal costs are to be conducted by costs assessors, and are
to be conducted in accordance with this Part, the
Uniform Rules and any
applicable jurisdictional legislation.
(2) On a costs assessment, the costs assessor must—
(a) determine whether or not a valid costs agreement exists; and
(b) determine whether legal costs are fair and reasonable and, to the extent
they are not fair and reasonable, determine the amount
of legal costs (if any)
that are to be payable.
Uniform Law Application
provides as follows:
64 Application of this Part
(1) This Part applies to Uniform Law costs and ordered costs.
This Part also applies to costs of an arbitration, as provided in
sections 33B
Commercial Arbitration Act 2010
(2) This Part has effect subject to—
(a) any other legislation, or
(b) any order or direction of the court or tribunal concerned (except as regards
section 74(3)).
70(5) of the
Uniform Law Application
provides as follows:
70 Certificate as to determination of costs to parties
(5) In the case of an amount of money specified in a certificate that has not
been paid, the certificate is, on the filing of the
certificate in the office or
registry of a court having jurisdiction to order the payment of that amount of
money, and with no further
action, taken to be a judgment of that court for the
amount of unpaid money. The rate of any interest payable in respect of that
amount of money is the rate of interest in the court in which the certificate is
75 to 77 of the
Uniform Law Application
provides as
75 Conduct of costs assessments of ordered costs
(1) An assessment of ordered costs must be made in accordance with—
(a) the terms of the order, rule or award under which the costs are payable,
(b) the rules of the relevant court or tribunal that made the order for costs,
(c) any relevant regulations, and
(d) any order made for interest on costs under
section 101
Procedure Act 2005
(2) If a court or tribunal has ordered that costs are to be assessed on an
indemnity basis, the costs assessor must assess the costs
on that basis, having
regard to any relevant rules of the court or tribunal and any relevant
regulations.
76 Criteria for costs assessments of ordered costs
(1) In conducting an assessment of ordered costs, the costs assessor must
determine what is a fair and reasonable amount of costs
for the work
(2) In considering what is a fair and reasonable amount of costs for the work
concerned, the costs assessor may have regard to the
section 172(1)
and (2) of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW) (as if that section also
applies to ordered costs and so applies with any necessary
modifications).
77 Use of costs agreements in connection with ordered costs
(1) A costs assessor may, when conducting an assessment of ordered costs, obtain
a copy of, and may have regard to, a costs agreement.
(2) However, for the purposes of the assessment, a costs agreement is not
conclusive as to what is the fair and reasonable amount
of costs for the work
Uniform Law Application
provides as follows:
93C Costs assessors
(1) The Chief Justice of New South Wales may appoint persons to be costs
(2) A costs assessor has the functions that are conferred on the costs assessor
by or under this or any other
or the Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW).
(3) For the purpose of determining an application for assessment or exercising
any other function as a costs assessor, a costs assessor
may determine any
anterior or incidental question of fact or law, but not so as to establish an
issue estoppel for that question
for the purpose of any other proceedings.
(4) A costs assessor is not an officer of the Supreme Court when acting as a
costs assessor.
(5) Proceedings relating to anything done or omitted to be done by the Chief
Justice of New South Wales in respect of the appointment
or removal of a costs
assessor (including terms of appointment and any other incidental matters) may
not be instituted against the
Chief Justice of New South Wales but may be
instituted against “The Manager, Costs Assessment” as nominal
(6) Schedule 6 contains provisions relating to costs assessors.
CONSIDERATION
bases for the orders sought by the plaintiff on the motion were as
(1) The CC denied the defendant's liability for costs and the quantum of those
costs, which was contrary to previous positions she
had taken in these and other
proceedings, and contrary to judgments of this Court. The defendant is debarred
from pleading those
denials by reason for litigation estoppels or abuse of
(2) The CC is unintelligible, ambiguous, vague or too general so as to embarrass
the plaintiff who does not know what is alleged
against them.
will address each of these issues, in seriatim, below.
process and estoppel
first issue for consideration is whether the CC should be stuck out on the basis
of an abuse of process, and ancillary to this,
whether the defendant ought to be
estopped from bringing further claims on the same subject matter of the CC.
noted above, the abuse of process arises from the fact that the pleadings
contained in the CC are contrary to previous positions
which the defendant has
taken, and contrary to previous judgments of this
terms of the written costs agreements are entirely at odds with what is pleaded
by the defendant in the CC. In particular, that
contradiction relates to both
the fact of the existence of the written costs agreements and the conditions
contained in any retainers.
this juncture, it should be emphasised that irrespective of whether the written
costs agreements were signed by the defendant and
returned to the plaintiff,
acceptance of the terms could have been satisfied by the defendant continuing to
instruct the plaintiff
in relation to both the substantive proceedings and the
appeal proceedings (in accordance with cl 2 of the general terms).
will become evident below, the terms of the written costs agreements assume
relevance for present purposes, by reason of the fact
that the defendant relied
on the written costs agreements in support of its applications for party/party
costs against B&K. However,
the defendant now denies the existence of those
agreements and pleads that the retainer between the parties was made orally on a
no-win-no-pay and pay-if-paid basis.
Party/party cost assessment
proceedings
defendant relied on the written costs agreements when applying for party/party
costs following the substantive proceedings and
the appeal proceedings.
3 August 2020, the defendant filed two applications for assessment of
party/party (ordered) costs, following the orders made by
the Court of Appeal in
the appeal proceedings. For clarity, there were two separate but related costs
assessment applications, one
which related to the legal costs of the substantive
proceedings and one which related to the legal costs of the appeal proceedings.
Relevantly,
for present purposes, the reasons given by the costs assessor in their
determination of costs for the substantive proceedings,
stated that:
(1) The total legal costs claimed by the defendant (for payment of, inter alia,
the plaintiff’s costs) was $518,366.27.
(2) The defendant “provided a copy of the costs agreement [to the costs
assessor] and asserted there is a liability to pay
the costs sought.”
(3) The costs assessor “examined the Costs Agreement between [the
plaintiff] and [the defendant]”, and made a determination
based on that
written agreement in the defendant’s favour.
reasons were given in relation to the determination of costs for the appeal
proceedings, namely, the defendant provided a
copy of the appeal costs agreement
to the costs assessor and asserted a liability to pay the costs sought, and the
costs assessor
examined that costs agreement before making a determination in
the defendant’s favour.
costs determinations were affirmed on review, and the appeals by B&K of the
review panel’s decisions were dismissed
by Justice Chen on 24 February
2023, pursuant to consent orders entered into between the
Solicitor/client cost assessment proceedings
30 May 2022, the plaintiff filed an application for assessment of
solicitor/client costs, as between the plaintiff as costs applicant
defendant as costs respondent.
response to that application, the defendant filed submissions dated 30 June 2022
in which the defendant submitted, inter alia,
(1) there was no written retainer entered into between the parties;
(2) the written costs agreements were never given to the Rahmes; and
(3) the costs arrangements between the parties was an oral arrangement, which
was said to be a conditional costs agreement within
the meaning of
Legal Profession Act 2004
is evident, the submissions advanced by the plaintiff were entirely inconsistent
with the position taken by her in the earlier
proceedings regarding the
assessment of party/party costs.
regardless of those submissions, the costs assessor in its ‘statement of
reasons’, made the following findings
(amongst others):
“...The submissions by the costs respondent asserted that the parties had
entered into a conditional costs agreement and as
this is the case, the
assessment should be stayed until the costs respondent received monies from
I could find no clause in the costs disclosure that indicated that it was a
conditional costs agreement. Even if it was, then as
the costs respondent had
been successful in securing a verdict, then the contingency would have been met
on payment of the verdict.
This had occurred and there appeared to be no merit
in the costs respondent’s submissions to delay the assessment or that the
costs applicant had received $1.1 million in respect of the costs the subject of
this assessment. Although the costs applicant had
not complied with
LPA, the costs applicant had complied with the disclosure requirements of the
The costs respondent made various submissions about the conditional costs
agreement with Kekatos. The costs agreement relied on by
the costs applicant in
this matter is not a conditional costs agreement.
By letter dated 2 June 2015, a costs agreement and disclosure was sent to the
costs respondent by the costs applicant. The costs
agreement provided that the
costs applicant would act for the costs respondent in proceedings against
Benjamin & Khoury Pty Ltd,
Dieb Khoury, Paul Satouris, and Michael Soulos.
Apparently, the proceedings against Mr Satouris and Mr Soulos were resolved and
matters against B&K and Mr Khoury proceeded for finality in the Supreme
Court and then in the Court of Appeal. The costs agreement
gave an estimate of
fees with a range of $390,000.00 to $540,000.00. The agreement also gave a range
of costs which the costs respondent
might recover if the costs respondent was
successful of $310,000.00 to $430,000.00. The agreement further gave an estimate
which the costs respondent would be liable for if she lost the
litigation of $310,000.00 to $430,000.00. Attached to that document
further document titled, "General Terms of Business". That document set out the
costs respondent's rights in a proforma document
which complies with the
certificate of determination dated 4 November 2022 ultimately assessed the costs
owed by the defendant to the plaintiff as $288,590.74.
its application for review filed by the defendant in March 2023, the defendant
did not challenge the findings made by the costs
assessor regarding the
existence of a written costs agreement between the parties. Rather, the
defendant, in fact, relied on the
terms contained within the written costs
agreements to found certain grounds of its application. For example, one ground
relied upon
“(f) the learned assessor should have instead made his own independent
allocation of a costs paid out of the trust account
in the same temporal order
in which costs were billed by Kekatos and incurred by Mrs Rahme, consistently
with her evidence, so that
costs were allocated to the trial costs billed before
any appeal costs were incurred or billed,
consistently with clause 8 of the
General Terms of Business forming part of the costs agreement dated 2 June 2015
which the assessor
upheld as valid and enforceable under the LPA 2004
notwithstanding the evidence of Mrs Rahme that she did not ever receive any such
costs agreement from Kekatos before its retainer
was terminated...”
(emphasis added)
accept that this extract demonstrates that the defendant understood and accepted
that the trial costs agreement was found to be
valid and enforceable between the
parties, and in consequence of that finding, the defendant relied on the terms
contained within
the trial costs agreement to buttress her own argument.
letter from the defendant’s legal representative, Solon Lawyers, to the
plaintiff dated 28 February 2023 further confirmed
that “[t]he only issues
raised in the Application for Review relate to the payment and allocation to the
costs billed for your
firm’s two retainers to ensure that [the defendant]
receives full credit for all costs paid from your trust account in accordance
with emails to and from her and the costs agreements.”
this clearly demonstrates an acceptance by the defendant that the written costs
agreements governed the retainer between the
parties, a fact which the defendant
seeks to dispute in the CC.
Is there a basis upon which the
Court might conclude there is an abuse of process?
my view, having regard to the defendant's conduct in prior proceedings of this
Court, the CC is clearly an abuse of process in
the sense described in
at [26]. I also find that the circumstances set out above are
sufficient to raise an estoppel, such that the defendant should not
be permitted
to raise matters, including as to the existence of the written costs agreements,
which have already been raised and
determined by this Court.
to the questions of law discussed below, the defendant cannot now deny a
liability for costs, or deny the quantum and substance
of that liability, when
that position is directly contrary to the position she has taken, and contrary
to determinations made on
the basis of that position, previously in this Court.
To allow that course would be contrary to the principles of finality and
which underpin the law of abuse of process and would “bring the
administration of justice into disrepute”:
Do the provisions of the Uniform Law and Uniform Law Application
preclude a finding as to an issue estoppel?
the analysis does not end here. The defendant submitted that the statutory
provisions of the
Uniform Law
Uniform Law Application
precluded an issue estoppel in this matter. Essentially, they submitted that an
issue estoppel was not available in law. As such,
it is necessary to consider
that argument.
for the plaintiff submitted that the estoppel which the plaintiff seeks to
invoke does not arise pursuant to the law, namely,
the statutory regime for the
determination of costs. Reliance was placed on the following Court of Appeal
authorities by both parties:
(1) Doyle v. Hall Chadwick
[2007] NSWCA 159
(2) Bingham v Bevan
(2023) 111 NSWLR 287
[2023] NSWCA 86
(3) Rahme v Kekatos Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 31
such, it is necessary to address those sections of the
Uniform Law
Uniform Law Application
which form the basis of this argument, and
address matters of construction raised by the parties.
written reply submissions, counsel for the plaintiff made a succinct submission
as to what the relationship was between the relevant
statutory provisions
engaged with by the parties, particularly,
Uniform Law
s 93C of the
Uniform Law Application
and the plaintiff’s
reliance on an abuse of process to defeat the CC.
plaintiff’s submissions in that respect were in the following
“First, section 93C, which is cited in support in the Court of
Bingham v Bevan
[2023] NSWCA 86
decision at [36], clearly
a costs assessor may determine any anterior or incidental
question of fact or law, but not so as to establish an issue estoppel for
” (underline added), but what that must also mean is
costs assessor may determine any non-anterior or non-incidental question of fact
or law, but not so as to establish an issue estoppel
for that question
the question is whether the finding that the written cost agreement existed was
anterior or incidental. This is clearly resolved
Profession Uniform Law
“(2) On a costs assessment, the
cost assessor must—(a) determine whether or not a valid cost agreement
”, and by finding the written cost agreement was valid and that
it existed the determination created an issue estoppel preventing
the pleading
in the cross claim that “
the trial costs agreement did not
” (1CB28[47(b)(iii)]) and “
the appeal costs agreement
did not exist
” (1CB28[47(b)(v)]).”
it was the plaintiff’s contention that a decision as to the validity of a
costs agreement is not an "anterior or incidental
question of fact or law"
within the meaning of s 93C(3) of the
Uniform Law Application
Rather, such a decision is a necessary step in the assessment of legal costs,
and as such, no restriction on issue estoppel (under
s 93C(3) of the
Law Application
) arises in relation to a decision of that nature. Thus,
the plaintiff contended that the defendant was thereby estopped.
arguments advanced by the defendant, in response to this contention, were as
(1) The defendant’s interpretation of s 93C of the
Uniform Law
Application
is wrong. In making a costs assessment, a costs assessor is
simply undertaking a quantification exercise by an administrative process
because liability has already been determined by the court. The role of a costs
assessor is simply to determine the amount of an
order, which is an exercise in
quantification not liability. The defendant relied on ss 75(1), 76 and 77 of the
Uniform Application
to support this construction of s 93C. As such,
the defendant argued that the costs agreement is simply a discretionary factor
a costs assessment which is used for the purposes of quantifying an order for
(2) With respect to
Uniform Law
, the jurisdiction of the
costs assessor is simply to determine the validity of a costs agreement rather
than its interpretation.
This is, it is an exercise in determining whether there
was a costs agreement, and if so, whether it was valid. This determination
for the sole purpose of determining the quantification of costs, that is, what
is a fair and reasonable amount of the costs.
accept that these arguments were advanced in order to demonstrate that a costs
assessor’s determination as to whether a valid
costs agreement exists, is
an “anterior or incidental question of fact or law” for the purpose
of s 93C(3) of the
Uniform Application
. As such, it was the
defendant’s contention that she is not bound by the findings of the costs
assessor with respect to the
existence and terms of the written costs
agreements, even if those findings were made in conformity with her conduct of
those proceedings.
turning to the authorities relied on by the parties, I will first address the
question of statutory construction.
93C(3) of the
Uniform Law Application
provides that:
(3) For the purpose of determining an application for assessment or exercising
any other function as a costs assessor, a costs assessor
may determine any
anterior or incidental question of fact or law, but not so as to establish an
issue estoppel for that question
for the purpose of any other proceedings.
Uniform Law
provides that:
(2) On a costs assessment, the costs assessor must--
(a) determine whether or not a valid costs agreement exists; and
(b) determine whether legal costs are fair and reasonable and, to the extent
they are not fair and reasonable, determine the amount
of legal costs (if any)
that are to be payable.
is evident that the provisions of s 93C(3) and
are dealing with
different functions of a costs assessor. This conclusion may be arrived at on
two bases. The first is the nature
of the function conferred.
power conferred upon the costs assessor under s 93C(3) is ancillary to any other
substantive function engaged in by the costs
is clear that the function conferred on the costs assessor under
s 199(2)(a)
in contrast, a substantive power as illustrated by the use of the word
“determine” on two occasions in subs (2).
second indicator of the difference is that the legislature has drawn a
distinction between the scope of the functions of the costs
assessor in each
such provision as between the conferral of a discretion under s 93C(3) and the
mandatory requirement to assess the
validity of a costs agreement under
s 199(2)(a)
, the legislature has used the word “must” to govern the
function of the costs assessor. Normally the use of the word
involves the legislature entrusting a function which is to be taken prima facie
as imposing an obligation to exercise
that function:
Grunwick Processing
Laboratories Ltd v Advisory Conciliation & Arbitration Service
at 690 (per Lord Diplock) and 698 (per Lord Salmon).
is an even stronger inference that the word “must” in
s 199(2)(a)
creates a mandatory requirement in this case as the legislative scheme plainly
indicates an intention that the assessment under
s 199(2)(a)
is a pre-requisite
to the ultimate determination of the costs assessor. So much is also clear from
the terms of
s 199(2)(b)
which, in my view, involves a discrete step for which a
conclusion must be reached after the determination made under subs (2)(a).
subs (2)(b), the cost assessor must determine whether the legal costs are
reasonable, and if not, what legal costs (if any)
are payable.
turning to s 93C of the
Uniform Law Application
, I note that this is
not a case where, strictly speaking, the legislature has within the one statute
used the words “shall”
or “must” in juxtaposition to the
word “may”; this representing an aid to construction. However, it
be noted that there is clearly different language being employed between
these related statutes by the use of the words “may”
was not suggested by the defendant that the use of the word “may” in
s 93C(3) of the
Uniform Law Application
did not confer a discretion.
In any event, the language of the provision is consistent with any presumption
of permissiveness that
comes with the use of the word “may” because
the provision is plainly permissive or facultative. This is illustrated
function of the costs assessor being such that the costs assessor may determine
an anterior or incidental question without
creating an issue
is plain then that in exercising the function under
s 199(2)(a)
Uniform Law
, the costs assessor is engaged in a different function from
that reposing on the costs assessor, in the exercise of the costs
discretion, under s 93C(3) of the
Uniform Law Application
, such that, the costs assessor is not engaged in the determination of a
anterior or incidental question of fact or law when making
a determination under
s 199(2)(a).
This is further illustrated by the fact that the function exercised
under s 93C(3) expressly excludes the establishment of an issue
estoppel in the
resolution of the question of fact or law when no such limitation operates with
respect to the exercise of the function
s 199(2)(a).
different approaches to the conferral of power by the legislature under s 93C(3)
demonstrate the legislative intention to treat those functions as
separate and discrete functions, such that the function exercised
is not an anterior or incidental question under s 93C(3).
plaintiff is correct to submit that, whilst a costs assessor may determine an
anterior or incidental question of fact or law for
the purposes of s 93C of the
Uniform Law Application
, but without establishing an issue estoppel
for that question, that must also mean that a costs assessor may determine a
non-anterior
or non-incidental question of fact or law, which may have the
effect of establishing an issue estoppel for that question. That is
given effect
Uniform Law
follows that a determination made under
s 199(2)(a)
Uniform Law
may, in fact, create an issue estoppel. The remaining question, as properly
posed by the plaintiff, is whether the question raised
by the CC as to whether
an agreement existed falls within the remit of the costs assessor under
Uniform Law
one view of
s 199(2)(a)
, the question may be resolved by the reference to the
word “exists”, but that word appears in a phrase “a valid
costs agreement exists” and hence, the question arises as to whether the
use of the word “valid” might suggest
that the provision was not
intended to deal with the question as to whether there existed a costs agreement
my view, the legislative intention is clear that the legislature contemplated
that the costs assessor will determine whether, in
law, a costs agreement exists
and that the issue of validity is consistent with the costs assessor examining
whether a costs agreement
exists simpliciter:
Judd v McKeon
[1926] HCA 33
(1926) 38 CLR
at 386 (per Isaacs J).
conclusion is reinforced by the use of the word “exists” in the
provisions of s 75(1), 76 and 77 of the
Uniform Law Application
not alter, in my view, the above construction of s 93C(3) of the
Uniform Law
Application
Uniform Law
. It is true that s
75(1) of the
Uniform Law Application
contemplates that an assessment
of costs must be made in accordance with the terms of any order under which the
costs are payable
and that the terms of, inter alia, any order made (for example
by a court). However, the assessment of costs in those circumstances
ordinarily be made by a costs assessor unless a lump sum order is made. In any
event, the issue here is what costs are payable
by the defendant to the
plaintiff in accordance with the retainer for legal work engaged in by the
s 76 of the
Uniform Law Application
really corresponds to the
Uniform Law
. The provisions of s 77(2) of the
Law Application
are similarly concerned with whether a costs agreement
is conclusive of what is the fair and reasonable amount of costs for the work
defendant relied on the judgment of the Court of Appeal in
– [62] (per Hodgson JA, with whom Mason P (as to the subject paragraphs)
and Campbell JA agreed). The relevant passages
of the judgment of Hodgson JA
were as follows:
“[55] Both parties submitted that a costs assessor does have jurisdiction
to construe a costs agreement and determine its effect.
[56] In my opinion, s.208(3) of the 1987
makes it clear that this is so, at
least where the assessment is between the lawyer and the client. However, I do
not entirely agree
with either of the opposing views expressed in the
litigation, that is, the view of Davies AJ in
Muriniti v.
[2000] NSWSC 680
and that of Dunford J in
Muriniti v. Lyons
[2004] NSWSC 135.
[57] In that litigation, there was a dispute as to the terms of an agreement
between a solicitor and a barrister, where the agreement
was apparently not in
writing and the barrister was deceased. The barrister’s widow applied to
the Supreme Court for a costs
assessment under the 1987
; and when, over
objection of the solicitor, the costs assessor indicated an intention to
proceed, the solicitor commenced proceedings
in the Supreme Court, seeking among
other things a declaration to the effect that any agreement with the barrister
was subject to
a condition that had not been fulfilled.
[58] Davies AJ dismissed those proceedings, holding that any questions as to the
terms of the agreement were to be determined by
the costs assessor, not the
[59] The costs assessor proceeded with the assessment, and issued a certificate,
although he stated explicitly that he was only determining
a fair and reasonable
amount of costs, not whether they were payable. The barrister’s widow
filed the certificate of assessment,
obtained a judgment under s.208J and
pursued execution of that judgment.
[60] The solicitor commenced further proceedings in the Supreme Court, seeking a
declaration that he was not liable to pay the costs;
and those proceedings were
subsequently amended to seek an extension of time to appeal from the
determination of the costs assessor.
Dunford J granted that leave. In the course
of his decision, he said this:
[55] A Costs Assessor under the
is not an officer of the Court when acting
as such; s.208S(4), is not part of the Supreme Court and has no power to take
sworn evidence
or resolve conflicts of evidence:
Ryan v Hansen
49 NSWLR 184.
[56] Having regard to the status and powers of Costs Assessors and the ordinary
meaning of the word “assessor”, I am
satisfied that the powers of
Costs Assessors are limited to determining the value of the work done or
services rendered in circumstances
where there is no dispute that costs are
payable and the only issue is as to the amount. It is no part of their function
to determine
whether or when such costs are payable. The matters set out in s
208A which they must, and in s 208B which they may, take into account
matters relevant to putting a value on the work done or services rendered and
the fairness or justice of the amount claimed;
but are not matters which relate
to the terms of a costs agreement (particularly if oral) and whether any
conditions precedent to
payment have been fulfilled. The determination of such
questions requires the reception of sworn evidence, which can be tested by
cross-examination, and an assessment of such evidence. Costs Assessors do not
have the power to deal with such matters.
[57] For similar reasons it has been held that a Costs Assessor has no power to
hear a cross-claim by a client against a solicitor
based on negligence, nor to
award damages:
Ryan v Hansen
, supra per Kirby J; or to make an
assessment when no costs are presently due and payable:
Lace v Younan
[1999] NSWSC 1072
per Master Harrison (no bill of costs rendered);
[2002] NSWSC 746
per Master Malpass (judgment in District Court that
applicant for assessment not entitled to costs). I am therefore satisfied that
on being notified of the dispute as to the plaintiff’s liability to pay
the costs, the Costs Assessor should have declined
to make a determination or
issued a certificate unless and until such issue was resolved.
[58] It could never have been the intention of the legislature that where the
liability for a debt for costs was disputed, a party
to the dispute could render
the other party to the dispute liable for the debt without any judicial
determination of the disputed
issues between them simply by having the value of
the work assessed by a Costs Assessor and the certificate of determination
as a judgment in a court of competent jurisdiction. Yet this is
precisely what the defendant has sought to do in the present case.
[59] In his judgment of 14 July 2000 in no 12152/99 at [13] Davies AJ appears to
have taken a different view and indicated that the
plaintiff’s contentions
as to the agreement and otherwise were matters to be determined in the first
instance by the Costs
Assessor and then be dealt with by this Court on appeal
pursuant to s 208L or 208M, although para [4] of the judgment suggests that
issue now under consideration was not raised in that case. With all respect to
his Honour, for the reasons already given, I take
a different view.
[61] In my opinion, Davies AJ was correct to say that a costs assessor,
assessing costs between a lawyer and client, can determine
disputes as to the
terms of the costs agreement, and Dunford J was wrong to say otherwise. However,
where the existence of the terms
of the agreement are in dispute in a way that
would require the hearing of evidence to resolve, it may be appropriate for the
assessor to decline to resolve the dispute; and in the Muriniti
litigation, it would in my opinion have been open and reasonable
for Davies AJ
to have permitted the question to have been determined in the proceedings before
him. As it turned out, the costs assessor
did decline to resolve this question;
and in my opinion, in those circumstances, the costs assessor should not have
issued a certificate
which could be converted into a judgment. That is, in a
case where there is a real dispute on substantial grounds as to whether any
costs are payable, a costs assessor should not complete an assessment by issuing
a certificate unless satisfied that the costs are
payable, because the
certificate can be filed so as to take effect as a judgment.
[62] In my opinion, this approach is consistent with the views of the Court of
Graham v. Aluma-Lite Pty. Limited
(NSWCA, unreported, 25/3/97)
Wentworth v. Rogers
[1999] NSWCA 403.
In so far as there is a
divergence of opinion in
Wentworth v. Rogers
[2006] NSWCA 145
power of a costs assessor, in assessing party and party costs, to determine the
terms and effect of the costs agreement
of the party against whom the costs are
sought, it is not necessary to address that divergence of opinion in this
principles in
do not, in my view, assist the defendant. The
question relevantly considered in
was whether the costs assessor
had jurisdiction to determine a question of construction of the costs agreement
primary judge in
dealt with a contention that the appeal before him
was incompetent because the determination of the costs assessor had merged into
a judgment, so that the underlying basis of the appeal had disappeared because
the judgment itself was conclusive (
at [37]). The primary judge
expressed the view that the construction of the contracts was not an exercise
contemplated by the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) as being within the
on appeal, both parties to the proceeding submitted that a costs assessor did
have jurisdiction to construe an agreement
and determine its effect
JA did not find otherwise, but determined that where the existence of the terms
of the agreement were in dispute “in
a way that would require the hearing
of evidence to resolve, it may be appropriate for the costs assessor to decline
to resolve the
further consideration, in my view, is that the circumstances discussed in
may be distinguished from the present matter. In the present
matter, there was no dispute in both party/party cost assessment proceedings
to the terms of the written costs agreements. Rather, in the party/party cost
assessment proceedings the defendant provided a
copy of the written costs
agreement to the costs assessor and asserted that she had a liability to pay the
costs of the plaintiff
on the basis of that written agreement.
Accordingly,
in this matter, there was no dispute in fact or in law raised by the defendant
before the costs assessor in that respect.
As such, there was no reason the
costs assessor was precluded from making the assessment and issuing a
certificate which could take
effect as a judgment. Of course, the situation
would be different if the defendant (as was the case in
) had raised
a dispute, such that the costs assessor ought to have declined to make a
determination or issue a certificate unless
and until that issue was resolved.
However, that is not what occurred.
defendant also referred to the following extract from
[36]-[37] (per Basten AJA, with whom Meagher JA and White JA agreed):
“[36] In principle, there is no doubt that the costs assessor, like any
tribunal, has power to determine whether a criterion
of engagement of a
statutory power has been fulfilled. However, it does not follow that the view
formed by the costs assessor will
be determinative for other purposes. If the
effect of the ruling by the assessor as to whether costs were due and payable
be determinative, it would effectively deprive a court of jurisdiction
to determine contractual issues between the parties. While
it might be open to
the legislature to remove such a right of access to the ordinary courts, as a
matter of statutory construction,
such an intended outcome should only be
accepted where expressed in clear terms. In circumstances where a costs assessor
has no power
to take evidence or conduct adversarial proceedings in relation to
contractual issues, that would be a startling outcome. In fact,
the Application
, Div 8, expressly denies such an outcome, no doubt from an
abundance of caution: [10]
93C Costs assessors
(2) A costs assessor has the functions that are conferred on the costs assessor
by or under this or any other
or the Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW).
(3) For the purpose of determining an application for assessment or exercising
any other function as a costs assessor, a costs assessor
may determine any
anterior or incidental question of fact or law, but not so as to establish an
issue estoppel for that question
for the purpose of any other proceedings.
[37] Accordingly, the Uniform Law should not be construed as having that
reliance on this authority, the defendant submitted that the entire legal and
factual substratum for the plaintiff’s abuse
of process case must
necessarily fail, as “the scheme of this legislation is that a litigant in
the position of [the defendant],
cannot be bound by what her former solicitor
has told a costs assessor in order to make his costs orders, because that was
of what he was entitled to recover, particularly if there is no
evidence, and there is no evidence, that his client knew about that
authorised it.”
do not accept the plaintiff’s contentions in this respect, for the
following reasons:
(1) The defendant’s submission is not factually accurate. The defendant is
said to be “bound by what her former solicitor
has told a costs
assessor”. However, the party/party costs assessment proceedings in
question were between the defendant and
B&K, and on the face of the record,
it was the defendant that provided the costs agreement to the costs assessor and
a liability to pay costs on the basis of that agreement. There is no
reference to the plaintiff having any involvement, let alone
making submissions
to the costs assessor, in the party/party cost assessment proceedings.
(2) In substance, the defendant relies on
as authority for the
proposition that the
Uniform Law
Uniform Law Application
permit the defendant to dispute the existence and terms of the written costs
agreement, notwithstanding that the defendant had previously
relied on those
agreements, on the basis that they, in terms, existed. I do not agree with that
submission.
, while the Court of Appeal held that the primary judge was
required to give independent consideration to the force and effect of
within a costs agreement (regardless of a cost assessors determination of the
issue), this was in circumstances where
the determination made by the costs
assessor was directly in issue and under appeal. Hence, the Court of
Appeal’s finding that
s 93C of the
Uniform Law Application
expressly denies that a view formed by a cost assessor will be determinative,
must be understood in this context.
(4) In my view, the decision in
is not analogous to the current
matter. In the current matter, the defendant has never challenged the
determination of party/party
costs, where she specifically relied on the
existence and terms of the written costs agreements. I accept, as was submitted
plaintiff, that the defendant never sought to challenge those decisions
because, no doubt, they benefitted her. It was only once
the existence and terms
of the written costs agreements did not benefit the defendant (in the
determination of solicitor/client costs),
that she sought to dispute the
existence of the written costs agreements.
(5) The judgment in
is not authority for the proposition that in
those circumstances, an estoppel may not arise because of an abuse of process.
my view, the conduct of the defendant as discussed in (4) of the preceding
paragraph, goes to the heart of abuse of process, as
is exemplified in the
authorities relied on by the plaintiff:
Rahme Appeal
Rahme Appeal
, the Court of Appeal upheld a decision of Schmidt AJ that
the defendant’s defence to a claim by the plaintiff in the Local
caveat costs constituted an abuse of process, on the basis that the matters
raised in her defence had already been the
subject of a claim determined in her
analogous to the issues in these proceedings, the issue in
Rahme Appeal
was the fact that the defence filed by the defendant in the Local Court pleaded,
inter alia, that the defendant did not enter a costs
agreement with the
plaintiff. It was held by Schmidt AJ that this constituted an abuse of process,
by reason of the fact that the
defendant had previously successfully claimed a
legal obligation to pay the plaintiff its invoiced costs, pursuant to a valid
therefore followed that the defendant resiling from the case she had
successfully pursued involved an impermissible abuse of process,
circumstances, the defendant’s success in the Local Court was
inexplicable:
Rahme Appeal
noted by Schmidt AJ in
Kekatos Lawyers Pty Ltd v Rahme
[2023] NSWSC 528
“[64] Justice could not permit her to depart from the result she had
earlier achieved, in order that she could avoid paying
the costs which she had
established that she had a legal obligation to pay to Kekatos, by the evidence
which she had led in the first
instance Equity proceedings, about the damages
she had suffered.”
follows that I have accepted the plaintiff’s submissions which are
predicated upon an abuse of process and estoppel.
argument on the basis of embarrassment
the plaintiff’s contentions as to embarrassment do have some force, it is
unnecessary to deal with this argument given
the conclusion I have reached in
respect of abuse of process.
CONCLUSIONS
so far as the CC asserts that the written costs agreements do not exist, and the
terms of the retainer with the plaintiff for the
substantive proceedings and the
appeal proceedings constitute terms other than those found in the written costs
agreements (that
is, in the form of the pleaded oral agreement), the CC
constitutes an abuse of process by the defendant for the reasons given above.
abuse of process gives rise to an estoppel which prevents the defendant pleading
in the CC that the trial costs agreement and
appeal costs agreement do not exist
or constitute the relevant retainer between the parties as to those proceedings.
to the arguments advanced by the defendant, the provisions of the
Uniform Law Application
do not alter that conclusion.
forms of relief were sought in the motion (some of which appeared to be in the
alternative). However, the exact form of relief
that would follow from the
conclusions I have reached in this judgment were not the subject of detailed
submissions by either party.
Accordingly,
I will give limited opportunity for short submissions as to the appropriate form
of relief before pronouncing final orders.
Those submissions will be made in
the conclusions reached by the Court on the motion make appropriate that an
order of costs in favour of the plaintiff, as
against the defendant, on the
motion and orders should be made accordingly.
Court makes the following orders and directions:
(1) On or before 4pm Wednesday 12 November 2025, the plaintiff shall file and
serve draft orders and submissions in support thereof,
not exceeding two pages,
as to the disposition of the motion in accordance with this judgment.
(2) On or before 4pm Friday 14 November 2025, the defendant shall file and serve
any alternative draft orders and submissions in
support thereof, not exceeding
two pages, as to the disposition of the motion in accordance with this judgment.
It was agreed between the
parties that the plaintiff was retained by the defendant, although, the terms of
that agreement (including
whether it was oral or written) is the basis of the
dispute in these proceedings.
Gino Dal Pont, Law of Costs (4th ed, 2018, LexisNexis Australia) at
The Amended Summons
referred to “this Summons dated 8 August 2023”. However, this
appears to be a typographical error
as the Amended Summons is dated 8 December
2023, not 8 August 2023.
Pursuant to s 70(5) of the Uniform Law Application
, the filing of the costs
assessment certificate in the office or registry of a court having jurisdiction
to order the payment of
that money, and with no further action, is taken to be a
judgment of that court for the amount of unpaid
Dennis Pearce, Statutory
Interpretation in Australia (10th ed, 2024, LexisNexis) at [11.5].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (411 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter