URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zandy v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPICMR 14; (15 April 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
Zandy v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
[2025] NSWPICMR 14
Dillan Zandy
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
MERIT REVIEWER:
Hugh Macken
DATE OF DECISION:
15 April 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; merit review;
statutory benefits payable; refusal of statutory benefits on grounds that
workers compensation claim is to be made;
insurer assertion that claimant was a
worker at the time of accident; onus of proof; failure to comply with request by
make a claim for workers compensation; reasonable grounds to consider
that workers compensation is or may be payable; lack of documentation;
was performing self-employed work; relevance of bank records;
– statutory benefits defence of
section 3.35
must fail; claimant has
no entitlement to workers compensation; internal review overturned; regulated
costs allowed.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries
reviewable decision about whether the insurer is entitled to refuse payment of
statutory benefits in accordance with
(no statutory benefits is workers
compensation payable) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
Act) and is therefore a Merit Review matter under Schedule 2(1)(s) of the MAI
reviewable decision is overturned.
claimant is entitled to legal costs up to the statutory maximum of 16 monetary
units for reasonable and necessary legal costs
incurred in connection with this
merit review pursuant to s 8.10(3) of the MAI Act and Schedule 1, cl 1 of the
Motor Accident Injuries
Regulation 2017 (the Regulation) in the sum of $2,191.73
inclusive of GST.
claimant is entitled to statutory benefits.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
is a dispute between Dillan Zandy (the claimant) and the insurer as to whether
the insurer is entitled to statutory benefits
in accordance with s 3.35 of
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(MAI Act) where workers compensation
may be payable.
claimant was involved in a motor vehicle accident on 9 March 2024. Thereafter
the claimant lodged an Application for Personal
Injury Benefits. On 24 April
2024 the insurer wrote to the claimant advising the claimant to lodge a workers
compensation claim.
Thereafter, on 16 April 2024 the insurer states that during
the course of a phone call on 16 April 2024 the claimant was asked if
working as a driving instructor at the time of the accident and he advised yes.
On 23 April 2024 the insurer states the claimant
advised over the phone that he
had not lodged a workers compensation claim. Thereafter on 24 April 2024 the
insurer wrote to the
claimant advising that they were unable to accept the claim
as circumstances of the accident entitled you (the claimant) to workers
compensation benefits.
claimant sought a review of this determination and in a certificate of
determination – internal review dated 2 July 2024
the insurer advised that
the decision to refuse payment of statutory benefits on the grounds that workers
compensation payable is
affirmed. The insurer’s internal review stated
that given a telephone call with the insurer’s case manager the claimant
advised that the accident occurred in the course of his employment as a driving
instructor. They acknowledge that the claimant advised
them that he contacted
icare for the purpose of lodging a claim but was unable to do so. They further
asserted that the claimant
explained that while he and his wife own a business
his wife is formally the owner and the business is under her name. That is, it
is the insurer’s assertion that the claimant advised at the time of the
accident he was working in his capacity as a driving
instructor for R & D
Driving School.
Legislation
3.35 of the MAI Act provides no statutory benefits of workers compensation
(a) an injured person is not entitled to statutory benefits under this part in
compensation under the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(b) workers compensation is payable to the injured person in respect to the
injury concerned; relevantly, that the insurer is not
entitled to refuse payment
for statutory benefits in respect to the injuries unless (be the insured person
has failed to comply with
the request by the relevant insurer under this section
to make a claim for workers compensation in respect to the injury.
3.35(4) states:
(a) if the relevant insurer for a claim for statutory benefits under this part
considers on reasonable grounds whether the workers
compensation is or may be
payable in respect to the injury concerned the insurer may require the injured
person to make a claim for
workers compensation.
issue in contention between the parties is whether there are reasonable grounds
for the insurer to consider whether the workers
compensation is or may be
payable in respect to the subject injury.
the ordinary course of events the claimant, being a person injured in a motor
vehicle accident, has an entitlement to statutory
benefits under the MAI Act.
3.35 states:
(a) removes the entitlement to statutory benefits, compensation under the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
is payable to the injured person.
3.35(2) states the relevant insurer for a claim for statutory benefits under
this part is not entitled to refuse statutory
benefits in respect to the injury
unless the injured person has failed to comply with the request by the relevant
insurer under this
section to make a claim for workers compensation in respect
to the injury. This can only be done if the insurer considers on reasonable
grounds that workers compensation is or may be payable in respect to the injury
is clear from the legislation that the onus is on the insurer to establish that
there are reasonable grounds to consider that workers
compensation is or may be
payable in respect to the injury.
this regard, the insurer’s submissions seem to impose some double
standards. In considering that there were reasonable grounds
to consider that
workers compensation is or may be payable, in circumstances where the claimant
denies this, they seemingly relied
upon submissions and concessions allegedly
made during telephone calls whilst not accepting the claimant’s version of
conversations
with icare as no notes or records of that conversation were
provided to the insurer.
internal review certificate of determination notes that (on 16 April 2024 during
a telephone call with your case manager, Miss
Veronica Lewis, you advised the
accident occurred in the course of your employment as a driving
instructor).
is no file note to this effect. There is no transcript or recording to this
they are happy to accept the contents of a telephone conversation in respect to
a concession they go on to say, the claimant
having advised them they had
to a lack of a policy
that “I note that we are not in possession of any
documentation from icare which confirms that a claim for workers compensation
was lodged and subsequently declined”.
documentation exists because the claimant did not assert that he did this.
the claimant contends that no workers compensation rights exist they submit that
“there is no evidence to corroborate
the claimant’s assertion that
he unsuccessfully attempted to make a workers compensation claim.” They
further submit
that the claimant has not disproven his rights to workers
compensation to make a claim for workers compensation as “the insurer
submits the claimant could have provided a call history log and the name of the
person he spoke to in an effort to verify his claim.”
is the insurer that bears the onus to establish on reasonable grounds that
workers compensation is or may be payable. The insurer
does not advance this
through assertions that the lack of documentary material from the claimant
somehow disproving that workers
compensation policy was in effect. This is not
sufficient to give rise to “reasonable grounds” that a workers
compensation
policy was in effect and insured the claimant in the circumstances
of this motor vehicle accident.
particulars provided by the claimant, do not bear out that he was a worker and
covered by employer’s workers compensation
the insurer submits that the claimant had confirmed that he was working for R
& D Driving School at the moment of the subject
accident occurred is simply
not borne out by the particulars themselves. What the claimant says is
“our client was working
as a driving instructor for R & D Driving
School at the time of the subject accident”. The insurer’s
submission submits
that the particulars state that he was working for R & D
Driving School at the moment of the subject accident. This is not what
particulars say. They go on to state that he was working in his capacity as a
sole trader driving instructor at the time of the
accident, he was performing
self-employed work under his own ABN number, when the subject accident occurred
and that the text messages
between the claimant and the student learner driver
confirmed that this was in conjunction with his work as a sole trader.
material suggests numerous possible scenarios seemingly based on bank statements
not showing payments directly to the claimant
from a student driver although the
claimant relies on bank records seemingly showing payments directly to the
claimant from other
student drivers.
insurer contends the claimant could have done more to confirm that he was not
employed and that he was working as a sole trader
at the time of the accident.
The claimant has submitted that the insurer could have made further enquiries to
satisfy themselves
that no workers compensation policy existed which would cover
the claimant for the injuries that he sustained in the motor vehicle
it is somewhat relevant the records do not provide particular assistance to the
insurer that the insurer could consider, on
reasonable grounds, that
compensation may be payable. Where the claimant, has denied that compensation
payments are payable, and
the insurer cannot establish on the documentation that
the claimant is covered by a workers compensation policy, it seems to me
to determine that the defence to the claim for statutory benefits
pursuant to s 3.35 must fail.
these circumstances the claimant has denied that he has an entitlement to
workers compensation. He has informed the insurer that
he contacted icare and
that they advised him that absent any workers compensation policy to make a
claim under he has no entitlements
to make such a claim. The denial of this
claim was made seemingly on the basis on conversations with the claimant. In
the insurer submitted that the notice reference telephone
conversation with the claimant including one on 23 April 2024 in which
claimant stated that he had not yet lodged a workers compensation claim. There
is no material as to what other conversations
were had. There is nothing in the
material in respect to transcripts or recordings or detailed notes of
conversations that the claimant
had with the insurer. The claimant states that
he made enquiries in respect to bringing a workers compensation claim and was
he has no entitlement to make a claim and that is, he has no entitlement
to make a claim and accordingly he did not do so. This cannot
be reasonably
inferred to be a concession by the claimant that he has an entitlement to make a
claim and will do so!
insurer goes on to submit in the conversation on 23 June 2023 during which the
claimant he said he contacted icare to lodge a
claim but was unable to do so.
This is correct. The claimant doesn’t have rights under the
Compensation Act 1987
Submissions
claimant submits that the insurer does not have reasonable grounds to believe
that workers compensation may be payable. The claimant
provided details in
respect to his performing work as a sole trader at the time he sustained his
injury. As a sole trader the claimant
contends that there is no policy covering
him for his injuries sustained in the course of his employment. Accordingly,
workers compensation
is not payable.
insurer submits the claimant has not produced any objective documentary evidence
to confirm that he was working as sole trader
nor that there is any evidence to
corroborate the claimant’s assertion that he unsuccessfully attempted to
make a workers compensation
claimant was working as a sole trader at the time of the accident and
accordingly cannot make a claim for workers compensation
as there was no policy
which covered him for injuries whilst giving driving instruction as a sole
trader and not as an employee or
follows then that the certificate of determination – internal review dated
2 July 2024 is overturned.
to Schedule 1, cl 2(b) of the Regulation his is a regulated merit review matter.
Accordingly, pursuant to s 8.10(3) of the
MAI Act and Schedule 1, cl 1 of the
Regulation, the claimant is entitled to legal costs incurred in connection with
this merit review
to the extent such costs are reasonable necessary, up to a
maximum of 16 monetary units.
note the claimant submitted the relevant amount claimed $1,992.48 plus GST
giving rise to a total $2,191.73 regulated costs.
have been no submissions from the insurer which contradict the calculations for
regulator costs submitted by the claimant. As
the claimant’s application
has been determined in his favour it follows that regulated costs ought to be
insurer is not entitled to refuse payment of statutory benefits. Accordingly,
the reviewable decision is overturned.
claimant is entitled to regulated legal costs in the sum of
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (410 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter