URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/231.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Attorney General for New South Wales v Haines (BHT Barbara Ramjan) [2025] NSWCA 231 (20 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Attorney General for New South Wales v Haines (BHT Barbara Ramjan)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 231
Hearing Date(s):
20 October 2025
Date of Orders:
20 October 2025
Decision Date:
20 October 2025
(1) Pursuant to
Mental Health and Cognitive
Impairment Forensic Provisions Act 2020
(NSW), the respondent is subject to an
interim extension order until 5pm on 19 December
(2) The appeal is expedited and listed for
hearing on 6 November 2025.
(3) The appellant is
to pay the respondent’s costs of the motion.
(4) The appellant is to file and serve a white
folder by 24 October 2025, with the white folder to stand as appeal
(5) The appellant is to file and serve
written submissions on the appeal by 24 October
(6) The respondent is to file and serve
written submissions on the appeal, along with any notice of contention and/or
cross-appeal
and/or application to rely on further evidence, by 31 October 2025.
(7) The appellant is to file and serve any
written submissions in reply by 12:00 noon on 4 November
(8) The parties’ submissions are to
comply with rule 51.36 of the Uniform Civil Procedure Rules (NSW).
(9) The appellant is to email the Registrar with
electronic copies of all grounds of appeal and all parties’ written
submissions,
pursuant to paragraph 27 (and, as applicable, paragraph 28) of
Practice Note SC CA 01, suitable for publication (with redactions
as required),
certified as such in each respective document by the lawyer responsible for
filing the same, by 12:00 noon on 4 November
(10) The appeal is listed for directions
before the Registrar at 9:30 AM on 5 November 2025, which may be vacated if the
order has been complied with.
Catchwords:
MENTAL HEALTH — Forensic patient — Extension of status as
forensic patient — interim extension order granted pending
resolution of
Attorney General’s application for extension order — application for
extension order refused by Supreme
Court — refusal appealed to Court of
Appeal — notice of motion filed by Attorney General seeking new interim
order — whether three month limit on interim extension orders
prevents granting of new interim extension order in appeal proceedings
meaning of “proceedings”
Legislation Cited:
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW) Sch 1
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Amendment Act
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment Forensic Provisions Act 2020
Supreme Court
Cases Cited:
Attorney General for New South Wales v Haines (Final)
[2022] NSWSC
Attorney General for New South Wales v Haines (Preliminary)
[2025] NSWSC
Attorney General of New South Wales v WB
[2020] NSWCA 7
(1929) 41 CLR 532
[1929] HCA 12
Coleman v Power
(2004) 220 CLR 1
[2004] HCA 39
Commissioner of Police (NSW Police Force) v Naser
[2025] NSWCA
CSR Limited v Eddy
(2005) 226 CLR 1
[2005] HCA 64
Distinctive FX 9
Pty Limited v Statewide Developments Pty Limited
[2012] NSWCA 393
Limited v Nominal Defendant
[2013] NSWCA 325
Habib v Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 347
Keynes Capital Global Limited v Guo (No 2)
[2020] NSWCA
Lazarus v Independent Commission Against Corruption
(2017) 94 NSWLR 36
[2017] NSWCA 37
Smith v Yusen Daly Smith International (in liq)
[2001] NSWCA 458
Taouk v Assure (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWCA
Ward v Hoenig
[2025] NSWCA 180
Texts Cited:
New South Wales Law Reform Commission, People with cognitive and mental
health impairments in the criminal justice system: criminal
responsibility and
consequences (May 2013)
Procedural rulings
Attorney-General of New South Wales (Appellant)
Dale Haines
(Respondent)
Representation:
P Coady SC / C Palmer (Appellant)
P Griffin SC / T Spohr
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Crown Solicitor’s Office
(Appellant)
Legal Aid NSW (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/396912
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court
Attorney-General for New South Wales v Dale Haines (BHT Barbara Ramjan)
[2025] NSWSC 1117
Date of Decision:
26 September 2025
File Number(s):
2025/143637
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
respondent in this matter is the subject of an interim extension order
Mental Health and Cognitive
Impairment Forensic Provisions Act 2020
). That order
expires in four days’ time. The IEO was made in proceedings in which the
Attorney General had sought that the
Supreme Court make an extension order with
respect to the respondent for a further two years. The primary judge,
Coleman J, subsequently
refused the application for an extension order:
Attorney-General for New South Wales v Dale Haines (BHT Barbara Ramjan)
[2025] NSWSC 1117
). The Attorney appeals by right from
that decision pursuant to
of the Act.
that context the appellant has applied for:
(1) a further IEO for a period of three months (or such shorter time as the
Court permits) under
of the Act;
(2) in the alternative, expedition of the hearing of the appeal – in
particular, if possible, such that the appeal is heard
and determined by the end
of this week.
appellant’s primary position involved asking the Court to make an IEO. The
application for expedition was very much its
secondary position. It is important
to make that point because if the conclusion I reach below about the three month
time period
is in error, on current authority that would mean that no further
extension order could be granted with respect to the respondent
Friday. That risk was accepted by the appellant.
respondent is currently 44 years old. He has a history of drug and alcohol abuse
which commenced when he was aged 15 years. The
primary judge
[11] The defendant has been diagnosed with chronic schizophrenia and substance
use disorder. His schizophrenic illness is characterised
by auditory
hallucinations, command hallucinations, delusions of reference, persecutory and
grandiose delusions, paranoia, and thought
disorder. His symptoms of
schizophrenia worsen in the context of substance use and non-compliance with
treatment. The defendant also
suffers from a cognitive impairment which is
likely contributed to by his brain injury, chronic psychotic illness and
prolonged substance
[12] The defendant’s criminal history commenced in 1999, at the age of 18,
with 4 charges of robbery with actual violence,
in relation to which he served 7
months imprisonment in Queensland. The defendant’s subsequent criminal
history in New South
Wales includes offences of assault occasioning actual
bodily harm, possession of prohibited drugs, and multiple counts of robbery
armed with an offensive weapon.
September 2014 the respondent was arrested and charged with a series of armed
robbery and assault offences in relation to robberies
of service stations and a
bank. The District Court found him unfit to be tried. Following a special
hearing, that Court found on
the evidence before it that the respondent had
committed six armed robberies, one count of face disguised with intent to rob,
count of robbery, one count of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, and
one common assault. The Court imposed a series of limiting
terms which expired
on 24 April 2022.
8 July 2022 Yehia J made orders extending the respondent’s status as
a forensic patient for three years, commencing on 24
General for New South Wales v Haines (Final)
[2022] NSWSC 930.
April 2025 the appellant sought a further two-year extension of that order. On
22 July 2025 Harrison CJ at CL made an interim extension
order commencing
on 24 July 2025:
Attorney General for New South Wales v Haines (Preliminary)
[2025] NSWSC 774.
application for the two year extension was then heard by the primary judge on 1
September 2025. On 26 September 2025 his Honour
refused the application.
current IEO remains in place but expires on 24 October 2025, being this coming
9 October 2025, 13 days after judgment had been handed down, the Crown
Solicitor’s Office (
) notified Legal Aid, solicitor for the
respondent, that it had “received urgent instructions from the Attorney
General to advise
on the prospects of an appeal”. Neither that letter nor
the affidavit of the relevant CSO solicitor says when those instructions
given. I infer it was only shortly before the letter was sent. The notice of
appeal and motion were filed six days later, on
15 October 2025 last week. That
was 19 days after the primary judge’s decision. Given the importance of
what was at stake,
and the fact that the IEO in place was soon to expire, it
cannot be said that the appellant acted with due diligence.
primary judgment and the appeal
of the Act sets out the two key statutory criteria that the primary judge
had to consider when determining the appellant’s
application for an
extension order:
(1) A forensic patient can be made the subject of an extension order as provided
for by this Part if and only if the Supreme Court
is satisfied to a high degree
of probability that—
(a) the forensic patient poses an unacceptable risk of causing serious harm to
others if the patient ceases to be a forensic patient,
(b) the risk cannot be adequately managed by other less restrictive means.
such an order is made the person’s status as a forensic patient is thereby
continued. The Court is required to notify the
Mental Health Review Tribunal of
the making of the order
(s 127(3)).
The person then continues to be subject
to the regime under the Act dealing with such persons, under the direction and
the Tribunal.
provided for by the statutory scheme, Harrison CJ at CL had made orders
requiring that reports by two experts be prepared for the
purpose of the final
(s 126(5)(a)).
The experts reached different conclusions. Despite
that fact, neither side required the experts to give oral evidence. The opinion
of Dr Gordon Elliott, a psychiatrist, was summarised by the primary judge as
[50] Dr Elliott opined that “there remains a risk that [the defendant] may
cause serious harm to others if he ceases to be
a forensic patient”. Dr
Elliott observed that the most likely nature of the serious harm would be the
defendant’s return
to armed robbery to support a relapse into substance
use. Dr Elliott considered that the likelihood of such harm would be critically
dependent on the defendant remaining abstinent from illicit substance use,
particularly methamphetamines. Dr Elliott considered that
a return to
methamphetamine use would be a critical event and dramatically increase the
likelihood of the defendant causing serious
harm to others. ...
[54] Dr Elliott opined that the defendant would not present as a continued risk
of serious harm to others if he ceased to be a forensic
patient, so long as the
risk he posed was managed by a combination of the defendant’s existing
care, treatment and support
and with a CTO. Dr Elliott considered this would be
the least restrictive means of managing the defendant’s risk of serious
harm to others. Dr Elliott felt that the defendant did not continue to pose an
unacceptable risk of serious harm given his compliance
with his current care and
Elliott’s conclusion was expressed to be subject to a caveat which
“arose from Dr Elliott’s concern about the
readiness of civilian
mental health services to continue to manage the defendant’s risk
assertively with a CTO [Community Treatment
Order]” (J [109]).
second expert was Dr Carollyne Youssef, a psychologist. Her conclusions were
summarised as follows:
[77] Dr Youssef stated that the defendant has some insight into his offending
behaviour in acknowledging the role of substance use
in increasing his risk due
to the financial burden it places on him and the impact on his behaviour.
Dr Youssef said that the factors
most likely to provide an exponential
escalation in the defendant’s risk of reoffending involved inadequate
community support
and supervision, relapse into substance use, financial
difficulties, difficulty coping and poor problem-solving, and a cessation
medication with a deterioration in his mental health. ...
[78] ... Dr Youssef opined that the defendant continues to pose a risk of
violence to others, with the potential for this to be serious,
if he ceases to
be a forensic patient. Dr Youssef considered that the defendant’s status
as a forensic patient was necessary
to manage his risk of harm to others, as it
ensured ongoing oversight by the Tribunal, including regular reviews of his
treatment and supervision. Dr Youssef noted that, without an order,
the defendant
reject his current supports, which would elevate his
risk of harm to others. [emphasis in original]
key difference between the views of the two experts was thus not as to whether
or not the respondent could pose a continued risk
of serious harm but as to
whether that risk could be adequately managed in the absence of an extension
order being made.
Honour said, amongst other things, that he could “see no reason why the
opinion of Dr Elliott should be rejected and that
of Dr Youssef preferred”
(at [112]). He concluded that the case for an extension order had not been made
out and dismissed
the application.
appellant now appeals on two grounds: first, that the primary judge erred in
indicating at [37] that court-appointed experts ordinarily
should be called to
give oral evidence where they had a difference of opinion, and in placing weight
on the absence of such evidence;
and, second, in confining attention to a
community treatment order when considering other less restrictive means, without
considering
whether that alternative was adequate to manage the risk in light of
some evidence having provided reason to doubt that the means
implemented effectively or at all.
do not have the benefit of written submissions from either side directed to
these issues. In any event, it is neither possible nor
appropriate for me to
consider in detail their likely prospects of success. It suffices to say that I
consider the grounds reasonably
Is it possible to make
an interim order in the current circumstances?
130 and 131 of the Act provide:
130 Interim extension orders
The Supreme Court may make an order for the interim extension of a
person’s status as a forensic patient if, in proceedings
on an application
for an extension order, it appears to the Court—
(a) that the limiting term or existing extension order to which the forensic
patient is subject will expire before the proceedings
are determined, and
(b) that the matters alleged in the supporting documentation would, if proved,
justify the making of an extension order.
131 Term of interim extension orders
(1) An interim extension order commences on the day fixed in the order for its
commencement (or, if no day is fixed, as soon as it
is made) and expires at the
end of the period (not exceeding 3 months from the day on which it commences)
that is specified in the
(2) An interim extension order made for a period of less than 3 months may be
renewed from time to time, but not so as to provide
for the extension of the
person’s status as a forensic patient under an order of that kind for
periods totalling more than
provisions mirror the predecessor legislation:
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
(NSW), Sch 1, cll 10-11 (
provisions are contained within Pt 6 of the Act. The objects of Pt 5
of the Act are set out in s 69(1) and, pursuant to s 69(2),
objects also extend to Pt 6. The stated objects include “to protect
the safety of members of the public”.
reference to “Supreme Court” in s 130 of the Act of itself
would encompass the Court of Appeal. As Spigelman CJ said
Smith v Yusen
Daly Smith International (in liq)
(2001) 53 NSWLR 385
[2001] NSWCA 458
: “The Court of Appeal exists within the Supreme Court. It is not a
separate entity from it”; see also
Habib v Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 347
. In any case, under
Supreme Court
(NSW), “[t]he Court of Appeal may, in proceedings before it,
exercise every power, jurisdiction or authority of the [Supreme]
Court, whether
at law or in equity or under any Act ...”.
issue in dispute is whether the three month time limit in
in such a way as to start running from when an IEO made in the Supreme Court
against the respondent first commenced, despite
the fact that an appeal has been
instituted. If it did apply in that way, I could not now make an IEO as the IEO
currently in place
expires this coming Friday, being three months after the IEO
made by Harrison CJ at CL commenced. On that understanding, to make
further IEO would go beyond the three month window.
Court considered the previous statutory regime in
Attorney General of New
South Wales v
[2020] NSWCA 7.
The main issue in that case was
whether an extension order could only be made if the person in question was a
“forensic patient”
in the sense that they were subject to an
existing limiting order or extension order in place at the time the order was
alternative argument was that it was sufficient that the person be a
forensic patient when the application for the order was first
made. The majority
of the Court (Basten JA with Macfarlan JA agreeing) took the former
view; Leeming JA, in dissent, took the latter
view. It is clear that the
parties and the Court in that case proceeded on the assumption that the three
month time period
encompass any IEO that might be made on appeal,
including even if the appeal was upheld and the matter remitted to the Supreme
see eg at [8], [49], [54], [79]-[80].
issue was not, however, the subject of argument. That being so, the assumption
made in that case is not binding upon me. If “a
point is not in dispute in
a case, the decision lays down no legal rule concerning that issue”:
Coleman v Power
(2004) 220 CLR 1
[2004] HCA 39
; see further
CSR Limited v Eddy
(2005) 226 CLR 1
[2005] HCA 64
Lazarus v Independent Commission Against Corruption
(2017) 94 NSWLR 36
[2017] NSWCA 37
issue before me is one of statutory construction. It is to be resolved by taking
account of the relevant text, context and purpose.
In my view the argument now
put by the appellant is correct. This Court is not precluded from making an IEO
in the current circumstances.
And that is so even though it relevantly
constitutes the Supreme Court, as referred to in
is the provision which grants the power to make an IEO. Such an order can be
sought and made “in proceedings on an application
for an extension
order”. The word “proceedings” is not defined in the Act.
Section 131
does not employ that word but there was no need for it to do
so, given that it is simply making provision for aspects of how IEOs
are to apply. The time limit specified in
necessarily
applies to an IEO that was made “in proceedings on an application for an
extension order” as identified in
Senior counsel for the
respondent argued that the words in
are plain and should be taken
to mean what they say. That submission ignores the link between
. That link means that there is an issue as to what “proceedings”
particular, the key question is whether an appeal to this Court is the same
“proceedings” as the application for the
extension order in the
Supreme Court. The word “proceedings” is capable of applying to the
, so as to encompass any appeal. The word “proceeding”
can also be used so as to mean “merely some method permitted
moving a Court or judicial officer to some authorized act, or some act of the
Court or judicial officer”:
[1929] HCA 12
at 536-537;
[1929] HCA 12.
Thus in various other contexts it has been
held by this Court that an appeal is a separate “proceeding”:
Distinctive FX 9 Pty Limited v Statewide Developments Pty Limited
Diveva Pty Limited v Nominal Defendant
[2013] NSWCA
Taouk v Assure (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWCA 224
Keynes Capital Global Limited v Guo (No 2)
[2020] NSWCA 336
cases illustrate that the appellant’s argument is open. They do not
resolve whether that construction is the correct
one in relation to the
provisions at issue.
136 of the Act states that “[a]n order for costs may not be made against a
forensic patient in relation to proceedings
under this Part (including
proceedings on an appeal under this Part)”. This provision seems to
distinguish between proceedings
at first instance and on appeal, but it cannot
be said that the point is clear.
to the 1990 Act, containing the predecessor provisions, was introduced by the
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Amendment Act 2013
2013 Amendment
). In his second reading speech, the Attorney General
stated that the 2013 Amendment was intended to implement the NSW Law Reform
Commission’s (
) recommendation that an extension order
mechanism be incorporated into the 1990 Act (New South Wales Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 13 November 2013 at
25639). The relevant NSWLRC report, released earlier that year, had recommended
that a scheme modelled
on the mechanism for issuing continuing detention orders
) for high risk offenders be adopted (NSWLRC,
People with
cognitive and mental health impairments in the criminal justice system: criminal
responsibility and consequences
(May 2013) (
NSWLRC report
ch 11). The report does not address the inclusion of IEOs in the scheme;
nor does that drafting choice receive substantive attention
in the 2013
Amendment’s second reading speech or explanatory note. The NSWRLC did note
that the CDO scheme empowered the court
to make an interim order for supervision
or detention not exceeding 28 days (NSWLRC report at 324). In sum, the NSWLRC
explanatory materials offer little guidance on the application of the
three month time limit on IEOs in a case such as this. Senior
counsel for the
respondent agreed that that was so. Neither side argued that cases relating to
continuing detention orders offer
any assistance in the current context.
obvious purpose in providing for the making of IEOs was to give the Supreme
Court a reasonable, if limited, period of time in
which to consider an
application for an extension order. The fact that the time was limited is
consistent with other aspects of the
statutory scheme, which stipulate that such
an application can only be made in the last six month before the expiry of a
term of previous extension order (s 124(2)), and that the required
preliminary hearing in the Supreme Court is to be conducted within
the application being filed (s 126(4)).
Basten JA said in
of the predecessor to s 131:
[49] ... The preferable view is that the purpose of cl 10 is to provide for
a brief extension of the status of forensic patient so
as to permit an extension
order to be made, but to maintain a tight limit on the latitude so provided.
the scheme also provides for appeals from decisions to make
or to refuse to
an extension order (s 135). Given the tight time constraints, it
will commonly be the case that the final decision of the Supreme
Court would
only be made at or near the end of the permissible three month period for an
IEO. In that context, were that same time
period to apply to proceedings in this
Court then little, or perhaps no, time may be left for the appeal process to
take its course.
In some plausible circumstances, thus, the statutory appeal
right would be rendered ineffective because there would be insufficient
the appeal to be filed, prepared, heard and determined. In other plausible
circumstances the parties and this Court would
be required to act with extreme
expedition under great pressure.
doubt the time limits are imposed in recognition of the fact that the statutory
scheme imposes significant restrictions on liberty.
Yet for that very reason it
is important that applications be dealt with not only promptly but carefully and
judiciously. The Parliament
can be taken to have intended as much. That
understanding is reinforced by the importance of protecting the safety of the
as referred to in s 69(1). That context makes it unlikely that the
time limits were intended to operate in a way which would commonly
restrict or
deprive the parties and this Court of the opportunity to deal with any appeals
with the requisite diligence and care,
in circumstances where the Parliament has
expressly provided appeal rights under the Act.
this Court is authorised to remit the matter to the Supreme Court
(s 135(5)). Such an order might well be made in circumstances
appeal was upheld against a Supreme Court order dismissing an application for an
extension order and this Court considered
it appropriate for the primary judge
to reconsider the matter (that judge may, for example, have had the benefit of
seeing and hearing
witnesses give oral evidence). If the three month time
restriction that originally applied to the Supreme Court also applied to any
such remitter then even if there was any time left, it would likely be very
constrained indeed.
135(6) of the Act provides:
Without limiting any other jurisdiction it may have, if the Court of Appeal
remits a matter to the Supreme Court for decision after
an appeal is made, the
Court of Appeal may make an interim order revoking or varying an extension order
the subject of the appeal.
oddity about this provision is that the language of “revoking or varying
an extension order the subject of the appeal”
presupposes that there is
some such order in place. That may not be the case if the Supreme Court had
declined to make such an order.
There is no apparent sensible reason why the
Parliament would not have intended to empower this Court to make such an order
cases. That suggests a slight lack of care in the drafting of the
question then arises as to whether, if the appellant’s argument is correct
(as I consider it to be), the three month clock
would start running again if and
when this Court made such an order. Much the same purposive and contextual
arguments would apply
in that context as arise vis-à-vis appeals.
However, as the senior counsel for the appellant accepted, the textual argument
relying on the notion of “proceedings” is not so clearly available
in this context. It may be that the remitted case
should implicitly be taken to
be new “proceedings”, being a new “method permitted by law for
moving a Court or
judicial officer to some authorized act” (quoting
is not necessary for me to determine that point. It is sufficient for current
purposes to note that the Act provides for the possibility
of remitter, and that
fact militates in favour of the conclusion that the three month limit on any IEO
made in this Court prior to
the determination of an appeal should be taken to
run from when an order of that kind is first made in this Court. It is that
construction
which, in my view, is the correct one. That construction is open on
the text and is supported by the contextual and purposive considerations
identified.
Should an interim extension order be made?
130 stipulates two requirements for the making of an interim extension order.
The first – that it appears that the existing
extension order to which the
forensic patient is subject will expire before the proceedings are determined
– is made out based
on the timeline outlined (taking account of the fact
that, as discussed below, the hearing of this appeal will be expedited and
on 6 November 2025).
second requirement is that the matters alleged in the supporting documentation
would, if proved, justify the making of an extension
order. As explained, the
key difference between the views of the two experts was not as to whether or not
the respondent could pose
a continued risk of serious harm but rather as to
whether that risk was sufficiently ameliorated by ongoing management in the
of an extension order being made. That is an evaluative matter going to
future risk. It is thus not surprising that experts might
disagree in their
assessment of the issue. It would be open to this Court to prefer the view of Dr
Youssef on appeal, taking account
of the grounds of appeal. In that sense, it
can be said that the matters alleged in the supporting documentation (including
of appeal) would if proved – ie made out – justify the
making of an extension order sufficient for the purposes of s
my view it is appropriate that the status quo be maintained pending
determination of the appeal. In that regard I take account
of the fact that the
respondent is not currently detained. He resides in the community in supported
independent living accommodation
pursuant to conditional release granted by the
Mental Health Review Tribunal on 14 May 2025 (see J [8]).
IEO should be granted. Although it can be made for a period of up to three
months, here it is sufficient to make it up until the
end of the Court term,
being 19 December 2025. That will provide sufficient time for this Court to hear
the appeal and either determine
it or, if appropriate, extend the term of the
this Court dismisses the appeal prior to the end of the IEO then it can revoke
the IEO pursuant to s 133(3). The criterion for
making such an order is
that the Court is “satisfied that circumstances have changed sufficiently
to render the order unnecessary”.
That criterion presumptively will be
satisfied if the appeal has been dismissed (subject to any countervailing
considerations, such
as some mooted application for special leave to
Application for expedition
respondent did not oppose the appellant’s application for expedition. That
application was put by the appellant in the alternative
to making an IEO.
However, given that the IEO restricts the liberty of the respondent the appeal
should be heard promptly. An order
for expedition should thus be made.
would be possible for this Court to hear and determine an appeal this week if
absolutely necessary. The Court can always respond
with very substantial
expedition if that is what the circumstances, and justice, require: see eg
Ward v Hoenig
[2025] NSWCA 180
Commissioner of Police (NSW Police
Force) v Naser
[2025] NSWCA 224.
However, determining cases in great haste
is less than ideal. The issues raised here are not unimportant. It is always
better that
both parties have some time to prepare careful written submissions
and that the Court has time to consider the issues before being
pressed to make
an urgent decision.
Court can hear the appeal in two and a half weeks’ time on Thursday 6
November 2025. That allows the parties reasonable
time to prepare their
submissions. The respondent also raised an issue about potentially wishing to
rely on further evidence (ie
beyond what was before the primary judge), although
the nature of that possible evidence was not explained. That factor, too,
that the orders should provide for an expeditious but not breakneck
Orders and costs
noted, pursuant to s 136 of the Act costs may not be made against a
forensic patient. The Act does not prevent costs being ordered
against the
Minister administering the Act. The appellant has succeeded in obtaining an IEO,
over the opposition of the respondent.
However, as was submitted on behalf of
the respondent, if the appellant had moved with greater speed after the decision
of the primary
judge then determination of this motion may not have been
necessary (cf [
above). The respondent’s submissions were of assistance. In this context
the appellant should be ordered to pay the respondent’s
costs of the
the degree of expedition ordered it is appropriate to make various timetabling
orders of the Court are as follows:
(1) Pursuant to
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment
Forensic Provisions Act 2020
(NSW), the respondent is subject to an interim
extension order until 5pm on 19 December 2025.
(2) The appeal is expedited and listed for hearing on 6 November 2025.
(3) The appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the motion.
(4) The appellant is to file and serve a white folder by 24 October 2025, with
the white folder to stand as appeal books.
(5) The appellant is to file and serve written submissions on the appeal by 24
October 2025.
(6) The respondent is to file and serve written submissions on the appeal, along
with any notice of contention and/or cross-appeal
and/or application to rely on
further evidence, by 31 October 2025.
(7) The appellant is to file and serve and serve any written submissions in
reply by 12:00 noon on 4 November 2025.
(8) The parties’ submissions are to comply with rule 51.36 of the Uniform
Civil Procedure Rules (NSW).
(9) The appellant is to email the Registrar with electronic copies of all
grounds of appeal and all parties’ written submissions,
pursuant to
paragraph 27 (and, as applicable, paragraph 28) of Practice Note SC CA 01,
suitable for publication (with redactions
as required), certified as such in
each respective document by the lawyer responsible for filing the same, by 12:00
noon on 4 November
(10) The appeal is listed for directions before the Registrar at 9:30 AM on 5
November 2025, which may be vacated if the preceding
order has been complied
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (299 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter