URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2013/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v FRYAR [2013] NSWPHT 2 (10 April 2013)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
JONATHAN FRYAR
AN INQUIRY BY
THE PHARMACY TRIBUNAL CONSTIUTED UNDER SECTION 165A OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) (“THE
NATIONAL LAW”) INTO TWO SEPARATE
COMPLAINTS REFERRED TO THE TRIBUNAL UNDER SECTION 145D AND CONDUCTED UNDER
SECTION 167, THEREOF.
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
Pursuant to Clause 7
of Schedule 5D of the National Law and with the exception of Dr. Kelvin Wong,
identified as Patient “KK”
in the Schedule of Patients in the First
Complaint, the Tribunal has made a non-publication order in respect of the name
and address
of any patient or of any material that may identify any such
patient, in each of the two Complaints the subject of the Tribunal’s
HCCC v FRYAR
[2013] NSWPHT
Health Care Complaints Commission of New
South Wales
(Complainant)
Jonathan Fryar
(Respondent Pharmacist)
Peter Dwyer, Chairperson
Ms. Jennifer Zwart (Pharmacist
Mr. David Preswick (Pharmacist Member)
Mr. Christopher Gardiner (Lay Member)
: 16, 17, April; 27, 28, 29, 31 August
: 10 April 2013
APPEARANCES:
Mr. G. Farmer of Senior Counsel,
instructed by Ms. M. Richmond (Solicitor, HCCC), for the Complainant, in the
Inquiry into each of
the two Notices of Complaint before the Tribunal;
Mr. G. Gregg of Counsel, instructed by Mr. D. Short, Solicitor, for the
Respondent, in the Inquiry into each of the two Notices of
Complaint before the
Pharmacist—
Unsatisfactory
Professional Conduct—Professional Misconduct
—supply contrary to
Clause 53 NSW
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
steroids, anastrozole, tamoxifen,
human chorionic gonadotrophin (HGC), benzodiazepines and phentermine;
” & related use of dispensed
steroids and other medications, disclosed to pharmacist; fail comply with
dispensing / repeat
requirements of Clauses 38 (2) (b) and 38 (3) PTGR; supply
restricted substances by
without licence contrary to Section
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act
(PTGA); fail without
reasonable excuse, to comply with Notices served pursuant to Section 35 PTGA in
respect of receipt and supply
of antenex 2mg and 5 mg tablets; temaze 10mg
tablets; oxazepam 30mg tablets; duromine 40mg capsules; dehydroepiandrosterone
ephedrine; and testosterone.
Pharmacist-
Unsatisfactory
Professional Conduct—Professional Misconduct
—supply compounded
Schedule 2 Minoxidil Solutions contrary to quality & purpose requirements of
Clause 23, NSW
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
fail label appropriately contrary to Clause 7 and item 1 (3) (d) and item 1 (3)
(g), of Appendix A, PTGR; supply by
contrary to Section 9(1)
PTGA; supply Schedule 4 compounded Minoxidil solutions contrary to quantity and
purpose requirements of
Clause 54 PTGR; supply otherwise than in accordance with
a prescription, contrary to Section 10 (3) PTGA; addition of unknown substances
to compounded Minoxidil solutions; fail label contrary to clause 26 and items
1(3) (d) and 1(3) (g) of Appendix A, PTGR; fail keep
proper records contrary to
clauses 55(1) and 176, PTGR; supply by
contrary to Section 9(1)
Pharmacist—
Unsatisfactory Professional
Conduct—Professional Misconduct
—supply Proscar (finasteride) and
Loniten (minoxidil) contrary to quantity and purpose requirements, Clause 54
PTGR; dispense
multiple prescriptions for same without prescriber’s
direction and without being satisfied of existing exceptional circumstances;
contrary to quantity and purpose requirements Clause 54 PTGR; Fail provide
appropriate counselling and product information to
patients in the supply of
Schedule 4 Minoxidil solutions, Proscar (finasteride) and oral minoxidil;
failure to ensure adequate dosing
instructions for intended recipients of same
medications; fail ensure safe use, storage and disposal of such
medications.
LEGISLATION CITED
-Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) No 86a
: S.145D,165A, 167;
-Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act
NSW, 1966: Sections: 9(1);
-Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Clauses 38 (2), 38 (3), 53;
-Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation
NSW 2008: Clauses 7 [& Items 1(3) (d), (g) of Appendix
“A”]; 23,26, [& Items (1) (3) (d) & (g)
of Appendix
“A”]; 54, 55 (1), 176;
CASES CITED
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Regina v McGrath
2 NSWLR 181
Law Society v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR
Burton v Anderson
(NSWCA, Unreported, 29 October
HCCC v Bosnich
[2012] NSWMT 15;
[1997] NSWPB (8
October 1997);
HCCC v DR. Bao-Quy Nguyen-Phuoc
(NSW Medical Tribunal)
7 December 2010;
Pillai v Messiter [No. 2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
[(1977)] 1NSWLR 256;
[2006] NSWCA 153
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
Law Society v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
Dawson v Law
[1989] NSWCA 58
[2012] NSWCA 80
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
Ex parte Tziniolis re Medical
Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty of
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
Professional Misconduct
, in respect of the First Notice of
Complaint dated 20 June 2011, as amended;
Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty of
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
Professional Misconduct
, in respect of the Second Notice of
Complaint dated 22 March 2012.
Respondent’s registration as a pharmacist, is cancelled;
application for review of the Tribunal’s Order of cancellation of the
Respondent’s registration under Division 8 of
the National Law, may not be
made until after the expiration of the period of eighteen (18) months commencing
on and from, the effective
date of the Order of cancellation;
the purpose of an application for review of the Order of cancellation of the
Respondent’s registration, pursuant to Division
8 of the National Law the
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales is to be the appropriate review
for any costs relevant to the delay caused by amendments to Particulars numbered
8 and 11 in the First Notice of Complaint, the
Respondent is to pay the
Complainant’s costs as agreed or if agreement cannot be reached, either
party may have the matter
re-listed for assessment by the
Tribunal’s Orders are to take effect upon the expiration of thirty (30)
days following the date of this decision;
REASONS FOR DECISION
Notices of Complaint were before the Tribunal; and the Complainant in each, was
the Health Care Complaints Commission of New South
Notice of Complaint complained that the Respondent was guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of Section 139B of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(“the National
Law”) in that the Respondent had demonstrated that the knowledge or
judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by him in the practice of pharmacy was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level
of training or experience [Section 139B (1) (a)]; and / or,
that he had engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the
practice of
pharmacy [Section 139B (1) (l)];
Additionally,
each Notice of Complaint complained that the Respondent was guilty of
professional misconduct
as defined in Section 139E of the National law,
in that he had engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration [S.139E (a)]; and/or, had engaged in
unsatisfactory professional
on a number of occasions which, when considered together, amount to
conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension
or cancellation
of his registration [Section 139E (b)];
first Notice of Complaint was signed by the HCCC Director of Proceedings on 20
June 2011; and was later amended to the effect
that Particulars 6, 7 and 8 of
the Notice of Complaint, were no longer pressed by the Complainant. This Notice
of Complaint was concerned
with the Respondent’s dispensing and supply of
medications and matters related thereto, in 2005 and 2006. This first Notice
Complaint is referred to in these reasons for decision, as “
Director of Proceedings above, signed the second Notice of Complaint on 22 March
2012. It was concerned with the Respondent’s
supply of medication
including those compounded by him, to the
Institute of Hair Regrowth and
(“IHRB”) pursuant to an agreement between the Respondent
and a Mr. Samuel Cohen of the IHRB. These various activities
occurred between
March 2010 and September 2010. This second Notice of Complaint is referred to in
these reasons for decision as “
the Second Complaint
each Complaint, the Complainant relied on the same Particulars therein, for the
complaints of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional
Respondent admitted to the Particulars of complaints in each of the First and
Second Complaints subject to certain qualifications
described below; and
admitted to being guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
respect of the First and Second
Complaints;
to the evidence before the Tribunal, the Respondent graduated with the degree of
Bachelor of Pharmacy from the University
of Sydney, in 1992. He was granted
Provisional Registration as a pharmacist in New South Wales on 13 January 1993
and Full Registration
as a Pharmacist on 10 February 1993. He has maintained his
registration as a pharmacist continuously until the commencement of the
Law on 1 July 2010 and thereafter. In January 1993 he commenced practice as a
registered pharmacist at a pharmacy in the
Sydney suburb of Hornsby for four
years followed by a year during which he practised as pharmacist and manager, of
a pharmacy in
Castle Hill. During 1997-1998 he practised as the pharmacist and
manager of a pharmacy in Southampton, in the United Kingdom. Returning
Australia in about 1999 he practised as a
pharmacist for about a
year during which he looked to purchase his own pharmacy;
1999 the Respondent purchased his first pharmacy located in O’Connell
Street, in the city of Sydney, which he owned and operated
for three to four
years. He acquired two other pharmacies in 2003, at one stage operating three
pharmacies one of which he closed
leaving two pharmacies;
the time of the Tribunal’s Inquiry, the Respondent owned and operated, one
pharmacy only—the
Hunter Connect Pharmacy
, (sometimes described as
Hunter Connection Pharmacy
) located in Pitt Street in the City of Sydney,
which is the pharmacy relevant for the purpose of the First and Second
before the Tribunal (“ the Pharmacy”);
Respondent’s practice at the Pharmacy included relevant to the Second
Complaint, a
compounding
component, which continues. From 9 February 2011
until 14 December 2011, the Respondent’s registration was subject to
requiring him to provide the Pharmacy Council of New South
Wales (the “ Pharmacy Council”) on a monthly basis, the compounding
“...worksheet and de-identified script for every product he
compounds.” (AHPRA
Confirmation of Registration Status
August 2012, [
Exhibit C-2
]. The Respondent apparently complied with these
conditions;
The First Complaint—a summary
First Complaint involves the Respondent’s admitted supply of
restricted substances
anabolic / androgenic steroids,
benzodiazepines
human chorionic gonadotrophin
anastrozole
phentermine
, in quantities and for
purposes which did not accord with recognised therapeutic standards and some of
which were commonly abused
for non-therapeutic purposes—‘
and achieving greater muscle mass—contrary to the
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(“PTGR”) and
over an extended period. Such medications as particularised in the First
Complaint, were supplied by the
Pharmacy pursuant to prescriptions most of which
were issued by Dr. Kelvin Wong, a registered medical practitioner, who practised
near to the Pharmacy. The amounts prescribed, their combinations and the
frequency of dispensing were considerable. Tables prepared
by the Complainant
and admitted into evidence, listed relevant prescription and dispensing dates
and amounts of medications supplied
by the Pharmacy together with the names of
the patients; and included the identity of the person who dispensed the
medication, in
a column headed “
period in which
the Pharmacy
supplied these medications was from
31 December 2006
.The above Tables identified those
prescriptions
actually dispensed by the Respondent
and when, in the
relevant period;
First Complaint also includes breaches of the PTGR with respect to supply of
anabolic / androgenic steroids
supplied more than once where repeats had
been authorised by the prescriber but no interval of repeat had been specified;
included in the complaint, is the Respondent’s failure to
properly account without reasonable excuse, for a range of medications,
response to a statutory Notice issued to him pursuant to Section 35 of the NSW
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act
(“PTGA); and additionally, the
Respondent’s sale of
restricted substances
to another pharmacy
without holding a ‘
wholesaler’s licence
’ contrary to
Section 9(1) of the PTGA;
Respondent admitted the Particulars of the First Complaint subject to some
qualifications regarding some of them; and admitted
the complaints of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
The Second Complaint—a summary
Second Complaint concerns the Respondent’s supply of Schedule 2 and
Schedule 4 medications including compounded topical
solutions of Minoxidil, of
varying strengths, with some including also, Tretinoin (Retin A); oral
Finasteride (Proscar) and Loniten
(Minoxidil), involving a range of breaches of
the PTGA and PTGR, including supply in a quantity and for a purpose that did not
recognised therapeutic standards
; supply without
prescriptions; failure to label preparations appropriately by omitting
directions for use and the patient’s
name; failure to record required
details of the prescriber’s name and the names and addresses of patients;
failure in supplying
certain medications on prescription or otherwise, to
provide appropriate counselling and product information to patients who were
intended recipients of the medications; and failure to ensure in respect of some
supplied medications, that the patients as the
intended recipients of the
medications, were adequately instructed about doses and fully understood how to
safely use, store and
dispose of the products;
of the subject matter of the Second Complaint was an agreement
the Respondent entered into with a Mr. Samuel Cohen of the IHRB, located
Street in the city of Sydney, quite close to the Respondent’s Pharmacy.
Mr. Cohen did not possess any health practitioner
qualifications or
registration. Further to this agreement, the complaint alleged that the
Respondent agreed with Mr. Cohen to supply
and did supply, Mr. Cohen with the
various topical solutions of Minoxidil; and with Proscar and Loniten, for the
use of IHRB clients.
Although his pharmacy was quite close to IHRB, the
Respondent was not relevantly in contact with the persons for whom the various
medications were ordered by and supplied to, Mr. Cohen at IHRB;
further element in the Second Complaint relevant to the Respondent’s
compounding
practice, was at Mr. Cohen’s request, the
Respondent’s adding to some compounded Minoxidil solutions of varying
a quantity of unknown, unidentified substances provided to the
Respondent by Mr. Cohen, without the Respondent knowing or ensuring,
quality, safety and efficacy of such substances referred to in the evidence
before the Tribunal, as “
”. According to the
Respondent’s evidence before the Tribunal, he undertook no analysis or
identification of such substances
provided to him by Mr. Cohen; and he claimed
to have ceased adding these substances after a period when, in effect, he
believed the
stability of the compounded solutions was adversely affected by
their inclusion;
The Inquiry: First and Second Complaints
Second Complaint having being referred to the Tribunal near to the scheduled
start of the Inquiry into the First Complaint, the
Tribunal invited the
parties’ submissions as to the optimal way for the Tribunal to conduct its
inquiry into the two complaints,
to ensure fairness to the Respondent with
whatever procedure was ultimately adopted; and to have regard for the
protective jurisdiction;
the first day of the hearing, the Tribunal having considered submissions,
decided to commence its Inquiry into the First Complaint;
to receive into
evidence the documentation to be relied on by the Complainant; and to then
adjourn the inquiry into the First Complaint.
Relevant to the First Complaint,
no witnesses were to be called by the Complainant; and none were required by the
Respondent, for
cross-examination. The Tribunal invited the Respondent to tender
if Counsel wished, any documents he sought to rely on, relevant
to the First
Complaint, at that stage. The Tribunal would then give Directions relevant to
the future progress of the inquiry into
the two Complaints and its resumption.
At the resumed Inquiry the Complainant would tender evidence relevant to the
Second Complaint,
as would the Respondent, to be followed by submissions in the
usual way. By this procedure adopted by the Tribunal, the Respondent
evidence to the Tribunal once only, with respect to both the First and Second
Complaints;
of the Complainant and Respondent was admitted; Directions were given for the
future progress of the Inquiry into the two
Complaints and the hearing was
the commencement of the Inquiry the Tribunal was made aware that the Respondent
admitted the particulars of the First Complaint—subject
qualifications as to some of the particulars of the Complaint; and further
admitted that he was guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
Complainant provided for the Tribunal’s assistance, a
with respect to each of the Complaints;
the purpose of these Reasons, the First and Second Complaints are addressed
separately, together with the relevant Particulars
THE FIRST COMPLAINT: PARTICULARS
At all relevant times between 1
July 2005 and 31
December 2006, the pharmacist was a registered health practitioner, practicing
as a pharmacist in the State of New South Wales, as
the sole practitioner at the
Hunter Connect Pharmacy:
the period 1 July 2005 to 31 December 2006, the pharmacist supplied the
prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic
steroids)(“AAS’s
) set out at Tables A, C, D, E, F, G,
H, I, J, K, L, M, N and highlighted in yellow, in a quantity or for a purpose
which did not
accord with recognized therapeutic standards of what was
appropriate in the circumstances where the pharmacist knew or ought to have
known that the substances were commonly abused for a non therapeutic purpose,
namely to achieve greater muscle mass, contrary to
regulation 53
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
the period 1 July 2005 to 31 December 2006, the pharmacist supplied the
prescribed restricted substances (anastrozole 1mg tablets
and/or tamoxifen 20mg
set out at Tables O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W and highlighted in
yellow, in a quantity or for a purpose which did not accord with recognized
therapeutic standards of what was appropriate in the circumstances where the
pharmacist knew or ought to have known that the substances
were commonly abused
for a non therapeutic purpose, namely to prevent the conversion of testosterone
to oestrogen for persons using
anabolic steroids
contrary to
of the PTGR
the period 1 July 2005 to 31 December 2006, the pharmacist supplied the
prescribed restricted substances (human chorionic gonadotrophin
(HGC) 5000 u/ml)
set out at Tables CC, Z, U, DD, EE and highlighted in yellow, in a quantity or
for a purpose which did not accord
with recognized therapeutic standards of what
was appropriate in the circumstances where the pharmacist knew or ought to have
that the substances were commonly abused for a non therapeutic purpose,
namely for body building, contrary to
regulation 53
the period 1 July 2005 to 31 December 2006, the pharmacist supplied the
prescribed restricted substances (benzodiazepines)
set out at Tables B,
FF, GG, KK, U, DD, V, NN and highlighted in yellow, in an excessive quantity
over an extended period and in
multiple combinations, that did not accord with
the recognised therapeutic standard of what was appropriate in the
circumstances,
contrary to
regulation 53
of the PTGR
the period 1 July 2005 to 31 December 2006, the pharmacist supplied the
prescribed restricted substances (phentermine) set
out at Tables A (in
combination with the anabolic steroids sustanon and primoteston for this
person), OO and highlighted in yellow,
in an excessive quantity over an extended
period or for a purpose which did not accord with recognized therapeutic
standards of what
was appropriate in the circumstances where the pharmacist knew
or ought to have known that the substances were commonly abused for
therapeutic purpose, weight loss and body building, contrary to
regulation 53
of the PTGR
the period 1 July 2005 to 31 December 2006, the pharmacist supplied restricted
substances (anabolic / androgenic steroids)
more than once where repeats
had been authorised by the prescriber but the interval of repeat had not been
specified, in
contravention of
regulation 38(2)(b)
A (Table A) on 7 and 8 November 2005 (from a 2 November 2005 prescribed date and
original dispense date for Sustanon 250mg
x 3 injections)
A (Table A) on 14 December 2005 (from a 2 November 2005 prescribed date and
original dispense date for Sustanon 250mg x 3
injections)
A (Table A) on 18 January 2006 (from a 6 January 2006 prescribed date and
original dispense date for Sustanon 250mg x 3 injections)
C (Table C) on 10 August 2005 (from a 28 April 2005 prescribed date and original
dispense date of 4 August 2005 for Sustanon
250mg injection)
D (Table D) on 15 March 2006 supplied 3 repeats (from a 14 March 2006 prescribed
date and original dispense date of 15 March
2006 for Deca durabolin 50 mg x 3
injections)
D (Table D) on 15 March 2006 supplied 3 repeats (from a 14 March 2006 prescribed
date and original dispense date of 15 March
2006 for Primoteston 50 mg x 3
injections)
E (Table E) on 30 December 2005 (from a 14 November 2005 prescribed date and
original dispense date for deca durabolin 50mg
x 3 injections)
E (Table E) on 30 December 2005 (from a 14 November 2005 prescribed date and
original dispense date for deca durabolin 50mg
x 3 injections)
F (Table F) on 20 December 2005 (from a 29 November 2005 prescribed date and
original dispense date for deca durabolin 50mg
x 3 injections)
F (Table F) on 20 December 2005 (from a 29 November 2005 prescribed date and
original dispense date for sustanon 250mg x 3
injections)
G (Table G) on 8 and 21 November 2005 (from a 24 October 2005 prescribed date
and original dispense date for deca durabolin
50mg x 3 injections)
G (Table G) on 21 November 2005 (from a 24 October 2005 prescribed date and
original dispense date for andriol 40mg testocapsules
G (Table G) on 21 November 2005 (from a 24 October 2005 prescribed date and
original dispense date for primoteston 250mg
x 3 injections)
G (Table G) on 8 and 21 November 2005 (from a 24 October 2005 prescribed date
and original dispense date for sustanon 250mg)
L (Table L) on 21 March and 11 April 2006 (from a 8 March 2006 prescribed
date and original dispense date for primoteson
250mg x 3 injunctions)
L (Table L) on 21 March and 11 April 2006 (from a 8 March 2006 prescribed date
and original dispense date for deca durabolin
50mg x 3 injunctions)
L (Table L) on 21 March and 11 April 2006 (from a 8 March 2006 prescribed date
and original dispense date for sustanon 250mg
x 3 injections)
L (Table L) on 4 and 11 April 2006 (from a 8 March 2006 prescribed date and
original dispense date for andriol 40mg testocapsules
N (Table N) on 19 April 2006 (from a 6 April 2006 prescribed date and 7 April
2006 original dispense date for andriol 40mg
testocapsules x 60 caps)
N (Table N) on 19 April 2006 (from a 23 February 2006 prescribed date and 7
April 2006 original dispense date for andriol
40mg testocapsules x 60 caps)
EEE (Table EEE) on 10 February 2005 (from a 23
November 2005
prescribed date and original dispense date for sustanon 250mg injection)
FFF (Table FFF) on 7 February 2006 (from a 24 November 2005 prescribed date with
a 22 December 2005 original dispense date
for deca durabolin 50mg injection)
O (Table O) on 3
November 2005 (from a 10
October 2005
prescribed date with a 10 October 2005 original dispense date for sustanon 20mg
O(Table O) on 3
November 2005 (from a 10 October 2005 prescribed date
with a 17 October 2005 original dispense date for primoteston depot 250mg
O (Table O) on 20
February 2006 (from a 10
October 2005
prescribed date 17 October 2005 original dispense date for primoteston depot
250mg injection)
Y (Table Y) on 29
September 2005 (from a 12 September 2005
prescribed and original dispense date for sustanon 250mg injection)
J (Table J) on 1
March 2006 (from a 3 February 2006 prescribed date
and original dispense date of 14
February 2006 for deca durabolin
50mg injection)
J (Table J) on 1
March 2006 (from a 3 February 2006 prescribed date
and original dispense date of 14
February 2006 for primoteston 250mg
J (Table J) on 3
April 2006 (from a 17
February 2006
prescribed date and original dispense date of 27
March 2006 for deca
durabolin 50mg)
J (Table J) on 3
April 2006 (from a 17
February 2006
prescribed date and original dispense date of 27
March 2006 for
primoteston 250mg)
J (Table J) on 20
April 2006 (from a 17
February 2006
prescribed date and original dispense date of 27
March 2006 for
primoteston 250mg)
K (Table K) on 13
April 2006 (from a prescribed date of 31
March 2006 and original dispense date 11
April 2006 for
sustanon 250mg)
M (Table M) on 8
March 2006 (from a prescribed date of 16
January 2006 and original dispense date of 8
March 2006 for
each of the following drugs, sustanon 250mg, deca durabolin 50mg and
primoteston 250mg)
III (Table III) on 1
May 2006 (from a 21
prescribed date and original dispense date for sustanon 250mg)
JJJ (Table JJJ) on 26
April 2006 (from a 1
prescribed date and 18
April 2006 original dispense date for sustanon
JJJ (Table JJJ) on 2
May 2006 (from a 1
prescribed date and 18
April 2006 original dispense date for sustanon
During the period 1 July 2005 to 31 December 2006, the pharmacist sold
restricted substances (Alphapharm brand products) to another
pharmacist at the
CBD Pharmacy Pitt Street, Sydney without holding a wholesaler’s licence,
in contravention of section 9(1)
of the Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act
the period 1 July 2005 to 31 December 2006, the pharmacist failed without
reasonable excuse to properly account for the receipt
and/or supplies of antenex
2mg tabs, antenex 5mg tabs, temaze 10mg tabs, oxazepam 30mg tabs, duromine 40mg
caps, dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA), ephedrine and testosterone in response to
notices served on him under section 35 of the PTGA.
Respondent’s admissions—First Complaint
to the evidence, the Respondent had made earlier admissions prior to the
commencement of the Tribunal’s inquiry when
such admissions were
formalised by the Respondent with respect to each of the Complaints, recorded in
a written document dated
20 February 2012
Respondent’s
Response to Notice of Complaint
—admitted into evidence as
, which included some qualifications to his admissions concerning the
periods of time particularised in the complaint—in effect,
lesser periods
of supply were admitted and some other matters, summarised as follows, below:
: approximately 12 months period admitted, not 17 months as particularised;
Particular 2
: approximately six months admitted, not 17 months as
particularised; In
Particular 3
: approximately six months admitted not 17
months as particularised; in
Particular 4
: 13 months admitted not 17
months particularised; and further, denied the particulars relevant to
” but admitted supply of benzodiazepines on two
occasions in 2005 and once in 2006; in
Particular 5
: admitted supply in
approximately 13 month period not 17 months in relation to “
as particularised; and denies Particular 5 as it relates to
” but admitted supply of Phentermine on two
occasions in 2005 and once in 2006; in
Particular 9
contraventions in a nine month period but not for the 17 month period
particularised; in
Particular 10
: admitted selling restricted substances
by wholesale without a wholesaler’s licence but did not admit the period
particularised;
Particular 11
: admitted he did not account for the
receipt and / or supplies of the medications in the period as particularised but
said he undertook
an extensive search for “the records” in response
to the Section 35 Notices, but could not locate them and relied
representation
...” by Mr. Alex
Gavrilovic, a Pharmaceutical Adviser with the Pharmaceutical Services Branch,
NSW Department of Health (“PSB”),
that he need only
undertake reasonable enquiries, beyond which, compliance was not
” [Exhibit R-1], in response to the Notices issued by Mr. J.
Lumby, Chief Pharmacist-PSB, pursuant to Section 35 of the NSW
PTGA. Responding
to the Respondent’s claim concerning the representation, a statement by
Mr. Gavrilovic dated
21 August 2012
was admitted without objection, into
evidence as
Exhibit C-80
in which Mr. Gavrilovic in effect disputed the
Respondent’s assertion, above; and emphasized that failure to fully comply
a ‘Section 35 Notice’ “...is an offence ”; and
that, given the nature and purpose of such a Notice and in
the relevant
circumstances he would not have made any such representation to the
Respondent;
the Respondent’s admissions to the First Complaint as particularised and
to his admission of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
as recorded in Exhibit R-1 and made before the
Tribunal by his Counsel, the Tribunal must consider the evidence before it, in
to be reasonably satisfied that the complaints are proved according to the
standard articulated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
, that is, comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities, but
that having regard to the serious nature of the complaints and
the consequences,
such satisfaction cannot be produced by “
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony or indirect references
.” The Tribunal has considered
carefully, the evidence before it;
Complainant’s evidence: First Complaint
Complainant’s documentary evidence was admitted without objection, as
inclusive. This evidence included documents
relevant to the investigation conducted by Mr. Gavrilovic and various classes of
including those related to Section 35 Notices described above,
concerning relevant substances for the period 1 July 2005 to 11 December
stock counts; Respondent’s Pharmacy records of supply of all drugs for all
patients based on prescriptions written by
Dr. Kelvin Wong
; copies of
prescriptions; records of supply of restricted substances to the Respondent by
various pharmaceutical suppliers; a
Record of Interview
Respondent conducted by Mr. Gavrilovic on 18 March 2008; and a
with Dr. Kelvin Wong conducted by Mr. Gavrilovic on 31 October
included in Complainant’s evidence within the above exhibits, were Tables
of Supply of Restricted Substances at the Respondent’s
pharmacy between I
July 2005 and 31 December 2006 compiled by the Complainant from records obtained
by the PSB and provided to the
Complainant:
Exhibits C-20
inclusive. These records identified those persons to whom relevant
medications the subject of the First Complaint were supplied by
Respondent’s Pharmacy within the above period, including the
self-prescribed medications supplied to Dr. Kelvin Wong;
above Tables (
Exhibits C-20 to C-64
) were alphabetically classified and
each Table was linked to a named patient; and included a Table (
) specifically linked to Dr. Wong,
Attached to the First Complaint was a ‘
Schedule of Patients in
...’ listing relevant patients by name and alphabetically.
During the Inquiry this Schedule was amended to delete from it, a
total of eight
(8) patients (C/F Transcript, at page 85). Consistent with this amendment, the
corresponding Tables relevant to the
deleted names of patients were no longer
relevant to the Complaint and the Inquiry
. C-53, to C-59 inclusive,
and C-62 and C-63. As amended, the Tables (excluding the deleted exhibits /
identified 37 patients
and relevant to the complaint as
particularised, included the medications each received from the
Respondent’s pharmacy. Each
of the above Tables
highlighting in yellow as noted in the Particulars of the Complaint, numbered 1
to 5 inclusive),
those prescriptions personally dispensed by the
(whose name appeared in the “
” column) and the dates on which he dispensed them. The above
Tables in evidence, clearly confirm the extensive role played
by Dr. Wong in
prescribing over a considerable period, relevant medications including
benzodiazepines
and other restricted substances, as
particularised in the First Complaint;
Complainant also tendered a Table of Patients relevant to the
Complainant’s investigation and references in the reports
of pharmacist
peer reviewer
Mr. Stuart Luddington
dated 29 October
2009 and 22 February 2010, noting therein, those patients included in the final
form of the Complaint: admitted
without objection as
to Dr. Wong’s self-prescribed prescriptions for various medications within
benzodiazepines
referred to above (Exhibit C-50 and
), as particularised in paragraph 4 of the Complaint,
between 10 November 2005 and 19 December 2006 inclusive, a total of 18
prescriptions
were presented to and dispensed at, the Respondent’s
pharmacy of which 11 were actually personally dispensed by the Respondent;
in the Complainant’s evidence admitted without objection [as
recorded interview
conducted by Mr.
Gavrilovic (PSB) and Mr. Thomson (PSB) on 31 October 2006. In considering the
First Complaint against the Respondent,
the Tribunal does not take into account
matters asserted by Dr. Wong by way of self-exculpatory explanations, in effect
the Respondent, but it does note the answer to one question put to
him as to whether he was aware of the possible side effects of
he prescribed, to which Dr. Wong responded (Exhibit, Ibid. P-48):
I actually don’t know the possible side
from my own knowledge, I might be guessing, maybe
like I’m not very knowledgeable about anabolic steroids, I think if you
use for long, long term use, very long term use, because I never actually
studied bodybuilding in medicine when I was in medical
It’s not really like a normal
kind of like a
medical use, so I don’t know actually exactly like how you should
monitor them and how we do it but only
if you use for long term
Tribunal records the above words of the prescriber relevant to the Complaint by
way of emphasising the well-established professional
role of pharmacists, indeed
legal responsibility for the profession, in protecting the
community which it serves, as the custodian of potentially harmful medications,
to challenge appropriately, prescribers of medications and indeed their
patients, whenever, as in this complaint, the substances
used—more accurately,
—by these patients for clearly,
non-approved uses; all the more necessary for pharmacists to intervene and
promptly, when such
medications were well known to the profession and indeed, to
the wider community, to be abused. Regretfully, the prescriber’s
above, speaks for itself; but the situation continued by choice of the
Respondent who told the Tribunal he was aware of
the body-building use of the
steroid medications by these patients to whom he supplied them, but he decided
it would be safer for
them to receive them from him rather than such abusers
obtaining potentially unsafe drugs from the illicit market;
information stored on the pharmacy’s dispensing-records computer,
confirming the history and identity of all medications
dispensed at the
Respondent’s pharmacy and the amounts and frequency of such dispensing,
was at all times relevant to the Complaints,
readily accessible by the
Respondent and to other staff including employed pharmacists, according to the
evidence before the Tribunal,
for all dispensed medications including those
dispensed to Dr. Wong on prescriptions written for himself;
later submissions to the Tribunal, Complainant’s Counsel cited a NSW
Medical Tribunal decision recording its removal
of Dr. Wong’s name from
the Medical Register—
HCCC v Wong
[2010] NSWMT 4, submitting it to
be apposite to the Respondent pharmacist in this inquiry given Dr. Wong’s
involvement in the professional misconduct of the Respondent in
the First Complaint...[and that the Medical Tribunal]...had recognised
improper handling of restricted substances for the purposes of body-building can
constitute professional misconduct.”
[Complainant’s
Submissions
, at Paragraph 28]. The above Medical Tribunal decision also
included its assessment of Dr. Wong’s self-prescribing of
benzodiazepines
Correspondence
between the Complainant and the Respondent’s solicitor was included in the
Complainant’s evidence [
Exhibits C-71 to C-78
Complainant tendered a letter addressed “
To whom it may
7 December 2011
, over the signature of
Daniela Bitlan
, the Medical Director of the
Sydney Medical, Dental and
Cosmetic Centre,
70 Pitt Street, Sydney (“ the Medical Centre”)
confirming Dr. Wong’s practising at the Centre between 1997 and
addressing also, his “...
somewhat erratic behaviour
during the “...
last few years of his employment
...”and the
Respondent’s approach to Dr. Bitlan about Dr. Wong’s
prescribing large amounts of Benzodiazepines and
” Without objection, the above letter was admitted as
Exhibit C-79.
The Complainant tendered this letter so that it could be
...” to the Respondent’s
Exhibit R-7
, another letter written by Dr. Bitlan
dated 2 February
2012; and become relevant to the period “...mid to late August
2006...” specified in Exhibit R-7 by Dr.
Bitlan. The Complainant had given
notice to the Respondent that it required Dr. Bitlan to attend before the
Tribunal, to give evidence—a
had been issued to Dr. Bitlan
for her attendance;
Peer review—Mr. Luddington: First Complaint
without objection, Mr. Luddington’s report dated 22 February 2010,
included his analysis and consideration of the relevant
Tables referred to above
and other materials provided by the Complainant. He had read, accepted and
agreed to be bound by, the HCCC
Expert Guidelines
provided to him; and
his consideration included reference to the
Pharmaceutical Society of
Code of Professional Conduct
and the PSA
Professional Practice Standards.
Mr. Luddington’s report included
an analysis of each of the identified patients for whom relevant medications
were prescribed;
and to whom such medications were supplied by the
Respondent’s Pharmacy. He had been requested to express his view whether
in dispensing the relevant medications to the identified patients the
Respondent’s conduct fell below the standard expected
of a practitioner of
an equivalent level of training or experience.
Luddington emphasized that the pharmacist-in-charge is responsible for the daily
activities of a pharmacy but that any actions
of an agent or employee of the
owner are taken to be the actions of the employer unless the employer can
establish that he or she
had no knowledge of such actions and could not by the
exercise of due diligence, have prevented those actions. He noted that accepted
dispensing practice involves reviewing or checking, a patient’s dispensed
medication history including, “
consistency
interactions...
evidence of
.”. He added that in effect, whilst no specific time frame
governs such review process, “...
the majority of pharmacists with a
similar level of training or experience
...[to that of the
Respondent]...
would be expected to
monitor a patient’s
records for the proceeding six to twelve months to determine if an issue
(Emphasis added). Accordingly, his review of the
relevant Tables showed that the Respondent was regularly involved in the
process and that regardless of whether or not the Respondent was on
duty when dispensing occurred, the records upon which Mr. Luddington
indicated that the Respondent "...
had sufficient exposure
available information to be aware of what was occurring in his pharmacy
even when he was not present.”
(Report, Ibid);
upon the information provided to him, Mr. Luddington summarised his view that
the Respondent by his actions and inactions, had
significantly from the standards acceptable to the profession and in doing so he
has placed the community at risk by allowing
large quantities of drugs
(anabolic-androgenic steroids and benzodiazepines) known to be abused and
misused, to be freely available
...[and]...
furthermore he...supplied
(Human Chorionic Gonadotrophon, Clomiphene, tamoxifen and
anastrazole) when his professional training and experience should have told
him...they were for a purpose that did not comply with the recognized
therapeutic standard of what is appropriate in the circumstances.”
(Report, Ibid.)
was also Mr. Luddington’s opinion that although the Pharmacy’s
dispensing records showed that the Respondent was not
directly responsible for
supplying all the medication in question, he was “...
responsible for a significant proportion
...[and the Respondent]...
ample opportunity to access
[patients’]...
medication histories to see what other supplies had been made by unidentified
pharmacists on other occasions
.” Concluding his report, Mr. Luddington
stated that the Respondent “...
chose to continue to supply medication
regardless of the
...[dispensed medication history]...
information being
available, contrary to legal and professional obligations
.” (Report,
Respondent’s conduct attracted Mr. Luddington’s strong criticism
.The Respondent did not require Mr. Luddington to
appear before the Tribunal for
cross-examination; nor, given his comprehensive, detailed report, did the
Tribunal need to hear further
from Mr. Luddington on any aspect, especially
given the respondent’s admissions relevant to the First
Record of Interview with Respondent: First Complaint
Respondent agreed to participate in a recorded interview with Mr. Gavrilovic
(PSB) and his colleague from the PSB, which took
place on18 March 2008 and which
without objection, was admitted as Exhibit [
]; the Tribunal has
considered this interview in its entirety, and includes below, some extracts
Respondent confirmed his ownership of the Pharmacy which was open from Monday to
Friday, weekly between 7.30am and 6.00pm; daily
dispensing about 150
prescriptions; during the period July 2005 to December 2006 the Respondent
confirmed he would be dispensing
at the Pharmacy regularly “...
between three to five
[days weekly]...
on average three days a
...[dispensing]...[but]... “
if I had another pharmacist there
I would not necessarily be there for the full day.”
(Exhibit, Ibid.);
in the above period the Respondent confirmed he had no (pecuniary) interest in
any other pharmacy; he employed regularly,
pharmacists Greg Johnson, Rita
Zalloua (although he was unsure whether this person was registered at the above
time or was working
in a ‘graduate’ capacity). The Tribunal notes
that the names “Greg Johnston” and “Rita” appear
throughout the Tables referred to above (within Exhibit C-20). The Respondent
also mentioned “Stephen Hughes” who is
the author of a
may Concern
letter dated 6 February 2012 in which he refers to his first
attendance at the Pharmacy in August 2006, tendered by the Respondent
admitted into evidence as [
Exhibit R-8
]. The Respondent confirmed that he
employed non-pharmacist assistants to “...
prescriptions
.”; and also confirmed that he was not a member of the
PSA, but that he remained a member of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia
confirmed he was not a licensed
at the relevant time of his
supplying stock to another pharmacy (“CBD Pharmacy”) and that he was
unaware at such time
that a licence was required but was now aware (at the time
of the interview); He agreed that he had not supplied certain information
required by a Section 35 (PTGA)
; and disputed answers on certain
topics given by Dr. Wong in his recorded interview with the PSB; he agreed that
he had said to Dr.
that he should stop prescribing anabolic
steroids because it’s getting out of hand ”
as he was concerned
the Respondent was asked during the recorded interview as to the purpose of
for a named patient (identified in
—Exhibit C-20) he responded “...
building purposes
...” as told to him by the patient, but he did not
ever discuss this with the prescriber; nor had he looked at MIMS (a publication
detailing product information for medications approved for use in Australia by
the Commonwealth
Therapeutic Goods Administration
[TGA] including
approved indications for such approved products) despite MIMS being the
reference source used in his Pharmacy at
the relevant time; he would gain some
information about a dose for body-building not by his own research but
just by talking to patients.
” The Respondent agreed as a
pharmacist, he had to be satisfied that what’s given to a patient is
appropriate
...” and that at the relevant time for the
above patient, he felt that giving the above medication was
appropriate
...”; and he agreed that he did not take any
other action as to whether or not the treatment was appropriate, as
my assumption was that they
...[the patients]...
monitored by their doctor
.” He could not recall whether or not he
specifically asked the patients anything about the above assumption nor did he
anything to that effect. He accepted that in almost every case put to him
during the interview, he was aware that the prescribed
steroid medication was
; and in response to questions put to him
during the interview, about the appearance of such patients he said:
they looked like they were big strong boys
.” He claimed
that such patients were themselves using the medications. During the interview
he was asked whether he was aware
of any issues of the potential
misuse or trafficking of these sorts of products
...” the Respondent
I am now, yes
...” claiming that he was not aware,
at the time;
questioned about the excessive supply of
benzodiazepines
pharmacy and whether he felt that such excessive supply was happening, the
Respondent conceded that “...
well after a period of time I did,
Concerning the amount of three types of
benzodiazepines
dispensed to one female patient over an eight month
period, the Respondent conceded that he would have seen that patient’s
on the (dispensing) computer screen at some stage; and he recalled
asking the patient about it, once and when asked about the patient’s
response, said “...
she was addicted to them
.” He agreed with
the proposition that the particular patient “...
was using it for the
purpose of dealing with some addiction
...” but he never raised or
discussed this with the patient’s prescriber nor was he aware of any
employed pharmacist who
might have raised this issue with the prescriber.
Concerning the “...
...” quantities of multiple
benzodiazepines
dispensed to numerous patients over a
reasonably extensive period of time
...” the Respondent
“...are you saying...you recognize
that those are
excessive doses?
” to which he responded
...” (Emphasis added); conceding that apart
from perhaps speaking to the patient, he didn’t think he would have
the prescriber; but if he did contact the prescriber, he would not
have documented such contact. Again, when questioned about a need
to contact the
prescriber given the amounts of these
benzodiazepine
medications
prescribed and to tell him “...
this has to stop
Respondent did not recall such a conversation happening, but added
it’s more a case of having my head down
...” (Record
of Interview, Ibid.).
the context of failure to contact the prescriber, the Tribunal notes from
evidence at the Inquiry, the proximity of Dr. Wong’s
practice at the
Medical Centre (as described above) to the Pharmacy; and the ongoing
professional relationship between the Respondent
and the Medical Centre. The
Tribunal also notes the number and frequency of prescriptions issued by Dr. Wong
relevant to the particulars
of the First Complaint;
the interview, when put to the Respondent that the relevant supplies of
benzodiazepines
were not necessarily prescribed in
accordance with the normal therapeutic standard
...” the Respondent
replied “...
during the recorded interview, the Respondent was taken to the dispensing of
anastrozole
, he confirmed his understanding that the
indication for each medication was breast cancer; and when pointed out that all
of the relevant
patients to whom these were dispensed, were
Respondent replied that his understanding of these medications being prescribed
for those patients, was, that they were “...
to be taken in conjunction
with their anabolic steroids to prevent the conversion of testosterone to
...[which he knew]...
because I known the biochemistry of
...” having made the assumption because he knew these patients to be
; and the above medications confirmed
by his contacts with them, being needed as “...
part of the
.” When then asked what was the appropriate dose for those
patients, the Respondent replied “
I’m not 100 per cent sure
actually, I couldn’t answer that
.” He could not recall ever
discussing with the prescriber, the prescribing of the above medications for
those patients as “...
he assumed they were being monitored by their
.” (Record of Interview, Ibid.);
phentermine
(Duromine) for a few
patients some of whom appeared from the Pharmacy records, to have also been
anabolic / androgenic steroids
, the Respondent said its
purpose was “...
weight loss
...”. When asked about a
particular, named patient having been prescribed and dispensed,
phentermine
on a monthly basis for a period in excess of a year, the
Respondent answered a question about its normal duration of treatment;
I believe it’s three months isn’t it?
Asked whether this particular patient whom he remembered, was
overweight’
the Respondent replied “...
not fat, not
...”. Given this patient’s use of the above
medications, the Respondent was asked why if the patient was trying to build
muscle, he would need a weight reduction preparation,
the Respondent agreed
it didn’t make sense
...”; and he agreed that the
two medications (that is,
phentermine
incongruous. (Record of Interview, Ibid.);
Respondent was asked about prescriptions for
anabolic / androgenic steroids
dispensed by the Pharmacy, with repeats of the prescribed medication ordered
by the prescriber but, contrary to legal requirements,
‘interval’ specified by such prescriber, for those repeats. The
following exchange was recorded in the Record
of Interview
Respondent: Right, yes. I’m aware now that that shouldn’t
Gavrilovic: Okay, but you were aware of that before?
Respondent: I kind of...
Gavrilovic: I mean you told me earlier that you told
Dr.Wong...to do that so you knew that.
Respondent: That was when I, sort of, when I worked it out, yeah, yeah. I
guess prior to that I kind of didn’t
really think about
Gavrilovic: Or is it a case of, I’m being blunt, but...you knew
Respondent: No, I just—I’d plead ignorance on
that one I think.
in concluding the recorded interview, to add anything concerning any of the
matters discussed during the interview, the Respondent
replied, in part, as
Look, the evidence is quite clear, what’s happened. All I can say is
that...I haven’t intentionally done anything wrong.
I certainly believe I
was quite ignorant and naïve and I tend to believe the best in people
around me and that’s a definite
fault in business as well as personal and
professional. So I think really, that’s the case of what’s happened
speaking with this. This is something that’s gone on and gone
out of control before I’ve realised it, gone, hey, this
is bad, this
doctor is really doing the wrong thing...But speaking mainly about the Dr. Wong
issue, I clearly see that, you know,
the prescribing was inappropriate, the
dispensing obviously is inappropriate. I realized that prior to you guys
approaching me...I
realized that this was inappropriate—inappropriate for
the doctor to prescribe, which I trusted he was a reasonable prescriber,
realized that the dispensing was unreasonable and rectified that situation since
then...But there’s not much more I can say,
really, you know. I’ve
certainly not intentionally done anything wrong, I don’t think, or
illegal. Just trying to run
my business.”
Tribunal notes the significant periods particularised in the First Complaint
as regards the
entire period of dispensing by the
— described during the inquiry into this Complaint, as
, the recorded details of which were available at all times to
the Respondent and to all employed pharmacists (significantly demonstrated
the evidence of
pharmacist Mr. Hughes)—or, by reference to
lesser periods
of time admitted by the Respondent during which
personally dispensed those medications the subject of the Complaint
words above, that he had
intentionally done anything wrong or
, relevant to his admitted conduct, are noted by the Tribunal given
the Respondent’s evidence during its inquiry. Relevantly,
in this context,
the Tribunal notes the Court of Appeal’s description in
2 NSWLR 181
(discussed below) of the
purpose of the relevant legislation and its emphasis in effect, on the obvious
importance of
legislation upon which its efficacy depends; such matters the Tribunal notes,
reflecting the
legal and professional obligations of a pharmacist to whom the
privilege of registration is granted;
Respondent’s documentary evidence: First Complaint
Respondent’s documentary evidence was admitted without objection as
inclusive. The tender of Exhibits R-9 and
R-11 was later withdrawn by the Respondent [TS 297-298];
above evidence included a report by psychiatrist
Dr. Kathryn Lovric,
dated 2 February 2012 (Exhibit R-5) who assessed the Respondent on that date, as
satisfying the
criteria for diagnoses of Generalised Anxiety
Disorder “...characterised by recurrent excessive worry and anxiety and
suffers recurrent Panic Attacks...usually on a daily basis.” Dr.
Lovric stated that these conditions “...are essentially
conditions ” and are “...disorders thought to be constitutional in
nature.” She notes that the Respondent
“...has a long history of
anxiety extending back to his childhood.” The history given to Dr. Lovric
by the Respondent
included “...
from 2005 onwards
...[he]...was
experiencing significant financial stress and his bank eventually refinanced
his loan, which had been ‘crippling my cash flow
by December 2006, he
“...finally had his financial issues under
.” Dr. Lovric also records (page 4, report, Ibid.) that the
Respondent “...
has steadfastly denied that he intentionally breached
any statutory or regulatory... (
” [Emphasis added](a word
is missing from this sentence of the report, presumably
...” may have been intended to appear). Also
included in the Respondent’s evidence (Exhibit R-6) was a ‘medical
summary’ for the Respondent provided by the
Mowbray Family
, dated 17 October 2011;
before the Tribunal was a report by
Mr. Paul Mahoney
, registered
pharmacist, dated
2 August 2010
(Exhibit R-2) formulated following his
visits to the Pharmacy: on
22 June 2010
for the purpose of conducting an
interview with the Respondent “...in order to get an overview of the
pharmacy and its operations”;
27 July 2010
“...conducting a more extensive inspection of the pharmacy and
...[he]...asked specific questions relating to the issues involved
matter.” Provided with and as part of Mr. Mahoney’s report (above),
was a document comprising 13 questions to
and answers from, the Respondent,
including those directed to the operation of the various
relevant to the PTGR and to the First Complaint; and Respondent’s
understanding of the phrase, ‘
recognised therapeutic
‘continuing professional
development’
activities. A further report from Mr. Mahoney (Exhibit
20 December 2011
, followed his further visit to the Pharmacy
16 December 2011
“...to compare...[the
Respondent’s]...current performance with my impressions from previous
visits ” in which he
noted that the Respondent had “...
considerable change to his professional practices.
implemented strict rules into his practice in relation to the
supply of restricted medicines
...”; Mr. Mahoney gave evidence before
the Tribunal relevant to both the First and Second Complaints;
letter dated 6 February 2012, addressed “
To whom it may
Mr. Stephen Hughes
was admitted as Exhibit R-8,
relevant to his role as a
pharmacist at the Pharmacy. Mr. Hughes
gave evidence before the Tribunal, addressed further, in these
Also included was a testimonial letter concerning the Respondent (Exhibit
Respondent’s evidence before the Tribunal—First
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal with respect to each Complaint,
over two days and was cross-examined by Complainant’s
Counsel. The
Tribunal also asked questions of the Respondent; and he was re-examined by his
Counsel. In these
the Tribunal separates the Respondent’s
evidence-in-chief and cross-examination as between the First and Second
and deals with them individually, under each complaint; and the
re-examination of the Respondent concerning both Complaints, is dealt
Respondent told the Tribunal that his Pharmacy had available at all relevant
times, a computerised system readily accessible by
pharmacists—Respondent and his employed pharmacists—whereby
historical information identified the Pharmacy’s
dispensing of medications
including the name of the prescriber; and the pharmacist dispensing such
medication. The Respondent installed
the system when he acquired the Pharmacy in
2003. To the best of his recollection, he identified the pharmacists employed at
Pharmacy in the relevant period of the First Complaint; he regarded himself
as the ‘pharmacist in charge’ when he attended
at the pharmacy,
usually on most days but not necessarily for the whole day;
the period relevant to the Complaint, the Respondent was aware of the legal
requirements in relation to
medications
and had been since commencing practice as a pharmacist. He told the Tribunal he
did not recall giving any specific instructions
to any employed pharmacists
whether full-time, part-time or
, about the dispensing of
benzodiazepines
, as he assumed they would know
“...how to deal with them” and, given the computer (dispensing)
systems in use in New
South Wales;
Respondent also told the Tribunal he was aware that due to the nature of
medications (relevant to the Second Complaint), they required
the supervision of a pharmacist; that he understood the basis of the
categorisation of
medications; and acknowledged the
pharmacist’s responsibility for the safe and efficacious use of all such
medications.
particularised, the Respondent conceded that with the
anabolic / androgenic
medications relevant to the First Complaint, he knew from the
beginning that they were being used for
body building
purposes and
“thought” that this was “okay”, the supply of such
medications not being by way of the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS). He
attributed this attitude to ignorance on his part. He understood the prescriber
to have been “
” and although these medications were
prescribed contrary to the therapeutic indication, he knew that such substances
used by these people; and he knew also, that they were going to get
possibly overseas, or veterinary drugs
assumed]...
that at least
...[those patients]...
are going to get them
from somewhere that was reputable, from a reputable doctor and at least have
some form of care of them...Now,
I don’t agree with that now but that was
my thinking at that time
...” [TS 110]. He agreed that such supply
continued for over a year during which period he did not question his supplying
drugs for the above purpose known to him; attributing such failure to his
fairly stressed state at the time...
”; and in effect,
after July 2005 it was his “...
...” that if the
doctor is prescribing such medications, it was in order for him to supply them
to these people. He could not
recall whether he spoke to any of his employed
pharmacists about such prescribing or whether any of them queried dispensing Dr.
prescriptions for such medications;
Respondent told the Tribunal that Dr. Wong had been in practice at the Medical
Centre well before the Respondent acquired the
Pharmacy in 2003 and he would
receive prescriptions written by the doctor. The Respondent had no recollection
as to when he first
spoke to Dr. Wong about
, or HGC or
benzodiazepines
. He did raise with Dr. Wong “...
...” the necessity for
prescriptions written for
but was unable to say when this
occurred but it was when Dr. Wong was actually in the Pharmacy.
Respondent also conceded that even though the
dosage for these
was in excess of the dose for
therapeutic
purposes, he
nonetheless dispensed them. He told the Tribunal that the patients identified in
the particulars of the Complaint appeared
to him to be ‘
with whom he had “...
discussions
that having warned them about the use of such drugs, he nonetheless decided to
dispense them; and he understood from
each of the relevant patients, that the
medications were for their own use in
according to
schedule for building up their muscles for
particular body building events etcetera
...[but there was no]...
...[but the Respondent learnt from these persons that]...
went in cycles of using various steroids in a specific period of time and then
they had a break and then they would go back
...[on them]...
and then have
Complainant’s
Counsel explored the Respondent’s reason for deciding it was appropriate
for him to dispense the
the Respondent replied:
“Well, I clearly don’t think that’s appropriate now. At
the time—I will tell you what I was thinking at the
time. My opinion was
I knew what these people were going to be doing with them and I knew they were
going to be getting them from
somewhere. I figured it was better to get them
from someone like myself who was there accessible and at the time I thought the
prescriber was reputable. At least someone is looking after them a little bit
whilst they are still going to do what they are going
to do. That was then.
That’s not my practice now.”
[TS116-117]
Respondent claimed to have no reason at the time (and over such an extended
period) as particularised in the First Complaint to
believe the prescriber to be
other than reputable; and he knew as well, that Dr. Wong was prescribing
benzodiazepines
in conjunction with
of the program
“, knowledge the Respondent again gained from his
discussions with the various recipients of these dispensed medications; but
could not recall "...
exactly what was said...as it’s six years ago,
now...I don’t know what I was thinking at the time
. [TS 117]. He
accepted that the quantities of these medications supplied as prescribed, were
excessive; and he agreed he did not
know whether these dispensed medications
were going to be sold “...
in other circumstances
...” by those
to whom he supplied them, as he based such supply on his “...
at the time...”
He could not recall what he would have said about side
effects, to those receiving the dispensed
Respondent agreed that
phentermine
(Duromine), relevant to the
particulars of the First Complaint, had also been prescribed for and dispensed
to, some of the persons
who were also supplied with
understood that this was to help with “...
...”, particularly “...
he named ‘weight loss’ as a therapeutic use for Duromine; he agreed
that this medication is an “...
amphetamine based drug
agreed that some of these patients were receiving a mixture of
for building their bodies up...
benzodiazepines
for calming them down
...”; but when it was suggested by Counsel
that Duromine was used for those persons “...
to speed them back up
..” the Respondent responded: “...
Duromine for
stripping body fat
” but he agreed that Duromine “...
have a side effect—central nervous system activity
.” When asked
whether such a cycle of drug usage as above, had concerned him, the Respondent
at first said he couldn’t
answer that question but when further asked:
Is the answer no?
” he responded: “
No, the answer
.” When then asked: “
is the answer yes?
the Respondent replied:
It concerns me now...At the time—I cannot tell you what I was
thinking at the time. But I clearly know it was not the right
thing to do.
[and when then asked]:
You clearly knew at the time, didn’t you?
[TS 118-119]
pressed about the above ‘cycle of drug usage’ by the particular
patients and having regard for the fact that at the
relevant time of supply to
these people the Respondent had been registered as a pharmacist “...for
nearly thirteen years...”
he agreed and added:
As I said before, it was a case of knowing what was being
prescribed was not necessarily the documented therapeutic use, but I can
how it was being used and I was misguided into thinking that at least it was
being supplied in an organised or reputable manner,
a belief I clearly don't
agree with now.
Respondent was asked about some patients having been supplied with multiple
medications within the
benzodiazepine
Q. What was your understanding of supplying patients with multiple types
of benzodiazepine? A. I don't have an answer for that.
Q. You don't say in answer to that, that you thought because a doctor
was issuing them prescriptions that it was okay?
A. Yeah, I took my eye off the ball. I can't explain why but I took my
eye off the ball. I didn't pay that attention.
Q. For each of those types of drugs, the steroids, the benzodiazepines
and the Duromine, all of that information about quantities
and patients would
have been stored in your computer system, is that right?
correct. Q. And would have been readily retrievable? A. Yes.
Q. By you at any time?
Respondent could not recall whether or not he checked the Pharmacy’s
computer records prior to supplying
to any particular patient
but he told the Tribunal “...
it would have been
...[his]...
practice to see the history of the patient up on the screen
agreed that between July 2005 and December 2006 the number of prescriptions for
written by Dr. Wong and presented to the Pharmacy, increased;
and that his “
” for these patients coming to his
Pharmacy was that Dr. Wong’s practice was “...
immediately across
the street.
..” from his Pharmacy [TS 121];
cross-examination, the Respondent admitted that he recognized, that certain of
prescriptions presented to the Pharmacy at the relevant times
particularised in the complaint, were in excess of the therapeutic guidelines
for those particular medications and that he did not do anything to stop it; and
that this admission applied also to the
benzodiazepine
prescriptions
written by Dr. Wong. It was only in August 2006, on the morning of the first day
of Mr. Stephen Hughes’ first
occasion working as a
Respondent, that the latter became concerned about the level of
dispensed at the Pharmacy. Although the Respondent told the Tribunal that Mr.
Hughes’ concern also included
benzodiazepines
, Mr. Hughes’
Statement (Exhibit R-8) confirms in effect, that the concern he conveyed by
telephone to the Respondent was as
anabolic steroids
. Although the
Respondent told the Tribunal that when Mr. Hughes told him of his above concern,
he was back in the pharmacy after a week away
, Mr. Hughes’
Statement and in evidence before the Tribunal, confirmed
he had phoned the
. Asked to explain how Mr. Hughes was able to immediately identify
the problem with prescriptions presented for these medications
Respondent could not, over a period of 12 to 13 months, do likewise, he
responded: “...
I have no reasonable explanation for you
also told the Tribunal that he was aware of the increase in supplies from
wholesalers, of
benzodiazepines
but that such
increase “...
...” prompt him to
consider whether
practices were in accordance with the
regulations and otherwise with the Professional Code of Conduct
Respondent did not regard it as unusual that Dr. Wong was prescribing
benzodiazepines
for his own personal use, in excess of the
therapeutic quantity...and over an extended period of
.” Questioned about his admitted conduct relevant to the First
Complaint, and his lack of any concern prior to August 2006,
the Respondent told
the Tribunal he had “...
dropped the ball
...” concerning the
subject medications. As to the reason why he had “...
dropped the
...” he nominated “...
many things going
...” in his life at the time, including
stress...and financial pressure
...” and that he
undergoing negotiations for
...[his]...
including]...
negotiating a new lease on a new
..”and added that he suffered from
chronic anxiety
...” and some family matters [TS 131-132;
Emphasis added]. He closed the above “ new pharmacy” nine months
opening it because “
I was juggling too many balls
[TS 134] He was taken to parts of the Record of Interview with Mr. Gavrilovic
(PSB), [Exhibit C-17], and to an answer in
effect that rather than discussing
with the prescriber, his pattern of relevant prescribing “...
more a case of having my head down
...” explaining this to mean
not turning a blind eye
...[but]...
not being as vigilant as I
should have been
...[and]...
thinking about too many other things and not
thinking about what I’m doing and that’s what happened
agreeing that this happened time and time again and on a weekly basis [TS
to the personal health issues the Respondent raised (above), the Tribunal notes
his agreement [at TS 165] to the proposition
put to him, to the effect that he
had suffered
throughout his life but this did not prevent him
from qualifying to become or working as a pharmacist, nor from establishing his
pharmacy; and indeed, at the time the issues relevant to Dr. Wong’s
prescribing arose, he was looking to expand his business,
being contacted by Mr. Hughes (as above)
in August 2006, the Respondent said he
told her that he was not going to dispense any prescriptions from Dr. Wong, for
benzodiazepines
; and that he also told his staff of
this decision; however he agreed that after that time, relevant prescriptions
written by Dr.
Wong, were being dispensed by others at the Pharmacy but he could
offer no explanation as to how this occurred;
Respondent confirmed that as a Pharmacy
Guild of Australia (PGA) member, he
received its
Guide to the Poisons Schedules
readily available to him and to employed pharmacists. Counsel for the
Complainant then questioned the Respondent about relevant professional
standards, as follows:
Q. Would you say that as at 1 July 2005 you were fully cognizant of the
standards applicable to a pharmacist? A. I should well
Q. Were you? A. I should well have been.
Q. What does that mean? A. Well, clearly I should well have
Q. You should have been; were you? A. I can't answer that because
my answer sorry, go on....
Q. ...You should have been, is that right? A. Yes, I should have
Q. And you were? A. In hindsight yes.
Q. You were aware of professional standards that were applicable to you,
weren't you? A. Yes.
Q. And this I had my head down type approach, you knew from a starting
point was unprofessional? A. No. If I knew it was unprofessional
wouldn't continue.
Q. Well, are you saying that the misconduct that you have admitted to was
unintended?
A. That's a good question. Yes.
Q. You didn't have the wherewithal to deal with an issue presented by a
prescription that overprescribed a particular good? A.
Yes. Q. You
are not serious, are you? A. Yes.
questioned the Respondent about his “
approach (above) and his explanation to this approach being caused by stresses
he was under at the relevant time. Respondent
accepted that he had a
professional duty to scrutinise any particular prescription for
); and agreed he had not done that
with respect to his admitted conduct the subject of the Complaint. Counsel then
turned to the element
relevant to the Respondent’s
dispensing, particularised in the complaint; Counsel asked:
Q. It's not that you didn't know you had the duty, you just didn't comply
with it, is that right?
A. No, sorry. You are asking the same question that you just asked
before, so you are saying that I deliberately did not do that,
is that right?
Q. Well, that's getting back to this intentional thing, yes?
A. No, no, there was nothing intentional. As I stated before, my
judgment at the time was that although these items weren't being
prescribed for
their official therapeutic use, they were being prescribed for a particular
medical use, which I misguidedly thought
was okay in that set of circumstances.
So did I feel like I was doing or did I deliberately go against my professional
obligations,
no. Misguidedly I did.
Q. And it only took but one matter being brought to your attention by
Mr. Hughes to put you back on track?
A. It's amazing what guidance and sense you get from an external pair of
eyes of someone you know and trust....
Q. .... So you didn't intentionally deviate from your duty as a
pharmacist, you misguidedly deviated from your duty as a pharmacist?
Q. And if you weren't on deck, as it were, at the pharmacy, and there
were other pharmacists practically in charge of the pharmacy
for a particular
time, were there any governing instructions from you as to what to do with
Dr Wong prescriptions?
A. During that period of time, do you mean?
Q. During that period of time? A. No.
Q. Did any of them, apart from Steven Hughes, bring to your attention
that a lot of these prescriptions were for nontherapeutic purposes?
A. They knew they were, what the reason was they were being used
Q. So you say the pharmacists in this period working for you knew that
these people coming into the shop were body builders who were
being looked after
by Dr Wong? A. Yes.
Q. You had a group meeting about it? A. No, we did not have a
group meeting.
Q. You told them one by one? A. No, I did not tell them
Q. How do you know what they know? A. I did not know
Q. Why did you say to them?
A. You are phrasing the question a certain way. Let's start again.
Rephrase the question.
Q. You said that the other pharmacists who were physically in charge in
the sense that you were there? A. Yep.
Q. Knew with patients of Dr Wong with prescriptions for steroids
were body builders?
A. Okay, I'm assuming that they knew.
Q. But you never had any discussion? A. We never had a formal
discussion.
Q. What about an informal one? A. I'm sure it was talked about.
Q. You are? A. This is six years ago.
Q. I'm aware of how long ago it was... A. I don't recall any of
specific conversations.
[TS 149-151]
Complainant’s
Counsel turned to the capacity for abuse of the relevant, dispensed medications
Q. All right, both these groups of drugs, if I use the term correctly,
steroids and benzodiazepines and probably Duromine at the
other end, were well
recognised by you as at 1 July 2005 as being drugs potentially able to be
abused? A. Yes.
Q. As at that time what did you understand that the abuse of those drugs
could result in?
A. Well, in relation to benzodiazepines obviously being addicted to them
from a sleeping perspective. Steroids, at the time, do
you want the at the
time? Okay, clearly now an abuse is used for body building purposes. I was
aware that that was not its official
therapeutic use but, as I've said earlier,
you know, in a misguided fashion I thought that was still a legitimate usage for
Q. And what about black market for either of those three groups? A.
That didn't enter my mind.
Q. It never occurred to you?
Q. But you knew as of 1 July 2005 that those three categories of drugs
were capable of being abused?
A. Well I know, I heard of people getting them on the internet or from
overseas and things like that and that's one reason why in
my misguided fashion
I did the supply what I did, thinking I was actually trying to save said
individual.
Q. Without knowing whether said individual was going to use the drugs
themselves?
A. Well, that's the assumption. That can be said for any
particular dispensing of any particular drug.
Q. Particularly benzodiazepines. You knew that they were capable of
being abused, is that right?
Q. Not just by one person consuming too many of them or whatever, but by
way of being used?
Q. As part of a cocktail, is that right? A. Yes.
Q. You knew that as of 1 July 2005, didn't you? A.
Q. And that for each of them, steroids,
benzodiazepines and the Duromine groups you knew that unscrupulous people, if
they got their
hands on enough of them, could make their own market and sell
them at a profit? A. That thought didn't cross my mind.
Q. You knew it as at 1 July 2005, didn't you? A.
Q. That there was that potential? A. It was a
possibility, yes.
returned to the reason given earlier, for the Respondent’s dispensing of
generally—in effect, better for the patients to get them
from a reputable source rather than somewhere elsewhere—and the
confirmed “...
that was my thinking at the time
...”. It was
put to him that it was contrary to his professional standards to supply those
medications to which the Respondent
at the time I
didn’t believe it was contrary to my professional obligations
[TS 161] The following, further exchange is instructive:
: Q. You knew that in providing these drugs for
nontherapeutic purposes and in dosages that exceeded the therapeutic dosages
recommended,
that you were assisting these people to get drugs that they were
otherwise not entitled to, weren't you?
A. You want a yes or no answer, when it's not a case of a yes or no
answer. Okay, yes. However, what I believed was that I didn't
realise it was
actually illegal for them to have those drugs for that purpose. This is where
I'm coming about being misguided.
My opinion at the time was even though it
wasn't the legitimate therapeutic use for the drug, I know that there is plenty
that are used for other purposes which are not their TGA listed
approved indication. I knew it was grey, if you would like to say
it that way,
because bodybuilding is that sort of area. However, my nature is to care for
people. I thought hey I didn't realise
it was illegal but I thought at least
if they are getting something from a clean source and they are being looked at
by a doctor
who at the time I thought was reputable, I was actually able to see
them and have a conversation with them at the time, how are you
going, is the
doctor checking your blood pressure, things like that, it is better than getting
something on the internet, or something
in Indonesia, or animal products. That
was my thinking.
Q. You suggest in that answer that they were being appropriately cared
for by Dr Wong. That's your understanding? A. That's my
understanding.
Questioned as to whether his evidence about providing a safe source of the
for patients for whom they were
prescribed by Dr. Wong,
extended to
benzodiazepines
, the Respondent replied: “
was part of the same program, so to speak
.” [TS 164]
Respondent agreed that the
resulted in a
‘turnover’ to the Respondent of $6,000 or $7,000 monthly in the
relevant period particularised, was “...
in the realms of
possibility
.” [TS 169 Emphasis added]. When put to the Respondent
by Complainant’s Counsel, that but for the intervention of Mr.
described above, in August 2006 “...
it would never have occurred to you
that you were doing something unprofessional
...” the Respondent
The penny may well have dropped
, the Tribunal addresses Counsel’s
tion of the Respondent relevant to
both the First and Second
, together, further below, immediately following its consideration
of the Respondent’s evidence before the Tribunal concerning
First Complaint—Evidence of Mr. Stephen Hughes
Hughes’ evidence was taken by telephone; his Statement had already been
tendered by the Respondent and admitted as Exhibit
R-8. His contact with the
Respondent (described above) was consequent upon being presented with
prescriptions by two patients separately,
on his first day at the Pharmacy as a
pharmacist and as described in his Statement, each for
. The second of these patients was in the Pharmacy when the
prescriber (identified by Mr. Hughes, below) arrived at the Pharmacy with
prescription for himself. Mr. Hughes could not recall what this prescription was
for but he did recall at some stage the prescriber
did present with a
prescription for himself (i.e. the prescriber), for
benzodiazepines
whether he recalled the Respondent’s response to his phone call concerning
issue, Mr. Hughes answered: “
I don't think he was
quite aware of the scope of the problem so I think he was a bit dumb struck, to
be honest, straight away, or
the fact that he, yeah, I guess he just didn't
[TS 217]. Mr. Hughes told the Tribunal he thought the
Respondent was a “...
good pharmacist
...[and] .....
...”; Mr. Hughes was “...
more interested in that
it’s stopped and he...
[the Respondent]...
gets back to helping
people like he’s good at really
.” [TS 220]. When asked whether
it is better for a pharmacist to supply
rather than a person
obtaining it from some unsafe source, Mr. Hughes emphasised that such a purpose
cannot be a justification as
it increases the amounts of such drugs in the
community and there is potential harm in doing this; he added at TS 2”20]:
...[the Respondent]...
had said that, I would have rebuked
giving his evidence, Mr. Hughes confirmed in terms of the Respondent’s
misconduct, that he was aware only, of his dealings
prescriptions; he was unaware of anything in relation to prescriptions for
benzodiazepines
apart from the one relevant to Dr. Wong’s
self-prescribing (referred to above); he confirmed that as in his Statement
R-8), his telephone contact with the Respondent in August 2006,
concerned only,
; he also confirmed that it is not a difficult
task to daily, access drug usage reports with accuracy. He told the Tribunal
was as a pharmacist and as a member of the public, aware of the
notoriety of the abuse of
anabolic steroids
especially amongst cyclists
and in any sport, all highly publicised issues; he was aware
is not an approved indication for such medications; he had not
asked the Respondent nor was he told by him, for what indications
the prescribed
dispensed at the Pharmacy, were supplied and added”...
don’t think you have to be a pharmacist to put two and two together
First Complaint—Evidence of Dr. Daniela Bitlan
Two letters each written by Dr. Bitlan were admitted into evidence as described
above: that tendered by the Complainant, as Exhibit
C-79; and the other by the
Respondent, as Exhibit R-7. A
had been issued to Dr. Bitlan to
appear before the Tribunal. Dr Bitlan’s evidence related to the Respondent
she believed “...in around August 2006...”
concerning the large amount of
benzodiazepines
prescribed by Dr. Wong. She confirmed that she had been “...working
together...” with the Respondent for “many years”,
pharmacy being the closest to the Medical Centre; and that it was
“natural” that most prescriptions from the Medical
dispensed at his pharmacy; she also told the Tribunal that if the Medical Centre
had any inquiries about certain medications
or compounds, “...we ask
him...[and]...cooperate in that way.”;
cross-examination by Complainant’s Counsel, Dr. Bitlan was questioned at
length, as to when she was contacted by the
Respondent, including questions
relevant to her evidence to the NSW Medical Tribunal in its inquiry into Dr.
Wong, referred to above.
She confirmed as truthful, her evidence given to the
Medical Tribunal, that she “...was absolutely not aware that...[Dr.
Wong]...was
prescribing steroids until he actually had an audit from
HIC...” and that that “audit” was in October 2006—she
agreed it was not the “HIC” which visited the Medical Centre but
rather, officers of the Pharmaceutical Service Branch
(PSB). In her first letter
dated 7 December 2011 (Exhibit C-79) she included no specific time when
describing the Respondent’s
Wong’s “...erratic behaviour...during the last few years of his
employment...”
she described “...at about the same time I
distinctly remember....” the Respondent’s approach. Responding to
question, whether “...as a doctor...[she was]...satisfied
with...[the Respondent’s]...capacity or capabilities...”
responded affirmatively; and when asked whether it was “...her
intention...to continue to use...[the Respondent]...as
a pharmacist in the
future...” she responded: “absolutely, yes.” [TS
Bitlan’s subsequent letter dated 2 February 2012 (Exhibit R-7), was
identical to her earlier letter (exhibit C-79) but for
the reference as to when
it was, that she was approached by the Respondent: “...in around mid to
late August 2006, I distinctly
remember being approached...”. She agreed
that regardless of the dates, her first awareness of Dr. Wong’s
prescribing
habits was when the PSB officers visited the Medical Practice; and
agreed also with the suggestion that the Respondent spoke to her
after the PSB
visit. Asked to explain her alteration of the time of the Respondent’s
approach, she told the Tribunal the Respondent
had said “...that he would
like a time...a date on the letter...[but] ”I said I did not remember
exactly the date...[and]...then
he told me...it was probably around August 2006
which I assume...was correct and I amended the letter.” [TS 292]. Dr.
assumed the date was not important or relevant in any way. She agreed
that her first letter (Exhibit C-79) was more accurate with
recollection;
by Respondent’s Counsel, Dr. Bitlan confirmed that in the period from
2006, she was aware of patients
attending the Medical Centre for
purposes; and she
remembered “...
one particular patient...
it was obvious
he was using something
.” [TS 296];
THE SECOND COMPLAINT—PARTICULARS
Schedule 2: Minoxidil solution
March 2010 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied compounded Schedule
Minoxidil solutions to Mr. Cohen on the occasions
set out in Schedule A to the
Complaint, in a quantity, or for a purpose, that did not accord with the
recognised therapeutic standards
of what is appropriate in the circumstances,
contrary to clause 23 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
March 2010 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied compounded Schedule 2
Minoxidil solutions
to Mr. Cohen on the occasions set out in Schedule A
to the Complaint, and failed to appropriately label the substance by failing to
include required details including:
for use, contrary to clause 7 and item 1(3)(d) of Appendix A of the
patient’s name, contrary to clause 7 and item 1(3)(g) of Appendix A of the
March 2010 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied by wholesale compounded
Schedule 2 Minoxidil solutions
to Mr. Cohen on the occasions set out in
Schedule A to the Complaint, without being the holder of a wholesaler’s
contrary, to
section 9(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Schedule 4: Minoxidil solution
May 2010 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied compounded Schedule 4
Minoxidil solutions to Mr. Cohen on the occasions
set out in Schedule B to the
Complaint, in a quantity, or for a purpose, that did not accord with the
recognised therapeutic standards
of what is appropriate in the circumstances,
contrary to clause 54 of the PTGR.
May 2010 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied compounded Schedule 4
Minoxidil solutions to Mr. Cohen on the occasions
set out in Schedule B to the
Complaint, otherwise than in accordance with a prescription, contrary to
of the PTGA.
May 2010 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied compounded Schedule 4
Minoxidil solutions
to Mr. Cohen on the occasions set out in Schedule B
to the Complaint, and failed to appropriately label the substance by failing to
include required details including:
(a) directions for use, contrary to clause 26 and item 1(3)(d) of
Appendix A of the PTGR.
(b) the patient’s name, contrary to clause 26 and item
1(3)(g) of Appendix A the PTGR.
pharmacist failed to keep a proper record of 37 supplies of Schedule 4 Minoxidil
solutions supplied to Mr. Cohen between May 2010
and September 2010 on the
occasions set out in Schedule B to the Complaint, contrary to clauses 55(1) and
176 of the PTGR, in that
he failed to record required details
name and the address of the patient
name of the prescriber.
May 2010 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied by wholesale compounded
Schedule 4 Minoxidil solutions to Mr. Cohen on
the occasions set out in Schedule
B to the Complaint, without being the holder of a wholesaler’s licence
contrary to
section 9(1)
of the PTGA.
Schedule 2 and Schedule 4: Minoxidil solutions
March 2010 and September 2010, the pharmacist compounded preparations containing
Minoxidil at varying strengths for the use
of IHRB clients as set out in
Schedule C to the Complaint, and added to those preparations a quantity of
unknown substances at the
request of Mr. Cohen without ensuring product quality,
safety and efficacy.
Schedule 4: Finasteride (Proscar) and oral Minoxidil
November 2008 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied Proscar for IHRB
clients on the occasions set out in Schedule D
to the Complaint, in a quantity,
or for a purpose, that did not accord with the recognised therapeutic standards
of what is appropriate
in the circumstances, contrary to clause 54 of the PTGR.
January 2008 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied Loniten for IHRB
clients on the occasions set out in Schedule E to
the Complaint, in a quantity,
or for a purpose, that did not accord with the recognised therapeutic standards
of what is appropriate
in the circumstances
contrary to clause 54 of the
or about 6 May 2010, the pharmacist dispensed multiple repeat prescriptions of
Proscar and Loniten for Patient A as set out in
Schedule F to the Complaint:
(a) without specific direction of the prescriber
(b) without satisfying himself that exceptional circumstances
in relation to the supply
quantity, or for a purpose, that did not accord with
the recognized therapeutic standards of what is appropriate in the
circumstances,
contrary to clause 54 of the PTGR.
or about 6 May 2010, the pharmacist dispensed multiple repeat prescriptions of
Proscar for Patient B as set out in Schedule F to
specific direction of the prescriber
satisfying himself that exceptional circumstances existed in relation to the
a quantity, or for a purpose, that did not accord with the recognized
therapeutic standards of what is appropriate in the circumstances,
contrary to
clause 54 of the PTGR.
or about 6 May 2010, the pharmacist dispensed multiple repeat prescriptions of
Loniten for Patients C and D
as set out in Schedule F to the
specific direction of the prescriber
satisfying himself that exceptional circumstances existed in relation to the
a quantity, or for a purpose, that did not accord with the recognized
therapeutic standards of what is appropriate in the circumstances,
contrary to
clause 54 of the PTGR
All Schedule 4s: (Minoxidil solution, Finasterade and oral
March 2010 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied the following Schedule 4
medications
to Mr. Cohen for the use of IHRB clients, on prescription or
preparations, some including Tretinoin (Retin A)
and failed to provide appropriate counselling and product information to
the patients who were the intended recipients of the medications.
March 2010 and September 2010, the pharmacist supplied the following Schedule 4
medications
to Mr. Cohen for the use of IHRB clients, on prescription or
preparations, some including Tretinoin (Retin A)
and failed to ensure
that the patients who were the intended
recipients of the medications had adequate dosing instructions and fully
understood how to
safely use, store, and dispose of the products.
Respondent’s admissions—Second Complaint
Respondent’s admissions were recorded in a document dated 20 August 2012
Amended Response to Second Notice of Complaint
tendered and
admitted as
Exhibit 2R-1
”) and included
his guilt of
professional misconduct
. As noted earlier with respect to
the Respondent’s admissions relevant to the First Complaint, the Tribunal
must be reasonably
satisfied, that this Second Complaint is proved, consistent
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
’ included as a preamble to the Particulars of
the Second Notice
Complaint, the Respondent confirmed that he
had entered an agreement with Mr. Cohen at IHRB pursuant to which he agreed to
compounded Minoxidil solutions for the use of IHRB ‘clients’;
but further to this background, the Respondent asserted
that each Minoxidil
topical solution so supplied, was compounded by him for the “
individual in each case and where the medication’s
scheduling required
...[that is, required by PTGR] such supply was made
pursuant to a valid prescription or on a ‘script owing’
”. He also admitted to paragraph 5 of the Complaint
which alleged that he “...
generally did not have any
direct contact, in person or otherwise, with the IHRB clients
the numbered paragraphs in the Particulars of the Second Complaint, the
Respondent admitted
without qualification
, those particulars in
1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7; 12, 13, 14, 15
Respondent admitted
paragraph 3
of the particulars, but qualified such
admission in that in each supply as particularised, “...
he considered
himself to be supplying
solutions for use by a particular individual
paragraph 8
, the Respondent admitted these particulars but with
the qualification— with respect to such admitted supply as particularised,
he considered himself to be supplying compounded
solutions for use by a particular
Respondent denied those particulars in
paragraph 9
but did admit that
between March and mid-April 2010, “...
he compounded preparations
containing Minoxidil at various strengths for the use of specific IHRB clients
and added to those preparations
a quantity of substances
...” at the
request of Mr. Cohen who “...
represented to him that...
substances]...
were Mr. Cohen’s confidential hair regrowth
.”; and additionally, that such substances were
comprised of a Chardonnay solution base containing some
.” The Respondent’s
to paragraph 9 of the
Particulars of the Complaint, included his assertion that “...
to ensure quality, safety and efficacy
including weighing and recording according to SOPs; recording and checking Lot
Numbers and expiry dates of active ingredients;
and the final product inspected
for stability. He claimed in his
above, that “...
unknown substances did not comprise of any active ingredients
after a few weeks,
no later than April 2010
, he ceased
adding the substances to the compounded preparations
as the substances
were causing problems with the stability of the compounded solutions
(Emphasis added);
paragraph 10
of the Particulars, the Respondent admitted the supply as
particularised but with the qualification that “...
he only ever
supplied Proscar for use by specific individuals pursuant to valid
prescriptions
Respondent admitted the particulars in
paragraph 11
but qualified this
admission in that “...
he only ever supplied Loniten for use by specific
individuals pursuant to valid prescriptions
Complainant’s evidence—Second Complaint
Complainant’s
evidence was without objection, admitted as
Exhibits 2C-1
inclusive, together with an Index to these exhibits; and a
relevant to the Second Complaint;
above evidence included statements from various witnesses relevant to complaints
concerning the IHRB and Mr. Cohen and the consequent
PSB investigation into
them; including also, the execution of a search warrant at IHRB premises on 22
September 2010, conducted by
NSW Police. The evidence also included items
obtained by search warrant executed at the Respondent’s Pharmacy,
materials recording supplies of medications relevant to the
Particulars of the Second Complaint; and communications between the Respondent
and Mr. Cohen / IHRB; and a Record of Interview with Mr. Sam Cohen, conducted by
PSB officers on 12 October 2010;
Complainant had prepared
of prescriptions, dispensing records
and other materials relevant to the Complaint as particularised, admitted as
Exhibits 2C-54 to
2C-64, inclusive;
included in the Complainant’s evidence was a
Record of Interview
between the Respondent and officers of the HCCC (Mr. Tony Kofkin and Ms. Karen
Ford) on 27 October 2010 (Exhibit 2C-47); the Respondent’s
solicitor Mr.
David Short was in attendance during this recorded interview;
reports from pharmacist
Ms. Maxine E. Goodman
, by way of
peer review
were included in the Complainant’s evidence: the first dated 28
February 2011 (Exhibit 2C-40) and the second, dated 2 May
2011 (Exhibit 2C-42).
Ms. Goodman was not required by the Respondent to attend before the Tribunal
nor was she required by the
in the Complainant’s evidence were the NSW
Recording the Supply of Substances on Prescription Generally or in an Emergency
relevant to the PTGR; NSW Pharmacy Board (as it then was)
Dispensary Computer Standard
Professional Practice Standards
(Version 4) 2010;
National Competency Standards Framework for Pharmacists
in Australia
Guidelines for Dispensing of Medicines, Pharmacy
Board of Australia
: Exhibits 2C-65 to 2C-69, respectively;
Record of Interview with Respondent: Second
Tribunal has considered the entire record of interview but notes some only,
extracts from it as follows: The Respondent described
how he became acquainted
with Mr. Cohen whose “...
business operated almost next door to
...” and how he approached the Respondent to
potentially compound his Minoxidil solutions for his
...” which the Respondent “...
thought was a
reasonable opportunity to grow my compounding business
(Exhibit 2R-4 Emphasis added))
, the Respondent replied (at page 5,
As part of our registration, I’m aware
of what is required as part of the Act. I know what substances are in what
and if I don’t know, I’ve got the Guild Guide to the
Poison Schedule on hand, and the Poisons Act and Regulations
...[the]...
premises as well.
unidentified
Mr. Cohen requested him to add,
the Respondent described them as a “...
small amount of his spice
solution...which I finally agreed to do
...”; he further described
these ingredients requested to be added as “...
a mix of curry spices
in a wine solution
...” which Mr. Cohen would provide to him; and he
added them for “...
less than a month, even
...” but he then
omitted these ingredients “...
not necessarily with Mr. Cohen’s
...”, as the Respondent believed they were adversely
affecting the stability of the compounded solution. When put to the Respondent
compounding
, given some ingredients by
someone with no medical qualifications, to add to the solution the Respondent
compounded, was he comfortable
without really knowing what these additional
ingredients were, he said:
No. That’s why I stopped using it or one of the reasons I
stopped using it. One was the stability issue, and the other reason...because
of the stability issue, I really thought I wasn’t sure exactly what was
in it. So I made the call to not do that.
” (Ibid. page 9-10);
asked about providing
medications to Mr. Cohen who was not a
pharmacist, the Respondent included in his response, the following:
I guess as far as my realisation of the finer points, the Schedule
2 regulations, to be quite frank with you,
since this investigation has come
, I’ve done a lot of looking at my procedure and my
understanding of Schedule 2
...” (Ibid. page 11, Emphasis added). The
Tribunal notes the period of the earlier (First) Complaint relevant to the
Respondent’s
admitted misconduct in 2005 and 2006. In answering further
questions, in effect relevant to supplying compounded medications directly
Mr. Cohen without any contact with the intended patient, the Respondent sought
to liken this as “...
the same scenario
...” to medication
going to a nursing home not directly to patients but to someone who administers
the medications to them.
The Tribunal cannot and does not, accept this
comparison as valid;
issue was raised during the recorded interview, concerning the supply of
substances’
preparations prior to his receiving the necessary prescription for them
–the Respondent explained that this:
“...came about due to time pressures put upon myself, firstly, with
pressure to get an order to Sam...[Cohen]...for his clients,
pressures upon myself with having to perform my duties as the owner of the
business, pharmacist and compound manager when
staff went away..
(Ibid. page 19)
to questions suggesting that Mr. Cohen gave him certain prescriptions
nine months
after they had been written but providing medication to clients
prior to actually getting such prescriptions dispensed, in effect
obtaining an
opportunity of building some stock
...” the Respondent
I can see that. I can see that now.
I didn’t see it at the time. Quite taken aback by that. I had no reason
to know that that
was going on
Now you paint that scenario, I can
clearly see my unwitting part in the process. What an idiot
Respondent later remarked: “...
Mr. Cohen is very convincing in his
sincerity. Unfortunately I tend to take people as being as honest and
upstanding as I am
.” (Ibid. p 27). Elsewhere in the recorded
interview, the Respondent described his trust in Mr. Cohen knowing what he was
as the overseer of the entire treatment...the doctor had
prescribed and I was dispensing. Error in judgment I grant you that
“ (Ibid. p. 32)
The Tribunal notes in this respect, the
Respondent’s evidence addressing explanation, relevant to the First
the recorded interview, the Respondent said:
Any breaches or omissions on my part have been completely
inadvertent. I went into it thinking it was quite above board...And I have
inadvertently given
...[Mr. Cohen]...
the opportunity not to act in the
best interests of the patients...and I it disappoints me ...that I allowed
myself to be put in
that position.
” (Ibid. p. 35)
Review—Ms. Goodman: Second Complaint
reports of pharmacist Ms. Goodman were tendered by the Complainant and without
objection, admitted into evidence as Exhibits 2C-40
and 2C-42, the second report
responding to additional documents provided to her by the Complainant as
itemised in her second report;
Tribunal has considered carefully, Ms. Goodman’s two ‘
’ reports and her conclusions concerning the Respondent’s
failures relevant to the Second Complaint as particularised;
and her reasons for
so finding. For its purpose, the Tribunal notes Ms. Goodman’s conclusions
by reference to the definition
unsatisfactory professional conduct
Section 139B of the National Law;
Respondent confirmed that he had read and considered the
Ms. Goodman in evidence before the Tribunal—as also with the report of Mr.
Luddington relevant to the First Complaint—and
he understood the level of
criticism of him made by each of them. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent
did not challenge either
reports, their criticisms or
conclusions;
Respondent’s documentary
evidence—the Second Complaint
by the Respondent and without objection, admitted as
Exhibits 2R-2
were two further reports by Pharmacist,
Mr. Paul Mahoney
first dated
27 June 2011
and the second dated
12 June 2012
Mahoney prepared the
first report
(Exhibit 2R-2) as requested on behalf
of the Respondent, to visit the Pharmacy, to inspect the Respondent’s
practices and procedures
and “...to produce a report regarding his current
fitness to practice as a pharmacist.” Mr. Mahoney visited the Pharmacy
24 June 2011
during which he was shown”... all relevant documents
and registers as requested and discussed professional practices relevant
matter and also, professional practices in general.” His conclusions were
recorded in this report. He noted that the
Respondent “...
is repentant
for...being perhaps too unquestioning of people who seek to use his professional
...[and]...
it seems he
realises...there are charlatans
in the world who will use a professional person to further their personal wealth
at the expense of
the community
;...[and Mr. Mahoney believes the
Respondent]...
is genuine in his expression of
...[and]...
is aware that to add unknown
ingredients to compounded products is behaviour which is professionally
unacceptable.”
Mr. Mahoney concluded that the Respondent
is fit to continue practice as a pharmacist
.” With this
report Mr. Mahoney included a document recording his questions to and answers
from, the Respondent;
Mahoney’s second report (Exhibit 2R-3) followed his visit to the Pharmacy
on 12 June 2012 “...to familiarise myself
Respondent’s]...current standards of practice and observe any alterations
which he may have made since...[his]...previous
visit.” In a separate
document (part of his report) Mr. Mahoney provided an account of his discussions
with the Respondent.
Mr. Mahoney concluded that he believed the Respondent
is a competent pharmacist and that he is conducting an ethical
...[and that]...
he freely expresses the views that events which
have led to this matter
...[i.e. the Second Complaint]...
have left him
with considerable shame, mainly because he allowed himself, perhaps unwittingly,
to be manipulated by unscrupulous parties
.” Mr. Mahoney again
expressed an opinion that the Respondent “...
a fit and proper person
to continue to practice as a registered
pharmacist.”
Respondent’s evidence before the
Tribunal—the Second Complaint
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal concerning the
immediately following his evidence concerning the First Complaint;
Cross-examination, the Respondent conceded that he did not know any of the
patients receiving the Minoxidil solutions he compounded
for Mr. Cohen / IHRB.
He did not recall whether, at the time of Mr. Mahoney’s first visit to the
Pharmacy in June 2010 (as
noted above)—by which time he had already
entered the agreement with Mr. Cohen—he had brought this
‘agreement’
to Mr. Mahoney’s attention;
respect to the
unidentified
ingredients
(described by Mr. Cohen as
solution”) requested by Mr. Cohen to be included in
compounded Minoxidil solutions, the Respondent confirmed he stopped adding
ingredients to these solutions adding that “...
I stopped because I
wasn’t 100 percent sure what was in them
”; and that he had never
sent these ingredients away to a laboratory for testing. He agreed with the
proposition put to him,
that with the above, additional ingredients provided by
Mr. Cohen, incorporated in the compounded solutions, he had no idea whether
not the product would be safe over a period of 12 months. The Respondent also
confirmed that Mr. Cohen paid for everything “...
on behalf of
the customers
...” by means of an account opened with the Pharmacy.
Although he “...
..” he was dispensing to IHRB clients
personally the Respondent agreed with the proposition that
was doing in reality was giving the product to
...[and]...
didn’t dispense to the clients
was put to the Respondent that if he gave Mr. Cohen 12 bottles of compounded
solution, then he “...
had the capacity to supply that in whatever way
he saw fit, is that right?
...” to which the Respondent replied:
Yes I know now
...” but not at that time when he
trusted that was not the case
.” The Respondent added:
knowing what I know now the measures would be I would deal directly
with the patients.”
[TS 187]. The Tribunal notes in this context, the
close proximity of the Respondent’s Pharmacy to the IHRB, despite which,
Respondent never requested that the patients should come to his Pharmacy.
The Respondent agreed that at the relevant time he was
not able to ensure that
the product given to Mr. Cohen would go to a particular patient;
Respondent told the Tribunal he did not ask Mr. Cohen if he had medical
qualifications; and did not know whether Mr. Cohen was
registered as a health
care provider otherwise; nor did Respondent ask Mr. Cohen whether he was
authorised to supply
medications [TS
Asked by Counsel—in the context of
preparations,
Minoxidil 5% solution with Tretinoin, requested by Mr. Cohen on ‘order
forms’ he gave to the Respondent
and which did not include the names of
patients—as to the reason why he couldn’t wait for prescriptions to
be first received,
before providing such requested medications to Mr. Cohen, the
Respondent answered: “...
probably time pressure put on me by Mr.
.” When asked why he should “...give in to time concerns or
time pressures...” the Respondent replied: “...
I agree with you
now...As I say, I am a trusting individual.”
When asked the motivation
for trusting Mr. Cohen, the Respondent replied: “...
there was a
degree of commercial gain out of growing my compounding business
a commercial arrangement
...; and he agreed he had “...
standards slip
...” [TS 194, Emphasis added];
Respondent agreed with the proposition that these activities relevant to Mr.
Cohen / IHRB (in 2010) followed on “...
from previous concerns in
relation to
drugs” (in 2005-2006). Asked to explain
to the Tribunal how he embarked on this enterprise (with Mr. Cohen / IHRB)
a mixture of
drugs, at a time
already under investi
by the HCCC for “...problems with
drugs...” the Respondent replied: “
As I stated
before, I believed at the time that what I was doing was within the realms of my
legal obligations. I understand that’s
not the case
...[and]...
ignorant of my obligations
...” [TS 194-195].
agreed with Counsel’s proposition that at the relevant time of the supply
of medications to Mr. Cohen / IHRB, having
regard to the problems related to Dr.
Wong, Respondent was “...right on top of
requirements
imposed on...[him]...at that time.”; and he attributed his providing such
products to “...
once again, my trusting
...[and]...
I don’t know why I trusted him. God only knows. I
wish I didn’t trust him
.” [TS 195]. He agreed that apart from
Minoxidil solutions, he was also providing Mr. Cohen with Loniten and Proscar
and that he recognised the dangers in doing that but could offer no
reason why he didn’t recognize it at the relevant time
of supply. The
Respondent thought Mr. Cohen sounded like an expert causing him to
let his guard down
...” having being convinced he said,
because “...
I’m inherently trusting
.” He accepted that
in relation to a number of supplies of medications, he was not presented with a
valid prescription. [TS
Respondent told the Tribunal that the Pharmacy was part of the Pharmacy Guild of
Australia (PGA)
Quality Care Pharmacy Program
(QCPP) since 2003 which
included his receiving procedure manuals dealing with
drugs; and he did not consult such publications or any other
manuals, guidelines, regulations, rules, standards of conduct, during
relevant periods of the First and Second Complaints because he was confident he
was knowledgeable about them;
the Respondent first encountered Mr. Cohen, he told the Tribunal, he was
under the “
financial pressures
as he was at the time of
the matters relevant to the First Complaint, but that
his trust in him was
. He agreed that he had totally abrogated his responsibility to
speak to individual customers about the use of the products supplied
Cohen; and abrogated his responsibilities in relation to ‘patient
Respondent’s re-examination—as
to both First and Second Complaints
re-examination, the Respondent told the Tribunal of aspects of his various
academic, professional, family, charity fund-raising
and sporting activities. He
confirmed his membership of the PCCA, the association whose members are
compounding pharmacists including
his involvement as a speaker in a training
session. He also told the Tribunal of his employment over the years, of Pharmacy
assisting them to complete their graduation year prior to registration
as pharmacists. He has sought information as to the availability
course having been made aware of his conduct
relevant to the two Complaints before the Tribunal and how he had let himself
such admitted conduct;
Respondent explained those qualifications to his admissions (described above)
concerning patients identified in Complainant’s
”. Following Mr. Hughes
Dr. Wong he would not
longer dispense his prescriptions for
benzodiazepines
anabolic steroids
...”. He later contacted Dr. Bitlan and “...
made sure she
was aware of what Dr. Wong was prescribing...”
decision to “...
cease dispensing
...[his]...
prescriptions
substances such as
...[those above]...”
whether he had “...many discussions with the staff about this
matter...” the Respondent told the Tribunal that he
had; and that these
involved instructing everybody to be vigilant about not dispensing
scripts for those items
...” and telling them the reason for his
actions. He then returned remaining stocks of
; and since then,
no steroids have been supplied by the Pharmacy other than for therapeutic
by his Counsel to tell the Tribunal about his conduct with respect to the First
and Second Complaints, the Respondent apologized
for such conduct and expressed
his shame “...
as an individual and as a
professional
...[and]...
what that has meant to the outward showing of the
profession as well
...[and that]...
once I realised and understood that my
actions were wrong, I righted them straight away
....”; Without seeking
to detract from his admitted conduct relevant to both Complaints, he told the
Tribunal that such conduct
“...not who I am as a pharmacist and I go out there and I care for
people and that’s why I got into the profession in
the first place and
that’s why I’ve got myself into trouble in the
past...[because]...I’ve cared too much and
let myself not be
by the Tribunal as to the reason
prescribed restricted substances
included in
Schedule 4D
Schedule 4B
, the Respondent answered
because they are drugs of potential abuse
would have learn
at my first year of
registration
.” [TS 239] He did not recall ever talking to Dr. Wong
Respondent that in the recorded interview with him on 18 March 2008 (at p 50 of
Exhibit C-17), he confirmed having said to
Dr. Wong that he should stop
prescribing
anabolic steroids
, because it was getting “out of
hand” and that he was concerned “absolutely’ about the
quantity of such medications.
The Respondent agreed that this suggested that he
had spoken to Dr. Wong about the dangers of his prescribing but he was unable to
say when this occurred; but “...
it must have been
to Mr. Hughes bringing the matter to the Respondent’s attention; [TS 242]
When taken to the example of the
quantity and frequency of dispensing of various
benzodiazepines
to a particular patient, the Respondent told the Tribunal
there was no therapeutic justification for such medications; in explanation
I was misguided in myself
Respondent told the Tribunal concerning the period of dispensing of
generally, relevant to the First Complaint, that although a copy of
‘MIMS’—(“ ...
a comprehensive reference guide with all
of the product information in it
...[including only those uses]...
for use in Australia by the Therapeutic Goods Administration
...[required in a pharmacy or an equivalent publication]...
to ensure the
correct use of medication
”)—was available at the Pharmacy, he
didn’t think it occurred to him to consult MIMS concerning the
medications; nor to ascertain whether ‘
was an authorised use approved by the TGA; but he said
[at TS 247-248]:
“I was aware it...[body building]...wasn’t approved...
but I was not aware that was actually an illegal thing...I thought
it was more
to do with the marketing of the drug.”
by the Tribunal whether at the time relevant to the dispensing of the
he was aware of any publications highlighting the
and their abuse, the Respondent answered: “
I was generally aware that steroids had been abused
...[and he was
at that time of the dangers from abuse of steroids
was taken to his earlier evidence that the
he applied in
supplying the
, in effect, that the prescriber was reputable; and
he knew what these patients were using them for; and he “...
were going to get them from somewhere...[and]...I figured it was better to get
them from someone like myself who was...accessible
...[and]...
someone is looking after them a little bit while they are still going to do what
they are doing
going to do
.” He was then
asked by the Tribunal as to whether he had any views as to whether the above
approach may well have contributed
to any adverse effects on the recipients of
to which he responded: “
It’s quite possible
that it did
.” [TS 248];
Respondent, asked by the Tribunal about his legal obligations including
compliance with the PTGA having received lectures on such
obligations whilst he
was at university, whether in supplying the excessive amounts of
, did such education not occur to him as to the need to comply
with the law, he replied: “...
It did not. No
.” Asked what
caused him not to so comply, the Respondent answered: “...
it’s a case of the geographical situation of having a doctor across the
road prescribing them a lot and being careless
in regards to my
obligations
...” [TS 250] Asked by the Tribunal what he regarded as a
pharmacist’s professional function in the community, Respondent
To care for the patients and make sure they are using their
medications carefully and safely
.” He conceded that in supplying
relevantly, the
benzodiazepines
clearly shows a lack of care...
” [TS 251];
Respondent further conceded he was not acting in compliance with legal
requirements in supplying
medications to Mr. Cohen. Asked by
the Tribunal, he agreed that the “...
custodial role of the
pharmacist...of drugs in their control, their possession and supply, is the most
fundamental obligation of as
.” Concerning the addition of
unknown and unidentified ingredients supplied to him by Mr. Cohen, to the
medications compounded
by the Respondent, he told the Tribunal, he was
...” about doing this as he did not know their
source and “...
wasn’t sure of what was in it
that he still did not know;
Evidence of Mr. Paul
Mahoney—First and Second Complaints
Mahoney gave evidence before the Tribunal with respect to the First and Second
various reports made by Mr. Mahoney on behalf of the Respondent, relevant to the
First and Second Complaint, have been identified
and described, above. It was
made clear by Mr. Mahoney that during his contacts with the Respondent relevant
to his two reports in
respect of the First Complaint, the Respondent never
raised with him, anything to do with the Second Complaint and Mr. Mahoney was
not then aware of the Second Complaint;
, at the time of Mr. Mahoney’s first contact with the
Respondent; and in June and August 2010 when he visited the Respondent’s
Pharmacy and conferred with him, a focus of their discussions was on
pharmacists’ compliance relevant to
products. One of the
questions Mr. Mahoney put to the Respondent and recorded (together with the
latter’s answers) in an annexure
to his report dated 2 August 2010
(Exhibit 2R-2, Question 5) addressed
of the PTGR and their relevance to
benzodiazepines
, specifically why did the Respondent
think these substances are so listed, to which he replied: “
In order to
restrict the usage and to ensure that the correct therapeutic reasons for use
are adhered to
The substances are commonly abused and / or
.” In his first report, Mr. Mahoney noted, that on each
occasion he visited the Pharmacy in June and July, 2012, Respondent
“...open and forthcoming with his responses to questions.” (Exhibit
2R-2). With reference to the subject matter of
the First Complaint, Mr. Mahoney
described the Respondent as being “...very aware of the serious
misjudgments he made at the
time of these events.” Although Mr. Mahoney
told the Tribunal that a pharmacist can make misjudgments and “...in the
course of a day...mistakes can be made...”, he told the Tribunal in
effect, that such a categorisation would be unlikely over
a 12 month period [TS
Mahoney agreed with Complainant’s Counsel, that it was very disappointing
to have to go back to the Respondent’s Pharmacy
relevant to another
instance of inappropriately dispensing
drugs. Counsel put a
question to Mr. Mahoney, whether given the system in operation relevant to the
Second Complaint whereby an unqualified
person (Mr. Cohen) nearby to the
Pharmacy, sends a written order for example requesting “...80 bottles of
...[solution]...in
24 hours...and don’t worry I will give you the script
later.” such would be covered by a ‘prescription owing’
emergency type situation, Mr. Mahoney responded that such supply would be
illegal. [TS 268]
re-examination, Respondent’s Counsel explored with Mr. Mahoney, the nature
and extent of what Mr. Mahoney had introduced
during cross-examination relevant
to the First Complaint concerning the purpose of prescribed medications, i.e.
the expression “
Off Label Use
”. Mr. Mahoney explained it by
examples, to the effect that although a medication is approved by the TGA for
use in a particular
condition, such approved medication might be prescribed for
another, non-approved, condition, in effect, if a prescriber is satisfied
evidence of its safety and efficacy, “...without breaking any
regulation.” In response to its question, Mr. Mahoney
told the Tribunal
that in his experience, he had never encountered ‘
as an appropriate, non-approved or
Testimonial evidence on behalf of
in the nature of
testimonials
tendered by the Respondent were admitted
into evidence before the Tribunal as
(Dr. Edward
Lurie, 2 February 2012) ;
(Mr. Geoff Coombes, 11 July 2012);
Exhibit 2R-5
(Mr. Frank Raue, 3 July 2012);
Exhibit 2R-6
Y. Yan, 25 June 2012);
Exhibit 2R-7
(Dr. Jenny Giam, 19 June 2012); and
Exhibit 2R-8
(Dr. Andrew Watson, 16 June 2012). Further to the
Tribunal’s enquiry as to whether each of the above person had been shown a
copy of both the First and Second Complaints, Respondent’s Counsel
confirmed that this had been done; and further informed
the Tribunal that none
of the above authors wished to amend their testimonial letters [TS
is a Medical Practitioner at the
George Street Medical Centre
in Sydney and has known the Respondent for nine years as a pharmacist and
proprietor of the Pharmacy, during which he “...
always found him to be
a knowledgeable and competent pharmacist...
[and that]...
his conduct has
always been of a highly professional and honest
had known the Respondent since 2009 when he joined a cycling charity
organisation—dedicated to raising funds and awareness
“...fight against cancer”—of which Mr. Coombes was co-founder
and a Board member. Mr. Coombes endorsed the
Respondent generally; and noted
that he is frequently asked to provide pharmaceutical and health care advice to
bike riders associated
with the organization, known as
Tour de Cure
has also personally relied on the Respondent’s “...skills as a
compounding pharmacist...” for his family;
is General manager and Company Secretary of
Professional Compounding
Chemists of Australia
(PCCA) which provides “...accredited training,
education and technical support to pharmacists and is licensed by the...TGA
supply active pharmaceutical ingredients and devices used in the compounding of
medicines by pharmacists.” Mr. Raue has
known the Respondent since the
latter became a PCCA member in
and since then has had regular
professional development (CPD)
activities and “...via regular visits to
his pharmacy and over the phone.” Mr. Raue regards the Respondent as
a highly regarded compounding pharmacist within PCCA.
has attended PCCA training courses as a speaker, assisting PCCA in
explaining to new members how to go about establishing a contemporary
compounding practice in Australia
.” Mr. Raue
...[the Respondent]...
to be one of the most
professional pharmacists I have come into contact with in my 30 year career in
the Australian healthcare industry
. Mr. Raue stated “....
genuinely believe that...
[the Respondent]...
regrets the error in judgment
that he has made in the past with his involvement with Mr. Samuel
[and that]...
this incident is completely out of
character.”
Mr. Raue expressed confidence in the Respondent
after a number of in depth discussions
...” with him, that
his compounding practice complies with relevant regulations and practice
guidelines;
Kwok Y. Yan
is a consultant physician in allergy, respiratory and sleep
medicine with his practice located in Pitt Street, Sydney. He had known
Respondent “...on a professional basis...” for more than six years,
during which he had been compounding prescription
nasal sprays for Dr.
Yan’s patients. He expressed the “...
utmost confidence
the Respondent]...
...[has]...
no question or doubt about his high
level of professionalism
...[having]...
...[his]...
patients for many years
showing compassion, care
and professional diligence
.” Dr. Yan has visited the
Respondent’s compounding laboratory several times and found that it is of
high ethical and professional standard
continues to refer his patients to the Respondent as “...
he can trust
the quality of his work and the high level of care he
demonstrates
holds the degree of Bachelor of Pharmacy (Honours) and a PhD. and has
been registered as a pharmacist since 1982; and since 2002,
she has been the
Technical and Training Manager at PCCA. She has known the Respondent since he
first attended PCCA activities and
since then has had regular contact with him.
She described how in her interactions with the Respondent she had found him
of the most
rofessional pharmacists I
...[and]...
of exceptionally good character with very high
ethical and professional standards.”
Dr. Giam described how
when PCCA first offered a Quality Assurance course to educate
compounding pharmacists on quality and standards in pharmacy compounding,
Respondent was one of the first to participate and implement improved standards
in his pharmacy
.” Dr. Giam believed the Respondent
regrets his poor judgment in becoming involved with Mr. Samuel
.” Given her professional interactions with the Respondent for
almost 10 years, Dr. Giam considers the Respondent’s relevant
completely out of character
...[and she is]...
he will ensure his compounding
practice complies
strictly with the relevant regulations and practice
Andrew Watson
practises as a medical practitioner at the Medical Centre
referred to earlier. He confirms his continuing “...
strong professional
relationship
...” with the Respondent in whom he has observed
great diligence, courtesy and high professional standards in order
to secure the best possible clinical outcomes for our patients
Watson expressed his “...
strong opinion that
Respondent]...
is a highly valued and respectable member of the pharmaceutical
Submissions
Counsel helpfully provided the Tribunal with a written outline of submissions in
advance of their final addresses during which
each provided further, detailed
submissions relevant to their outlines and responded to questions from the
Tribunal. Their submissions
are not repeated in their entirety in these
but the Tribunal has taken them into account in reaching its
determinations;
Complainant’s submissions—an
Complainant
cancellation
of the Respondent’s registration as a
pharmacist was the appropriate and only,
order sought by the
Complainant;
First Complaint
, Counsel for the Complainant submitted that the
Tribunal should reject the Respondent’s suggestion that in supplying the
medications
relevantly, when he knew they were to be used for
purposes, that he was mistaken or misguided; and further, the
Tribunal should reject his attempted justification for his actions
and reject as
well, the Respondent’s suggested reason that it was better that such
recipients of the medications to receive
them from him rather than from an
unsafe source. Counsel emphasised the contrast between the Respondent’s
evidence and that
pharmacist, Mr. Hughes, whose prompt
identification of the extent of dispensing of
at the Pharmacy
and his immediate action notifying the Respondent of this; and Mr.
Hughes’s refusal to engage in such dispensing,
epitomised the proper
response to prescriptions of the kind issued by Dr. Wong. Counsel emphasised as
important for the Tribunal
to note, that it was only by Mr. Hughes’
intervention, that the relevant dispensing conduct came to an
referred to some factual matters that were in issue concerning some evidence
from the Respondent relevant to the patients
identified in Tables
and the doctors who issued the prescriptions for them, none of which the
Complainant challenged; it was submitted that it
is for the Tribunal to
determine whether such matters have been proved, but even if professional
misconduct is not proved relevant
to those particular patients, this does not
detract from the overall complaint established by the Complainant and by the
Respondent’s
admissions of professional misconduct;
was submitted that the Respondent had demonstrated little
his admitted conduct; and has failed to accept that his actions were deliberate
breaches of the relevant laws and professional
standards governing his conduct
at the relevant time. Counsel noted the words of
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
expressed intention not to re-offend is relevant to
mitigation, it will have little weight unless accompanied by an understanding
the wrongfulness of the conduct...the subject of the disciplinary
noted that the Respondent did not challenge the report of Mr. Gavrilovic nor the
opinions expressed by Mr. Luddington in his
peer review
report. The
Complainant accepted the dates admitted by the Respondent reflecting the actual
supply by him, of the relevant medications;
and noted that supplies dispensed by
others at the Pharmacy also occurred within those periods. Counsel noted that
the broader date
range as particularised in the First Complaint included
dispensing of the medications at the Pharmacy by others and that, the Respondent
accepted that he was the pharmacist-in-charge of the Pharmacy; and noted also,
that the Respondent accepted that the dispensing records
including the history
of all dispensing of such medications, were available at all times, to assist a
determination as to whether
a particular prescription should be
was the Complainant’s submission concerning the contested issue as to when
precisely, the Respondent spoke to Dr. Wong or
his associates, that this
communication did not occur until probably, after October 2006; noting that the
recorded interview (Exhibit
C-5) with Dr. Wong between officers of the PSB and
Dr. Wong occurred on 31 October 2006. Counsel referred to Dr. Bitlan’s
evidence before the Tribunal concerning her first awareness of Dr. Wong’s
prescribing and this was when the PSB officers visited
Dr. Wong. The Tribunal
notes that Dr. Bitlan’s evidence was also to the effect, that she heard
from the Respondent only after
the PSB visit. Counsel submitted that it was only
as a result of the interventions of others that brought about the cessation of
such activity by the Respondent; and that once Dr. Wong was dealt with in
October 2006, there was a complete cessation of such activity;
Complainant submitted that the Respondent’s admitted conduct was extremely
serious especially given the issue of the protection
of the public, the
quantities of
benzodiazepines
supplied and over such
a significant period, to the recipients as particularised. Counsel submitted
that the Tribunal would disregard
the Respondent’s attempts to justify
such dispensing; and further submitted that the Respondent’s evidence
explanation as to why he engaged in such an activity over such a long
period, although the Respondent rejected the suggestion it
was commercially
motivated. Counsel noted in this context, that all relevant prescriptions for
benzodiazepines
prescriptions
(i.e. not issued pursuant to the
Pharmaceutical
[PBS]) and that the Tribunal could come to its own
conclusions concerning the benefit of such dispensing;
was submitted that the Respondent’s admitted conduct could justify
cancellation of his registration as a pharmacist; and
that cancellation would
achieve some consistency between the Medical Tribunal’s cancellation of
Dr. Wong’s registration—even
though he had served a period of
suspension—and the Pharmacy Tribunal’s determination, concerning the
Respondent;
the Respondent’s evidence on a number of occasions, to the effect he did
not engage in his admitted conduct or breach
the relevant regulations (PTGR),
intentionally, Counsel submitted that the Tribunal should reject such evidence,
as a pharmacist
with the Respondent’s experience ought to have known such
conduct breached the regulations and was contrary to the relevant
practice. Whilst accepting the Respondent’s admissions including that of
professional misconduct, Counsel submitted
that his claim, not to have
deliberately breached regulations or codes of conduct, detracts from his
assertion that he “owned”
the mistakes he made; and his reasons for
supplying the relevant medications contrary to his legal obligations cannot
justify what
he did; in contrast to the action taken by Mr. Hughes. It was
submitted that whilst the Respondent had gone some way to admitting
professional misconduct, he still seeks to justify it in some
Complainant emphasised also, that quite apart from the notoriety (of abuse) of
the relevant medications, the ready availability
to the Respondent of the
publication ‘MIMS’ which he failed to consult, would have alerted
him had he consulted it prior
to supplying the medications. As to any suggested
element of being ‘negligent’ in his admitted supply of the
medications,
Complainant’s Counsel submitted that perhaps on one occasion,
a single, inappropriate dispensing might possibly be so categorized
such a lengthy period as admitted by the Respondent, there was a continuing
preparedness and willingness, to continue
what was completely contrary to the
“principles of Pharmacy” and the law applying to control of
submitted that it was unfortunate from the evidence, that there is no
understanding of the
of the arrangement between the Respondent
and Dr. Wong; but it was plain that it was an enterprise entered into by the
Respondent;
and a matter of grave concern requiring the Tribunal’s careful
consideration in relation to the protection of the public in
was submitted that the Respondent had not been “ completely frank”
as to why, having received Dr. Bitlan’s evidence,
he later contacted her
to amend it by the addition of “August 2006”; and Counsel suggested
it seemed to be an attempt
“to fit” Dr. Bitlan’s evidence with
that of Mr. Hughes and that as such, it was a matter of some concern. Counsel
submitted that the Tribunal should reject the Respondent’s evidence that
he immediately contacted Dr. Bitlan following Mr.
Hughes’ contacting him,
although Counsel noted that from about August 2006 onwards, there was a
significant decrease in the
number of relevant prescriptions
Respondent’s evidence before the Tribunal to the effect that he was
“overly trusting”, Counsel submitted
this cannot be a justification
for his admitted misconduct, as a pharmacist is required to be objective in such
matters; and that
a pharmacist cannot simply accept that as in this case, Dr.
Wong is looking after and monitoring, these patients; especially Counsel
when Dr. Wong was self-prescribing
benzodiazepines
in excessive
quantities. It was submitted that a pharmacist’s
“intermediary” role cannot be ignored by merely accepting
prescriber’s written order; and in this matter, the Respondent ignored
this intermediate step to be fulfilled by him;
Second Complaint
and the Respondent’s admitted conduct,
Counsel submitted that this complaint arose at a time when the Respondent was
aware he was being investigated with respect to the First Complaint. It
was further submitted that “there is a real sense”
that an increase
in the business of the Pharmacy was the motivation for Respondent’s
conduct; and that his compounding took
place in the absence of prescriptions and
in the expectation that a large amount of the compounded product would be
supplied to Mr.
Cohen. Counsel referred also, to the reports of Ms. Goodman in
evidence before the Tribunal, and her concerns with Respondent’s
products and without the
maintenance of the pharmacist’s “intermediate position”
between medications and users,
as an opportunity to provide relevant information
responsibilities;
respect of the supply of the relevant medications to Mr. Cohen in the
expectation of a valid prescription, it was submitted that
such supply was not
in accordance with supply on a “
Counsel submitted that if the Respondent prepared medication in the belief that
he would receive a prescription from
Mr. Cohen and if he was fulfilling his
responsibilities as a pharmacist appropriately, then on the first or second
occasion when
a prescription was not forthcoming, such practice ought to have
ceased. Counsel noted the significant quantities of compounded medications
provided to Mr. Cohen, in effect empowering him to do with these products as he
wished; thereby allowing a “complete bypass”
of the system set in
place by the law and professional standards, applicable to the Respondent as a
registered pharmacist;
noted that the Respondent in his written
to the Second Notice
of Complaint
, disputed the period particularised in paragraph 9 of the
Particulars—“...between March 2010 and September
2010...”—but
he admitted the period “...between March 2010
and...mid April 2010...” during which he had added the unknown substances
) at Mr. Cohen’s request; and had also admitted in the
that “...no later than April 2010 he ceased
adding...[them]...to the compounded preparations...”; Counsel submitted
Schedule “C”
to the Second Complaint (Schedules prepared
by the HCCC) identified the occasions between March and September 2010, when PGX
added to the solutions compounded at the Pharmacy;
was further submitted, that the Tribunal would be concerned by the
Respondent’s arrangement entered into with Mr. Cohen;
by the absence of
prescriptions to support many supplies of
products and by
supply to Mr. Cohen; and by the Respondent’s
failure to ensure patients were appropriately warned about use and storage, of
the supplied products;
submitted that it was open to the Tribunal to cancel the Respondent’s
registration given the seriousness of his conduct
and his admitted professional
misconduct in two distinct periods; and that such seriousness may warrant an
order of cancellation
being made for either or both periods of misconduct.
Counsel cited some decisions of the NSW Medical Tribunal including its decision
concerning Dr. Wong, which he described as apposite to the Respondent in the
First Complaint, noting the Medical Tribunal’s
recognition that improper
handling of restricted substances for the purpose of
, can constitute professional misconduct. Counsel emphasised the
Tribunal’s main consideration in the exercise of its jurisdiction,
protection of the public, which includes maintenance of the high standards of
the profession; and deterrence;
acknowledged there had been delay in bringing the matters before the Tribunal, a
matter he submitted, the Tribunal should
take into account together with all the
circumstances surrounding the Respondent’s conduct and subsequent events.
It was submitted
that unlike in
Burton v Anderson
(NSWCA Unreported 29
October 1994) the Respondent could not claim that the period following that of
the First Complaint has been without
further professional misconduct. He cited
also, another medical Tribunal decision,
HCCC v Bosnich
[2012] NSWMT 15,
as relevant to the delay between the time of the investigation and that of the
Tribunal’s decision. However,
mindful of the decision of the (then) NSW
Pharmacy Board in
[1997] NSWPB (8 October 1997) which deregistered
the pharmacist despite evidence that he had “cleaned up” the
in his pharmacy and his chance of re-offending was minimal, Counsel
submitted that in the circumstances of the Respondent, he demonstrated
disregard for the relevant rules and regulations in the face of pending
disciplinary proceedings concerning those matters
included in the First
Complaint, by engaging in the conduct relevant to the Second Complaint.
involved the supply mainly, of
benzodiazepines
included some
anabolic steroids
amphetamine
was submitted that the Tribunal must have regard for the whole of the
Respondent’s conduct; and although it might be suggested
that the Second
Complaint is less serious than the First Complaint, it must be remembered that
the misconduct relevant to the Second
Complaint commenced when the Respondent
was aware of a complaint having been made about his earlier conduct. Counsel
submitted that
the Second Complaint shows the Respondent’s continuing
disregard of the legal and professional obligations imposed on him as
pharmacist;
factor submitted as relevant to the Tribunal’s determination of protective
orders, was that between December 2006 and
June 2011, no practice
were imposed on the Respondent arising from the conduct
relevant to the First Complaint—it was only when the matters the subject
of the Second Complaint were discovered, that
were imposed on
his practice with which the Complainant accepted, the Responded had
Complainant sought an order for
in its favour and acknowledged that
it ought not be awarded costs in relation to the delay caused by the amendments
to Particulars
8 and 11 in the First Complaint. Counsel provided a document to
the Tribunal and to Respondent’s Counsel, setting out the course
changes made to the First Complaint. Counsel confirmed for the
Respondent’s information, that in matters before the Tribunal
Complainant seeks costs only from the time a complaint is lodged with the
Respondent’s submissions—an
Respondent’s
Counsel challenged the conclusions submitted by the Complainant concerning Dr.
Bitlan’s evidence including
her two letters addressing when it was the
Respondent contacted her; and submitted that there was no evidence before the
that the PSB Officers visited her in October 2006; further submitting
that the Respondent contacted Dr. Bitlan as a result of Mr.
Hughes contacting
him in August 2006 and as a result of which took relevant steps including
counselling his staff to be vigilant
and not to dispense Dr. Wong’s
prescriptions for the subject medications;
to the First Complaint, subject to the allegations referable to patients
Respondent’s Counsel noted that the relevant conduct had been admitted;
was submitted that the Respondent is a person of good character and is regarded
as an ethical and professional pharmacist and that
the testimonial support of
those persons (described above) whose opinions were in evidence, supported this
submission; that he has
been actively involved with PCCA and has been involved
in an educational role and
extending to the regular and
ongoing, placement of university students in his pharmacy for one to two week
‘blocks’ and
the employment
of students, part-time. Although
the Respondent “...suffered from anxiety...” it was submitted he is
fit to practise;
referred to the Respondent’s “...remedial steps...” in
evidence, about his contacting Dr. Wong and ceasing
to dispense the medications
relevant to the First Complaint; returning stocks of
instructions to all staff to be vigilant and not to dispense prescriptions for
the relevant medications prescribed by Dr.
Wong; and that, since August 2006,
the relevant conduct has not been repeated; nor it was submitted, has there been
any repetition
of the conduct which occurred over five months in
was Counsel’s submission that the evidence showed that the Respondent had
not sought to conceal his conduct nor did he falsify
any records; and that he
cooperated with the relevant investigations from the outset and made frank
admissions; and, although explaining
during his evidence, that he was under
various stresses—financial, emotional and physical—the Respondent
did not seek
to offer these as excuses for his conduct; and that his cooperation
with the investigators, his admissions made to them and the manner
and conduct
of the proceedings before the Tribunal, indicated the Respondent’s
contrition and insight—demonstrated by
his efforts to enroll in an
course for pharmacists but which, following his enquiries of the
Pharmacy Faculty at Sydney University, was not available but he
remains willing
to undertake such a course;
in effect, the cause of the Respondent’s relevant conduct, Counsel
submitted that the Respondent had admitted unsatisfactory
professional conduct
and professional misconduct despite the “fact” that his lack of
vigilance might “...to a degree
be understood...” in the stressful
circumstances he described; but that, he nevertheless admits that the breaches
of his obligations
came about “...through his own
negligence”;
submitted it was established, that any orders the Tribunal might impose are not
punitive in nature but for the protection
of the public; and that the Respondent
would submit to and cooperate with, any conditions the Tribunal might impose on
his practice
as he had done with respect to the conditions imposed on his
practice relevant to the Second Complaint, concerning ‘compounding’
which has improved his practice in that area. Counsel also submitted that the
Respondent would embrace any ethics or other courses,
that the Tribunal might
consider appropriate; and that he would be pleased to engage with a
for such period as might be ordered;
decided cases in the Pharmacy Tribunal and Medical Tribunal were cited by
Respondent’s Counsel by way of comparison of
the circumstances in such
cases, with the Respondent’s conduct, should the Tribunal be of the view
of registration was indicated;
the order for
sought by the Complainant, Counsel submitted that if
so ordered, the Respondent would suffer a significant financial detriment given
the costs to him personally, of these proceedings before the Tribunal;
additionally, Counsel submitted that the Tribunal should have
regard for the
costs “...incurred and thrown away by the conduct of the complaints by the
Complainant, including the “...many
iterations of the complaint and two
iterations of the peer report in connection with the first
complaint.”;
submitted that the dispensing of those medications the subject of the First
Complaint by other pharmacists at the Pharmacy
in the period nominated in the
Complaint, has no direct bearing upon the particulars of complaint against the
Respondent; although
Counsel accepted such dispensing by other pharmacists as a
” matter relevant to the Respondent’s
capacity to alert himself to “...what was going on in the
pharmacy.”;
was the Respondent’s submission that the Complainant’s citing
(during its submissions) of the Medical Tribunal’s
decision to de-register
Dr. Wong and the submitted need for this Tribunal to make protective orders
consistent with that decision,
was inappropriate and amounted to a punitive
approach, not one properly designed to protect the public. Counsel emphasised
the Tribunal to rely upon the Medical Tribunal’s decision for the
purpose urged by the Complainant, when the facts and circumstances
adequately summarised in the decision, would lead the Tribunal “...into
error...” and should not be accepted;
submitted that according to the Respondent’s evidence, the
Complainant’s submission to the effect that it did
not accept that the
Respondent did not intentionally “...breach the rules...” was in
effect, flawed; and that at the
relevant time, the Respondent knew that
prescribed (for body building) was not a TGA-approved indication
but he was not aware it was illegal if prescribed by a doctor. Counsel
to the Respondent’s evidence and submitted that he is not seeking to
abrogate his responsibilities nor to minimize
them but with
“...hindsight...reflection and with insight...” he accepts it was
neglect on his part and he should not
have done what he did; Counsel reminded
the Tribunal that when it was put to the Respondent that his “...head down
approach...”
was “unprofessional”, he replied that if he knew
it to be unprofessional he wouldn’t continue such
to the Tribunal’s question as to whether at the time relevant to the First
Complaint—and to the Second Complaint
to the extent the latter included
medications—the Respondent knew his obligations pursuant
to the PTGA and PTGR, Counsel responded by reference to selected parts
evidence, that the Respondent was aware of such obligations but “...in the
circumstances at the time, he didn’t
check what he was doing or check
prescriptions against provisions of the Act..”; and that the Respondent
acknowledged that
in not doing so, he was “negligent” in the sense
that “...he turned his mind to it and nevertheless embarked upon
conduct.” Counsel accepted that the Respondent had the means of knowing
the relevant provisions of the PTGA and PTGR at
the times he dispensed the
relevant medications; Counsel further described such as: “Globally he knew
but he didn’t have
it in the forefront of his mind when it should have
been.” Counsel again submitted such failures by the Respondent to comply
with his professional and statutory obligations, were not
deliberate;
Respondent’s
Counsel submitted that Mr. Mahoney’s opinions expressed in his reports and
in his evidence before the Tribunal,
were not challenged, as to his current
pharmacy practices being acceptable and his understanding of the PTGR and of the
responsibilities
of a pharmacist to the community; and submitted that the
Respondent is a fit and proper person to remain as a practising pharmacist.
Counsel further submitted that the Complainant had ample opportunity to take
issue with Mr. Mahoney’s reports by obtaining
the views of another
pharmacist, but had not done so; accordingly, he submitted, the Tribunal should
accept Mr. Mahoney’s opinions
in evidence before it. Counsel cited a
Medical Tribunal decision to the effect that even where there is a finding of
serious misconduct,
deregistration does not necessarily follow if at the time of
the hearing, present unfitness has not been demonstrated; and accordingly,
present fitness to practice is a relevant consideration:
HCCC v Dr.Bao-Quy
Nguyen-Phuoc
–NSW Medical Tribunal (No. 40028 of 2009) 7 December
Complainant’s further submissions—in
reply to the Respondent’s Counsel’s submission about the absence of
evidence before the Tribunal as to the October
2006 date when PSB officers
visited the Medical Practice, Complainant’s Counsel cited the Record of
Interview conducted with
Dr. Wong by PSB officers at the Medical Practice, on 31
October 2006, in evidence as Exhibit C-5;
Complainant’s
Counsel referred to the Respondent’s submission, in effect, that relevant
to his admitted conduct, the Respondent
was negligent; and submitted the
Tribunal should reject such categorisation, as negligence cannot ever extend to
a period of in
excess of a year;
Findings—First
Tribunal has carefully considered the evidence and by applying the requisite
standard in
, is reasonably satisfied consistent with the
Respondent’s admissions, that the particulars of the
First Complaint
as amended, in paragraphs
1, 2, and 3,
including the lesser periods
of supply of the subject medications admitted by the Respondent in his
Response to Notice of Complaint
(the “Response”), have been
proved; such admitted lesser periods are those in which the Respondent
personally supplied
the subject medications;
the particulars in
paragraph 4
of the Complaint and accepting the
Respondent’s admissions concerning the supply of the medications, as set
out in each of
the “Tables” particularised; and the lesser periods
of supply admitted by the Respondent in which he personally supplied
the subject
medications, the Tribunal turns to consider the balance of the particulars
concerning breach of the PTGR in respect of
supply set out in
denied by the Respondent in his Response;
Tribunal notes in
Table “”GG”
(a member of the
benzodiazepine
class) tablets the Respondent
dispensed on 16 September 2005 (25 tablets ordered with prescriber instructions
for one to two, to be
taken at night when necessary) followed the
Pharmacy’s dispensing (not by the Respondent personally) of 100
on 25 August 2005 when there were no prescriber’s
directions for use, which suggests that if one or two were to be taken at
night—as instructed on the above 16 September 2005 prescription—then
by the next date it would seem, some of the earlier
supply should have remained.
The Tribunal also notes that Dr. Greig was the prescriber of three of the five
and Dr. Perko
prescribed the other two; and that on 20 March 2006—approximately five
months after he last prescribed
for the patient—Dr. Greig
according to
issued two prescriptions
for the patient each for 100 tablets with directions on each,
for one tablet to be taken at night, when necessary; and each of those
prescriptions was dispensed on 27 June 2006 as admitted by the
Respondent—approximately seven months since he dispensed the
prescription on 19 October 2005.
Tribunal has considered the Respondent’s evidence [at TS 227-228]
concerning the patient identified in
effect that he was a long-standing, regular patient with chronic conditions,
aged about 70 years, whom the Respondent had
known since he acquired the
Pharmacy in 2003; and that his treating doctor was known to the Respondent and
practised in the city,
near to the Pharmacy. The Respondent did not regard these
supplies as inappropriate or illegitimate. The Tribunal has also considered
evidence of Mr. Luddington relevant to Table “GG”. In the absence of
any further evidence including the reasons for
the relevant prescribing on 20
March 2006, the Tribunal cannot be reasonably satisfied that the particulars in
paragraph 4 as they apply to
are proved.
However, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the remainder of the
particulars in
paragraph 4
of the First Complaint are proved;
Respondent admitted the supply to the patient identified in
as particularised in
paragraph 5
of the Particulars
of the First Complaint but for the period of supply specified therein. The
Respondent admitted supply in the period
2 November 2005 to 7 December 2006; and
the Tribunal accepts this admitted period. Concerning the patient identified in
the Respondent admitted that he personally
phentermine
on 8 November 2005, 23 December 2005, and 19 May
2006, but he denied the balance of the particulars concerning breach of the
The Tribunal notes (as did Mr. Luddington) that
phentermine
indicated for short-term therapy to assist weight loss. Mr. Luddington noted
that it is recommended for use for four to six weeks,
to a maximum of 12 weeks.
Taken in accordance with the prescriber’s instructions of one daily as
ordered for each dispensing
of 30 capsules, such supply would normally last 30
days. It is noted that treatment with
phentermine
for the patient in
commenced with the Pharmacy’s dispensing in
July 2005 and was last dispensed on 25 September 2006; and that within such
there were intervals between dispensing of approximately, four months and
three intervals each of two months. The Respondent confirmed
that pharmacists
were able to readily access a patient’s dispensing history. In his
evidence he remained of the view that the
supplies of
phentermine
were therapeutically appropriate.
Having regard for the evidence and in the absence of any further evidence
concerning the patient
identified in
, the Tribunal
is not reasonably satisfied that the particulars in
paragraph 5
proved. However, accepting the Respondent’s admissions to the period of
supply (as above) the Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that
paragraph 5
with respect to the particulars relevant to
been proved;
Respondent admitted the particulars in
Paragraph 9
of the First Complaint
but for the period of supply particularised in respect of which the Respondent
admits a lesser period—10
August 2005 to 2 May 2006 –being the
period in which he admitted personally dispensing the
anabolic / androgenic
. During his evidence the Respondent described the prescriber of
testosterone
for the patient identified as “III” (in
) in paragraph 9 (hh) as not being connected to Dr. Wong;
and the conditions for which he was being treated with the above medication;
described also, how the patient was well known to the Respondent. However, the
Respondent did not challenge the absence of ‘
on the five occasions he dispensed the medication to
” out of a total of 15, the balance of which were
dispensed at the Pharmacy by other pharmacists. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that
Paragraph 9
of the particulars with the above, lesser
period admitted by the Respondent, has been proved;
the particulars in
Paragraph 10
of the First Complaint [TS 58],
Complainant’s Counsel referred to the Respondent’s Response with
respect to these particulars,
which were admitted, but not as to the period
particularised therein; and noted that the Respondent did not specify any other
in his Response. Before the Tribunal, the Respondent maintained his
admissions to Paragraph 10 and confirmed that he did not have
wholesaler’s
[TS 233] Having
considered the evidence, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that
of the particulars has been proved;
paragraph 11
of the Particulars of the First Complaint, the Respondent
In his Response, admitted that in the period particularised, he did not
for the receipt and supplies of the specified medications in response to
served on him pursuant to Section 35 of the PTGA ; and that he
had undertaken an extensive search for the records but could not locate
Additionally, his Response asserted that he had relied upon a representation
made to him by Mr. Gavrilovic (PSB). The Complainant
tendered at the
commencement of the Inquiry, two ‘file notes’ made by Mr.
Gavrilovic, one dated 11 December 2006 and
the other, 31 January 2007 to which
tender the Respondent objected on the basis “essentially”, of
‘procedural fairness’
in that neither File Note appears in Exhibit
C-19 (a statement made by Mr. Gavrilovic on 24 December 2009); and that Mr.
was not available for cross-examination, the Respondent having
requested he be available, but was told by the Complainant that he
was overseas,
his whereabouts were unknown and hence, he was unavailable [TS 26]. During the
first stage of the Tribunal’s
Inquiry, on 16 April 2012,
Respondent’s Counsel told the Tribunal [TS 27] that the Respondent had
experienced difficulties
in locating relevant records; and that Mr. Gavrilovic
had told him that he need only “...undertake reasonable inquiries beyond
which compliance was not required.” [TS 27]. This was the
“representation” which the Respondent relied on as noted
Response [at paragraph (c)];
the Inquiry resumed on 27 August 2012, the Complainant tendered relevant to
Paragraph 11
of the Particulars, a statement made by Mr. Gavrilovic dated
21 August 2012 a copy of which had been provided to the Respondent who
require Mr. Gavrilovic for cross-examination. Complainant’s Counsel
informed the Tribunal that arrangements were in
place if necessary, for Mr.
Gavrilovic to give evidence by telephone from London, during the afternoon on
that day. Mr. Gavrilovic’s
statement was admitted into evidence as Exhibit
C-80. It included his stated role as a Pharmaceutical Adviser with NSW Health,
Pharmaceutical
Services and that he was on extended leave until January 2013.
His statement recorded his reliance upon his diary note made on 11
2006, to the effect that the Respondent had indicated he may have difficulty in
locating his retained records in response
to the Section 35 Notice but that he
was certain...I did not tell him that ‘compliance is not
required’ as this is not something that I would ever say.
Gavrilovic believed he made it clear that should the Respondent experience
difficulty in complying with the notices, “...
he should contact the
Department immediately, as it is an offence not to comply with the notices in
” He expressed certainty about what he said as “...
something I would always say when serving such notices
.” [Exhibit
C-80, paragraph 6];
his statement, Mr. Gavrilovic described how the Respondent contacted the
Department following which “... new notices were
served, granting him an
extension of time...[in which]... to produce the records...[and]...hence the
record of my second visit to
his pharmacy on 31 January 2007 [Ibid. Paragraph
7,]. “As an experienced officer of the Department...” Mr. Gavrilovic
stated “...
I would not have diminished the importance of pharmacists
being able to fully comply with served notices
...[and]...
I would have
stressed...the pharmacist’s obligation to have compete
.’ complete’]...
and full records, which must be
made available to the Department.
” [Ibid. Paragraph 9]. During his
evidence when Complainant’s Counsel took him to what Mr. Gavrilovic
stated, to the effect
he would not have said that attributed to him by the
Respondent, the Respondent told the Tribunal he did not have “...
clear recollection of what
...[Mr. Gavrilovic]...
...[but that,
that was what he]...
.” The Respondent disagreed with the
proposition from Complainant’s Counsel, that he did not have a
recollection of anything
like what the Respondent claimed was said to him by Mr.
Gavrilovic;
considered the evidence, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that P
of the Particulars of the First Complaint has been
the state of the evidence on a contested issue as to when
Respondent notified Dr. Wong following Mr. Hughes’ notification to the
Respondent concerning the dispensing of
—including the
evidence of the Respondent and Dr. Bitlan, the Tribunal cannot be reasonably
satisfied. However, the Tribunal
accepts the Respondent’s evidence as to
approximately
, he contacted Dr. Wong. In any event, given the length
of the period contested, the Tribunal notes by way of comparison, the extensive
periods admitted by the Respondent, relevant to the First Complaint, during
which his admitted conduct occurred; and indeed, as
contextually
the periods in which relevant dispensing by other pharmacists employed by the
Respondent at his pharmacy, occurred;
Tribunal notes the Respondent’s admissions of
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
professional misconduct
in respect of the
First Complaint
. Having considered the evidence before it relevant to the
First Complaint as particularised, the Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty
unsatisfactory professional conduct
being conduct below the relevantly
expected standard as defined by Section 139B (1) (a); and improper and unethical
conduct pursuant
to Section 139B (1) (l), of the National Law;
Tribunal further finds that such proven
unsatisfactory professional conduct
is of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of
the Respondent’s registration as a pharmacist and
accordingly, the
Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty of
professional
defined in Section 139E of the National Law in respect of the First Complaint;
Findings—Second Complaint
Tribunal has carefully considered the evidence before it with respect to this
complaint; and the Respondent’s admissions
as recorded in his
Respondent’s Amended Response to Second Notice of
(the “Response”)
made without qualification, to
those particulars of the complaint in paragraphs numbered 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12,
13, 14, 15, and 16.
The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that these particulars
have been proved and it finds accordingly;
respect to the Particulars in
paragraph 3
of this complaint, the
Respondent admits these particulars but states in his Response, that he
considered such supply of compounded
Minoxidil solutions to
Mr. Cohen, was for use by a particular individual. Having considered the
evidence and taken into account what
the Respondent considered as above, the
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the particulars of complaint in
paragraph 3
have been proved and it finds accordingly;
Respondent’s Response to the particulars in
Paragraph 8
complaint concerning the supply of compounded
solutions to Mr. Cohen, includes his admission to such supply but as with
paragraph 3 above, the Respondent claims that
he considered this supply for use
by a particular individual. The Tribunal has considered the evidence and what
the Respondent claimed
particulars of the complaint in
paragraph 8
have been proved; and the
Tribunal finds accordingly;
addition of “
) to compounded Minoxidil solutions of varying
strengths, requested by Mr. Cohen, as particularised in
paragraph 9
the complaint, was admitted by the Respondent in his Response; but he added that
Mr. Cohen “...represented...” to
him that such substances were Mr.
Cohen’s “confidential hair regrowth formula” and that they
were “...comprised
of a solution of Chardonnay solution base containing
some herbs.”; but that he (the Respondent) “...took steps to ensure
product quality, safety and efficacy...”including by weighing and
recording “...according to SOPs.” The Tribunal
notes given the
Respondent’s admission to adding such “
substances”, that he states in his Response, they did not
comprise of any active ingredients
.” His Response also
included, that his admitted addition of the above “
” took place between March 2010 and mid-April 2010; but
after a few weeks, no later than April 2010.
ceased adding them “...
due to ...the substances...causing problems
with the stability of the compounded solutions...
” In his evidence to
the Tribunal as quoted earlier in these
, the Respondent told of
his unease in adding such substances to the compounded solutions as he
didn’t know their source and
wasn’t sure of what was in such
substances; and that he still does not know;
“C“ to the Second Complaint contains the “records”
of compounded Minoxidil solutions prepared by the Respondent
for IHRB patients
in the period March to September, 2010. This
is identical to
the records in evidence as Exhibit 2C-60, admitted without objection. There are
49 entries included in the
in each of which under the heading of
“Qty and Drug” (i.e. quantity and drug) “PGX Lotion” is
included, “
” being how the unidentified substances
provided by Mr. Cohen, were described. The first of such entries is on 25 March
and they continue on various dates in May, June, July, August and September
2010. The Tribunal asked the Respondent [at TS 255] about
a letter from Mr.
Cohen to the Respondent requesting supply of various items including Minoxidil
solutions three of which included
” (Exhibit 2C-30, at
page 1); the letter is dated 30 April 2010. The patient identified in this
letter by name, against the
item “10” is named in
C” (at page 2) and the relevant items are numbered 41 and
42—with each preparation corresponding to these numbers, including
”. The Respondent told the Tribunal
” was Mr. Cohen’s “...term for the extra
substances...[and was]...the unidentified substances.”; and that
letter was likely
through to the Respondent, with the original
letter later brought to the Pharmacy by an “...
assistant who would have
collected it and given us the prescriptions
.” [TS 255]. The Tribunal
notes also, that within Exhibit 2C-38, a copy of the Pharmacy’s
issued to the IHRB Account and dated
16 September 2010
included two items—headed
Compounded Prescription
, each of which
of the recorded interview of the Respondent by the HCCC officers (Exhibit 2C-47)
is reproduced above (under the heading
Record of Interview with
Respondent—Second Complaint
) relevant to the
and paragraph 9 of the particulars of this
Relevant to the Respondent’s admitted addition of the
is that part of the above interview [Ibid. page 9] when in the
context of “best practice” when compounding according
“doctor’s prescription” and making it stable, the Respondent
after agreeing that no “...
ingredients
should be added to such a prescribed compounded preparation, the Respondent
described “
” in those circumstances as,
use my knowledge or my database of information or to decide on a
correct formulation for it
...” [Ibid. page 9]. Again, in this context,
the Tribunal notes that the Respondent as noted above, still does not know what
was in the “
”, described only, as
considered the evidence relevant to
paragraph 9
of the particulars of the
Second Complaint including that addressed above, the Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that the Respondent’s
addition of the “
” continued beyond the period to which he admitted in his
evidence and Response; and continued for the period particularised
in paragraph
9. Accordingly, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that paragraph 9 of the
Particulars has been proved and it finds
accordingly. The Tribunal notes, that
even if the lesser period admitted by the Respondent had been accepted by the
Tribunal, such
lesser period would be regarded as extremely serious conduct for
any registered pharmacist but especially so, given the years of
registration and
experience as that of the Respondent, including his
compounding
Tribunal has considered the evidence concerning the Respondent’s admitted
supply of the particular
medications Proscar and Loniten,
contrary to the PTGR as particularised in
paragraph 10
paragraph 11
of the complaint; and the Respondent’s assertion (in
his Response) to the effect he only ever supplied the subject
medications for use by specific individuals pursuant to valid prescriptions. The
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the particulars
paragraph 10
paragraph 11
have been proved and the Tribunal finds
accordingly;
Tribunal notes the Respondent’s admissions of
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
professional misconduct
in respect of the
Second Complaint. Having considered the evidence before it relevant to the
Second Complaint as particularised,
the Tribunal find the Respondent guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
as defined in Section 139B (1) (a)
and Section 139B (1) (l) of the National Law;
considering (relevant also to its finding in respect of the First Complaint)
whether the Respondent’s proven
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
, the Tribunal is reminded of the
Pillai v Messiter [No. 2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR
, at 200, which although concerning a medical practitioner, are applicable to
a pharmacist:
“Departures from elementary and
generally accepted standards of which a medical practitioner could scarcely be
heard to say
that he or she was ignorant could amount to professional
misconduct. But the statutory test is not met by mere professional incompetence
or by deficiencies in the practice of the profession. Something more is
required. It includes
a deliberate departure from accepted standards
such serious negligence as although not deliberate, to portray indifference
and an abuse of the privileges which accompany registration as a medical
practitioner.” (Emphasis added)
Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s proven
unsatisfactory professional
is of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or
cancellation of the Respondent’s registration as a pharmacist
accordingly, the Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty of
professional
as defined in Section 139E of the National Law in respect of the
Second Complaint;
National Law provides (Section 3A) that in the exercise of functions under a NSW
provision—such as the statutory functions
of the Pharmacy
Tribunal—“...
the health and safety of the public must be the
paramount consideration.
also provided by the National law, two members of the Tribunal are registered
pharmacists; and as such, the Tribunal is an ‘
expert professional
’, so described by the NSW Court of Appeal in respect of
another professional disciplinary tribunal, in
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
1 NSWLR 256
JA. Relevantly also, as noted by
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
in considering the purpose of protective orders
following a finding that a complaint has been proved, including the element of
to other practitioners, to recognize the importance of
compliance with professional standards and the risk of failing to do so, His
Honour said:
The purpose of any order consequent upon a finding that a complaint has
been proved, is said to be protective of the interests of
the public at large,
but more particularly patients or potential patients of the practitioner
concerned. However the public interests
include indirectly, the standing of
the medical profession and the maintenance of public confidence in the high
standards...of
practitioners. There is also an element of deterrence or, to put
it more positively, encouragement to other practitioners to recognize
importance of complying with professional standards and the risks of failing to
do so. The powers of a Tribunal having two
members of the medical profession
should, at least in relation to professional standards be accorded a degree of
flexibility which
might not necessarily be accorded to a Tribunal differently
constituted.
His Honour’s words are
applicable to pharmacists and the pharmacy profession;
The Tribunal’s jurisdiction is
of the community not
of the practitioner. Accordingly, it must have regard for the
maintenance of professional standards to protect the standing and reputation
the profession further to its protection of the public. Its protective
the particular
practitioner and on the profession generally. Additionally, pharmacists’
professional misconduct may amount
to an abuse of the
registration and could lead to the profession’s loss of privilege. The
community is entitled to have trust in the practising
profession;
role of the pharmacist through academic achievement, registration and the
maintenance of continuing practice competence, consistent
with tradition and
long-established professional codes of practice and ethical obligations, is
directed to the protection of the
community, which the profession serves, as
with all health professions. The pharmacist is the community’s custodian
of potentially
harmful medications; a role clearly intended by the statutory
controls on medications pursuant to the PTGA and PTGR various provisions
which are relevant to each of the complaints found by the Tribunal to have been
proved. To achieve this legislative purpose, medications
are by regulation,
included within
such as those relevant to
identified in each of the subject complaints, allocated according to perceptions
of toxicity; and from time to time they may be
amended in response to a
demonstrated or perceived, need for greater restriction on their availability in
order to protect the community
Regina v McGrath
, discussed further, below;
above statutory obligations upon a pharmacist and on registered medical
practitioners as prescribers, are unequivocal in their
demands; they allow for
no departure except in limited circumstances such as for example, what has been
referred to in this Inquiry
script owing
’ exception,
where in effect, medication might be needed in an emergency situation; and
supply by a pharmacist is permitted,
but subject to strict
requirements—not relevant to the subject complaints. Sanctions are
provided for infringements of these
statutory provisions. For the statutory
requirements to be effective in protecting the community, pharmacists must
comply with them.
For a pharmacist to be ignorant of or to ignore them, is
unacceptable. Compliance with such legal and professional obligations is
fundamental to a pharmacist’s practice and remains a paramount
responsibility at all times;
the Tribunal, the Respondent confirmed his awareness of his legal obligation
concerning scheduled medications, to comply with
the relevant statutory
provisions; and he acknowledged the need for a pharmacist’s supervision of
their supply. He acknowledged
also, a pharmacist’s responsibility for the
safe and efficacious use of such medications. The Respondent did not claim
of relevant statutory obligations in bringing about his admitted
conduct; rather, he attempted to explain it in other ways, including
that it was
as a result of having his “ head down ”; or “inadvertent
”; or “ dropped the ball ”;
or “misguided”; or by
“lack of vigilance” and even that he was “negligent”;
such explanations
ignore the significant periods of his admitted misconduct in
each Complaint;
Respondent’s claims of stress and financial pressures, in negotiating his
loan structure including those related to obtaining
another lease for a new
pharmacy, in explanation for his admitted misconduct in the First Complaint; and
in the Second Complaint,
the potential increase in his pharmacy compounding
practice, are not accepted by the Tribunal. Such explanations cannot ever,
or in any way diminish the necessity to comply with, the
Respondent’s paramount obligations as a registered
pharmacist;
not taken into account by the Tribunal for present purposes, the fact of the
extensive, overall period of dispensing of medications
the subject of the First
Complaint against the Respondent, by other pharmacists employed at his Pharmacy,
is a matter of significant
concern. As noted by Mr. Luddington--an experienced
pharmacist such as the Respondent, would be expected to monitor a
records for the preceding six to twelve months to determine if
an issue of concern exists. The Table prepared by Mr. Luddington in
before the Tribunal [Exhibit C-70A]—based on his analysis of the total
number of times the medications relevant to
the First Complaint were dispensed
and of those, the number of times they were dispensed by the Respondent and the
number of times
dispensed by other pharmacists—demonstrates the situation
that prevailed over such a lengthy period;
Respondent’s evidence that in effect, because the
prescribed pursuant to the Commonwealth
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS), their use for ‘
therefore acceptable, is not accepted by the Tribunal; nor is his reliance on
the prescriber Dr. Wong, being known to
him as “reputable”. His
further reason—in effect, it was better for him to supply the
to the recipients than for them to risk harm if obtained from
other sources—is rejected, as did the Tribunal in rejecting a similar
explanation, in
[2011] 2 NSWPHT 2;
critical and constant, need for a pharmacist’s supervisory, custodial role
to be applied at all times, cannot be better
demonstrated than by the telling,
recorded interview with Dr. Wong, conducted by officers of the PSB, in evidence
[Exhibit C-5],
including in effect, his admitted and obvious, lack of relevant
knowledge as the prescriber of the subject medications. Relevantly
interview records the PSB having been contacted by other pharmacists elsewhere,
concerned by aspects of Dr. Wong’s
prescribing, when presented with his
prescriptions;
circumstances relevant to the Second Complaint have been sufficiently described,
including the Respondent’s lack of contact
with the recipients of
medications supplied by him. Further, the Respondent’s addition of
provided by and at the request of, Mr. Cohen,
to compounded preparations, is repugnant in the Tribunal’s view, to a
pharmacist’s
professional obligations protective of the community. Such
admitted conduct occurred when the Respondent was already aware of the
investigation into matters relevant to the First Complaint. The Respondent
agreed that the custodial role is the most fundamental
obligation of a
pharmacist;
observed in
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
[1997] NSWSC 297
41 NSWLR 630
where the court (
said, at 638C:
“The gravity of professional misconduct is not to be measured by
reference to the worst cases, but by the extent to which
it departs from the
proper standards. If this is not done there is a risk that the conduct of the
delinquents in a profession will
indirectly establish the standards applied by
the Tribunal”.
to the fundamental responsibilities of a pharmacist—and to the
Respondent’s conduct the subject of the Tribunal’s
findings of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
noting that each Complaint includes breaches of the PTGA and PTGR—are the
observations (referred to earlier) of the NSW Court
of Appeal in
2 NSWLR 181
, an appeal from a conviction for the unlawful
amphetamine
under the then applicable, NSW
Poisons Act
1966, which considered
, the purpose of the legislation
(relevant also, to the current PTG Act and Regulation). The Court said (at page
“...The subject matter...of the Act is one vital to the welfare of the
community and... designed for the protection of the
public...The clear
purpose...is that...[Poisons and restricted Substances]...shall be in the hands
of persons who may be expected
to know their purposes, effects and evils and
who would sell them for proper and lawful purposes only.”
conduct attracting the Tribunal’s findings of
professional
, is extremely serious and occurred over a significant period.
Significantly also, in each Complaint, the relevant conduct was not
an end by the Respondent but by the intervention of others—in the First
Complaint by Mr. Hughes’ immediate
and unequivocal, response to what he
saw on his first day at the Pharmacy as an employed
pharmacist,
dispensing; and in the Second, by the PSB
investigation processes initiated following a complaint about the IHRB and Mr.
Law Society v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
, at pp 33-34,
referred with approval, to a passage from the judgment of
Law Society v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
“Whilst a practitioner’s expressed intention not to re-offend
is relevant to mitigation, it will have little weight
unless accompanied by an
understanding of the wrongfulness of the conduct...the subject of the
disciplinary charge.”
considering the Respondent’s likely behaviour in the future, the
observations of
Dawson v Law Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
, are relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of its
orders and their purpose, to protect the community:
“In judging whether an applicant will, in the future, act
differently from the past, the Court is not required to act on
psychological
theories or analyses...As I have said, it is difficult to decide what a man will
do and the decision in a particular
case is, to a greater or lesser extent,
dependent on the Court’s assessment of the applicant. And in making that
it may draw inferences from what he has done in the past and, in
particular, what led to his being removed from the roll. An understanding
that may assist the court to determine what are his standards and his
understanding...[of his]...responsibility and, from this,
what he is apt to do
in the future. And it is perhaps, on this basis that, where what has been done
in the past has been sufficient
to indicate his ‘probably permanent
unfitness’:
Ex parte Lenehan
at 422; the court will require
solid and substantial grounds’
for the conclusion that his
standards have changed or that he will act differently.” (Emphasis
[2012] NSWCA 80
, referring to the words of
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
, the Court said, at [30] per
“His Honour agreed that other cases might be of value as
examples in indicating a range of appropriate orders but could not
precedents.” And at [33] “Just as the characterisation of conduct
as professional misconduct entails the
exercise of judgment by a specialist
tribunal, so too, it seems to me, does a decision about the order that should
be made where
such conduct is proved.”
Ex parte Tziniolis Re medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
JA observed:
“Reformation of character and of behaviour can doubtless occur but
their occurrence is not the usual but the exceptional thing.
One cannot assume
that a change has occurred merely because some years have gone by and it is not
proved that anything of a discreditable
kind has occurred. If a man has
exhibited serious deficiencies in his standards of conduct and his attitudes,
it must require clear
proof to show that some years later he has established
himself a different man...In such cases it has been frequently said that
heavy onus lies on the applicant.”
Tribunal takes into account the opinion evidence of Mr. Mahoney supporting the
Respondent’s current fitness to practise
and the currently acceptable
state of his Pharmacy. The Tribunal also takes into account, changes made to his
practices relevant
to the subject matter of the Complaints, but notes, only
after the intervention of others. The Tribunal however, must consider and
into account in considering its protective orders, the nature and extent of the
Respondent’s extremely serious and admitted,
misconduct;
is now over six years since the relevant conduct the subject the First Complaint
ceased and over two years since that of the Second
Complaint ceased. Sufficient
time was available to the Respondent to consider his conduct before giving
evidence before the Tribunal.
Respondent’s Counsel in submissions,
emphasised the Respondent’s early admissions; but in this respect, the
notes the availability prior to the commencement of the Inquiry, of the
evidence the Complainant brought before the Tribunal including
that of the PSB
and HCCC investigations;
Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s explanations for his admitted
misconduct. Given the evidence before it, including
the Respondent’s
considerable experience as a registered pharmacist; his state of knowledge of
the nature and effects of the
subject medications and relevant provisions of the
PTGA and PTGR; and his evidence seeking to explain the reasons for his admitted
conduct relevant to each Complaint, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that
the Respondent’s professional misconduct was
deliberately undertaken and
continued for a significant time; and for personal benefit. The Respondent has
failed to demonstrate
into his conduct; and failed to satisfy the
...” so described in
persuade the Tribunal of the “...
solid and substantial
...” referred to by
with the observations of the Court of Appeal in
HCCC v Litchfield
Tribunal measures the gravity of the Respondent’s professional misconduct
not by reference to the worst case but by the
extent to which it departs from
proper standards. In this context, the Tribunal has also taken into
consideration the unchallenged,
peer review
reports of Mr. Luddington and
Ms. Goodman. Adopting the Medical Tribunal’s words in
[2010] NSWMT 4 at [143], the Tribunal regards the Respondent’s
conduct as a “
complete abrogation of his
responsibilities
an abandonment of principle
inconsistent with the legal and professional obligations inherent in
registration as a pharmacist.
the exercise of its protective function and the maintenance of proper
professional standards, the Tribunal considers that the Respondent’s
registration should be cancelled and accordingly, orders such cancellation; and
further orders that an application for review of
the order under Division 8 of
the National Law, may not be made until after the expiration of a period of
eighteen (18) months commencing
on and from the effective date of the Order; and
the appropriate review body for the purpose of any such review, is the Pharmacy
Council of New South Wales,
Tribunal further orders that save for any costs relevant to the delay caused by
amendments to Particulars numbered 8 and 11 in
the first Notice of Complaint, as
conceded by the Complainant, the Respondent is to pay the Complainant’s
costs as agreed or
if agreement cannot be reached, either party may have the
matter re-listed for assessment by the Tribunal;
Tribunal’s Orders are to take effect upon the expiration of thirty (30)
days following the date of this
.....................................................................
Dwyer—Chairperson
---------------------------------------------------------
Zwart—Pharmacist
---------------------------------------------------------
David Preswick—Pharmacist
---------------------------------------------------------
Christopher
Gardiner—Lay Member
Dated: 10 April 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (836 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter