URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/254.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARB v GIO (Claims Assessment) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 254 (24 November 2020)
ARB v GIO (Claims Assessment)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 254
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Miscellaneous Claims Assessment
Accident not caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the Claimant –
balance of probabilities – Insured driver driving
too quickly- legal
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Civil Liability Act 2002
Cases Cited
Cooper v. Nominal Defendant
[2017] NSWDC
Podrebersek v. Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
Sibley v Kais
[1967] HCA 43
Nievas v Mohammed
[2017] NSWDC 168
Singler v Ferguson
[2015] NSWDC 38
Dungan v Chan
[2013] NSWCA 182
Road Rules 2014
ARB – Claimant
GIO – Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Issued in accordance with section
7.36(5) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
and clause 7.441
Motor Accident Guidelines
Determination of a matter declared under Schedule 2(3) of
the Act to be a miscellaneous claims assessment matter
AAI Limited trading as GIO
Date of Accident
10 September 2019
DRS Reference
DRS Claims Assessor
Terence STERN
Date of Decision
24 November 2020
The findings of the assessment of this dispute are as follows:
the purposes of section 3.11 the accident was not caused wholly or mostly by the
fault of the Claimant.
The amount of the Claimant’s costs assessed in accordance with
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
$1,633.00 plus
3. A brief statement of my reasons for this
determination are attached to this certificate.
DATED: 26 November 2020
Terence STERN
DRS Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
REASONS FOR DECISION – MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS
Issued in accordance with
section 7.36(4)
Motor Accident
Injuries Act 2017
This determination relates to a Miscellaneous Claim which is a reviewable
decision pursuant to Schedule 2, Clause 3 of Motor Accidents
Injuries Act 2017
2019 was wholly or mostly at fault.
10 September 2019 at about 10.15am the Claimant was driving her motor vehicle
ABC-123 on Eleventh Avenue Austral when it was involved
in a collision at its
intersection with Edmondson Avenue with a vehicle driven by the insured.
Insurer alleges that the accident was wholly or mostly the fault of the Claimant
and has issued a Liability Notice accordingly
and has ceased making weekly
payments pursuant to s.3.11 of the Act.
THE ISSUE IN
issue in dispute is whether or not for the purposes of the Act the Claimant was
wholly or mostly at fault for the collision.
briefly set out the chronology:
10 September 2019 the
30 September 2019 Certificate of Fitness
1 October 2019 Application for Personal Injury Benefits
Claim Form lodged
2 January 2020 Liability Notice/Benefits after 26 weeks
GIO admitted liability after 26 weeks
determining that the Claimant was not mostly at fault
22 May 2020 Factual Investigation Report of M & A
Investigations
24 June 2020 GIO Liability Notice/Benefits after 26 weeks denying
liability on the basis that the Claimant was wholly
at fault because
the Claimant had failed to give way to oncoming vehicles at an
intersection while facing a
‘Give Way’ sign
29 June 2020 Application for Internal Review
1 July 2020 Application for Determination of a Miscellaneous
Dispute as to whether the Claimant was wholly at fault
and seeking
an outcome that the Claimant was not at fault for the subject
accident and should be entitled to
ongoing statutory benefits
17 July 2020 Determination of Internal Review affirming the
liability decision of the Insurer that the Claimant
was wholly at
THE EVIDENCE
The Claimant’s statement of 1 October 2020
briefly summarise to the extent of the material:
3. born April 19XX
4. at the time of the accident was a dental hygienist
5. duties required her to travel to various places
8. left home around 7.45am to undertake her duties at a site in Austral to
assist with dental hygienist services to students
9. arrived at the site at about 8.15am
10. completed her work at about 10.00am
11. & 12. upon finishing her duties was driving on Eleventh Avenue
intending to cross at the intersection with Edmondson Avenue
the Give Way Sign on Eleventh Avenue came to a complete stop
left and right before proceeding through the intersection
as she was about the reach the other side of the intersection another vehicle
(the insured vehicle) collided into the left-hand
side of her
‘at considerable speed’
A photograph of the left passenger door of her vehicle shows
considerable damage
injuries to her lumbar spine, cervical spine and her chest
‘complete shock’
. NSW Ambulance attended and took her
Fairfield Public Hospital
asked her some questions at the scene. She could not answer as she was
‘not in the right mind space
due to the sudden
30 September 2019 consulted Dr Ijaz Khan for treatment. Dr Khan referred her to
a spinal surgeon Dr Nair
No Statement by the driver of Holden Astra XYF-506
statement was available from the driver of the other vehicle. The insured, MMG
declined to speak to the Police or to provide a
Statement of Leading Senior Constable George Binyameen
attended the scene. He told the investigator:
A16 the approximate
time of the collision was about 10.30am
A18 he arrived at the scene just after 10.30am
A19-20 two vehicles were involved in a collision at the intersection of
Eleventh Avenue and Edmondson Avenue Austral
A27 in answer to who was driving – MMG
A33 spoke to the two drivers at the scene
A35 the Claimant driving the grey Corolla was travelling east on Eleventh
Avenue approaching the intersection of Edmondson Avenue
A36 the other vehicle driven by MMG was travelling south on Edmondson Avenue.
The Claimant drove her vehicle through the intersection
from Eleventh Avenue
onto Edmondson Avenue
A37 which was the cause of the impact. Colliding with the oncoming car,
being the car driven by MMG
A38 the impact caused vehicle 1 driven by ARB to spin around and come
stationary on the other side of Eleventh Avenue
A39 the vehicle driven by MMG remained at that point of impact so it would
have still been on Edmondson Avenue
A40 there was heavy damage to the first vehicle. It was t-boned on the front
passenger side
A41 there was front-end damage to MMG’s car
A46 (the Claimant) bit shock about the accident. She was explained to
understand (sic) that it was her fault – the cause of
A68 in answer to whom (sic) he considered to be at fault, he said the
SUBMISSIONS OF THE INSURER
briefly summarise the submissions:
2.3 reproduces the Crash Summary
Details in the NSW Police Report
2.4 refers to an accident description from the APIA Personal Motor Claims
Team containing an accident description as provided by the
driver’s relative:
driving along Edmondson Avenue he has come to the intersection
Avenue where the third party has gone through the give way
sign and my dad has t-boned her. POI – front end damage.’
2.5 the Claimant failed to give right-of-way
2.7 Constable Binyameen considered the Claimant to be at fault
2.8 refers to the Claimant’s statement of 19 November 2019:
‘2.8 ......I was not at fault. On or about 10 September 2019, I was
travelling on Eleventh Avenue heading towards Austral. I
was traversing the
intersection of Eleventh Avenue and Edmondson Avenue where there was a give way
sign. I came to a complete stop,
when there was no oncoming traffic and it was
safe to proceed, I continued through the intersection. Just as I almost reached
other side of the intersection, suddenly, another motor vehicle impacted the
right rear side of my car.’
[I note that in her statement of 1 October 2020 the Claimant says it was the
‘left side’ which as the photo shows is
obviously correct]
3.1 Claimant is not entitled to statutory benefits beyond 26 weeks if the
accident was caused wholly or mostly by her fault
3.2 the accident was wholly or mostly the fault of the Claimant because she
failed to give way at an intersection. She failed to
keep a proper lookout and
proceeded through the intersection when it was unsafe
3.3 no objective evidence that the insured collided with the Claimant’s
‘at considerable speed’
on the basis that there is no
objective evidence to support such submission
3.4 the insured had the right of way. The Claimant’s submission that
the insured also had a Give Way sign is at odds with the
photographs of the
scene as contained in the Factual Investigation Report which clearly shows that
it was the Claimant who was required
to give way
3.5 I should be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the accident
was caused by the fault of the Claimant for the purposes
of Part 3 Schedule 2
(d) and mostly by the fault of the Claimant for the purposes of Part 3 Schedule
3.6 I am required to be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, having
regard to all of the material that the accident was caused
by the fault of the
Claimant for the purposes of (d) and mostly by the fault of the Claimant for the
purposes of (e)
SUBMISSIONS OF THE CLAIMANT
briefly summarise the submissions made by the Claimant:
Insurer has the onus of establishing that the Claimant was wholly or mostly at
1.4 the evidence is limited
1.5 refers to the materials which the Insurer had available in coming to its
determination
to the Application for Personal Injury Benefits Claim Form and in particular the
Claimant came to a complete stop at the Give
Way sign for Eleventh Avenue
intending to cross through the intersection when it was safe to do so. That the
Claimant proceeded
through the intersection and when she had almost reached the
other side the insured vehicle collided with the left- hand side of
her vehicle
at considerable speed
2.1.2 also relies on her statement of 1
October 2020
2.1.3-2.1.4 the diagram illustrates that the Claimant had almost reached the
other side of the intersection indicating also that the
insured had reasonable
and sufficient time to slow down to take evasive action
2.1.5 as to whether the insured had right of way relies on
to the effect that both drivers approaching an intersection were
required to take reasonable care
2.1.6 if the Claimant had reduced her speed and continued to travel into the
intersection as documented in the insured’s submissions
the insured driver
would have had reasonable and sufficient time to stop to avoid the collision.
The insured was speeding and did
not keep a proper lookout. The pattern of
damage to the Claimant’s vehicle confirms that the t-boned collision was
significant
and can only have been caused by a forceful impact
2.2 the contemporaneous evidence should be given greater weight than the
police report which provides an interpretation of what happened
but does not add
any information of a probative nature as to causation or fault
2.3.1 the APIA Property Damage file does not provide evidence of what
happened but two versions of the events
2.3.2 the APIA Property Damage file documents the insured’s version of
the accident
2.4 the M & A Investigation Factual Report of 22 May 2020 is to be given
limited weight. The insured driver did not co-operate
with the enquiries or
give a statement
2.4.2 Constable Binyameen’s statement as to fault is merely his
3.3 if the insured’s version is accepted that he was travelling
straight and within the speed limit and the road rules he would
have seen the
Claimant’s vehicle and slowed down in sufficient time to avoid the
collision. The insured t-boned the Claimant’s
motor vehicle just past the
middle of the intersection suggesting that he would have had reasonable and
sufficient to avoid the collision.
The damage to the Claimant’s vehicle
establishes that the insured was speeding and that he had taken no evasive
3.4 it should be found that the insured was at fault if not mostly at
THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
am required to determine whether or not the Claimant was wholly or mostly at
3.11 (1) provides:
‘(1) An injured person is not entitled to weekly payments of
statutory benefits......more than 26 weeks after the motor
accident.....if:
(a) the......accident was caused wholly or mostly by the fault of
the person, .....’
3.11 (2) provides:
‘(2) The motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of a
if the contributory negligence of the person ....was greater than
3.28 (1) and (a) provides:
‘3.28 Cessation of statutory benefits after 26 weeks to injured
adults most at fault or to injured persons with minor injuries.
(1) An injured person is not entitled to statutory benefits under
this Division for treatment and care expenses incurred
more than 26 weeks
after the motor accident concerned if:
(a) the motor accident was caused wholly or mostly by the fault
of the person and the person was over 16 years of age
at the time of the
motor accident.’
3.38 (1) provides:
‘(1) the common law and enacted law as to contributory
applies to an award of damages in respect of a motor accident
applies....to weekly payments of statutory benefits for any period of loss
of earnings or any capacity that occurs more
than 26 weeks after
the.....accident’
3.38 (3) provides:
‘(3) the weekly payments of statutory benefits payable....are
to be reduced on account of contributory negligence....’
(c) in any other case – by such a percentage as the Dispute
Resolution Service determines.....is just and equitable
circumstances.....’
ROAD RULES 2014
NEW SOUTH WALES
‘(1) a driver at an intersection ..... with a give way sign or give
way line must give way in accordance with this rule.’
common law applies in relation to a determination of the degree of default for
the purposes of contributory negligence.
of the common law decisions in respect of contributory negligence are in
relation to the apportionment of damages and such apportionment
is made by such
percentage as the court thinks just and equitable in the
circumstances.
Civil Liability Act 2002
‘5R Standard of contributory negligence
(1) The principles that are applicable in determining whether
a person has been negligent also apply in determining
whether the person who suffered harm has been
contributorily negligent in failing to take precautions
against the risk of that harm
(2) For that purpose:
(a) the standard of care required of the person who
suffered harm is that of a reasonable person
in the position of that person, and
(b) the matter is to be determined on the basis
of what that person knew or ought to have known
at the time’
Cooper v. Nominal Defendant
[2017] NSWDC Neilson DCJ [at 32]
‘......an effect of
is to pick up and apply, as best one can,
to the conduct of the person who suffers harm principles relevant to
determining
negligence on the part of the person owing a duty of care.
That would include the general principles set out in
turn would be consistent with the fact that Div.2 of
motor accidents.’
34 His Honour referred to the judgment of the High Court of Australia in
Podrebersek v. Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
‘The making of an apportionment as between a plaintiff and a
defendant of their respective shares in the responsibility for
involves a comparison of culpability for the damage involves the comparison
both of culpability i.e. of the degree
of departure from the standard of care
of the reasonable man......and the relative importance of the acts of the
causing the damage.......it is the whole conduct of each negligent
party in relation to the circumstances of the accident which
subjected to comparative examination.’
Sibley v Kais
[1967] HCA 43
the High Court of Australia was dealing with
an intersection accident and the duty to give way to a vehicle on the
brief facts in
as summarised by the Court [1] are that the
applicant was driving at 20-25 miles per hour as he approached the intersection,
no traffic seeking to enter from his right but was late in looking to his
left. He was in the intersection before he observed the
respondent’s car
approaching
“pretty fast”.
He applied his brakes but there
was a collision.
[2] The trial judge found the accident was solely due to the respondent’s
negligence. On appeal the Full Court held that
the trial judge erred in
allowing the traffic rule as to giving way at intersections to determine the
question whether the applicant
was guilty of negligence in entering the
intersection.
[5] the court held:
‘These regulations.....are salutary......their breach is
......marked with......penalties. But they are not definitive of the
duties of the drivers of such vehicles to each other .......nor is the breach
......conclusive as to the performance of
the duty owned to one another....the
common-law duty to act reasonably in all the circumstances is paramount. The
failure to take
reasonable care in given circumstances is not necessarily
answered by reliance upon the expected performance by the driver of the
vehicle of his obligations under the regulations; .....there is no general rule
that in all circumstances a driver can rely
upon the performance by others of
their duties,.......Whether or not in particular circumstances it is reasonable
to act upon the
assumption that another will act in some particular way, as for
example by performing his duty under a regulation, must remain a
question of
fact to be judged in all the particular circumstances.....’
above case has been cited many times over the decades by superior courts and
remains an accurate statement of the law. It was,
for example, cited by Wilson
Nievas v Mohammed
[2017] NSWDC 168
[at 146] as properly stating
the obligation of each driver of two vehicles approaching an intersection.
SC DCJ in that case [148] found that the plaintiff had discharged his obligation
to take reasonable care in approaching the
intersection. He was travelling at a
safe speed (less than a motor vehicle ordinarily would) keeping a proper lookout
and, in fact,
saw the defendant’s vehicle well before the intersection and
applied the brakes of his bicycle as soon as it was reasonably
practical to do
found [149] the plaintiff’s conduct reasonable and not warranting a
reduction for contributory negligence.
for the defendant had [150] submitted that contributory negligence ought to be
50% and nothing less than 25%. Wilson SC DCJ
found the submission of no
assistance.
Singler v Ferguson
[2015] NSWDC 38
Mahony SC DCJ set out the legal
principles applicable [116]:
‘[116] The plaintiff bears the onus of proof of establishing
that the defendant was negligent. Negligence is to
be determined
pursuant to the provisions of the CLA. ......
[117] .....the High Court held in Sibley v Kais
that the regulations relating to traffic rules were not
definitive of the respective duties of drivers of vehicles to each
nor was the breach of such regulations conclusive as to the performance of
a duty owed to other road users.’
At page 427 the court said:
‘The common law duty to act reasonably in all the circumstances if
paramount. The failure to take reasonable care in given
circumstances is
not necessarily answered by reliance upon the expected performance by the
driver of the give way vehicle of
his obligations under the regulations, for
there is no general rule that in all circumstances a driver can rely upon the
performance
by others of the duties, whether derived from statutory sources or
from the common law. Whether or not in particular circumstances
reasonable to act upon the assumption that another will act in some particular
way, as for example, by performing his duty
under a regulation, must remain a
question of fact to be judged in all of the particular circumstances of the
Honour continued:
‘[35] The exercise of reasonable care requires, as the
majority observed in Manley v. Alexander .....reasonable
attention to all that is happening on or near the roadway that
may present
a source of danger. That in turn requires ‘simultaneous attention to,
and consideration, of a number of
different features of what is already
or may later come to be, ahead of the vehicles’ path.
[36] The driver is not required......to know or predict every
event which happens in the vicinity of the vehicle so as to be
able to take reasonable steps to react to such event......the
only required to take reasonable steps to be in a position to know what is
happening or might happen in the vicinity
of the vehicle.
[37] ....nor is the driver required to be in a position where he or
she can react to everything which may happen in the
vicinity of the vehicle.
The driver is not required to travel at a speed which is within the limits
of visibility and control
so as to be able to react to whatever ventures
into the vehicle’s path.....
[121] referring to the Court of Appeal decision in
Dungan v Chan
‘15. A driver is entitled to assume that others will observe the
rules of the road. .......as a general rule a person
is entitled to
assume that others will act in a non-negligent manner. However, where
negligence is the issue the real
question is, whether, in all the
circumstances, the person charged with negligence exercised a degree of care
circumstances required......’
the case in question the court had to determine whether the defendant breached
his duty of care to the plaintiff by proceeding
into the intersection with a
green light. His Honour noted that the defendant had a duty to take reasonable
care to avoid risk of
injury to the other road users who were taking care for
their own safety. Applying
Civil Liability Act
the test His
Honour said is what precautions would a reasonable driver with a green light
facing him take. In that case the road
in question was also a major arterial
road while the street intersecting with it was a minor road. His Honour found
it was reasonable
for the defendant to proceed through the intersection. His
Honour noted:
‘While there is always a possibility that other drivers will run a
red light there was no reason for the defendant to assume
that it would happen
here. For that reason I find that there was no breach of the defendant’s
duty of care in the circumstances.’
common law applies in relation to a determination of the degree of default for
the purposes of contributory negligence.
of the common law decisions in respect of contributory negligence are in
relation to the apportionment of damages and such apportionment
is made by such
percentage as the court thinks just and equitable in the
circumstances.
CONSIDERATION
Claimant has provided a statement. The insured driver has not.
Claimant says that her statement accurately sets out the evidence she would give
in a Court and that what is contained in her
statement is true to the best of
her knowledge and belief and in making it she acknowledges that she would be
liable to prosecution
for a wilful mis-statement.
Claimant states [13] that on reaching the Give Way sign on Eleventh Avenue she
brought her vehicle to a complete stop.
states [14] that she looked left and right for oncoming traffic and proceeded
when it was safe.
states [15] that just as she was about to reach the other side of the
intersection the insured vehicle collided with the left-hand
side of her motor
vehicle at considerable speed.
Claimant attaches a coloured image from the date of the accident showing the
damage to the left-hand side of her vehicle.
photograph depicts considerable damage.
Claimant’s statement is uncontradicted and there is no good reason to
conclude that she is not telling the truth.
Claimant states and I again accept that it is the truth that the other vehicle
was travelling at considerable speed.
file contains a photograph of the damage to the insured’s vehicle. The
front-end damage is considerable and exercising
common-sense consistent with the
Claimant’s statement that it was travelling at considerable speed and
consistent with the
extent of the damage to the Claimant’s vehicle.
accept the Claimant’s case that her vehicle was almost across the
intersection at the time of impact.
standard of care required of the Claimant at the time [s.5R
Civil Liability Act
] was of a reasonable person in the position of the Claimant.
the matter is to be determined (2) (b):
......on the basis of what that person knew or ought to have
known at the time.’
presence of a Give Way sign is [
Sibley v Kais
] not determinative.
Mahoney SC DCJ said in
‘the common law duty to act reasonably in all
the circumstances is paramount.’
the balance of probabilities, the insured driver was:
(i) driving too quickly in all the circumstances
insured has the onus of proof of establishing the Claimant was negligent.
the balance of probabilities, the Claimant objectively acted reasonably in
entering the intersection when she did and in crossing
it when she did.
accept the Claimant’s evidence that the intersection was clear and that it
was safe having made appropriate observations to
enter the intersection when she
all the facts into account I do not consider the Claimant was mostly at fault or
at fault at all. Rather the accident was
largely the fault of the insured
arriving at this conclusion I take into account that the only probative evidence
was that of the Claimant noting that the insured
driver did not give a statement
and noting that the information obtained by the Policeman was after the event
partly opinion and
not probative.
note that the evidence obtained from the investigator with respect to the
information obtained by the property damage insurer was
not probative opinion
and hear say.
LEGAL COSTS
determine that the Claimant is entitled to costs of
$1,633.00 plus GST
accordance with the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
Dated: 26 November 2020
Terence STERN
DRS Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (852 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter