URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Sudath [2013] NSWMT 2 (22 February 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Sudath
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 2
Hearing Date(s):
18/02/2013-21/02/2013
Decision Date:
22 February 2013
Elkaim SC DCJ
Dr K Ilbery
Dr V de Carvalho
Ms C Berglund
Direct the deregistration of Dr Sudath
Catchwords:
Doctor convicted of serious offences. Unsuccessful challenge to the facts
of the offences.
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) (No
Medical Practice Act 1992
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
General Medical Council v
[1943] AC 627
[2008] NSWCCA 207
Sudath v HCCC
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr Aron Kondasinghe
Sudath (Respondent)
Representation
P M Strickland SC and E Brus (Applicant)
P R Boulten SC and M G
Ainsworth (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
TressCox Lawyers
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
400204/2008
Publication Restriction:
Introduction
proceedings before the Tribunal are brought by the Health Care Complaints
Commission (the "HCCC"). The HCCC seeks resolution of
two complaints. For
convenience the Further Amended Notice of Complaint is annexed to this decision.
respondent has consented to the Tribunal dealing with both the establishment of
the complaints and, if proved, the imposition
of protective orders.
Tribunal is acutely aware of the seriousness of the allegations put by the HCCC
and the long reaching effect of the orders open
to it. Accordingly it has
approached the evidence on the basis of the standard of proof prescribed in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Some background
respondent, Dr Aron Kondasinghe Sudath, was born in 1967 in Sri Lanka. He came
to Australia in 1991 and commenced study at the
University of Adelaide with the
benefit of a scholarship. He graduated in
1996 with the double
degrees of MBBS and BSc. The respondent was first registered as a medical
practitioner in South Australia in
November 1996. He then practised in various
parts of Australia. He was also registered in the United Kingdom.
respondent's name in university documents was recorded as Aruna Sudath
Kondasinghe or, another occasion, as Aron Sudath Kondasinghe.
His registered
name in the United Kingdom is Aron Sudath Kondasinghe. His recently obtained
masters degree is in the name of Dr Aron
Kondasinghe (Exhibit 5).
respondent first married in December 1996. The marriage did not last very long.
The parties separated after about a year. The
respondent said he had never
received any official divorce papers but he feels certain that he is divorced.
March 2003 the respondent and a Ms A, also a person of Sri Lankan origin, were
married in a Sri Lankan ceremony. They met and lived
in Australia. This was not
a marriage performed under Australian law but for all intents and purposes Ms A
became the respondent's
wife. The relationship bore a son, B, in January 2004.
The complaints
complaints arise from two incidents in New South Wales in April 2005 and one in
Queensland in 1998.
One was admitted. Ultimately the HCCC made no submissions in respect of the
Queensland conviction. Although the finding
of guilt was conceded the Tribunal
has effectively ignored it.
Two was contested with the exception that Particulars numbered 3 and 4 were
admitted. These related to accusations made
by the respondent against a KH and a
Dr B. In respect of these two admissions Dr Sudath gave reasons to excuse his
convictions in Complaint One relate to the following offences:
(a) On 29 April 2005 the respondent had sexual intercourse with Ms A without her
consent, knowing she was not consenting (
Crimes Act 1900
Section 61I).
(b) On 30 April 2005 the respondent assaulted Ms A (
Crimes Act 1900
Section 61).
first of the offences is generally described as "
", the second as
common assault
23 March 2007, following a trial before a judge and jury, the respondent was
convicted of the above two offences. The respondent
was released on bail between
conviction and sentence.
respondent was sentenced on 21 September 2007. In respect of the rape he was
sentenced to a period of imprisonment of five years
with a non-parole period of
three years. For the common assault he was sentenced to a period of nine months
imprisonment with a non-parole
period of six months. An appeal to the Court of
Criminal Appeal against both conviction and sentence was dismissed on 9
respondent was released from prison on 25 November 2011.
on the convictions, the HCCC seeks the deregistration of the respondent, relying
Section 64(1)(c)
Medical Practice Act 1992
. The parties agreed
that this now repealed Act is the governing legislation.
second complaint asserts the respondent "
is not of good character
on the facts giving rise to the two NSW convictions as evidence of the
allegation and also relying on the letters about KH
and Dr B. Once again the
HCCC seeks deregistration of the respondent, this time stemming from
hearing before the Medical Tribunal on 29 September 2011 led to a decision that
the respondent was not entitled to challenge the
facts behind his conviction for
the above two offences. An appeal against this decision was allowed (
[2012] NSWCA 171).
As a result the respondent was permitted to, and
did, challenge the factual findings of the trial in the District Court. In
he challenged Ms A's description of the detail of the rape describing
a much more 'benign' (to him) scenario in which she initiated
encounter, she aroused him contrary to his wishes and the intercourse after the
removal of consent was brief. He entirely
denied the common assault, putting
forward a version in which he became the victim and Ms A was the aggressor.
respondent's description of the events in oral testimony was an expansion of the
facts he describes in his statement dated 5 September
2012 (Exhibit 1, Tab 61).
result of the respondent's challenge to the facts was that the HCCC was required
to prove the particulars of Complaint Two (other
than Numbers 3 and 4). These
particulars were derived from the findings of fact recorded by Nicholson DCJ in
his remarks on sentence.
The respondent accepts that the findings are validly
based on the evidence before the jury. However the respondent says the Tribunal
should not accept these findings because of the evidence he has now presented.
'new' material includes the statements and oral evidence of the respondent.
There are also some medical reports and a number of
references. The respondent
did not give evidence at his trial. Ms A did not give evidence before the
Tribunal. The reasons for her
not doing so are set out in the affidavits making
up Exhibit D. The Tribunal accepts the validity of these reasons.
Tribunal also notes the extensive cross-examination that Ms A was subjected to
in the District Court trial. She was in the witness
box for over 3 days. The
respondent's position was then one of total denial necessarily involving the
cross-examination of Ms A on
the basis that she was fabricating her
allegations.
respondent's subsequent admission of raping Ms A, although in a different
factual scenario, indicates that it was the respondent
who was in fact
dishonest, both in his instructions to his lawyers and to the many other persons
and bodies to whom he protested
his innocence.
respondent's position before the Tribunal was therefore markedly different to
the stance he took at trial. His denial of the common
assault was constant
although his version was never tested because he did not give
the Tribunal was presented with a fact finding mission in which the HCCC,
carrying the onus of proof, could rely only on documentary
evidence against the
oral testimony of the respondent. Notwithstanding that the case was entirely in
documentary form the Tribunal
feels it appropriate to take into account the
(a) As stated Ms A gave evidence before the jury in the District Court. She was
extensively cross-examined.
(b) The crown was required to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. The
standard of proof before the Tribunal is on the balance
of probabilities
although subject to the enhancement imposed by
(c) The case put to Ms A in cross-examination is different to the case now
advanced by the respondent. He challenged the whole of
Ms A's assertions,
assigning the characterisation of dishonesty to her evidence. He now concedes a
sexual assault, albeit derived
from different facts.
(d) The respondent did not give evidence before the jury. It is likely that the
decision not to give evidence, no doubt influenced
by legal advice, was his
(e) The respondent appealed against both conviction and sentence. He failed
[2008] NSWCCA 207).
of the difficulties faced by the Tribunal is that the respondent has made
allegations against Ms A which were not the subject
of cross-examination at the
criminal trial and she has not given evidence before the Tribunal to deal with
these allegations. The
Tribunal can be comfortably certain, as conceded by Mr
Boulten, that the respondent's instructions to his lawyers were that the sex
consensual. However the Tribunal recognises it should be very cautious to infer
that an absence of cross-examination on a topic
was a necessary product of
instructions as opposed to a tactical decision on the part of the
cross-examiner.
material tendered by the HCCC, without more, unequivocally establishes the
particulars of Complaint Two. So much was accepted
by the respondent.
weight given by the Tribunal to the case presented by the HCCC is consistent
with the following remarks of Meagher JA in
at paragraph
"The requirement that the Tribunal allow the appellant to present relevant
and probative material in response to the evidence relied
upon by the respondent
in relation to the second complaint, does not mean that the Tribunal is required
to rehear the matters dealt
with in the District Court. It is entitled to
receive as evidence before it, the certificates of conviction, the trial judge's
in his remarks on sentence and the evidence before the trial judge. It
must consider all of the evidence and material before it and
in the process of
making findings of fact, it is entitled to give those matters significant
Tribunal also accepts as correct, and fairly put, the following statement made
by Mr Boulten:
"The respondent has essentially an evidentiary onus to raise material that
is then capable of rebutting the primary material tendered
by the applicant. In
considering the respondent's evidence the tribunal does not need to reach a
concluded view about every paragraph
of every particular, but there may be a
need, in various ways, to consider whether the evidence, as a whole, allows a
that the rape occurred in a particular way, as contended for by A,
and the applicant, or whether it was the way that the respondent
Boulten went on to say, again fairly, that: "
If, though, you don't believe
the respondent about the version, then he has not overcome the evidential onus
to rebut the significant
value of the material that's before you, as it has been
described."
parties accepted that the Tribunal's focus needed to be on Complaint Two
because, although Complaint One was admitted, the circumstances
convictions would be an essential consideration in determining the protective
Tribunal, against this background, carefully considered the respondent's case,
which was made up of the oral evidence of the respondent,
Dr Roberts and Mr
Taylor as well as a number of documents.
line with Mr Boulten's formulation (paragraph 26, above) fundamental to the
consideration of the respondent's case was whether
the Tribunal accepted the
evidence, written and oral, of the respondent. The Tribunal concluded that it
could not rely on the respondent's
evidence. The Tribunal found his version of
both the sexual assault and the common assault unreliable and implausible. The
for this conclusion are given below.
the Tribunal observed the respondent in the witness box over a number of hours
paying careful attention to his demeanour.
He was prone to hyperbole and the
over-emphasis of his attributes. This is an example:
"Q. Yes. Yes, understand. How can this tribunal, other than your
expressions of remorse, be satisfied that the flaw no longer exists?
A. Your Honour, I am very insightful man now. I - when I look back through
the rehabilitation I went through, I have now developed
strategies and tactics
and the techniques and the skills for - it's called offence mapping, which is
what we did; and I also went
through intensive cognitive behavioural
In doing so, I am now skilled with strategies, techniques, to analyse my
thought process and filter those thought processes before
it becomes action. As
I mentioned during the crossexamination, ABC of offence mapping, so that way we
were taught where to pinpoint
the origin of the bad behaviour came from. So
that's why I'm saying I'm a very - obviously very remorseful of what happened,
I did. I'm very insightful and I'm a very different person, your
Q. The second point perhaps flows from that and that is yesterday you
seemed to distinguish between the respect due to a - in your
words - a blueeyed
blonde and a Sri Lankan woman. If you're in practice now and in walks a Sri
Lankan woman who tells you that her
husband has had sex with her against her
consent, would you still see her background as relevant?
A. Absolutely, your Honour. When you say background, what I'm saying is I
would sympathise; I would empathise; I would not consider
because she's Sri
Lankan woman she was supposed to have this treatment. I would be treating her
equally as I would treat for Australian
And I think in the notes somewhere you probably have seen, when I went to
Sri Lanka I actually wrote to the attorneygeneral in Sri
Lanka, "Look, the law
needs to change in this country. Is this not right for women, the - marital rape
is not recognised?" And I
think when I was having the interview with Dr Samson
Roberts or Dr Peter Klug I mentioned that as well. I am now willing to go to
that extent to use my experience, my lesson, to convinced the Sri Lankan
authorities, if I could, to the best of my abilities, to
even change the law in
Sri Lanka. So, your Honour, I would probably think I would probably be one of
the best doctors to treat a
sexually assaulted Sri Lankan woman having been
through this experience."
(T 180.45).
respondent submitted that his expansive manner was not necessarily a reflection
of his true self. It was necessary to look behind
the gloss. Dr Roberts said
"A. There are certainly plenty of people in substantial positions of
authority and respect whom we give a lot of - to whom we give
a lot of kudos to
exhibit features of narcissism and exhibit a degree of grandiosity which might
cause our stomachs to turn on occasion,
but it certainly doesn't lead them into
unlawful conduct. The fact is that - perhaps I should be absolutely
straightforward - there
are times when Dr Sudath's manner, use of language,
intonation, even some direct comments are potentially of a nature as to lead
to come across as conceited, arrogant, superior, allknowing, and that has the
potential to grate on us, but it would be inappropriate
if an assessing
clinician such as myself condemned everyone I saw who grated on me; in fact if I
was working in justice health for
any length of time and did so I would be out
of business."
the Tribunal accepts the logic of Dr Roberts' remarks it nevertheless had a
distinct impression of deliberate exaggeration and
fabrication on the
respondent's part.
Tribunal also observes that if the respondent's self promotion are not to be
taken at face value then the same caution must be
applied to his effusive
statements of sorrow and remorse. Here is an example:
"Q. How do you feel now about having made false allegations about the
social worker, KH?
A. I'm extremely sorry. I deeply regret and I sincerely and deeply
apologise for giving such a hard time to HCCC and to KH and to
Tribunal found the respondent's protestations of remorse to be insincere and
more an expression of regret of his own downfall
than any genuine expression of
remorse, or even concern for Ms A. There was also an overwhelming impression
that the respondent was
concerned to tell the Tribunal what he perceived it
wished to hear in order to enhance his chances of remaining a medical
practitioner.
This was exemplified by the respondent's change of tack when his
incorrect evidence about John Hunter Hospital was revealed (T 137.31).
decision of the Tribunal is not however based only on demeanour and impression.
It takes into account the weighing up of the whole
of the evidence presented by
the respondent.
Boulten said that while he did not contest Ms A's reasons for not giving
evidence he did rely on her 'bad' character in support
of his submission that
she should not be believed. Ms A had been convicted of social security fraud and
was alleged by the respondent
to have practised as a radiographer without proper
qualifications. The difficulty with this submission is that while the
convictions
do not reflect well on Ms A they could reflect equally badly on the
respondent. Ms A, in her statement dated18 September 2006, said
"The reason why I was collecting the payments in both names is because
Arun wanted me to compensate him for not receiving the DOWRY,
which is a custom
in Sri Lanka according to what Arun told me. This was done by me under
(Exhibit A, Tab 14)
respondent, in his oral evidence, said that this allegation was untrue. He said
he had not been interested in a dowry and, in
any event, under Sri Lankan custom
the bride's parents gave the dowry to the bride. He said Ms A's parents had said
they would give
her a house in Blacktown and a new Mercedes Benz. They did not.
The respondent said this failure had little effect on him notwithstanding
he had bought his wife a new red Mercedes Benz at his own expense. His evidence
on this matter, in common with his evidence
generally, was simply not
believable.
Tribunal does not accept that being relieved of purchasing an expensive car for
his wife would not have been beneficial to the
respondent. The Tribunal is also
mindful that Ms A has not had the opportunity to reply to the respondent's
assertions although,
for reasons stated above, the Tribunal does not infer, from
the absence of cross-examination at trial, that the respondent did not
consistent instructions to his lawyers at the trial.
history given to Dr Roberts also suggests the dowry issue was one of some
significance to the respondent (Exhibit 2, page 6).
April 2005, the relevant period for the present proceedings, the respondent was
working at Bega District Hospital as an emergency
physician. He was also
apparently doing some locum work in Melbourne and New Zealand. His frequent
visits to Melbourne also involved
the carrying on of a liaison with another
woman. The Tribunal doubts the alleged nature of this relationship. The
respondent said
it was a platonic connection not involving a sexual element. The
respondent participated in a CORE program in which he was required
certain exercises. His handwritten notes are behind Tab 6 in Exhibit C. They
include the following:
(a) "In love with another woman whilst married to my wife".
(b) "Receiving the love, care, affection and attention from a woman other
than the wife".
(c) "Away from home quite a lot travelling to NZ every fortnight, and to
Melbourne twice a week"
(the 'other woman' lived in
Melbourne).
(d) "Not being totally honest with my wife about my activities in
(e) "Furthermore, as I will be marrying my "first love/love of my life" there
is no risk of marrying a woman without genuinely loving
her and then starting an
extra-marital relationship with the "first love/love of my life"
situation played a significant role in my previous marriage breakdown and in my
already stated, the doctor's version of what occurred on 29 and 30 April 2005 is
contained in his statement dated 5 September 2012.
He expanded on this statement
in his oral evidence. There does not appear to be any other document in which
the detail found in the
statement is present at an earlier time. Although the
Tribunal could not make a finding of recent invention it does have significant
doubts about the accuracy of the statement.
2(h) in this statement sets out the respondent's version of the sexual assault.
The Tribunal finds this version difficult
to accept. According to the version,
both written and in oral evidence, Ms A initiated the sexual encounter by
performing oral sex
on the respondent and then straddling him in a manner in
which his penis was inserted into her anus and she said that she would
"saturate him with sex."
She seems to have pressed on despite his pleas
to go to sleep but then, once he was aroused, she completely lost interest and
face down on the bed beside him. The initiation and saturation have
seemingly abruptly ended for no reason. In addition, the respondent's
unconvincing.
Tribunal finds Ms A's version, as expressed in her oral evidence and statements,
to be more plausible. This includes an assessment
of her evidence at trial,
including her screaming in pain, her injuries and the medical examination by Dr
B. Taken with the Tribunal's
general rejection of the respondent's evidence the
Tribunal is satisfied that the sexual assault occurred as described by Ms A. It
is also to be recalled that the Tribunal has given "
significant weight
to the findings of the trial judge.
good deal of evidence, and submissions, concerned the so-called
element of the respondent's assertions. In essence, he said
that under Sri Lankan law, at least at the time of these offences, it
permissible for a Sri Lankan man to have sex with his Sri Lankan wife without
her consent. There is some support for this in
Ms A's evidence (Exhibit B, page
404). There is also support in the Sri Lankan legislation that was included in
Exhibit C, Tab 8.
HCCC submitted that the respondent's reliance on this cultural background should
not be accepted, for two reasons:
(a) No mention of it was made as an explanation prior to September 2011 when the
respondent's first statement for these proceedings
was prepared (Exhibit 1, Tab
(b) The respondent is an intelligent man, he had already been married to an
Australian woman whom he said would not have been subject
to the same rules and
he was a doctor who practised in the Australian community. Therefore he must
have known that having sex with
a wife, of whatever ethnicity, was unlawful.
Tribunal thinks there is some force in the HCCC's submission but would not go so
far as to entirely discount the respondent's
belief in his marital rights. His
descriptions of his life with Ms A, for example his control of financial
affairs, suggested a domineering
attitude consistent with a belief in a right to
sex. Having said that, the Tribunal was unimpressed with the respondent's
to the effect that an Australian, blue-eyed, blonde woman (his first
wife) was deserving of greater respect than his Sri Lankan born
wife. He gave
this evidence:
Q. For the two or three years that you were living with (Ms D), did you
believe that - I withdraw that. In the year that you were
married to (Ms D), did
you believe that, because you got married, you could have sex with her with or
without her consent?
A. She was a nice blonde, blueeyed girl from Port Lincoln, Australia - not
a Sri Lankan girl. I didn't get married to her through
a Sri Lankan proposal and
a Sri Lankan poruwa ceremony. Absolutely not. I had full respect for her. She
was a very nice girl.
(T 114.43. "Ms D" has been substituted for her real
respondent originally denied the sexual assault. While the Tribunal understands
the respondent was entitled to require the prosecution
to prove its case at
trial the Tribunal notes that the defence to the charges was run on the basis of
dishonest allegations by the
victim, a stance which was pursued through the
Tribunal takes the same view in relation to the common assault as it did for the
rape. This was totally denied by the respondent
who put forward a version in
which he was the victim and Ms A was the assailant.
whatever happened on 30 April Ms A and B left the house. According to the
respondent he desperately tried to contact Ms
A but she did not return telephone
calls and he was unsuccessful. Despite his alleged attempts to locate Ms A and B
the respondent
then travelled to his sister's home near Newcastle. This in
itself seems unusual. His wife and child lived in Northmead. Why travel
Newcastle if he was desperate to find them? The police records indicate he had
left his home address by the time police arrived
shortly after 12.30pm (T
316.43). This is also inconsistent with his alleged searching for his family.
next day, in the afternoon, the respondent felt chest pain. It is to be recalled
here that part of the respondent's version of
the assault by Ms A is that he was
hit or scratched on the back with a fork and hit over the head with a saucepan.
Initially in oral
evidence the respondent was adamant that the injuries
consequently suffered were
"no big deal"
the respondent, still in Newcastle, felt the chest pain he went by ambulance to
the John Hunter Hospital where he was admitted.
He was attended by a
cardiologist who was also of Sri Lankan heritage and had attended university
with him. The respondent was clear
in his evidence that he made no reference to
any injuries from the assault by Ms A until the hospital staff noticed them. The
produced by the hospital contradict the respondent's evidence and, for
other reasons, reflect badly upon him. The notes are in Exhibit
E. They include
the following:
(a) The respondent gave a history of the assault to the ambulance officer. He
thus mentioned the assault at the first opportunity.
(b) He did so again in the triage department where the note reads:
"Yesterday? Assaulted by partner. (Lac to left arm."
(c) The history recorded by the emergency department RMO is as follows:
very teary and upset. States de facto partner has anger management issues and
has been verbally and physically aggressive to both
him and their 16 month old
child. Partner has affair with drug addict and is requesting money regularly.
Yesterday Pt had no money
and was assaulted physically with multiple injuries.
Pt states partner has inflicted burns x2 on baby and cuts (unknown word)
unexplained falls and rough handling of child. Partner is also verbally
aggressive/constantly to him and child. Pt is thinking of
taking legal
(d) The reference to Ms A having an affair with a drug addict referred to an
associate of hers some 11 years earlier at high school.
The respondent admitted
the allegation was entirely unfounded.
(e) The allegation of the infliction of burns and other injuries on the child
was equally false and perhaps more insidious. He said
Ms A had burnt a cake that
she had thrown onto the ground causing some inadvertent burns to B.
(f) Another entry states:
"Yesterday, partner attacked him and baby. He
sustained several injuries in the attack"
. The assertion that the baby had
been attacked was admitted by the respondent to be false.
(g) The respondent said he discharged himself from hospital after he spoke to
the cardiologist and was told that his tests were satisfactory.
There was no
reason for him to stay. The notes contradict this evidence. They state that the
patient was
"not fit for discharge"
and that he
"left against medical
. This note was made after his departure was noticed and the
cardiologist had been informed.
John Hunter Hospital notes are important because they not only reveal the
dishonesty of the respondent at the time of his admission
but, probably more
significantly, through the inconsistencies with his oral evidence raise
fundamental concerns about his honesty
before the Tribunal.
documentation, from both sides, contains numerous expressions by the respondent
of untenable justification of his conduct. There
is also a disturbing 'shifting"
of the blame to his wife. Some examples are the following:
(a) In his letter to Mr Ware in the Department of Corrective Services dated 9
March 2010 the respondent suggests the charges against
the respondent are
alleged to have been an invention of the victim to promote her property
settlement and child custody proceedings.
(Ex A, Tab 41). The Tribunal notes
that following the rape Ms A lived in a women's shelter for some
(b) The Pre-Release Report in December 2010 refers to the respondent attempting
to cast a negative impression of the victim
". (Exhibit A, Tab
(c) Even more lately the respondent seemed to be attempting shift blame onto Ms
A or her family. This is evident in the report of
Dr Roberts (Exhibit 2, page
Tribunal had the distinct impression the respondent's admission of the sexual
assault is not an indication of genuine remorse
but rather an acceptance of the
inevitable and a realisation that continued denial would not assist his cause.
respondent's sending of the letters of complaint about KH and Dr B reflect
particularly badly on him. They were the health professionals
involved in the
care and assessment of Ms A after the allegation of sexual assault. The starting
point is that when he wrote the
letters he had already come to terms about his
guilt. In his application to enrol in the CORE program the respondent wrote, in
2009, in relation to the rape: "
I am responsible
." (Exhibit 1, Tab
64). In September and November 2009 however the respondent wrote the letters
allegations including the involvement of KH
in a conspiracy with Ms A and "
serious professional misconduct
(Exhibit A, Tabs 38 and 39 respectively).
respondent's now explanation of seeking revenge on those persons he wrongly
perceived as having caused his predicament is inconsistent
with his assumption
of responsibility some months earlier. It also bespeaks ill of his character
that he would so severely smear
the reputation of a medical colleague and
another health professional.
aspect is that there was no actual acceptance of responsibility in the CORE
application. He was simply making the admission
to further his chances of
acceptance into the program and in turn his release on parole. Dr Roberts
expressed the possibility in
"I'd also have to bear in mind the fact that it's written in 2009 and it's
also written for a very specific purpose. It's in order
to achieve entry into a
sought after program which inmates know would support their release. So in my
experience, whatever the driving
force behind comments in such an application
form, it's not uncommon for people to write what they perceive would help them
entry into a program.
Q. You mean treat it with a pinch of salt?
A. I would say that you have to be cautious to place weight on this
document in isolation."
Dr Roberts' possibility is the reality it conforms with the Tribunal's
conclusion that the respondent often tailored his evidence
to his perception of
what he perceived the Tribunal would want to hear in order to give him a
favourable result.
addition the Tribunal does not accept the respondent's explanation for the
letters about KH and Dr B as excusing his conduct. By
September 2009 the
respondent had been in prison for some time and had ample opportunity to come to
terms with his predicament.
already stated the Tribunal has rejected the respondent's version of the rape
and common assault. Complaints One and Two are therefore
found to have been
Insight and re-offending
Pre-Release report mentioned above makes this comment on the respondent's
"Mr Sudath appears to lack insight regarding the effect of his
behaviour upon others which has been problematic at times in his interactions
with other offenders and staff throughout his custodial sentence."
conclusion the report states:
"Mr Sudath's attitude to his offences has wavered between denial and
minimisation. He has failed to demonstrate genuine victim empathy
into his offending behaviour and apportions blame to the victim, often
denigrating her and her background."
Tribunal finds this lack of insight still infects the respondent's appreciation
of his wrongdoing and remains a significant factor
in the protective orders that
should be made. The Tribunal notes Mr Taylor's evidence that insight is not a
single concept but can
be obtained in stages. Thus a person's insight may be
small or more complete.
respondent said there was no history of abuse in the relationship. This is
contradicted by Ms A. She told the Dr B that :"
The physical abuse story is
one that has repeatedly occurred over the six years of living with her
" (Exhibit A, Tab 18). The sentencing judge also commented: "
mid-April 2005 (the victim) had reached a point where she could no longer
tolerate the abuse and violence she experienced from
" (Exhibit A, Tab
6). In fairness to the respondent, the allegation of Ms A that the respondent
was deregistered and practising under
an alias does not appear to be correct.
Tribunal has mentioned above the various names used by the respondent but,
unlike the prison authorities, could not reach a conclusion
of deliberate use of
respondent's assertions of his rehabilitation and freedom from risk of
re-offending include reference to his participation in
the CORE Moderate Program
between May and November 2011. This is therapy program for men who have
sexually abused adults and/or children
." The treatment report is behind
Tab 5 in Exhibit C. Despite a number of supporting comments the conclusion is
"Mr Sudath is a 44 year old male with a professional background. He
offended against his partner in the context of a problematic relationship.
During treatment it appears the he may have attempted to portray himself in a
positive light, and may have engaged in dishonesty
regarding his life
circumstances. Taking into account both static and dynamic risk factors, the
risk rating of Low on the STATIC-99R
is considered to under-represent Mr
Sudath's potential risk. Poor stress management, combined with entitled beliefs
within a relationship
may pose most likely risk scenario for Mr Sudath. In order
to manage Mr Sudath's future risk the following is recommended;
Case Management decisions be made on the basis of supporting collateral
information
Attend relationship counselling in any future relationship
Attend Domestic Violence program for perpetrators of domestic violence
Maintain a work-life balance that allows for adequate relaxation pursuits,
in order to assist with stress management
Attend individual counselling with COS Psychologist to assist with stress
management on a needs basis
Attend individual counselling with SVOTP Rural Aftercare or CSOCAS
accredited psychologist to assist with offence related risk management
needs basis
Encourage Mr Sudath to engage in honest and open communication with
support people, so they are aware of risk management issues."
Tribunal does accept that there is a good deal of evidence to suggest that the
respondent is unlikely to re-offend. For example
Dr Roberts and Mr Taylor are of
this view and time spent in prison has no doubt had a deterrent
the Tribunal accepts there is a low risk of re-offending but does not regard
this conclusion as impacting on the assessment
of the respondent's character or
the nature of protective orders that must be made.
Protective orders
respondent has submitted that his registration should not be cancelled. He says
he should rather be dealt with by way of the imposition
of conditions upon his
registration. He says that he has done his best to rehabilitate himself. He has
a good deal to offer the community
as a medical practitioner and he has been
sufficiently punished by the sentence already imposed upon him. It is, of
course, trite
to say that the role of the Tribunal is not one concerned with
punishment but rather the protection of the public and of the medical
profession.
reasonably, the respondent could not identify a specific time when he came to
accept his wrongdoing. There seem to have been
periods when he both admitted his
guilt but also maintained his innocence. This has been mentioned above in
relation to the letters
Tribunal does not think that the common assault conviction, without more, would
necessarily lead to cancellation of the respondent's
registration. The assault
was serious, a fact which is evident in the imposition of a term of
imprisonment. The Tribunal may have
considered a suspension of the respondent's
registration as being the appropriate protective order in respect of the
conviction of
common assault.
position, however, is very different in respect of the rape conviction both
viewed alone and in conjunction with the common assault
and the circumstances
behind them including the letters about KH and Dr B.
details of the offences are set out in the judgment on sentencing of Judge
Nicholson SC delivered on 21 September 2007 (Exhibit
A, Tab 6). It is not
necessary to repeat the details. Suffice to say that the offences involved not
only the humiliation of the respondent's
wife but the infliction of significant
pain and distress. His Honour found that the offence, by a narrow margin, fell
"below a mid range of seriousness"
. This is to some degree a technical
classification, which should not be seen as mitigating the seriousness of the
offence. The Tribunal
notes that the Court of Criminal Appeal made this comment:
"In relation to the first count I am completely satisfied that the
sentence imposed was within the range. Indeed, having regard to
the serious
nature of the sexual assault a non-parole period greater than that which was
imposed would not have been inappropriate."
(Paragraph 74, Exhibit A, Tab
effect of the finding by the Tribunal that it does not accept the respondent's
version of the sexual assault and the common assault
necessarily leads to a
finding of his dishonesty in the witness box. Of itself, such a finding cannot
be classified as a particular
of being a person not of good character. However,
the respondent's dishonesty before the Tribunal can be taken into account in
way: The Tribunal has little doubt, and in fact there is no real dispute,
that on the basis of its findings the respondent was a
person not of a good
character at the time he committed the offences and probably for as long as he
continued to deny them. That
being so, the evidentiary onus would have shifted
to the respondent to establish that he was no longer of bad character. This task
is made almost impossible by his present dishonesty.
Tribunal's findings in respect of Complaint Two lead almost automatically to a
conclusion that the doctor was, and more importantly
is now, a person who is not
of good character. Although the role of the Tribunal in protective orders is not
to punish, it does have
an obligation to maintain the standards of the
profession and the confidence of the public in it. It also must consider the
element in relation to other practitioners conducting themselves in a
similar fashion.
the gravity of the offences committed by Dr Sudath, in particular the rape, is
such that the following statement of Viscount
Simon LC in
General Medical
Council v Spackman
[1943] AC 627
is applicable:
"The high reputation of the medical profession as a whole depends in no
small measure on excluding from it those whose professional
misconduct makes
them unworthy to belong to it, and the confidence which the public are
accustomed to put in the family doctor is
intimately connected with the
assurance that those who practise the art of medicine are, in all relations with
their patients, individuals
of the highest honour."
Tribunal is firmly of the view that deregistration is the only option open to it
having regard to its findings in respect of Complaint
Two. When these findings
are applied to Complaint One the same result becomes inevitable.
HCCC submitted that if the respondent was removed from the Register he should
not be permitted to apply for re-instatement for
three years. Having regard to
the length of time for which the respondent has been suspended the Tribunal
thinks the period should
be two years.
Tribunal makes the following orders:
(a) A direction that the respondent be deregistered.
(b) The respondent should not be permitted to apply for reinstatement of his
registration for a period of two years from the date
(c) The respondent is to pay the costs of these proceedings.
IN THE MEDICAL TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED UNDER
SECTION 146
MEDICAL PRACTICE
IN THE MATTER OF Dr Aron Kondasinghe Sudath, a person registered under the
Medical Practice Act 1992
AMENDED NOTICE OF COMPLAINT
TAKE NOTICE THAT the
Medical Tribunal
has received a complaint from
Office of the Health Care Complaints Commission
Commission")
following consultation with the
New South Wales Medical
in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
section 51(1)
Medical Practice Act 1992
of Long Bay Correctional Complex, Malabar,
New South Wales, 2036 ("the practitioner"), being a medical practitioner
registered under
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been convicted of offences in the State of New South Wales and made the
subject of a criminal finding in the State of Queensland.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
(i) On 21 September 2007 at Penrith District Court the practitioner was
convicted of one count of sexual intercourse without consent
under section 611
Crimes Act 1900
(ii) On 21 September 2007 at Penrith District Court the practitioner was
convicted of one count of common assault under
(iii) On 23 September 1998 Brisbane District Court found the offence of common
assault under section 335 of the Criminal Code 1899
(Qld) proved against the
practitioner. The Court recorded no conviction and fined the practitioner the
sum of $375.00.
COMPLAINT TWO
Is not of good character.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
1. On 21 September 2007 at Penrith District Court, the practitioner was
convicted of one count of sexual intercourse without consent
under s. 611 of the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) arising out of the following underlying
(i) At all material times, the practitioner and his wife, the Complainant in the
criminal proceedings ("the Complainant"), resided
at Baulkham Hills with their
son who was born on 25 January 2004.
(ii) On the evening of 29 April 2005, the family had returned to the family home
at Baulkham Hills after a short stay in Bega.
(iii) At about 9.00 p.m., the Complainant went to a bedroom, intending to
breastfeed her son. She was laying on the bed, her son at her
(iv) The practitioner lay beside her and began making advances consistent with
indicating a desire to have sex.
(v) The Complaint said "No. I am breastfeeding my son. Leave me alone". She was
wearing a nightdress; he a sarong.
(vi) The child began to cry.
(vii) The Complainant moved from the lying position. The practitioner asked
"Where's the fucking sorbolene?"
(viii) The Complainant left the room to look for the sorbolene, thinking the
practitioner may use it, as he had apparently done so
in the past, for
self-pleasuring.
(ix) The Complainant returned to the room and was told by the practitioner "Look
under the bed in our room".
(x) At the time the son on the bed was still crying.
(xi) The Complainant crawled on the bed towards the pillows where the boy was
lying. She intended to lift the baby and take him from
the room. As she made her
way across the bed to the child, she was pushed forward so that her backside was
raised but her head and
shoulders lowered towards the bed clothing. Her ankle or
lower leg was grabbed.
(xii) The practitioner lifted the Complainant's nightgown and put sorbolene in
the region of her anus.
(xiii) She screamed
"Don't do it, don't do it".
(xiv) The practitioner inserted his erect penis into her anus. It was painful
for her. She was being held and was fearful of falling
towards her
(xv) The practitioner pumped his penis into and out of the Complainant's anus.
The Complainant called upon him to stop. She screamed
in pain. Her son had not
stopped crying and was crying still in response to the Complainant's cries of
(xvi) The Complainant's whole anal area felt ripped apart.
(xvii) The Complainant sustained injury as a consequence of the incident. On her
thighs there were a number of small bruises. On
the angiogenital area, there
were more than a dozen linear abrasions, some two or more reaching into the anal
canal. Those injuries
were occasioned by the application of force to the area in
the course of this sexual assault. The ones reaching into the anal canal
caused by force penetration of the anus. The Complainant experienced pain when
she sat upon the toilet the following morning.
2. On 21 September 2007 at Penrith District Court, the practitioner was
convicted of one count of common assault under
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) arising out of the following underlying conduct:
(i) On the morning following the sexual assault which occurred on 29 April 2005,
the practitioner encountered the Complainant on
the upper landing of their two
storey dwelling at Baulkham Hills. The Complainant was carrying their
(ii) The practitioner asked her for her passport, claiming to need it for the
purpose of opening a bank account. The Complainant
replied she did not have it.
Immediately the practitioner replied
"Where's the fucking passport?",
again to be told the Complainant did not have it. The practitioner responded
"You're a fucking liar. Your parents are fucking liars." The
practitioner
became angry. The Complainant told the practitioner she did not want to open a
bank account in her name, if the practitioner
wanted to open an account he could
do so himself because the Complainant would not be part of that stuff
(iii) By now, the practitioner was screaming. The Complainant turned to go down
the stairs. The practitioner grabbed the Complainant's
hair, banged her head up
against the doorframe of the upstairs study up to three times, all the time
demanding the Complainant's
(iv) The Complainant lost her footing but was able to put her son on the floor.
She tried to regain her footing.
(v) The practitioner said
"Here is the fucking child.",
and handed the
child back to the Complainant.
(vi) For a second time the practitioner grabbed the Complainant's hair, pulling
it as both the Complainant and the practitioner made
their way down the
(vii) At the foot of the stairs the Complainant fell backwards, striking her
bottom on one of the steps. The Complainant retained
her son, clasping him in
(viii) Pulling on the Complainant's hair, the practitioner pulled her forward
onto her feet, and pushed her towards a couch in the
loungeroom.
(ix) The-Complainant sat holding the child. She-was distressed and
(x) The practitioner kept continuously striking her head with his fists numerous
times. The Complainant was screaming.
(xi) The Complainant was pushed to another couch. In anger, the practitioner
struck the Complainant yet again in the head. The Complainant
stood to defend
herself by raising her hands. The Complainant called out for the practitioner to
(xii) At some point the Complainant stood up, only to be pushed back to the
first couch and assaulted yet again.
(xiii) The Complainant began to scream for help
"Please help me, please help
(xiv) The practitioner grabbed a cushion and put it on the Complainant's face.
The Complainant struggled for breath. She stopped
screaming. The practitioner
released the cushion. The Complainant commenced screaming again. The
practitioner replaced the cushion
on her face. The Complainant lost air and
stopped screaming. The cushion was removed. The Complainant screamed a third
time. Three
times the cushion was replaced before the Complainant's will was
overcome and she stopped screaming.
(xv) The Complainant was then told by the practitioner
"Feed the fucking
The Complainant went to the kitchen and made the child's formula.
Once the formula was made the Complainant grabbed the child with
one hand, her
handbag with the other, and fled the house, running to a nearby neighbour's
(xvi) The assault was of such ferocity that it was capable of causing injuries
such as deep bruising to the proximal interphalangeal
joints, and a fracture of
the final phalanx of the third finger.
On or about 24 September 2009, the practitioner wrote to the Commission
in which he made improper allegations and comments against
a social worker,
On or about 27 November 2009, the practitioner wrote to the Commission
in which he made improper allegations and comments against
Dr B in relation to
Dr B's examination of the complainant on 2 May 2005 at the Liverpool Sexual
Assault Centre and Dr B's subsequent
report dated 16 May 2005 (date typed 6 May
Dated: 29 October 2008
Karen Mobbs
Director of Proceedings
Health Care Complaints Commission
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (209 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter