URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/184.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
English v R [2025] NSWCCA 184 (12 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
English v R
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 184
Hearing Date(s):
23 July 2025
Date of Orders:
12 November 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
Kirk JA at [1];
Yehia J at [98];
Rigg J at [103]
(1) Extend time to appeal to 12 May
(2) Grant leave to
(3) Appeal upheld.
(4) Quash the applicant’s convictions on
counts 3-6 of the indictment dated 10 November 2022 and a judgment of acquittal
entered in their place.
(5) Quash the sentence
imposed by O’Brien DCJ on 14 April 2023, and in lieu thereof sentence the
applicant on count 7 on the
indictment to 12 months imprisonment commencing on
20 July 2021 and ending on 19 July 2022.
Catchwords:
CRIME — Appeals — appeal against conviction —
unreasonable verdict — Crown alleged exclusive possession of
cash — applicant argued evidence did not establish exclusive possession
— whether applicant had exclusive possession
of drugs and cash
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Supreme Court (Criminal Appeal) Rules 2021
Cases Cited:
Barzani v R
[2024] NSWCCA 188
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
Davidson v R
(2009) 75 NSWLR 150
[2009] NSWCCA 150
Teh v The Queen
(1985) 157 CLR 523
[1985] HCA 43
[2020] NSWCCA
Kentwell v The Queen (2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
(2013) 232 A Crim R 337
[2023] NSWCCA 203
; (2023) 310 A
Lee v The Queen
(2014) 253 CLR 455
[2014] HCA 20
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
Moors v Burke
(1919) 26 CLR 265
R v Amanatidis
[2001] NSWCCA 400
(2001) 125 A Crim R 89
[2025] HCA 9
(2025) 99 ALJR 676
The Queen v Hillier
(2007) 228 CLR 618
[2007] HCA 13
Principal judgment
Michael English (Applicant)
Crown (Respondent)
Representation:
P Boulten SC / K Averre (Applicant)
Solicitors:
Mitchell & Co Lawyers (Applicant)
the Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
File Number(s):
2020/120827
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court
Not applicable
Date of Decision:
17 and 22 November 2022
O’Brien DCJ
File Number(s):
2020/120827
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The applicant was convicted of three counts of (deemed) supply of a
prohibited drug (counts 3-5), one count of dealing with proceeds
(Australian currency – count 6) and one count of possessing false
identification document with intent to commit the
indictable offence of drug
supply (count 7). These offences were alleged to have been committed at a
unit in St Leonards on 22 April
2020. He was also acquitted of two further
counts of supply prohibited drug (counts 1-2) in relation to drugs found at
a different
premises, in Mascot.
The applicant sought an extension of time and leave to appeal from his
conviction on counts 3-6 on the sole ground of unreasonable
verdict. He
argued that the jury’s verdict was unreasonable because the Crown had
chosen to put its case against him on the
basis that he had
possession of the drugs and cash found in the St Leonards unit, and the evidence
could not establish the exclusivity of his possession
beyond reasonable
The unit had been rented to another person in mid-March 2020. The real estate
agent who managed the unit had provided that person
with two keyrings, along
with a remote control for the underground carpark. On each keyring was a key to
the unit and a fob to enable
use of the lifts. That person took steps to
transfer the lease of the unit to the applicant (who was using an alias) a few
days before
the police arrested the applicant.
The Crown’s evidence relevantly also included video footage of police
items in the
apartment and an associated storage cage; photos taken from CCTV footage from
inside the apartment building’s
lift; and logs recording times at which
the fobs associated with the unit were used in the building.
The Court (Kirk JA, Yehia and Rigg JJ agreeing) held, granting
an extension of time and leave to appeal against the convictions, and
the appeal:
(1) The very notion of possessing something implies that
others are excluded from having that thing, but that does not mean that
people may not have possession jointly or in concert. However, the Crown here
made the forensic choice at trial to assert
that possession of the drugs and
cash was truly exclusive, that is, to the exclusion of all others. The
possibility of joint possession
was eschewed: [
He Kaw Teh v The Queen
(1985) 157 CLR 523
[1985] HCA 43
(1919) 26 CLR 265
[1919] HCA 32
[2013] NSWCCA 68
(2013) 232 A Crim R 337
, considered.
(2) The video evidence of the search supports a conclusion
that the applicant was residing in the apartment in the period shortly
and on, 22 April 2020. There is reason to think he was residing there alone, but
the point is not certain: [
(3) The DNA evidence strongly supports a conclusion that the
applicant had handled, and had possession of, the drugs. But it does
either way to establish whether the possession was exclusive: [
(4) The applicant had possession of one of the two available
sets of keys (including a fob – fob 1) when he was arrested.
part of the other key set is depicted in a video of items found on a desk in the
study of the unit. But the evidence does
not disclose whether the door key and
the fob (fob 2) were still part of that set (that key set not having been
seized by the police).
There is a real possibility that they were not: [
(5) The fob usage log suggests that both fobs 1 and 2 were
used in the days leading up to the applicant’s arrest. There is
the applicant used fob 1 in that period, including on the day he was
arrested. There is a real possibility, based on matching
CCTV evidence from the
lift with the fob logs, that other people also used fob 1 in that period. There
is no evidence the applicant
used fob 2 in that period. Yet there is
evidence that fob 2 was used in that period: [
(6) What is at issue is exclusive possession of the drugs
and money, not occupancy or possession of the unit, but in this case the
cannot really be disentangled. There is a reasonable possibility that some other
person or persons had possession of, or access
to and use of, fob 2 and the
associated unit door key in the period leading up to the applicant’s
arrest, including on 22 April
2020 itself. The evidence indicates that other
people had been coming and going from the unit in the preceding days. It is
possible that at least one of those people had the second door key
and fob 2, such as to give them access to the unit, and potential
joint custody
or control of the drugs and the cash. It is by no means implausible that the
drug supply enterprise being undertaken
from the unit was a joint one: [
(7) The jury had the advantage of drawing upon its
collective experience and wisdom, but the objective and substantially
unchallenged
nature of the evidence in this case means any advantage enjoyed by
the jury was slight, and the advantages of the jury do not explain
the reasonable doubt identified: [
]. It was not open to the jury to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the applicant was guilty of counts 3-6 in the manner
by the Crown: [
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
Dansie v The
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
[2025] HCA 9
99 ALJR 676
[2023] NSWCCA 203
; (2023) 310 A Crim R 170,
The applicant, Michael English, was charged in the District Court with
five counts of supply prohibited drug (counts 1-5), one count
of dealing with
proceeds of crime (count 6) and one count of possessing false identification
document with intent to commit the indictable
offence of drug supply
(count 7). Counts 1 and 2 were in connection with a residence in Mascot.
There was a directed verdict of not
guilty on count 2 and the jury found the
applicant not guilty of count 1. Counts 3-6 related to drugs and cash found
in an apartment
in St Leonards. The jury found him guilty of those counts,
along with count 7. The trial judge, O’Brien DCJ, imposed an
sentence of seven years and six months imprisonment with a non-parole
period of five years and seven months.
applicant seeks an extension of time and leave to appeal from the conviction on
counts 3-6 on the sole ground of unreasonable
verdict. He does not challenge his
conviction on count 7. His argument is simple. He does not claim that the Crown
did not prove
he had possession of the drugs and money. But he says that the
Crown chose to put its case against him on the basis that he had
possession, and the evidence cannot establish that point beyond
reasonable doubt. As his senior counsel put it at the outset of oral
submissions, the Crown did not “negative the reasonable possibility that
the applicant was in joint possession of the drugs
the subject of the counts
that led to the convictions”.
my view, having carefully reviewed the evidence, the argument is correct. Leave
to appeal should be granted, the appeal upheld,
and the applicant’s
convictions on the three challenged counts quashed with a verdict of acquittal
entered instead. He should
be resentenced on count 7 in accordance with the
indicative sentence identified by the trial judge.
reasons are structured as follows:
(1) the application for an extension of time to appeal (at [
(2) principles governing an unreasonable verdict appeal (at [
(3) the notion of possession (at [
(4) an overview of the Crown case (at [
(5) the evidence going to exclusive possession (at [
(6) resentencing on count 7 (at [
Application to extend time
applicant was sentenced on 14 April 2023. A notice of intention to appeal was
filed on 28 April 2023 but the notice of appeal
was not filed until 12 May 2025,
over 12 months late. The applicant seeks an extension of time.
explanation for the delay was given in an affidavit sworn by the
applicant’s current solicitor, Mr Gerard Mitchell. The applicant
been unsuccessful in securing private funding for the appeal until October 2024,
in circumstances where it was believed that
Legal Aid would not be available.
The applicant’s solicitors at the time then appropriately indicated that
they were unable
to review the matter in reasonable time due to other
commitments. In November 2024 the applicant sought to engage another firm of
solicitors, which indicated it could review the matter in short order. However,
in late March 2025 the applicant discovered that
the process of reviewing the
matter had barely begun. He promptly withdrew his instructions and engaged
Mr Mitchell’s firm.
Mr Mitchell retained senior and junior
counsel swiftly, and the appeal and submissions were filed on 12 May 2025.
Crown did not oppose an extension of time per se, with it noting that the merit
of the substantive appeal was a relevant consideration:
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37.
The delay is regrettable but it should
not be held against the applicant in light of the explanation provided, and
taking account
of the prospects of success of the appeal. Time should be
extended to permit the application for leave to appeal to be brought pursuant
r 3.5(5) of the
Supreme Court (Criminal Appeal) Rules 2021
Principles applicable to an unreasonable verdict appeal
role of an appellate court considering a conviction appeal alleging an
unreasonable verdict was authoritatively stated in the
joint judgment in
v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
at 492-495;
[1994] HCA 63
see further
v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2025] HCA 9
(2025) 99 ALJR 676
. The question which the court must ask itself is “whether it
thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty” (
at 493), that question being “one of fact which the court must decide by
making its own independent assessment of the evidence”
The joint judgment in
also explained (at 494):
In most cases a doubt experienced by an appellate court will be a doubt which a
jury ought also to have experienced. It is only where
a jury’s advantage
in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced
by a court of criminal appeal
that the court may conclude that no miscarriage of
justice occurred.
Honours said that “full allowance” is to be made for the advantages
enjoyed by the jury (
at 494). Those advantages may extend not just to
witness testimony but to all of the evidence adduced at trial, “including
by the application of the jurors’ collective wisdom and experience of
ordinary affairs”:
at [9]. The “existence, nature and
scope of those advantages will vary from case to case depending on the form in
evidence was adduced and the nature of the issues that arose at the
trial”: ibid. For example, where the prosecution case is
circumstantial
and consists mostly of unchallenged testimony, and the accused did not give
evidence, then the advantage possessed
by the trier of fact may be slight: ibid,
referring to
was explained in
at [11] that
requires that the appellate court undertake an “independent
assessment” of the sufficiency and quality of the “whole
evidence”. However, that assessment is undertaken in a context in which an
appeal is as much of an adversarial process
as the criminal trial from which the
appeal is brought and in which it is for the parties to identify the evidence
that the appellate
court must review and assess and the features of that
evidence that support their respective cases on appeal. [citations omitted]
both sides focused on the evidence going to the issue of possession. It is that
evidence which is determinative of the appeal.
the Crown noted, this Court said the following in
Barzani v R
with respect to such an appeal in a circumstantial case:
[58] Where a jury verdict based on a circumstantial case is challenged as being
unreasonable, an assessment of the sufficiency of
the evidence to support the
verdict of guilty requires this Court “to weigh all the circumstances in
deciding whether it was
open to the jury to draw the ultimate inference that
guilt has been proved to the criminal standard” and to assess whether
“the prosecution has failed to exclude an inference consistent with
innocence that was reasonably open”:
Coughlan v The Queen
267 CLR 654
[2020] HCA 15
[2023] HCA 29
(2023) 97 ALJR 758
. As explained in
at [47], for an inference to be reasonable, “it
‘must rest upon something more than mere conjecture. The bare possibility
of innocence should not prevent a jury from finding the prisoner guilty, if the
inference of guilt is the only inference open to
reasonable men upon a
consideration of all the facts in evidence’”.
considering a circumstantial case, all of the circumstances established by the
evidence are to be considered and weighed in deciding
whether there is an
inference consistent with innocence reasonably open on the evidence; neither at
trial nor on appeal is such a
case to be considered piecemeal:
The Queen v
(2007) 228 CLR 618
[2007] HCA 13
and [48]. The applicant
did not submit that any particular fact in this matter was of such a nature or
significance that it was necessary
to prove that fact beyond reasonable doubt:
Davidson v R
(2009) 75 NSWLR 150
[2009] NSWCCA 150
the main evidence going to possession is of a documentary or unchallenged kind.
It includes correspondence with respect to the
taking over of the lease, video
recording of a police search of the premises, photos taken from CCTV footage of
the applicant’s
presence in the apartment building (but no CCTV video
footage), fob usage logs maintained by building management, and unchallenged
evidence as to the whereabouts of the keys and fobs associated with the
apartment. Witness credit and reliability was not in issue.
to the collective wisdom of the jury in making judgments other than of
credibility, senior counsel for the applicant submitted
not got any work to do in this case”, referring to the fact that the case
does not depend on an assessment
of credibility but rather on objective
circumstantial evidence. Counsel for the Crown took a different position,
submitting that
“that advantage ... derives from that diversity, the
experience ... of 12 members in the community”, saying “that
advantage has some work to do”, although “we don’t submit
it’s overwhelming”.
case is similar to
in that the prosecution had a circumstantial
case depending largely on documentary and uncontested evidence. The jury does
advantage of drawing upon the diverse range of human experience,
understanding and judgment of 12 randomly drawn members of the community
making factual assessments: note
at [9]-[10];
; (2023) 310 A Crim R 170 at
. But here there appears to have
been relatively little scope for that collective wisdom and experience to have
had much role to play,
and the Crown has not identified any particular special
advantage that the jury had beyond its collective nature. It suffices to
the High Court did in
, that any advantage held by the jury was
The notion of possession
the centrality of the notion of possession in the
Drug Misuse and Trafficking
(NSW), the term is not defined in the Act. This Court said the
following of the notion in
[2020] NSWCCA 202:
[21] ... The concept of possession in this context is that “one has in
one’s possession whatever is, to one’s own
knowledge, physically in
one’s custody or under one’s physical control” (
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Brooks
[1974] AC 862
at 866; cited with approval in
He Kaw Teh v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
at 537 (Gibbs CJ);
Where, as here, the prosecution alleges exclusive possession by an accused
it must negate possession on the part of any other person
such as a co-occupant
of the accused’s residence (
R v Filippetti
(1978) 13 A Crim R 335
Dawson J said in
He Kaw Teh v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
[1985] HCA 43
that the concept of possession in criminal law “is a basic
one involving the intentional exercise of physical custody or control
something”.
very notion of possessing something implies that others are excluded from having
that thing. Thus the High Court has said of the
notion that “exclusiveness
is essential”:
[1919] HCA 32
(1919) 26 CLR 265
[1919] HCA 32.
But, as the Court immediately went on to say, that
“does not mean that several persons may not in concert have and exercise
that exclusive possession as against the rest of the world”. Thus the
Court did not use the word exclusive to mean truly exclusive,
that is, excluding
all others. A few people might have joint possession of a thing.
Beech-Jones, relevantly speaking for this Court in
[2013] NSWCCA
(2013) 232 A Crim R 337
, referred to the passage in
[281] It follows from this that two persons can only be in possession of the
same item if they are so jointly or “in concert”
and they must
exercise or be capable of exercising their power of exclusive possession against
all outsiders. Absent such joint possession
it is not possible for two persons
to both be in possession of the same item because by definition each of their
respective powers
of control cannot be exclusive.
Court’s decision in that case was overturned in
Lee v The Queen
(2014) 253 CLR 455
[2014] HCA 20
, but on other grounds which do not undermine
the point quoted (and note further
R v Amanatidis
[2001] NSWCCA 400
(2001) 125 A Crim R 89
explained below, the notion of exclusive possession invoked by the Crown in this
matter was truly exclusive, that is, to the exclusion
of all others. The
possibility of joint possession was eschewed. Why that forensic choice was taken
is not clear. In any case, the
reason for the choice is not this Court’s
concern. Counsel for the Crown on the appeal properly did not seek to backtrack
the way in which the prosecution case had been put at trial.
An overview of the Crown case
The Mascot premises
the applicant was acquitted on counts 1 and 2, for the purpose of providing
context it is convenient briefly to refer to the
events at the Mascot premises
on 5 February 2020. On that day an ambulance and police attended an apartment in
Mascot in response
to an incident. It was not disputed that the applicant was
the resident of that apartment at the time. Three men were present in
apartment, including the applicant. One of the others was Joshua Proia, who was
unwell and ended up being taken away for medical
care. While police were there
they observed objects suggestive of drug possession and supply, including white
powder in two bags
and on a piece of paper. The applicant admitted possession of
the powder sitting on the paper. Warrants were obtained to search the
and the underground carpark. Police found a commercial quantity of heroin in a
Ford Ranger ute parked in the car space
opposite to the space designated for the
occupant of the apartment in question (that being the subject of count 2), and a
large commercial
quantity of methylamphetamine in an Audi A5 car parked behind
the Ford Ranger (that being the subject of count 1). Neither of those
was registered to the applicant. The applicant was taken to the Mascot Police
Station on the day but was not detained.
pre-trial ruling was made that the evidence supporting counts 1 and 3 was
cross-admissible as coincidence evidence. Obviously enough,
the Crown has
accepted that coincidence reasoning is not available on appeal given that the
applicant was acquitted on count 1.
The St Leonards
were based on events connected to a two bedroom dwelling, unit 2607 (also
referred to as 2607B), on the 26th floor of an
apartment building in
St Leonards. Unlike with the Mascot premises, there is a real debate as to
whether the applicant was the sole
resident of, or even resided at, the unit at
the relevant times. Evidence that goes to the precise nature of the
applicant’s
connection with the unit, and control over the drugs and cash
found therein, is at the heart of this appeal and will be examined
below. For present purposes it suffices briefly to outline the Crown case.
12 March 2020 a man named Krikor Gregory Sinian entered into a residential
tenancy agreement with respect to the St Leonards unit.
He was the sole tenant
on the lease.
the evidence tendered by the Crown the earliest date that the applicant was seen
in the vicinity of the unit was 14 April 2020
when he was depicted in a still
image taken from the CCTV cameras in the building lifts as entering the level on
which the unit was
situated. He was also captured on those cameras on 15 and
17-19 April 2020 travelling to and from that level in the lifts, sometimes
and the other times with other unknown individuals.
receptionist employed by the real estate agency managing the unit gave a
statement, which was marked for identification and read
out by the prosecutor at
the trial. She said that on Sunday 19 April 2020 she received a noise complaint
unit. She forwarded the complaint to the email address
Sinian had provided. The next day Sinian told her that a man named Logan Dart
would take over the lease. A person identifying themselves as Logan Dart then
2020 – prior to the
applicant’s arrest later that morning – she received purported
identification and financial
documents from Logan Dart. It is not disputed that
Logan Dart was an alias of the applicant.
that same day police received information that the applicant was residing in the
vicinity of the St Leonards apartment building.
The unit had been under
surveillance. Police observed the applicant’s BMW (which was registered in
his name) parked in the
underground carpark and saw the applicant in CCTV
footage captured within the building. Police arrested the applicant when he
the lifts on ground floor, searched him and found a set of keys and
forged identification documents in the name of Logan Dart with
applicant’s photo. Later that day police executed a search warrant at the
unit, having guarded it in the meantime. No-one
else was present inside when
they entered the unit.
was agreed that police found a plastic resealable bag on the top right shelf of
an entertainment unit in the living room containing
996.3 grams of
methylamphetamine. It was agreed that police found in the bottom drawer of a
workstation in the second bedroom (which
was also described as an office or
study) four bags of brown powder containing a total of 164 grams of MDMA (it
appears that there
were also other bags, including containing MDMA, found in
this drawer – it may be that the agreed facts should have referred
bags containing that total amount). It was agreed police found in the same
drawer 54x10 blister packs containing a total of
115.2 grams of alprazolam.
Alprazolam is also known as Xanax. It was agreed that on that day the applicant
was in possession of falsified
documentation in the name of Logan Dart,
including a driver’s licence, Medicare card, and bank and employment
records. Police
also found $18,825 in cash in the unit.
Crown’s case on possession with respect to counts 3-6
3-5 of the indictment each alleged that on 22 April 2020 the applicant, contrary
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
, did supply the
following prohibited drugs: not less than a large commercial quantity of
methylamphetamine (count 3, under
; not less than a commercial
quantity of MDMA (count 4; under
; and alprazolam (count 5; under
The alleged supply was a deemed supply by reference to the
applicant have possessed the drugs, taking account of the quantity in
The drug charges thus could only be made out if the Crown established that the
drugs were in the possession of the applicant.
Count 6 alleged that on the same
day the applicant dealt with $18,825 in cash which there were reasonable grounds
to suspect was
the proceeds of crime, contrary to s 193C(2) of the
(NSW). The term “deal with” in
that provision is defined to include “possess”, pursuant to
. It was alleged that the applicant dealt
with the cash by possessing it.
Crown prosecutor said in opening at the trial that at “the heart of the
case is the notion of possession”. He went
on to say that “this
issue of possession involves custody and control to the exclusion of all
others”. At the end of
the first day of the trial, in the absence of the
jury, the trial judge sought to clarify for his own benefit that the
case is that he is the sole – it’s not a case of joint
possession”. The prosecutor answered “No”, indicating
agreement that the case was not put in terms of joint possession. On the next
hearing day the prosecutor reiterated, in the absence
of the jury, that
“I’m remaining in the position I’m going to have to prove sole
possession”, saying “[i]t
won’t be joint possession”.
17 November 2022, after the close of the Crown case, the trial judge directed
the jury to acquit the applicant of count 2 having
concluded that the evidence
did not allow the conclusion to be drawn that he had been in exclusive
possession of the heroin found
in connection with the Mascot premises. His
Honour noted in his judgment on the point that “[t]his is a case in which
has opened and has run his case on the basis of exclusive possession,
not joint possession”.
his closing address the Crown prosecutor said that “we say that he was in
possession of those drugs – unlike count
2 – in possession of those
drugs in that he was exercising exclusive control in respect to those
his summing up his Honour directed the jury that “the Crown must prove
that the accused intentionally had the substance in
his physical custody or
control to the exclusion of any other person”, saying that “this is
the principal issue with
which you must be concerned”. It was implicit
that the standard of exclusive possession was also being applied with respect
count 6 relating to the cash (and the Crown did not suggest otherwise on
after the jury retired to consider its verdict it sent the judge two notes, in
one of which it said:
The jury is struggling with the interpretation of “exclusive
possession”, could you please clarify how we should interpret
definition of exclusive access in this instance? If, for arguments' sake, we are
agreed that the accused is in possession,
however, there are multiple people
coming and going, does this negate the definition of exclusivity? If this is so,
then the jury
are struggling with how can anyone be proven guilty, as there will
always be more than one person involved in any complex operation.
please help clarify for us how we should think about exclusive possession and/or
control in this instance? Could you please
provide an example, if possible?
response, following discussion with counsel, the trial judge directed the jury
that the word “exclusive” was an ordinary
English word, that he did
not propose to interpret it further or give them an example, and that exclusive
control was a question
of fact for them to decide.
jury subsequently returned its verdict of not guilty on count 1 and of guilty on
counts 3-7.
The evidence going to exclusive possession
appeal involves consideration of all the evidence that went to establishing
exclusive possession by the applicant on 22 April
2020 of the drugs and cash
found in the unit.
Indicia of occupancy
Crown sought to rely on evidence indicating that the unit was occupied. That
evidence is found in a series of police videos taken
during the search. The
Crown placed significant reliance upon the videos in its submissions and
implicitly invited the Court to watch
them (as it did expressly in oral
submissions as regards identifying keys). I have watched them. The Crown did not
suggest that the
jury had some particular advantage in assessing what was shown
in the videos, beyond the advantage of their collective experience
front door of the unit led into a small hallway, next to which is a small
bathroom. There did not appear to be personal toiletries
in that bathroom. There
appeared to be some clothes on the floor.
the hallway was a small cupboard laundry containing a washing machine and dryer.
There was a load of clothes in the dryer, and
clothes appeared to be sitting on
the washing machine. The nature of the clothes is indistinct. There appeared to
be bottles of washing
liquids sitting in a sink.
next room on the right was a bedroom, containing a built-in wardrobe and what
appeared to be a Queen-size bed. The bed had a top
and bottom sheet on, with the
top sheet tossed back. The bed looks to have been in use. A cardboard box next
to the bed contained
clothing, while a laundry basket and a bucket next to the
bed appeared to contain clothing and bed linen. The built-in wardrobe,
appeared half-empty, contained some linen, clothing in a laundry basket, loose
clothing, a heater and a cardboard box. There
were clothes on the floor.
size of two pairs of shorts found in the bedroom was identified on the videos:
some blue shorts were “2XL”, and some
black shorts had their size
marked as having a 112cm/44inch waist. The Crown submitted that this large size
was compatible with the
applicant’s build. There was no direct evidence of
his waist size, but photos suggest that he was somewhat portly around the
so such large sizes are consistent with being his clothing. Photos taken from
the lifts depict him regularly wearing shorts.
the bedroom was a doorway which led to an open area comprising the kitchen and a
living room. There was some food in the
kitchen – for example, there were
a number of packets of breakfast cereal in the cupboard along with some peanut
butter. Many
of the kitchen cupboards were empty. Supermarket shopping bags can
be seen. A frypan sat on the cooktop, next to which was a toaster
and a kettle.
In the sink in the kitchen bench was a used bowl, a plastic food container, a
drink can, a drink bottle, and some cutlery.
Next to the sink was some washing
up liquid. There was an open cereal packet on the kitchen bench. There was clean
cutlery in a drawer.
There was a “Slush Puppie” machine standing
next to the kitchen bench. There were food and drinks in the fridge and food
the freezer.
the living room area there were two dark grey couches and a small dining table.
On the table was some scales, two drink cans, some
water bottles, a food bowl,
some snack food, and a Lee Child novel. There was also an entertainment unit on
which was a TV and a
speaker system. A rug was on the floor between the couches
and the TV. There were bags, boxes and other items on the floor, including
empty water bottle. The room was messy. The living room connected to a balcony.
room was accessible from the living room to the right of the balcony, which was
set up as a study/office (also described as
the second bedroom). It contained a
grey sofa which was consistent in appearance with an item which the applicant
had carried up
in the lift with an unknown male on 18 April 2020. There was also
a built-in wardrobe containing two shelving units, a desk with
an office chair,
a rack-style cabinet and a drawer cabinet. There were aftershave bottles on one
of the shelves. It was in this room
that the MDMA, the alprazolam and the
$18,825 in cash was found.
was an ensuite attached to this room. In the ensuite was some men’s spray
deodorant, nail clippers, a bottle of mouthwash
(partially used), an electric
toothbrush, an ordinary toothbrush, and two slightly used toothpaste tubes. The
toothbrushes were seized
for DNA analysis but, by implication, it seems no
positive matches were found.
was a car space and a storage cage for the unit in the underground carpark. The
applicant’s BMW was parked in the unit’s
car space, the car key for
which was found in the unit.
documents and identification cards in the name of Logan Dart – the
applicant’s alias – were found on the
desk in the study (with, as
explained below, the applicant’s DNA on the forged payslips).
the unit was messy, there was strong evidence of it being lived in. For example,
the food, the open cereal packet, what was
in the sink, the state of the bed,
the load of clothes in the dryer, the contents of the ensuite, the aftershave in
the study, the
novel on the table, do suggest that at least one male had been
staying in the unit.
Crown submitted that the condition of the unit was consistent with the occupant
having moved in recently. That was said to be
supported by the limited items in
the bedroom and the kitchen. The messy state of the kitchen, bedroom and living
room might be explained
by the occupant having just moved in, or it could just
be that the occupant was a somewhat messy person. However, the mess could
conceivably also be explained by a number of people coming and going, without
much care for whether the unit was tidy or pleasant.
there is a reasonable basis to infer that the applicant had been residing there:
the tenancy had been transferred to the
applicant’s alias; photos showed
him coming and going from the apartment from 14 April 2020 onwards, and moving
in the grey
sofa found in the study; his false identification documents were
there; no-one else was found there; his car key, for his car in
the carpark, was
in the unit; and he had just exited the apartment when he was arrested, carrying
a set of keys for the apartment
(discussed below).
is no direct evidence of other persons residing in the apartment. It was not
suggested, for example, that there were clothes
of two different people found
there, and there was no bed in the second bedroom/study. That conclusion is
subject to the following
possible qualifications:
(1) Sinian had rented the apartment a month and ten days earlier. His DNA was
not identified as having been found on any of the items
in there, although it is
not apparent from the evidence that his DNA had been obtained or was otherwise
on the police database. On
the real estate agent’s evidence, the agent
approached Sinian at his work on 23 April 2020 and asked him “what
– presumably referring to police activity at the apartment
on the 22rd – to which Sinian responded “I want to know
happened too ... I didn’t live there at the beginning, I only put the
stuff in there, you can check the camera”.
The “stuff” he was
referring to was not identified; in context, it might have been furnishings. At
the least, there is
nothing to suggest he was residing there on 22 April
(2) Identity documents of three other people were found in the apartment. There
was a Liverpool Catholic Club card in the name of
Joshua Proia found on top of
the fridge in the kitchen – he was the unwell person at the Mascot unit
when police had arrived
there. It was put to the officer in charge (SC Heather
Craig) in cross-examination that Proia had been staying with the applicant
short while in the Mascot apartment because he had had some difficulties with
his partner – a proposition to which SC
Craig said “possibly,
yeah”. The evidence from SC Craig was that she had tried to speak to Proia
after the Mascot incident
but she had not been able to locate him, and she
understood he had moved to Queensland. In that context there is little basis to
infer that Proia was living in the St Leonards unit. Separately, in a small
cabinet in the study was found a Queensland driver’s
licence in the name
of Aimee Farman, and a NSW Safework card and a private health insurance card in
the name of Sebastian Dean. The
significance of these two people, if any, was
not identified. These identity cards suggest it is possible that those
individuals
had been in the apartment. However, there is nothing otherwise to
suggest that they lived there or had means of access to the unit.
(3) As noted, two toothbrushes were found in the bathroom, suggesting it was
possible two people had been staying there. That said,
it is not unknown for
individuals to have both an electric and ordinary toothbrush.
(4) Although there did not appear to be toiletries in the first bathroom near
the entrance, there did appear to be some clothes,
the presence of which
indicated both bathrooms had been in use. That could suggest that more than one
person was residing there.
as a whole, this evidence supports a conclusion that the applicant was residing
in the apartment in the period shortly before,
and on, 22 April 2020. There is
reason to think he was residing there alone, but the point is not certain.
conclusion is consistent with some evidence given by two police officers (SC
Natalie Dixon and SC Matthew Cash) that on the morning
of 22 April 2020 they
spoke with the building manager at the apartment building, who confirmed that
the applicant was “residing”
in Unit 2706 in the building under the
name of Logan Dart. SC Cash indicated that this was said after he had showed the
image of the applicant. That said, the basis upon which the manager
held that belief was not explained. The two officers each also
said that they
observed the applicant enter a lift on level 26 that morning to come down to the
foyer, where he was arrested by them.
Crown submitted that the fact that the drugs and the money were left easily
accessible suggested that the applicant was the only
person with access to the
unit and the drugs. Yet that fact is also consistent with a number of people
involved in a drug supply
venture having access to both the drugs and cash.
There is little doubt, incidentally, that drug supply activities were being
out at the unit. So much is supported by the presence in the unit and
the storage cage not only of the drugs, but also the cash,
three money counting
machines, plastic bags, numerous weighing scales and five mobile phones.
Crown tendered an agreed schedule of DNA evidence summarising trace DNA analysis
of various items found in the unit. It cannot
be said that the schedule is
clear. It does not identify in plain English what item, found where, is being
referred to. Nevertheless,
as I understand it, the evidence was as
(1) The applicant was identified as the major contributor of DNA, amongst at
least three persons, on the seal area of the resealable
methylamphetamine.
(2) DNA of the applicant was on one of the blister packs of alprazolam.
(3) He was the major contributor among at least two individuals to DNA on three
of the knotted bags containing MDMA. Another of the
bags in that drawer (not
containing a prohibited drug) had DNA from at least three individuals with the
applicant being the major
contributor. Another bag in the drawer containing pink
tablets (not said to be a prohibited drug) had DNA from two people with the
applicant being the major contributor. A further bag in the drawer containing
white powder (not said to be a prohibited drug) had
DNA from at least three
people, and the applicant and another named person “cannot be excluded as
contributors”.
(4) The applicant and another named person could not be excluded as contributors
to DNA from at least two individuals on the inside
seal of a small resealable
bag containing methylamphetamine found near the drawer cabinet in the study.
(5) Also in the study were falsified documents in the name of Logan Dart,
including forged payslips, one of which had DNA from at
least three individuals.
The applicant could not be excluded as the major contributor, with another named
person capable of being
a minor contributor.
(6) The applicant’s DNA was on a small resealable bag containing
methylamphetamine found in the ensuite attached to the study.
(7) In the storage cage for the unit located in the basement, there were,
amongst other things, several ink stamps. The applicant
and another named person
could not be excluded as contributors among three individuals to DNA on the
handle of one of those stamps.
implication of this evidence is that the applicant had handled at least some of
the prohibited drugs and other items inside the
apartment and the storage cage;
although, for some of these items, so had (or might have) other people. The
evidence of him having
handled these items can be said to be supportive of a
conclusion that he possessed them on 22 April. But it is by no means conclusive.
actual or potential presence of other people’s DNA on some of the evidence
from the unit – three of whom were identified
by name – shows that
other people had or may well have had contact with that evidence (noting there
is also the possibility
of indirect transfer). The Crown’s expert
indicated, as regards one of the other named individuals, that that person could
be identified “because he was in the database”, implicitly
suggesting some past encounter with police. Presumably the
same is true of the
other named individuals.
reduces the probative force of the DNA evidence in terms of whether or not the
applicant had had exclusive possession. But, again,
it is far from conclusive.
Drug supply often involves successive handling by multiple people, which is not
inconsistent with exclusive
possession at a particular point in time.
DNA evidence thus has some, limited, probative force.
of keys to the unit
explained, possession involves custody or control. The drugs were found in the
unit with no-one present. In that context, identification
of who held the means
of access to the unit was and is a key aspect of considering who possessed the
drugs. If the Crown could establish
that the applicant had sole possession of
the means of access to the unit on 22 April 2020 that would go a significant way
establishing that he had exclusive possession of the drugs within the
unit on that day.
was no dispute that it was necessary to use a key to enter the unit itself; that
it was necessary to use a fob/swipe token in
the lift to gain access to the
residential floors, including level 26; and that it was necessary to use a
remote control “airkey”
to drive into the underground parking in the
building. There is no direct evidence as to whether it was necessary to use a
use the lift to travel from the residential floors to the ground floor.
The fob logs (discussed below) do not record any fob being
used around 11:30am
on 22 April 2020 when the applicant descended just prior to being arrested. If
the timing disclosed on the fob
logs is reasonably accurate then that fact
suggests that it was not necessary to use a fob to reach the ground level. But
is not clear.
real estate agent gave a statement which, by consent, was read out by the
prosecutor at the trial. The agent said that Sinian was
given two sets of keys
to the unit, two building access swipes (the fobs) and one underground parking
access remote control. Photos
of those keys, fobs and remote control were
tendered as an exhibit at trial. There is one photo of a garage remote control.
is another photo showing two keyrings, on each of which were two keys (one
larger and one smaller), an oval shaped fob, a leather
tag (brown on one ring
and black on the other), and a plastic tag with handwritten information seeming
to identify the apartment.
It can be inferred that the larger key on each ring
was for the front door of the unit. It is reasonable to infer that the smaller
key was for something like a mailbox, but the point is not significant. It seems
likely it was not for the basement storage cage
associated with the unit, given
that video evidence shows that the cage was secured by an ordinary padlock (for
which the police
had no key, and which they broke open).
is no evidence as to whether there are any other copies of the apartment keys.
However, it is reasonable to infer that the agent
and/or the owner would have
retained at least one copy. The inference is supported by usage logs for the
fobs, which give some basis
to infer that “fob 3” was held by the
agent or owner (as discussed further below).
was evidence that on 24 April 2020 the building manager provided SC Cash
with usage logs for all fobs connected with the unit.
There are usage logs for
three fobs, identified as “fob 1” to “fob 3”, and
for the “airkey” for
access to the underground parking. Printed
usage logs were tendered. All entries for fob 1, fob 2 and the airkey –
fob 3 – are attributed on the logs to the applicant
(identified as Logan Dart) as early as 27 February 2020. The parties accepted
that the attribution to such early dates is an anachronism, in the sense that
the (false) name the applicant used appears to have
been inserted
retrospectively by the relevant computer system. The attribution to him for all
of the fobs seems simply to reflect
the fact that he was recorded in the system
as the resident of the unit.
unchallenged evidence of SC Dixon and SC Cash was that the latter searched the
applicant when he was arrested in the foyer of
the building and “removed a
set of keys” from him. In cross-examination SC Cash indicated that so far
as he recalled
there was a fob with the keys. Also in cross-examination, SC
Dixon stated that she believed some other officers also did locate some
within the unit. Neither officer otherwise clarified exactly what keys Cash had
removed from the applicant, nor what the other
keys were. It can be inferred,
however, that the keys taken from the applicant were one of the sets provided by
the real estate agent.
That is the natural inference given that the applicant
had just left the apartment. It is supported by the fact that both officers
they proceeded to level 26 to guard the unit – the implication being that
they used the fob and keys taken from the applicant.
They do not say that the
building manager escorted them up or down, let alone that they had obtained a
set of keys and a fob from
the real estate agent.
Craig said she believed that at the time of arrest the applicant had one fob,
but she did not know who had the other fobs associated
with the apartment.
question then arises as to who, on the day in question, had possession of the
other set of keys provided by the agent to Sinian.
The Crown identified a
segment of one of the video recordings that showed some keys and a leather
keychain in the study room. The
leather tag appears to be the same as the brown
tag on one of the sets of keys in the photo of keys and fobs sets provided to
A small key can be seen, which looks to be the same as the (presumptive)
mailbox key shown in the earlier photo. There appears to
be a small round object
next to the keychain. It could be the fob but it is not clear. The bigger key in
the earlier photo cannot
be seen. It is possible that it was hidden underneath.
It appears that the police did not take those keys into custody as an exhibit
(there is video of the exhibits officer reading out the exhibit list, and he
does not refer to them, whereas he does refer to a BMW
this video it can be inferred that at least part of the other key set was within
the unit on 22 April 2020. But it is not clear
that the fob, let alone the door
key to the unit, was there. It is hardly unheard of to take keys or fobs off
keyrings, perhaps to
put them onto another keyring already in use.
police did not seize a key piece of evidence, being the keys found on the desk.
Of course, the strength of the Crown case is to
be assessed as it is, not as it
might have been. The practical significance of this gap in the evidence as to
whether the applicant
had possession (at least in the unit) of the second set of
keys has to be understood in the context of the evidence as to lift and
Lift photos and fob usage
noted, SC Cash indicated the building manager provided him with logs for all
fobs connected with the unit. There are usage logs
for three fobs, identified as
fob 1 to fob 3, and for the airkey. The usage log for fob 3 is short. It
records usage between 27 February
and 11 March 2020, then usage on 23 April
2020, with no usage in between. Given that the apartment was leased to Sinian on
2020, and police arrested the applicant on 22 April 2020, it can be
inferred that this fob (and likely any associated keys) was held
by the agent
and/or owner. Given its complete disuse during the whole period in question it
can be set aside.
this context it can be inferred that fobs 1 and 2 were the ones provided to
Sinian by the agent on the two keyrings. The logs indicate
as follows (starting
from 12 March 2020 when Sinian obtained the keys):
(1) Fob 1 was used on 20, 22, 26, 29 and 31 March, and on 1-3, 8-11 and 14-23
April 2020. On most of those days there were multiple
usages, indicating regular
use of the lifts.
(2) Fob 2 was used on 12, 13, 22, 23, 26, 30 and 31 March and on 1-3, 6-11, 13,
15 and 20 April 2020. Again, most of those days involved
multiple usages. On the
last of those days, however, it was used only twice – at 8:13pm and
(3) The airkey was used on 20, 22, 23, 26, 30 and 31 March and on 1-3, 7-11 and
14-23 April 2020.
is reasonable to infer that fob 1 was the one taken from the applicant when he
was arrested, because there is no record of fob
2 relevantly being used after 20
April 2020. Further, there is significant usage of fob 1 on 22 and 23 April
2020, which is consistent
with the police making use of it having seized it from
the applicant. The airkey was also used a great many times on 23 April 2020.
That suggests that the police had obtained it, although there is no direct
evidence of that having occurred.
applicant tendered a set of CCTV photos of the interior of the lifts, along with
a schedule matching the photos to times on the
fob usage logs. The applicant is
shown in some of the photos, twice in company. But in some photos there are
three individuals without
the applicant apparently present: a woman of Asian
appearance in jeans (who in two photos is depicted with another man who seems
be interacting with her); a man with a pony tail in a black and white t-shirt
(who in other photos is depicted helping the applicant
bring the grey sofa into
the lift); and a man with a cap, glasses and a beard and another man bringing
into the lift a Slush Puppie
machine (which looks the same as the machine in the
unit’s kitchen). Whether the man in the cap had any connection to the
or use of the fob is unknown. The times shown on the photos are within
Crown also tendered a set of 26 CCTV lift photos, in all of which the applicant
appears, sometimes in company. His earliest appearance
in evidence was on 14
April 2020. This set of photos was certainly not suggested to be exhaustive of
the times the applicant used
the lifts. There are many more fob entries on each
relevant day than camera captures of the applicant and there is no evidence as
to who used the fobs at those times.
the applicant is in company in some photos is of limited significance with
respect to the exclusive possession issue. The fact
that an occupant of a unit
containing drugs has occasional visitors does little of itself to suggest
possession was not exclusive.
is more significant is that all of the times in the photos in the Crown’s
set equate (within about one minute) to log entries
for use of fob 1. They do
not equate to fob 2 usage. There is one exception, being a photo at 12:07am on
15 April 2020 which does
not equate to either fob (or the airkey or fob 3).
such photographic evidence as there is suggests that the applicant used
fob 1 and not fob 2. The photos from the applicant’s
reasonably be argued to show other people using fob 1.
Crown submitted that the photos and fob data had limitations: that evidence does
not prove access to the apartment itself, and
there is no evidence establishing
correlation between the fob entries and CCTV. As to the first point, if others
could use the fob
there is every reason to accept the possibility that they also
had use of the key to access the unit, for if they had one means of
use the lifts) it seems reasonably possible that they also had the other means
of access (to get into the unit). As to
the second point, the Crown is correct
in saying that it is not necessarily the case that the times shown in the photos
usage logs were accurate or synchronised. As noted, one of the photos
show the applicant using the lift at a time which does not
correlate to any fob
entry. However, that might be some kind of one-off glitch. There is certainly a
reasonable possibility that
the timing on the photos and the logs was
approximately synchronised. The Crown did not establish otherwise.
that understanding, it is significant that there are no photos showing the
applicant using the lifts at times which correlate with
times on the fob 2 log.
And yet fob 2 was used reasonably regularly in the period leading up to the
applicant’s arrest. Specifically,
in the period after the applicant was
first shown in the lift photos on 14 April 2020 it was used on 15 and 20 April
2020 (there
being ten entries on the former date and two on the latter). It was
not used as often as fob 1, and its last usage was about a bit
over a day and a
half before the applicant was arrested. Nevertheless, this evidence suggests
there is a real possibility that some
other person or persons possessed and used
fob 2, potentially doing so independently of the applicant. And if that was so,
the Crown’s
case on exclusive possession is significantly undermined,
because the unit and its contents would not be in the exclusive custody
control of the applicant. That point gains some further reinforcement from the
fact that other people were seemingly using fob
1 without the applicant present.
the timing on the photos and logs was not synchronised, then that serves to
drive home the point that the Crown did not establish
that the applicant was
using both fobs in the period leading up to his arrest, in circumstances where
it did not suggest that the
fob record was so inaccurate that it could not even
be understood that fob 2 was being used on the days identified. On the contrary,
it appeared to accept that fob 2 had been used on those days. This understanding
still leaves open a reasonable possibility that
fob 2 was not in the
applicant’s possession in the period leading up to his arrest. Further, it
is reasonable to infer that
at least the man with the ponytail was using one of
the fobs associated with the apartment, given the former person was shown in
other photos with the applicant. Of course, it is possible that the applicant
lent his fob to others on a temporary basis.
Crown made the point that two of the photos in its set showed the applicant
carrying red containers up in the lift which were
of a kind found in the unit.
That point assists to link the applicant to the unit; it does little to
establish exclusivity of possession.
Crown also tendered a set of photos taken from the entrance/exit to the
underground carpark. The earliest of the photos is dated
14 April 2020. The
photos depict the applicant’s black BMW coming and going, in some of which
he can be seen; one photo is
said to show him sitting in the passenger seat of a
light truck entering the carpark, although that is by no means clear; some
depict him entering carpark on foot or walking outside of it; and one
photo shows him meeting an unknown male outside the carpark.
This evidence ties
the applicant to the unit, and tends to confirm that he was residing there.
Conclusion on evidence
discussion above addresses different parts of the evidence, but the evidence
must be assessed as a whole and not on a piecemeal
basis. The evidentiary
threads can be drawn together as follows:
(1) The evidence supports a conclusion that the applicant was residing in the
apartment in the period shortly before, and on, 22
April 2020. It is not certain
that he was residing there alone.
(2) The DNA evidence strongly supports a conclusion that the applicant had
handled, and had possession of, the drugs. But it does
little either way to
establish whether the possession was exclusive.
(3) The applicant had possession of one of the two available sets of keys
(including a fob) when he was arrested. At least part of
the other key set is
depicted in a video of items found on the desk in the study of the unit. But the
evidence does not disclose
whether the door key and the fob were still part of
that set. There is a real possibility that they were not.
(4) The fob usage log suggests that both fobs 1 and 2 were used in the days
leading up to the applicant’s arrest, including
in the period from 14
April 2020 when he is first depicted being in the building. There is evidence
the applicant used fob 1 in that
period, including on the day he was arrested.
There is a real possibility that other people also used fob 1 in that period.
is no evidence the applicant used fob 2 in that period. Yet there is
evidence that fob 2 was used in that period.
is at issue is exclusive possession of the drugs and money, not occupancy or
possession of the unit. In this case the two cannot
really be disentangled. The
proposition that the applicant was the sole occupant of the unit was central to
the Crown case. If he
did not have exclusive access to the unit, it is difficult
to see how it could otherwise be established that he had exclusive possession
the contents of the unit, including the drugs and cash. That is so even taking
account of the DNA evidence linking him (and others)
to some of the drugs. That
evidence establishes a link between him and the drugs, but not exclusive
possession of them.
Crown submitted that “the analysis really should focus on the state of
affairs on 22 April”. Yet there is nothing
to suggest that anything
significant had changed in the period beginning 14 April 2022, when the first
evidence places the applicant
there, to suggest that the applicant’s
access to the unit had become more or less exclusive in that period.
all of this evidence together, I am satisfied that the applicant was residing in
the unit on 22 April 2020, had handled the
drugs, and was in possession of the
drugs and the cash found in the unit. However, I think there is a reasonable
possibility that
some other person or persons had possession of, or access to
and use of, fob 2 and the associated unit door key in the period leading
to the applicant’s arrest, including on 22 April 2020 itself. The evidence
indicates that other people had been coming and
going from the unit in the
preceding days. It is reasonably possible that at least one of those people had
the second door key and
fob 2, such as to give them access to the unit, and
potential joint custody or control of the drugs and the cash. That conclusion
takes account of the facts that fob 1 was used by the applicant, there is a
reasonable possibility that fob 1 was used by others,
and fob 2 was used in the
days before the applicant’s arrest but there is no evidence as to by whom.
It is by no means implausible
that the drug supply enterprise being undertaken
from the unit was a joint one.
thus consider that there is a reasonable possibility that the applicant’s
possession of the drugs and the cash was not exclusive.
In my view, and taking
account of the way that the Crown ran its case, it has failed to exclude an
inference consistent with non-guilt
that was reasonably open.
ultimate question is whether upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the
jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the accused was guilty. In
considering that question this Court must not disregard or discount the
consideration that the jury is
the body entrusted with the primary
responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, and must make full allowance
for the advantages
enjoyed by the jury: see above at [
jury appears to have been astute and diligent, as shown in the note they sent to
the judge soon after they began their deliberations
going to the core issue. As
discussed above at [
], I accept that the jury has the advantage of drawing
upon its collective experience and wisdom, but consider that given the objective
and substantially unchallenged nature of the evidence in this case any advantage
enjoyed by the jury was slight, as in
. I do not consider that the
advantages of the jury explain or resolve the reasonable doubt identified.
regard to all the evidence I consider that it was not open to the jury to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant
was guilty of counts 3-6 in
the manner alleged by the Crown. The applicant should be acquitted of the
charges on those counts.
Resentencing on count 7
trial judge imposed an aggregate sentence for all of counts 3-7, with the
sentence taken to commence on 20 July 2021. It is necessary
to resentence the
applicant on count 7 alone.
indicative sentence his Honour regarded as appropriate for count 7 was 12 months
imprisonment. The applicant proposed that this
Court impose the same penalty, to
commence on the same date. The Crown argued in written submissions that we
should approach the
question of resentence afresh. However, as counsel for the
Crown accepted in oral argument, the applicant has already served more
years of his sentence and any new sentence on count 7 alone will be for less
time, and the period of the new sentence will
not make any practical difference.
In that context there is no utility in engaging in a detailed resentencing
exercise, especially
as neither side made any material criticism of the
indicative sentence imposed.
indicative sentence noted by the trial judge was appropriate, for the reasons
given by his Honour. On count 7 the applicant is
resentenced to 12 months
imprisonment to commence on 20 July 2021, ending on 19 July 2022. There is no
sense in setting a non-parole
orders of the Court should be as follows:
(1) Extend time to appeal to 12 May 2025.
(2) Grant leave to appeal.
(3) Appeal upheld.
(4) Quash the applicant’s convictions on counts 3-6 of the indictment
dated 10 November 2022 and a judgment of acquittal be
entered in their place.
(5) Quash the sentence imposed by O’Brien DCJ on 14 April 2023, and in
lieu thereof sentence the applicant on count 7 on the
indictment to 12 months
imprisonment commencing on 20 July 2021 and ending on 19 July 2022.
I have had the considerable benefit of reading the judgment of
Kirk JA, in draft. His Honour has conducted a careful and comprehensive
analysis of the prosecution’s circumstantial case. It is therefore
unnecessary to repeat that analysis here, except to note
that his Honour’s
conclusions accord with my own.
his Honour observes at [
], the prosecution case against the applicant was put
on the basis of exclusive possession of the drugs and money the subject of
3-6. The possibility of joint possession was eschewed.
Crown was obliged therefore to exclude the reasonable possibility that the
applicant was in
possession of the drugs and money and to do so
beyond reasonable doubt. It failed to do so in this case.
conducted an independent assessment of the sufficiency and quality of the whole
of the evidence, I am of the view that it was
not open to the jury to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. In coming to that
conclusion, I have given
“full allowance” to the advantages enjoyed
by the jury, noting that given the substantially unchallenged nature of the
evidence in this case any advantage enjoyed by the jury was slight.
Accordingly,
I agree with the orders proposed by Kirk JA.
I am grateful for the detailed consideration of the evidence and issues
set out in the judgment of Kirk JA. Having undertaken my
own assessment of
the evidence, I agree with his Honour’s explanation for why it was not
open on the whole of the evidence
to be satisfied of exclusive possession beyond
reasonable doubt. I agree with the orders proposed by
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (374 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter