URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/842.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dong v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPICMP 842; (30 October 2025)
DETERMINATION
OF REVIEW PANEL
Dong v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPICMP 842
Kelvin Dong
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
REVIEW PANEL
Maurice Castagnet
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Michael Couch
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
DATE OF DECISION:
30 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
claimant’s application for review of Medical Assessor’s
determinations of permanent impairment and reasonable and necessary
(physiotherapy); whether the accident caused an injury to the lower back;
whether an episode about two years after the
accident in which the claimant
sustained a back injury was a flare up of the back injury caused by the accident
or whether it was
a later injury not caused by the accident; original assessment
of permanent impairment of 0%; re-examination of the claimant;
– original assessment of a degree of permanent impairment of 0% revoked
and replacement certificate issued with a finding of
a degree of permanent
impairment of 4%; proposed physiotherapy treatment not reasonable and necessary
in the circumstances.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries
The issues determined by the Review Panel are:
the degree of permanent impairment of the injured person as a result of the
injury caused by the motor accident is greater
than 10%, and
the proposed physiotherapy treatment by Infinity Physiotherapy Paramatta relates
to an injury caused by the accident and whether
the treatment is reasonable and
necessary in the
circumstances.
Determination
Review Panel revokes the certificate of Medical Assessor Wallace dated 15
September 2023.
Review Panel issues a new certificate determining that:
(a) the following injuries caused by the motor accident give rise to a permanent
impairment that
is not greater than
left subtalar
(b) the proposed physiotherapy treatment to be
provided by Infinity Physiotherapy Parramatta as recommended in a referral from
S Calvache-Rubio dated
6 December 2021, relates to the injuries caused by
the accident but such treatment is not reasonable and necessary in the
circumstances.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
1 October 2019, the claimant, Kelvin Dong, was involved in a motor accident when
the motorcycle he was riding, was struck from
the left side in a roundabout by a
vehicle insured by Allianz.
claimant claims that in the accident, he sustained physical injuries. He also
claimed that he developed psychological injury,
although this aspect of his
injuries is not the subject of this review.
insurer accepted liability to pay the claimant statutory benefits and damages
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(the MAI Act).
disputes have since arisen between the parties.
first relates to the claimant’s entitlement to make a claim for damages
for non-economic loss. According to s 4.11 of the
MAI Act, no damages for
non-economic loss may be awarded in respect of injury unless the degree of
permanent impairment of the injured
person as a result of the injury caused by a
motor accident is greater than 10%. The insurer did not concede that the
injuries caused by the accident, had crossed that threshold
(the permanent impairment dispute).
second is about whether physiotherapy treatment to be provided by Infinity
Physiotherapy Parramatta as recommended in a referral
from Dr S Calvache-Rubio
6 December 2021, relates to an injury
caused by the accident and whether the treatment is reasonable and necessary
(the treatment
resolve the disputes, the claimant made an application pursuant Division 7.5 of
MAI Act, for medical assessments by the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission).
to Schedule 2, cl 2 of the MAI Act, both the permanent impairment dispute and
the treatment dispute are declared to be medical
assessment matters.
to s 7.20 of the MAI Act, the matters are determined at first instance by a
Medical Assessor and according to s 7.26 of
the MAI Act, on review, by a review
disputes were referred at first instance to Medical Assessor Raymond Wallace for
assessment.
15 September 2023, the Medical Assessor issued a certificate, finding firstly,
that the claimant’s injuries to the left ankle
and left subtalar joint
were caused by the motor accident and gave rise to a permanent impairment of 0%.
The Medical Assessor found
that the injury to the lumbar spine was not caused by
the motor accident. Secondly, the Medical Assessor found that the treatment
be provided by Infinity Physiotherapy Parramatta relates to the injuries to the
left ankle and left subtalar joint caused by the
motor accident, but such
treatment is not reasonable and necessary in the circumstances.
THE REVIEW APPLICATION
16 October 2023, pursuant to s 7.26 of the MAI Act, the claimant made an
application to the President of the Commission to refer
the medical assessments
of the Medical Assessor to a review panel for review. On 17 October 2023, the
review application was accepted
by the Commission as being made within the time
prescribed by s 7.26(10) of the MAI Act.
President referred the application to a review panel for review, being satisfied
that there was reasonable cause to suspect that
the medical assessment was
incorrect in a material respect, having regard to the particulars set out in the
application.
OF THE REVIEW
to s 7.26(5A) of the MAI Act, the Review Panel consists of two Medical Assessors
and a Member of the Motor Accidents Division
of the Commission. On this
occasion, the Review Panel is constituted by Medical Assessor Gray, Medical
Assessor Couch and Member
Castagnet (the Panel).
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(the PIC Act), enables the
Commission to make rules with respect to the practice and procedure before the
Commission including proceedings
before a panel reviewing a decision of a
Medical Assessor.
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
(PIC Rules), a
review panel determines how it conducts and determines the proceedings. The
panel may determine the proceedings solely
based on the written
application.
review is not limited to only that aspect of the assessment that is alleged to
be incorrect and is by way of a new assessment
of all the matters with which the
medical assessment is
LEGISLATION, LEGAL PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES
Permanent impairment
7.21 of the MAI Act provides that the degree of permanent impairment of an
person is to be made in accordance with the Motor Accident
Guidelines (the Guidelines).
Guidelines are issued pursuant to s 10.2 of the MAI Act. The Guidelines adopt
the fourth edition of the
American Medical Association’s Guides to the
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
(AMA 4). Where there is any difference
between AMA 4 and the Guidelines, the Guidelines are
definitive.
provisions of the
Civil Liability Act 2002
(the CL Act) apply to the MAI
Act in determining issues of causation, particularly ss 5D and 5E of the CL
Raina v CIC Allianz Insurance Ltd
[2021] NSWSC 13
, Campbell J made the
following observations at [65]:
“One may accept that a review
panel is engaged in a process of dispute resolution by expert assessment of
medical issues arising
under the Act. However, the questions arise in a legal
context and it is incumbent upon the panel, medical practitioners they may
to correctly apply the law including the law of causation in the exercise of
their powers. This includes the provisions of Division
Liability Act 2002
of that Act. Although it may be expected that questions about
the appropriate scope of liability will arise but rarely.”
6.5 to 6.7 of the Guidelines also address the issues of causation of injury and
whether the degree of permanent impairment
is caused by injury.
6.7 of the Guidelines provides:
“There is no simple common
test of causation that is applicable in all cases, but the accepted approach
involves determining
whether the injury (and the associated impairment) was
caused or materially contributed to by the motor accident. The motor accident
does not have to be the sole cause as long as it is a contributing cause, which
is more than negligible.”
Panel is required to determine the issues on the balance of probabilities. The
resolution of causation does not require scientific
Briggs v IAG
3.24 of the MAI Act provides:
“(1) An injured
person is entitled to statutory benefits for the following expenses (treatment
and care expenses) incurred in
connection with providing treatment and care for
the injured person—
(a) the reasonable cost of treatment and care,
(b) reasonable and necessary travel and accommodation expenses incurred by
the injured person in order to obtain treatment and care
for which statutory
benefits are payable,
(c) if the injured person is under the age of 18 years or otherwise requires
assistance to travel for treatment and care, reasonable
and necessary travel and
accommodation expenses incurred by a parent or other carer of the injured person
in order to accompany the
injured person while treatment and care for which
statutory benefits are payable is being provided.
(2) No statutory benefits are payable for the cost of treatment and care to
the extent that the treatment and care concerned was not
reasonable and
necessary in the circumstances or did not relate to the injury resulting from
the motor accident concerned.
Accordingly,
in order to receive statutory benefits, the claimant must establish that the
treatment concerned:
(a) is reasonable and necessary in the circumstances;
(b) relates to an injury resulting from the subject accident;
(c) that the cost of the treatment is reasonable, and
(d) if applicable, that any travel and accommodation expenses incurred in
obtaining the treatment are reasonable and necessary.
a medical assessment matter under Sch 2, cl 2 (b) of the MAI Act, the Panel has
matters (a) and (b). Disputes
relating to matters relating to matters (c) and (d) are determined by
expression “reasonable and necessary” is not defined in the
legislation. It follows that the expression falls to be
considered in its
statutory context and in accordance with the objects of the MAI Act. These
to encourage early and appropriate treatment
and care to
achieve optimum recovery of persons from
injuries sustained in motor accidents and to maximise their return to work or
other activities.”
and care” is defined in s 1.4 the MAI Act to include medical treatment and
rehabilitation. Physiotherapy is
a form of medical treatment and/or
rehabilitation.
expression “reasonable and necessary” in relation to treatment
occurs elsewhere in the MAI Act, notably at ss 3.17
3.17 provides:
“(1) An insurer must require an injured person
who is in receipt of weekly payments of statutory benefits under this Division
to undertake such reasonable and necessary treatment, rehabilitation or
vocational training as the Motor Accident Guidelines may
(2) If an injured person fails without reasonable excuse to comply with a
requirement of an insurer under this section, the person’s
entitlement to
weekly payments of statutory benefits under this Division is suspended while the
failure continues.”
6.5 provides:
“(1) A claimant has a duty to take all
reasonable steps to minimise loss caused by injury resulting from a motor
(2) This duty of a claimant includes the following duties—
(a) the duty to undergo reasonable and necessary treatment and care and do all
such things as may be reasonable and necessary for
the claimant’s
rehabilitation,
(b) the duty to commence or return to work as soon as reasonably
practicable.
(3) If a claimant fails to comply with a duty arising under this section,
the insurer may, if authorised to do so by the Motor Accident
Guidelines,
suspend payment of weekly payments of statutory benefits to the claimant during
any period that the failure to comply
continues. The person forfeits their
entitlement to weekly payments of statutory benefits during the period of any
such suspension.”
by those provisions, and the objects of the Act, the Panel finds that for the
proposed medical treatment in dispute, to be
considered “reasonable and
necessary in the circumstances”, as required by s 3.24(2), it should
(a) medically indicated, and not, for example, scientifically unproven, or given
in circumstances where the risks of undertaking
the treatment are likely to
outweigh any benefit to the claimant, and
(b) likely to optimise the claimant’s
prospects of recovery and maximise their return to work or to their other
activities.
the Panel considers “reasonable and necessary”
composite expression, the same result may be obtained by giving each of the
words “reasonable” and “necessary”
a discrete area of
operation. A treatment is reasonable if it conforms to paragraph 33(a) and
necessary if it conforms to paragraph
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT
UNDER REVIEW
injuries referred to the Medical Assessor for assessment in the permanent
impairment dispute were:
Radiculopathy to
the lumbar spine
Injury to the
lumbar spine
Injury to the
Injury to the
left subtalar joint
previously indicated, the Medical Assessor found that the injuries to the left
ankle and left subtalar joint were caused by the
accident and gave rise to a
permanent impairment of 0%.
Medical Assessor also found that the lumbar spine injury was not caused by the
motor accident and that the lumbar spinal symptoms
were due to pre-existing disc
disease. In making that finding, the Medical Assessor noted that the claimant
was under observation
at Blacktown hospital for eight hours on the day of the
accident during which time he did not complain of any lumbar spine symptoms.
noted that the first documentation of lumbar spine symptoms was some eight weeks
later on 28 November 2019 when the claimant attended
an exercise physiology
session. Lastly, he noted that there was a history of a previous injury of
lumbar spine pain requiring medical
review and investigations in September 2016,
some three years prior to the subject motor accident.
treatment dispute referred to the Medical Assessor for assessment arose from a
referral by the claimant’s general practitioner
(GP), Dr S Calvache-Rubio
dated 6 December 2021 to Infinity Physiotherapy Parramatta for physiotherapy
treatment. The referral was
in the following terms:
Mr Kelvin Dong who has recurrent lower back pain flare up post MBA [sic]. Ankle
and foot pain and prolong [sic] altered
Medical Assessor accepted that the physiotherapy treatment to be provided
relates to the left ankle and left subtalar joint injuries
caused by the motor
accident. However, he was of the opinion that the provision of further physical
therapy some four years after
the injury is not reasonable and necessary in the
circumstances because such therapy at this time will not lead to a durable
in the level of symptoms or increase in function at the left ankle or
left subtalar joint.
Medical Assessor did not make any comments on the proposed treatment of
recurrent lower back pain flare up or prolonged altered
gait, presumably on the
basis that he found that the lumbar spine injury was not caused by the
MATERIAL BEFORE THE PANEL
claimant filed a paginated and indexed bundle of documents comprising 1012
insurer filed a paginated and indexed bundle of documents comprising 57 pages.
claimant also filed a copy of his application for personal injury benefits and
the records of the Ambulance Service, at the direction
of the Panel.
Panel considered all the above materials.
SUBMISSIONS
The claimant’s submissions
claimant submitted that the Medical Assessor did not properly apply the test of
causation when he concluded that the lumbar spine
injury was not causally
related to the accident.
Medical Assessor's conclusion that the lumbar spinal symptoms were due to
pre-existing degenerative disc disease, which was constitutional
in origin, is
contrary to the medical evidence available to the Medical Assessor at the time
of his assessment.
claimant submitted that the fact that the pre-accident X-ray report of the
lumbar spine dated 27 September 2016 found that the
lumbar spinal alignment was
unremarkable and showed no abnormality would suggest an absence of pre-existing
degenerative disc disease.
By contrast, the findings in the post-accident MRI
report dated 23 November 2021, revealed moderate disc desiccation with reduced
disc height and minor central annular fissure and central disc protrusion at
L4/5, findings that were absent in the pre-accident
27 September
was submitted that in circumstances where the claimant is a young man of 26
years of age, where he was injured as a result of a
high-impact collision as a
motorcycle rider versus car, which resulted in him being thrown from his
motorcycle, where there is an
absence of any precipitating event that could have
reasonably caused those spinal structural changes other than the subject
and where there is absence of complaint of lumbar spinal pain in the
three- year period prior to the accident, it was unreasonable for the
Medical Assessor to conclude that the claimant's lumbar spinal
injury was not
causally related to the accident.
the issue of delay in reporting lumbar spinal symptoms for some eight weeks
following the accident, the claimant submitted, in
reliance on
Bugat v Fox
[2014] NSW SC 888
, when considering the question of causation, the presence
or absence of contemporaneous evidence of injury is relevant, but not
determinative,
in circumstances where there is other evidence available. In this
case, on the other available evidence as noted above, it would
be reasonable to
conclude that the accident was a contributing cause to the lumbar spine injury,
which was more than negligible.
Panel notes that there were no submissions from the claimant to the Panel that
addressed the treatment dispute.
The insurer’s
submissions
insurer submitted that the claimant’s submissions do not fully take into
account the clinical notes of the treating GP,
Dr David Dao which were before
the Medical Assessor. Apart from the X-ray report of the lumbar spine dated 27
September 2016, the
clinical records included the following entries:
27 September
2016 – lower back pain, no radiation.
28 September
2016 – arthritis, prescribed Celebrex. Plans to see rheumatologist.
4 October 2016
– lower back pain for the past 5 weeks. Referral to Dr Loretta Rozario
(rheumatologist) to exclude ankylosing
spondylitis.
insurer submitted that in light of the above history, it was open to the Medical
Assessor to conclude that the claimant’s
lumbar spine condition was not
causally related to the accident. This was a matter for his clinical judgment,
and it was open to
him on the evidence to so conclude.
insurer submitted that the claimant’s submissions do not refer to the
post-accident event to explain injury to the lumbar
spine. In reaching his
conclusion on causation, the Medical Assessor noted that the claimant reported
an incident towards the end
of 2021, when he reached out to lean on a table and
collapsed with lumbar spinal pain. Shortly after the incident, the claimant
an MRI of the lumbar spine and was referred to orthopaedic surgeon, Dr
Bhisham Singh for his spinal condition.
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE
evidence before the Panel may conveniently be summarised as
Pre-accident medical evidence
Clinical records of Dr Dao
clinical records of GP, Dr David Dao were before the Panel. They record
treatment received by the claimant since the mid-1990’s,
shortly after his
birth to the date of the accident.
was recorded that the claimant sustained a compound fracture of his right big
toe in 2010 when doing martial arts which was treated
by way of an open
reduction and internal fixation. A report by orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Jayker
Dave, dated 14 December 2010, indicated
that there were no complications.
K-wires were due to be removed about four weeks later.
was a consultation with Dr Dao on 27 January 2015 about pain in the left
forearm. An X-ray performed on 27 January 2015 suggested
a healing stress
fracture of the mid left ulnar shaft
. In October
2016, it was recorded (as past medical history) that there was a healed stress
fracture of the mid left ulnar shaft sustained
27 September 2016, the claimant consulted Dr Dao complaining of “lower
back pain”. It was noted that there was no radiation.
He was referred for
an X- ray. There was a consultation recorded the next day. The reason for
The claimant was prescribed
findings of a lumbar spine X-ray performed on 27 September 2016 were as
“The lumbar alignment is unremarkable. There is no
spondylolisthesis. The vertebral bodies are maintained in height. There is
compression fracture. The discs are maintained in height. The facet joints are
unremarkable in outline. There is no pars defect.”
next consultation for the presenting back problem was on 4 October 2016 when Dr
Dao recorded the following:
“lower back pain last 5/52, was
normal before that, for ct scan, see Dr L Rozario to exclude Ankylosing
spondylitis.”
to the clinical records, Dr Dao issued a letter referring the claimant to
rheumatologist, Dr Loretta Rozario for further
management. However, there is no
evidence before the Panel of any treatment of the claimant by Dr Rozario. There
is no evidence of
any further consultations with Dr Dao for any back condition
prior to the accident
a consultation with Dr Dao on 23 October 2018, the following entry was
“Was abuse[sic] yesterday on street, left jaw hurt,
right wrist hurt x rays review, no fracture seen, panadol”.
was a discharge summary from Liverpool Hospital which recorded that on 11 March
2019, the claimant was admitted for a rotator
cuff “strain” of the
shoulder. The claimant reported that he woke up with an “on/off”
sharp pain in the right
shoulder with episodes lasting approximately 30 minutes.
The claimant denied trauma, twisting, sudden unusual activities but reported
having a very physically straining job installing elevators with frequent heavy
pushing, pulling, lifting and overhead activities.
The impression was
“rotator cuff tendinopathy.” He was discharged with recommendations
to rest and refraining from working
for three days. He was prescribed with 400mg
Nurofen and he was advised to see his GP in the next few days to get a referral
physiotherapy.
The claimant’s statement about the motor
his application for personal injury benefits dated 4 October 2019, the claimant
described his injuries from the motor accident
in the following
“Currently on crutches. Unable to put pressure on left
leg. X-rays showed nothing broken. I’ll be able to find out the
the damage after I visit my GP and have my follow up check at the injury
Post-accident medical evidence
The Ambulance Service
to the Ambulance Service records, on arrival at the scene of the accident, the
claimant was lying in a supine position on
the road. The claimant complained of
pain in the right elbow and the left ankle. On the way to hospital, he
complained of mild pain
in the right upper leg and the right
Blacktown Hospital
Discharge Summary of Blacktown Hospital recorded the claimant travelling through
a roundabout at about 30kph when a car collided
with his motorcycle. He was
thrown off his motorcycle and landed on the concrete road. He was wearing a
helmet. The claimant reported
ongoing pain in the left ankle, left hand, right
elbow, right hand and left knee. On examination, there was pain over the right
with an abrasion noted. There was tenderness in the right thumb, the
dorsum of the right index finger and the left ankle joint.
clinical records referred to X-rays of the right elbow and hand, left hand, left
knee, foot and ankle being apparently performed.
However, there were no X-ray
results in evidence before the Panel.
claimant was discharged the same day on crutches and referred to his general
practitioner for follow up in two days.
claimant consulted Dr Dao on 4 October 2019. The following entry was
“Motor bike accident Tuesday 1/10/2019 now not able
to weight bear on Left foot, now tender over left ½ leg... for the
xrays at hospital show no fracture.”
claimant was referred to an orthopaedic surgeon for further management.
X-ray of the left leg, left foot and left ankle performed on 4 October 2019 did
not reveal any evidence of fractures.
MRI of the left ankle performed on 10 October 2019 showed a strain to the
anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) and the calcaneofibular
ligament (CFL) and
partial thickness insertional tears of the deltoid ligament, bony contusions in
the medial and lateral malleolar
region with incomplete fractures of the lateral
ultrasound of the left knee performed on 10 October 2019 revealed features of
mild subcutaneous prepatellar bursitis without a
focal drainable
collection.
a consultation on 24 October 2019, Dr Dao recorded that the claimant was advised
to see the “injury centre” for a medical
certificate. As will become
apparent later in these reasons, the reference to the “the injury
centre” is a reference
to another medical practice called “Workers
claimant saw orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Sumil Ramawat on 16 October 2019 in regard
to the left ankle injury. In a report to Dr Dao
of the same date, Dr Ramawat
noted that the MRI performed on 10 October 2019 showed an incomplete fracture of
the left lateral malleolus
as well as an ATFL and CFL injury. He recommended
conservative treatment including weight bearing as tolerated in a moon boot for
another four weeks followed by physiotherapy.
claimant was followed up by Dr Ramawat on 11 November 2019. On examination, it
was noted that there was tenderness in the ATFL
and CTF ligaments and that the
Anterior drawers test was negative. Dr Ramawat recommended that the claimant
continue with physiotherapy.
Workers Doctors
appears that from 29 October 2019, the claimant received treatment from the
medical practice, Workers Doctors. Such treatment comprised
of consultations
with GP’s, physiotherapists and a psychiatrist, Dr Kumagaya.
first consultation was with GP, Dr Calvache-Rubio on 29 October 2019. Dr
Calvache-Rubio recorded injuries to the left ankle and
right thumb. On
examination, it was noted that the claimant was in a moon boot and he had gait
issues and right thumb grip issues.
It was recorded that the claimant had
symptoms of right thumb and left ankle pain. Other symptoms recorded were:
worry, overthinking, trouble sleeping, poor concentration, more
cautious while driving”. The diagnosis made was a left ankle
fracture, a
right thumb strain and an adjustment disorder. The claimant was referred for
physiotherapy and prescribed simple analgesia.
the same day, the claimant also saw physiotherapist, Ryan Heuston at Workers
Doctors. Mr Heuston recorded that the claimant reported
pain in the right thumb,
pain in the left ankle and pain in the lower back. This was about four weeks
after the accident. The claimant
reported no pain in the neck, right leg or
paraesthesia. Mr Heuston recorded that there was a pre-accident history of
back stiffness” for which no treatment was required. The
Panel considers that Mr Hueston would be referring to the lower back
complained of in 2016.
claimant saw Mr Heuston again on 25 November 2019. It was recorded that the back
pain improved since the cam boot was removed
the week before and that he was
able to manage walking for up to 20 minutes.
claimant was referred by Workers Doctors for further management by orthopaedic
surgeon, Dr Gavin Soo. He saw the claimant on 12
December 2019. In a report of
the same date, Dr Soo noted that the claimant remained in a moon boot for seven
weeks and following
this, he commenced physiotherapy. He recorded that the
claimant reported that his left ankle symptoms had improved, with occasional
discomfort when he walks for too long. On examination of the left ankle, Dr Soo
noted that there was no tenderness. The ankle was
stable and had an excellent
range of motion.
Soo noted that an MRI of right hand showed a low-grade ulna collateral ligament
tear of the thumb. He noted that the claimant still
had weakness in his right
hand and that he should continue with
physiotherapy.
Workers Doctors
(continued)
24 January 2020, the claimant saw physiotherapist, Cheuk Yin (Davy) Lam at
Workers Doctors
The claimant reported that his left ankle and right
thumb were improving but his lower back was “feeling the same”. The
claimant reported that his main concern was his lower back pain which was a
sharp and dull pain. There was no feeling of pins and
needles or numbness. On
examination, there was restricted movement in the lower back and a treatment
plan was formulated to restore
lumbar spine extension.
claimant saw Mr Lam again on 30 January 2020. It was recorded that the back pain
was getting worse and that the main concern was
the lower back pain on the left
side. The pain was sometimes sharp and can also be dull and constant. The pain
is aggravated by walking.
It was recorded that there were no pins and needles or
claimant saw GP, Dr Aaron Tso on 7 February 2020. The claimant reported ongoing
pain and weakness in the right hand and that the
left ankle has significantly
improved. There was mild constant pain in the lower back, “5/10 at
worst” and a dull ache.
There was no radiation of pain. The lower back
pain can wake him up from sleep.
the same day, the claimant was seen by physiotherapist, Mr Lam. The claimant
reported pain in the right thumb and the lower back
with no pins and needles or
numbness. Mr Lam recorded that there was a reduced range of movement of the
lumbar spine.
21 February 2020, the claimant saw GP, Dr Morgan Mo. It was recorded that the
claimant reported that the left ankle pain was improving
but he has had ongoing
right thumb and lower back pain since the accident. It was recommended that the
claimant continue with physiotherapy
to the right hand but it appears that there
was no treatment recommended for the lower back.
13 March 2020, the claimant saw physiotherapist, Kar Luen (Karen) Au Yeung. It
was recorded that the claimant’s major concern
was a constant dull pain in
the right thumb. The claimant reported that the week before, he had increased
lower back pain with bending.
31 March 2020, the claimant saw physiotherapist, Mr Lam. He reported pain in the
right thumb, the left ankle and the lower back
with no pins and needles or
numbness. Mr Lam recorded that there was a reduced range of movement of the
lumbar spine.
3 April 2020, the claimant saw Dr Tso. He recorded that the claimant reported
ongoing pain in the right thumb, lower back and left
ankle. The diagnosis of the
claimant’s injuries arising from the accident was revised by Dr Tso to the
following: left ankle
fracture; right thumb pain; lumbar back strain and
adjustment disorder.
Dr Bradshaw
24 April 2020, the claimant was referred by Workers Doctors to orthopaedic
Dr David Bradshaw for management of ongoing right thumb pain.
a report to Dr Lim dated 19 May 2020, Dr Bradshaw recorded that in the accident,
the claimant sustained injuries to the right thumb,
left ankle and pain in his
lower back.
examination of the left ankle, Dr Bradshaw noted that the claimant walked with a
mildly antalgic gait. His left ankle was mildly
tender over the anterior joint
line and there was slightly reduced dorsiflexion compared to the contralateral
side. He noted that
there was a degree of scar tissue on recent imaging which
would explain some of the stiffness in the ankle.
examination of the right thumb, Dr Bradshaw noted that there was a good range of
motion. There was focal and reproduceable tenderness
over the UCL and stress of
the UCL provoked pain. The RCL had no tenderness or palpation or pain or stress
of the RCL.
Bradshaw was of the opinion that surgery is not required for either of right
thumb or left ankle injuries. He expected there would
be gradual improvement in
the ensuing months and that the claimant is likely to always have some degree of
discomfort and stiffness
in these joints in view of the significant soft tissue
injury he sustained around them.
does not appear that the pain in the lower back reported by the claimant was
addressed at the examination.
Workers Doctors (continued)
7 May 2020, the claimant was seen by physiotherapist, Mr Lam. The claimant
reported pain in the right thumb, lower back and the
left ankle. It was recorded
that there was a reduced range of movement of the lumbar spine.
8 May 2020, the claimant was seen by Dr Calvache-Rubio. His diagnosis was
revised to include a lumbar back strain based on “clinical
findings to
11 May 2020, the claimant was seen by physiotherapist, Mr Lam. Mr Lam recorded
that there was ongoing improvement with reduced
lower back pain in L4/5 level.
The claimant reported that the lower back pain is aggravated by sitting and
walking. It was recorded
that there was a reduced range of movement of the
lumbar spine.
a further therapy session with Mr Lam on 18 May 2020, it was recorded that the
claimant had ongoing restricted range of movement
in the lumbar spine. In
another session on 21 May 2020, Mr Lam recorded that there was ongoing
improvement with reduced lower back
pain at the L4/5 level and that the pain was
aggravated with sitting and walking.
clinical records of Workers Doctors showed that in the period between June 2020
to November 2021, there were regular attendances
by the claimant for treatment
by the GP’s and physiotherapists, where he complained of fluctuating
improvement of pain in the
right thumb and the left ankle. During some of these
visits, the claimant also complained of intermittent low back pain. Some of
notes recorded in that regard were:
(a) 11 June 2020 – physiotherapy session; it was recorded that there was a
reduced range of movement of the lumbar spine
(b) 19 June 2020 - consultation with Dr Calvache- Rubio – lower back pain,
discomfort and stiffness.
(c) 17 July 2020 – physiotherapy session – still having back pain on
and off; doing stretches.
(d) 22 July 2020 – physiotherapy session – low back and left ankle
are the main concerns; constant low back pain –
3-4/10; it was recorded
that there was reduced range of movement in the lumbar spine.
(e) 29 July 2020 – physiotherapy session – low back sore today.
(f) 12 August 2020 – physiotherapy session – low back pain on and
off – mainly stiffness more than pain.
(g) 19 August 2020 – physiotherapy session – low back pain on and
off; location of pain – central and bilateral
lumbar spine L3/4.
(h) 26 August 2020 – physiotherapy session – back pain on and off;
it was recorded that there was reduced range of movement
in the lumbar spine.
(i) 2 September 2020 – physiotherapy session; back pain on and off which
is aggravated by prolonged sitting and driving; constant
low back pain on left;
is getting better but still tight.
(j) 16 September 2020 – physiotherapy session – it was recorded that
there was reduced range of movement in the lumbar
(k) 29 June 2021- psychologist recorded that claimant reported that he cannot
walk for too long because of ankle and low back pain.
Seven Hills Physiotherapy & Sports Injury Clinic
to the records of this physiotherapy clinic, the claimant was referred for
treatment in December 2020 for his left ankle
fracture, right thumb injury and
lumbar spine facet closing dysfunction. The claimant was treated by
physiotherapist Ms Niyuth Chea
during the period
9 December 2020 to 21 June
2021. She indicated that the target areas for treatment were the “glutes,
legs and low back.”
Workers Doctors (continued)
to a consultation with GP, Dr Dickson on 8 September 2021, the claimant reported
worsening pain in the left ankle since
he ceased being treated by an exercise
physiologist. Dr Dickson referred the claimant to an orthopaedic surgeon and
recommended that
an updated MRI be performed.
MRI of the left ankle performed on 10 September 2021 showed the
“Mild thickening of the ATFL suggestive of scarring
related to old injury, not altered when compared to imaging performed in
2020. There is no disruption. Elsewhere no abnormality demonstrated.”
a consultation with Dr Dickson on 15 November 2021, it was recorded that the
claimant was largely pre-occupied by worsening pain
in the back. Walking is
limited due to pain and he is experiencing “severely disturbed
sleep.” The pain was emerging
in the context of an antalgic gait due to
the left ankle injury. Dr Dickson recommended that the claimant seek an
assessment “from
local GP who can examine.”
a consultation with Dr Calvache-Rubio on 22 November 2021, the following entry
was recorded:
“has been limping and using walking stick since
Ongoing attendance to physio
Walks one to two hrs
Back pain flares up
Recurrently
Last flare up last week
Tried to reach a plate on the dining table
Stiffness in lower back
Difficulties with sitting and walking
No radicular symptoms
Taking endones prn
Discuss [sic] this
Advised againt [sic] it.”
MRI of the lumbar spine performed on 23 November 2021 showed “mild disc
desiccation at the L4/5 level. At the L4/5, there
is moderate disc desiccation
with reduced disc height and minor central annular tissue and central disc
protrusion.”
a consultation with Dr Calvache-Rubio on 6 December 2021, the claimant reported
that his back pain was slowly improving but he
is experiencing ongoing stiffness
and discomfort. He was advised to continue with conservative therapy and
referred to a spinal surgeon
for review.
claimant was seen by orthopaedic and spine surgeon, Dr Bhisham Singh on
December 2021. In a report dated 14 December 2021, Dr Singh recorded that the
claimant has had increasing lower back pain since
the motor accident. According
to his sitting and standing tolerance and the imaging, Dr Singh believed that
the bulging is a suggestion
of loss of disc height at L5/S1 as well as L4/5. He
believed that the symptoms were progressive since the accident.
Singh was of the opinion that the claimant had sustained a significant injury to
his lumbar spine arising from the accident and
that ultimately he will require
surgery by way of decompression and a fusion. He indicated that heavy physical
work was likely to
aggravate and exacerbate the requirement for the surgery.
Liverpool Hospital
A Discharge Summary from Liverpool Hospital dated 20 July 2022, showed that the
claimant had attended the emergency department on
that day complaining of back
pain. It was reported that taking into account the clinical features, the
biochemical parameters and
radiological findings, he was managed with analgesic
and discharged home to see his GP for a follow up in one to two days for
consideration
of a referral to a chronic pain clinic and physiotherapy.
Workers Doctors (continued)
clinical records showed that the claimant attended for treatment on regular
occasions in 2022, reporting ongoing complaints of
lower back pain. In a
consultation with Dr Emerte Kporku on 1 December 2022, it was recorded that the
claimant reported that after
12 months of physiotherapy and six months of
exercise physiology, he felt that these treatments had exacerbated his back pain
were helpful with his right thumb injury. The claimant reported that he
would prefer to have hydrotherapy as he found that hot showers
have been helping
his back pain.
Medicolegal evidence
claimant was examined by orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Todd Gothelf at the request of
both parties on 13 May 2021. He provided a report
on 24 May 2021.
claimant reported to Dr Gothelf that in the accident, he was thrown off his
motorcycle to the ground. He had a lot of pain in
the knees and elbows. He could
not feel his left ankle and had right hand pain. He commenced physiotherapy
accident a month after the accident and was attending
twice a week.
claimant reported that he was currently doing exercise therapy addressing the
lower back, thumb and ankle.
Gothelf was of the opinion that as a result of the accident, the claimant
sustained soft tissue injuries to the right elbow, right
thumb, right index
finger, soft tissue injury to the left knee with pre-patellar bursitis, a left
ankle bone contusion and incomplete
fracture of the lateral malleolus, a lateral
ankle sprain of the anterior talofibular ligament and calcaneal fibular
Gothelf was of the opinion that the low back pain complained of was not caused
by the accident because there was no mention of
a lower back injury in the
hospital clinical notes or the ambulance records and there was no mention of
lower back symptoms in the
early period after the accident.
Gothelf assessed the right thumb injury as giving rise to a whole person
impairment (WPI) of 1%, the left ankle injury a WPI of
0%, resulting in an
overall permanent impairment of 1%. He believed that the soft tissue injuries to
the right elbow and right index
finger did not result in any impairment.
claimant was examined by orthopaedic surgeon, Dr James Bodel on 14 March 2022 at
the request of his lawyers. Dr Bodel provided
a report on 24 March 2022.
claimant reported to Dr Bodel after his motorcycle was struck by a vehicle in
the roundabout in the accident, there was a blank
period in his memory, and he
next recalled lying on his back in the intersection with his motorcycle some
distance away. The claimant
reported that at the hospital, his concern was the
Bodel was of the opinion that as a result of the accident, the claimant
sustained multiple ligamentous injuries to the region of
the left foot and ankle
and associated minor fractures and disc prolapse at the L5/S1 in the lumbosacral
Bodel was of the opinion that the claimant required surgery at the lumbosacral
junction but he considered that given the claimant’s
age, a simple
decompression would be sufficient rather than a fusion.
Bodel was of the opinion that the physiotherapy recommended by Dr Calvache-Rubio
on 11 December 2021 was needed both pre-operatively
and post operatively.
Bodel was of the opinion that the claimant’s clinical condition had
stabilised at the time of his examination. He assessed
WPI for the left ankle at
3%, WPI of 1% for the sub-talar joint and WPI of 10% for the lumbar spine,
resulting in a permanent impairment
RE-EXAMINATION
25 March 2025, the claimant was re-examined by Medical Assessor Couch and
Medical Assessor Gray at the medical suites of the Commission
on behalf of the
claimant attended alone and on time. He was driven to the appointment from his
examination report now follows.
Educational, occupational and
social history
claimant was born and brought up in Sydney. His parents both came to Australia
from Vietnam as refugees. He completed his Year
12 at high school and did three
years of a civil engineering degree at Western Sydney University. He said that
he needed to stop
because of financial issues. He had a single mother and needed
to work to support himself. He said he would need to study for a further
years to complete this qualification, but he did not feel he was currently
capable of coping with this.
the time of the accident, the claimant was working full-time as a trades
assistant installing elevators (lifts) for a smaller company.
He said that he
had worked on residential buildings up to 11 floors in height. He described
working long hours and physically demanding
duties, including regularly carrying
a 30- 40kg tool bag up and down stairs. In addition, he had worked as an on-call
shift supervisor
at a Kentucky Fried Chicken store. On questioning, he said that
he had never been involved much in sports, but he and his partner
had enjoyed
activities such as going to the beach and hiking.
claimant said that he had not managed to return to work installing lifts since
the accident. He had tried working one shift at
the Kentucky Fried Chicken
store, but he had to cease work during the shift “because my ankle gave
claimant is living with his partner in a rented apartment in Parramatta. She is
currently the sole household earner and works
in retail. He said that the
insurer had paid weekly payments (of statutory benefits) until 2022. He said
that he is not currently
eligible for any Centrelink benefits such as Jobseeker.
Past medical history
claimant described good general health and no previous major illnesses. He
stated that he fractured his right great toe when accidentally
kicking the floor
during martial arts training at the age of 14. He described treatment with
internal fixation and made a full recovery.
in response to direct questioning, the claimant said he had no pre-accident
material problems with his low back. He was
the made aware of a history of low
back pain recorded by his general practitioner in 2016. He said that he himself
know about that, forgotten” but said he had returned
to the radiology clinic to get the related imaging report.
claimant said that did not have any treatment from Dr Rozario and that after
satisfactory imaging he had made a normal recovery.
claimant denied any previous ankle injuries. He denied taking any medication for
his low back or otherwise at the time of the
of the motor accident and subsequent treatment
claimant stated that on 1 October 2019, he was riding home from work on his
300cc Kawasaki motorcycle in a 50kph zone. As he went
into a roundabout, he was
struck by a car from the left side. He did not know exactly how the accident had
happened. He said that
he saw the car approaching and next thing he was on the
road, “looking at the sky”. He recalled that initially he could
feel his left ankle or leg at all while he was lying on the ground and wondered
if he had in fact lost it. He thought that he
had remained lying on the road
until an ambulance attended promptly. He recalled wondering if he had injured
his neck or back as
he arrived at Blacktown Hospital, he recalled that he could see that his leg was
intact but that it felt numb with pain from
the left knee down to his left
ankle. He also recalled abrasions to his elbows and knees. He said that he had
been riding in appropriate
garments, including a helmet, leather jackets,
motorcycle gloves, tradesman’s long trousers and boots.
claimant was asked more about his recollection of symptoms while at the
hospital. He said that he was in the emergency department
for about six hours.
He recalled that he was very angry at the circumstances of the accident. He
said: “I was on adrenaline
– angry, mixed emotions – a long
day at work – I was annoyed that I had been hit”. He recalled that
pain in his left ankle after about two hours, “when the
adrenaline had worn off”. He said that he was moved out of the
department in a wheelchair and his sister came and took him home when he was
still in pain in his left ankle. That was
his main concern. Regarding the other
injuries, he “didn’t care” and other pain,
“forgotten”.
claimant was asked when he first noticed low back pain and he replied: “I
think it was about the first month – then
I started to notice
things”. He also remembered some problems gripping with the right hand and
having early difficulty standing
in a left moon boot.
medical examiners of the Panel noted that junior medical officer, Dr Kabir
Nahyan at Blacktown Hospital, described a similar mechanism
of accident. It was
recorded that the claimant had flown off the bike and landed over the bike onto
the concrete. He was complaining
of ongoing pain over the left ankle, left hand,
right elbow, right hand and left knee. He denied any cervical spine tenderness.
Examination
showed an abrasion and tenderness over the right elbow, tenderness
of the right thumb and tenderness over the lateral anterior aspect
of the left
medical examiners of the Panel noted that X-rays were apparently performed of
the right elbow and hand, left hand, left knee,
foot and ankle. He was
discharged with crutches to be non-weight bearing on the left lower limb and for
follow-up by his general
practitioner in two days. There was no mention of back
medical examiners of the Panel asked the claimant more about his recollection of
first seeking treatment for his low back. He
said he thought this had been one
to one and a half years after the accident at about the beginning of 2021. This
appears to be a
reference to seeing Dr Singh, and orthopaedic and spine surgeon,
on 9 December 2021. It is apparent from earlier records, in particular
physiotherapists Mr Heuston, Mr Lam and Ms Yeung that the claimant had been
consistently seeking treatment for his back
since late October 2019.
claimant recalled an incident in 2021 at a friend’s house when, while
standing, he reached forward to pick up some food
from a table. He suddenly lost
all feeling from the waist down and in both lower limbs and
‘dropped’, initially without
pain. He said that this resulted in a
fall, and the only initial pain was pain in the left arm from stopping the fall.
He said that
the friend whom he was visiting, practiced massage and massaged his
back. He began to get some feeling back in his legs. He said
that friends had to
carry him to a car, and he was driven home.
claimant recalled: “I thought it was just one of those days”. The
next day he recalled numbness and sharp pain generally
in both legs and he
couldn’t walk. The following day, he was able to walk but said that it was
a struggle. From then on, he
experienced sharp pain and tingling.
claimant was asked about further treatment received for his back. He was told by
the first surgeon he had seen that the only appropriate
treatment would be a
spinal fusion. He sought a second opinion from a different surgeon who mentioned
two surgical options, one of
a more minor procedure and one of a fusion. He said
that the only specific treatment he had for his back had been one CT-guided
This improved his low back pain but not his perceived lack of
claimant recalled an episode about four and a half months after the injection
when, having been pain-free, he was walking out
of the kitchen at home and,
“it just hit me hard out of nowhere ... I said I can’t ...”.
claimant was asked if he ever attended a neurologist, and he did not think he
claimant said that he had not attended any medical specialists recently for his
back condition. He said that he had sometimes
sought chiropractic treatment,
“to be able to get more movement”. He described some benefit from
these sessions but felt
that they also increased pain after the treatments. He
had also seen an exercise physiologist.
History of injuries or
incidents since the subject motor accident
claimant did not describe any such accidents or incidents apart from the
Current status
claimant was asked what his main current physical symptoms were. He said:
“I’ve started getting numb in my legs frequently
with pins and
needles with the numbness”. During the interview he described numbness
down the anterior aspect of both thighs
and part of the anterior aspect of both
lower legs. He pointed to these areas while describing this. He also described
numbness over
one particular area over the left dorsum of the left ankle.
claimant described this numbness as coming and going, occurring particularly if
he sits for too long. He said that he can only
sleep on his left side and needs
to put one pillow behind his back and another between his legs.
asked if he had any days in which he felt normal, the claimant said:
“Never really, I just lie to myself”. When asked
specifically about
back symptoms, he described a sensation like that of a “thin cut” in
the midline on his lower back,
with a stabbing pain. He also sometimes notices
burning or pins and needles. Pain is aggravated by sitting still.
asked if pain was relieved by moving around, the claimant replied: “100% -
it’s better if I move around, but if I
move too much it comes
claimant was asked what physical postures and activities he mostly adopted while
spending much of his days at home. He said that
he might be in bed, sometimes
rolling around in bed or sitting up in bed, then moving to the lounge room and
sitting or lying on
a couch and watching television or a movie. He said that he
does walk around and play with their two cats.
claimant was asked about exercise. He said the furthest he walks is perhaps 600
metres to a nearby park on most days. He was asked
if he developed any different
leg symptoms when walking and he said he could get pain in his legs if he walked
too far. He denied
any bladder or bowel symptoms.
further questioning at this stage of the interview, he again denied having had
similar symptoms before, stating: “I built
elevators, etc – and I
still had energy for KFC work”.
Lifestyle factors
claimant said he does not drink alcohol or smoke cigarettes but does vape. He
said that this has a calming effect on him. He denied
using cannabis or other
illicit drugs.
claimant said that he now doesn’t go out and he no longer hikes. He
stretches at home and walks 600m intermittently.
examination
claimant presented as a quiet young man who appeared to be quite intelligent and
well-educated. He gave a clear specific history, with no apparent
exaggeration or dramatisation. He was co-operative during the physical
examination, with no obvious abnormal pain behaviours, self-limitation or
inconsistencies.
height 175cm and weight 75kg, he was within the healthy weight range. (He said
that he has weighed 86kg and had been much more
muscular when doing physical
work installing elevators. He added that he had put on weight to about 94kg 18
months earlier but had
lost weight since then).
claimant was able to undress to underpants for examination and re-dress
afterwards. He did walk into the examination room slightly
slowly, and although
he could climb on and off the examination couch, he was noted to be slow turning
over on the couch between supine
extremities
hands were clean and soft with only a few small calluses over the metacarpal
heads. The claimant confirmed that his hands had
been very rough and callused
previously when working installing elevators.
Lumbosacral
when standing was within normal limits. On gentle palpation the claimant
reported local tenderness with wincing at the L4
level in the midline, but not
over the paraspinal muscles on either side without guarding.
range of movement (AROM) of the lumbar spine was carefully observed by both
medical examiners, with repetition of movements.
Forward flexion was about
three-quarters of normal but extension was restricted to about half of normal,
stopping suddenly with complaint
of sudden pain – this was reproducible.
Lateral flexion was full bilaterally. When he stood and moved his bodyweight
from one foot to the other, the paraspinal muscles on the weightbearing
side relaxed in the normal manner, indicating no actual
Lower limbs
10cm proximal to the patella, both thighs measured 46cm, the right (dominant
side) calf 37cm and the left 37.5cm. Knee jerks
and ankle jerks were normal and
symmetrical. Both plantar responses flexor (normal). Straight leg raising was
full bilaterally, with
complaint of central low back pain but negative sciatic
stretch test bilaterally.
was normal in both lower limbs. Power of extensor hallucis longus (L5 nerve
roots) and ankle eversion (S1 nerve roots) was
full on the right. On the left,
power was probably full, but apparent effort was somewhat reduced and variable
(thus there were no
objective signs of lumbosacral radiculopathy).
to the ankles, the right was entirely normal. The left ankle was normal in
appearance with no deformity or tenderness. There
was slight restriction of AROM
in the ankle joint and subtalar joint (hindfoot) as tabulated below:
Active ROM Measured
Active ROM Measured
Ankle plantar flexion
Ankle dorsiflexion
Hindfoot inversion
Hindfoot eversion
knees were clinically entirely normal.
Functionally,
the claimant could do a fairly full squat to the floor and recover without
describing pain. One of the medical examiners
demonstrated a squat-walk (duck
walk) to him but the claimant preferred to avoid this because of anticipated low
DOAGNOSIS CAUSATION AND REASONS - PERMANENT
IMPAIRMENT DISPUTE
The left ankle and subtalar joint
Panel accepts on the basis of the overwhelming evidence, that the claimant
sustained injuries to his left ankle, including an
displaced fracture of the
lateral malleolus (treated conservatively) caused by the motor
The lumbar spine
was a past history of low back pain in 2016, for which the claimant consulted
his usual GP, Dr Dao. Plain X-ray was reported
as normal. The claimant told the
Medical Assessors of the Panel that he could not recall the details of this
episode, and he had
not required treatment. He was referred rheumatologist, Dr
Loretta Rozario by Dr Dao for further management. There is no evidence
the Panel of any treatment of the claimant by
Dr Rozario.
is no record of complaint of back pain in the clinical records of Blacktown
Hospital or by Dr Dao three days after the accident,
or by Dr Calvache-Rubio
four weeks later. The first mention of injury to the lumbar spine was Ryan
Heuston, Physiotherapist, on the
same date as Dr Calvache-Rubio, did record
central low back pain rated as 5/10 on the VAS. In December 2019, another
physiotherapist
at the same practice, Ka Wai (Gary) Ng, noted that low back pain
was resolving, although the claimant had not yet returned to work.
of back pain was recorded by GP Dr Aeron Tao on 7 February 2020 and 3 April
2020, GP Dr Morgan Mo on 21 February 2020 and
Dr Calvache- Rubio on 8 May 2020.
However, there is no evidence of any treatment or investigation of the back
complaints by any of
those medical practitioners.
April 2020, the claimant was referred to orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Bradshaw for
further management of his injuries. At the consultation
with Dr Bradshaw in May
2020, the claimant mentioned that he had lower back pain. In a report to Dr Lim
dated 19 May 2020, Dr Bradshaw
recorded that in the accident, the claimant
sustained injuries to the right thumb, left ankle and pain in his lower back.
there is no evidence of any suggested treatment or investigation by Dr
Bradshaw of the back pain.
18 months after the accident, (although the clinical records of Dr
Calvache-Rubio suggests that it was over two years after the
accident in
November 2021), the claimant described an unusual episode when he experienced
sudden loss of sensation, pain and possible
loss of power function in both lower
limbs while reaching for some food at a friend’s table, resulting in a
fall. Following
this episode, he sought treatment for his back. The claimant
said that this was the first time he sought medical treatment for his
subsequent MRI scan on 23 November 2021 showed disc desiccation with some
bulging at L5/S1 without obvious neural compromise.
He had subsequently
consulted two different spinal surgeons and surgery, including the possibility
of a fusion, had been raised.
The ‘normal’ x-ray of 2016 would not
be expected to delineate any disc injury; he did not have a pre-accident MRI to
compare with later lumbar MRIs.
considered all the available evidence, the nature of the accident (the claimant
being knocked off a motorcycle by a car and
landing on the road), combined with
references by a treating physiotherapist four weeks later, the Panel accepts, on
the balance
of probabilities, that the claimant sustained a soft tissue injury
to the lumbar spine in the accident for which the claimant continued
regularly attend upon physiotherapists for treatment.
Panel also considers that it was more probable than not that in the incident in
November 2021, as described by the claimant, the
claimant sustained some further
back injury at this time.
Other injuries
Panel accepts that claimant sustained a low-grade ligament strain injury to his
right hand caused by the motor accident. He sustained
other minor
abrasions/contusions that have resolved.
examination, the only abnormal findings were reduced range of movement,
localised tenderness over the lumbar spine and slight dysmetria,
with a painful
“catch” in lumbar extension. There were no other abnormal
neurological signs and no evidence of lumbosacral
radiculopathy. The Medical
Assessors of the Panel assessed this condition as a DRE Lumbosacral Category II
assessable level of impairment
which gives rise to a whole person impairment
(WPI) of 5%.The Medical Assessors are of the opinion that this impairment is not
attributable
to the soft tissue injury to the lower back sustained in the
accident but rather, to the later episode that occurred in November
to the Guidelines and AMA 4, and following the examination of the lower limb by
Medical Assessor Couch, the Medical Assessors
of the Panel are of the opinion
that the only applicable assessment method for the claimant’s ankle injury
is by range of movement.
Referring to the tabulated range of movement at
paragraph 167 above, there is no assessable impairment for the right ankle or
Plantar flexion restricted to 20 degrees on the left gives 3% WPI or
7% LEI. Referring to hindfoot movements, inversion restricted
to 20 degrees or
eversion restricted to 10% gives 1% WPI or 2% LEI. These impairments are
combined using the Combined Values Charts
to give 9% LEI, or 4% WPI.
are no other assessable impairments arising from the physical injuries caused by
the accident.
Panel adopts the examination findings and assessment of permanent impairment of
the Medical Assessors of the Panel in relation
to the injuries to the left
ankle, the subtalar joint, and the lumbar spine.
CAUSATION AND
REASONS- TREATMENT AND CARE DISPUTE
second dispute relates to physiotherapy treatment to be provided by Infinity
Physiotherapy based on a referral from Dr Calvache
Rubio on 6 December
referral specified pain in the lower back, the left ankle, left foot and altered
Panel has found that the accident caused an injury to the claimant’s left
ankle, including a displaced fracture of the lateral
malleolus. The proposed
treatment is therefore related to that injury. Some six years after the
accident, with established chronic
symptoms, the Panel is not persuaded that
further physiotherapy treatment is reasonable and necessary because it is
unlikely to be
effective in relieving the claimant’s pain and thereby
optimise his prospects of recovery and returning to work and or other
activities.
Panel has found that the accident caused a soft tissue injury to the
claimant’s lumbar spine. The proposed treatment is
therefore related to
that injury. The Panel considers the need for the physiotherapy treatment
received in the months following the
accident would have been reasonable and
necessary. However, the Panel does not accept that the proposed physiotherapy
treatment for
back pain in December 2021 was reasonable and necessary as it
would not relate to the soft tissue injury sustained in the accident
but to some
later injury as earlier described in these reasons.
Panel conducted a new assessment of all the matters with which the medical
assessment is concerned.
Panel, comprised of two specialist medical practitioners, is not required to
choose between competing medical opinions and is
required to form its own
opinion: See
Insurance Australia Group Ltd v Keen
[2021] NSWCA 287
, [41] and [45] and
Insurance Australia Ltd v Marsh
[2022] NSWCA
, [21], [64].
Panel has reached a different conclusion in their assessment of WPI which has
resulted in an assessment of a higher degree of
permanent impairment.
Accordingly,
the Panel revokes the certificate of Medical Assessor Wallace and issues a new
certificate. The new certificate of the
Panel is attached to these
Section 7.26(5) of the MAI
Section 41(2) of the PIC
Rule 128 of the PIC
Section 7.26(6) of the
The Guidelines applied
by the Panel was the Motor Accident Guidelines Version 9.3 which commenced on 6
December 2024.
Clause 6.2 of
the Guidelines.
See s 3B (2) of
the CL Act.
[2022] NSWSC 372
(No 2)) at [73].
Sch 2,cl 1(i) of the MAI
Subsection 1.3(2)(a) of
the MAI Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (777 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter