URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/178.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
FRP v R [2025] NSWCCA 178 (7 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 178
Hearing Date(s):
26 May 2025
Date of Orders:
07 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Harrison CJ at CL at [1]
Garling J at [2]
Yehia J at [73]
(1) Appeal upheld.
(2) Quash the
sentence imposed by the District Court on 20 October
(3) Impose an aggregate sentence of imprisonment of 10
years and 6 months to commence on 16 December 2021 and expire on 15 June
(4) Impose a non-parole period of 7 years to commence from
16 December 2021 and expire on 15 December 2028.
Catchwords:
CRIME – Appeal against sentence – Sexual offences –
Aggravated sexual assault – Indecent assault – Circumstances
aggravation – Victim under authority – Victim under 16 years of age
– Leave granted – Appeal upheld –
resentenced
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence
– Misapplication of principle – Whether the sentencing judge erred
in an assessment of objective seriousness – Whether the characterisation
given by the sentencing judge was reasonably open
to him –Ground of appeal
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence
– Misapplication of principle – Whether the sentencing judge erred
in finding that personal deterrence was a significant factor in sentencing
– Whether the offender’s willingness to engage
in treatment courses
is conditional upon expressions of remorse and insight into offending –
Error of principle – Where
remorse and insight into offending found not to
be a precondition for engagement in treatment courses – Grounds 2 and 3
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence
– Manifest excess – Unnecessary to consider in light of upholding
grounds 2 and 3
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) ss 61M(1), 61M(2),
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Cases Cited:
Alseedi v R
[2009] NSWCCA 185
Britton v R
[2024] NSWCCA 138
[2018] NSWCCA 278
Ibbs v The Queen
[1987] HCA 46
(1987) 163 CLR 447
[2016] NSWCCA 66
[2014] NSWCCA 183
[2006] NSWCCA
[2004] NSWCCA 434
(2004) 150 A Crim R 575
Texts Cited:
Not Applicable
Principal judgment
FRP (Applicant)
The Crown (Respondent)
Representation:
I Nash (Applicant)
E Wilkins SC
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
CA Williams Legal (Applicant)
Director of
Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2021/357364; 2023/32136
Publication Restriction:
Not Applicable
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court
Date of Decision:
20 October 2023
Fitzsimmons SC DCJ
File Number(s):
2021/357364; 2023/32136
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The applicant, FRP, pleaded guilty to sexual offences against two victims. In
relation to Victim 1, the applicant pleaded guilty to
four counts of aggravated
sexual intercourse with a child, between 10 and 14 years of age, contrary to
(NSW), and asked that two offences of
intentionally sexually touching a child, contrary to
(NSW) be taken into account on a Form 1. In relation to Victim 2,
the applicant pleaded guilty to two counts of aggravated indecent
assault and
one count of sexual intercourse with a person between 10 and 16 years of age,
contrary to ss 61M(2) and
respectively. The applicant asked that four other offences of aggravated
indecent assault, contrary to s 61M(1) of the
taken into account on a Form 1. The offending occurred during two periods of
time, separated by approximately 27-30 years.
On 20 October 2023, Judge
Fitzsimmons DCJ imposed an aggregate sentence of 13 years imprisonment, with a
non-parole period of 8 years
and 8 months.
The applicant sought leave to appeal against his sentence and relied upon the
following grounds of appeal:
his Honour erred in his assessment of the
objective seriousness of the offences against Victim 1;
his Honour erred in finding that personal
deterrence was a “
significant factor
his Honour erred in concluding that the
applicant’s engagement in rehabilitation must be done in the context of
some insight into his offending and expressing some remorse; and
the aggregate sentence is manifestly
(Garling J, Harrison CJ at CL and Yehia J agreeing)
unanimously upheld Grounds 2 and 3 of the appeal, quashed the sentence
imposed by the sentencing Judge and engaged in the resentencing
As to Ground 1:
(1) Allowing for the imprecision of language surrounding the way in which
objective seriousness can be described, the Court found
that the assessments of
the sentencing Judge of the objective seriousness of the offences relating to
Victim 1 were open to him.
Whilst the acts themselves may have been suggestive
of conduct below the mid-range of objective seriousness, other features, such
the age of the victim, the age of the applicant, the familial relationship
between the two and the location of the offending conduct,
were all matters
demanding consideration and are suggestive of the sentencing Judge’s
assessment of objective seriousness being
justified. No error was made out, and
Ground 1 was not upheld: per Garling J at [45]-[46] (Harrison CJ at CL and Yehia
at [1] and [73], respectively).
Dawkins v R
[2018] NSWCCA 278
[2016] NSWCCA 66
[2004] NSWCCA 434
(2004) 150 A Crim R 575
[2006] NSWCCA 282
Ibbs v The Queen
[1987] HCA 46
(1987) 163 CLR
As to Grounds 2 and 3 (which were dealt with together):
(2) It was submitted that these grounds were related because the finding that
personal deterrence was a significant factor in the
sentencing of the applicant
is related to the sentencing Judge’s finding about the applicant’s
prospects of rehabilitation:
per Garling J at [47]-[48] (Harrison CJ at CL and
Yehia J agreeing at [1] and [73], respectively).
(3) The Court held that the existence of remorse is not a prerequisite to a
finding that an offender has prospects of rehabilitation.
Further, the
sentencing Judge’s remark that the lack of any real remorse “
not bode well
” for the applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation
was a finding consistent with legal principle. However, the Court was
accept the Crown’s submissions that the sentencing Judge’s remarks
ought not be interpreted as a finding that
some insight into, or expression of
remorse for, the applicant’s offending are preconditions to his engagement
in appropriate
treatment courses and thereby are relevant to his prospects of
rehabilitation. The Court held these findings to be expressed erroneously
not based on any factual material in the sentencing proceedings. Thereafter, the
erroneous reasoning affected the finding of
the sentencing Judge that personal
deterrence was a “
significant factor
” in the sentencing of
the applicant. Error was made out, and Grounds 2 and 3 were upheld: per Garling
J at [56], [61]-[63]
(Harrison CJ at CL and Yehia J agreeing at [1] and [73],
respectively).
Alseedi v R
[2009] NSWCCA 185
[2014] NSWCCA 183
As to Ground 4:
(4) In light of the Court’s conclusions about Grounds 2 and 3
necessitating resentencing, it was inappropriate to consider the
manifest excess.
In light of the Court’s findings, Garling J (Harrison CJ at CL and
Yehia J agreeing) imposed an aggregate sentence of imprisonment
of 10 years and
6 months to commence on 16 December 2021 and expire on 15 June 2032, with a
non-parole period of 7 years to expire
on 15 December 2028.
: I agree with the orders proposed by Garling J.
: On 19 July 2023, the applicant, to whom the Court has given the pseudonym
FRP, entered pleas of guilty to four counts of aggravated
sexual intercourse
with a child, whom this Court will refer to as “Victim 1”, between
10 and 14 years of age, contrary
(NSW) (“the
”). He asked that two offences
of intentionally sexually touch a child, contrary to
be taken into account on a Form 1.
14 June 2023, with respect to a second victim, whom the Court will refer to as
“Victim 2”, the applicant entered pleas
of guilty to two counts of
aggravated indecent assault contrary to s 61M(2) of the
and one count of sexual intercourse with a person between 10 and 16 years of
age, contrary to
. With respect to these
three offences against Victim 2, the applicant asked that four other offences of
aggravated indecent assault,
contrary to s 61M(1) of the
be taken into account on a Form 1.
20 October 2023, Fitzsimmons SC DCJ (“the Judge”) imposed an
aggregate sentence of 13 years imprisonment, with a non-parole
period of 8 years
and 8 months.
Grounds of Appeal
applicant seeks leave to appeal and, if granted leave, relies upon the following
(1) Ground 1: his Honour erred in his assessment of the objective seriousness of
the offences against the Victim 1;
(2) Ground 2: his Honour erred in finding that personal deterrence was a
significant factor
(3) Ground 3: his Honour erred in concluding that the applicant’s
engagement in rehabilitation must be done in the context
of him having some
insight into his offending and expressing some remorse; and
(4) Ground 4: the aggregate sentence is manifestly excessive.
the reasons which follow, I would grant leave to appeal, quash the sentence and
impose a lesser sentence.
Description of Offences
is convenient to set out the offences to which the applicant pleaded guilty,
together with details of the Form 1 offences, and
the relevant
H85887854 – Victim: 1
Sequences 1, 3, 5, 6
Aggravated sexual intercourse with a child between 10 and 14 years (DV)
(Victim 1 aged 10) (circumstances of aggravation: under authority)
Date of offences: between 3 January 2021 and 11 December 2021
Section 66C(2)
Crimes Act 1900
Maximum Penalty: 20 years imprisonment
Standard Non-Parole Period: 9 years imprisonment
Form 1 Offences
Sequences 2, 4
Sequence 2 taken into account on Sequence 1
Sequence 4 taken into account on Sequence 5
Intentionally sexually touch a child between 10 and 16 years (DV) (Victim 1
Date of offences: between 3 January 2021 and 11 December 2021
Section 66DB(a)
Crimes Act 1900
H93271808 – Victim 2
Aggravated indecent assault – Victim 2 aged under 10 years (DV)
(Victim 2 aged 7, 8, or 9)
Date of offences: Between 2 July 1992 and 1 July 1995
Section 61M(2)
Crimes Act 1900
Maximum Penalty: 10 years imprisonment
No Standard Non-Parole Period
Aggravated indecent assault (DV) (Victim 2 aged 10 or 11) (circumstances of
aggravation: victim under 16 years)
Date of offences: Between 2 July 1995 and 1 July 1997
Section 61M(1)
Crimes Act 1900
Maximum Penalty: 7 years imprisonment
No Standard Non-Parole Period
Sequence 10
Sexual intercourse with a person between 10 and 16 years (Victim 2 aged 10
Date of offences: Between 2 July 1995 and 1 July 1997
Section 66C(1)
Crimes Act 1900
Maximum Penalty: 8 years imprisonment
Standard Non-Parole Period: Not applicable
Form 1 Offences
Sequences 6, 7, 9, 11
Sequences 6 and 7 taken into account on sequence 4
Sequences 9 and 11 taken into account on sequence 10
Aggravated indecent assault (DV) (circumstances of aggravation: victim
under 16 years)
Date of offences:
Sequences 6, 7 and 11: Between 2 July 1995 and 1 July 1997 (Victim 2 aged
Sequence 9: Between 2 July 1997 and 2 July 1999 (Victim 2 aged 12, 13, or
Section 61M(1)
Agreed Facts
applicant was sentenced on the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts, which are
referred to below.
offences with respect to Victim 2 occurred at various times between July 1992
and July 1997. Sequence 4 (an aggravated indecent
assault contrary to
s 61M(2) of the
) occurred when Victim 2 was between 7 and
9 years of age. The applicant and Victim 2 were in the applicant’s
vehicle. The applicant,
whilst stopped in a carpark, pulled Victim 2, who was
sitting in the front passenger seat, across to sit on his lap. He positioned
to be facing him and then rocked her backwards and forwards on his lap. Victim 2
felt something dig into her pubic area. The
applicant then turned Victim 2
around, and she pretended she was driving the motor vehicle.
respect to Sequence 4, two offences of aggravated indecent assault were taken
into account on a Form 1. The first of those, Sequence
6, happened on an
occasion when Victim 2 was aged between 10 and 12 years, and was in the car with
the applicant. He kissed her hard
on the lips before letting her leave the car.
The second Form 1 offence, Sequence 7, occurred whilst in the applicant’s
in their shared home. The applicant kissed Victim 2 hard on the lips for an
extended period – during the course of which, as
Victim 2 began to pull
back, the applicant used his lips to pry open her lips, following which he
slipped his tongue into her mouth.
8 (a further aggravated indecent assault, the circumstances of aggravation being
that Victim 2 was under the age of 16 years)
took place whilst she was in the
applicant’s bedroom. She sat on the applicant’s lap with her legs
straddled around him,
following which the applicant began rocking his body back
and forward. Victim 2 felt “
something hard poking her groin
” and could see that the applicant had an erection.
10 was an offence of sexual intercourse with a person between 10 and 16
years of age, contrary to
. Victim 2, who
was aged either 10 or 11 years old, was lying towards the end of the
applicant’s bed when the applicant knelt
on the floor, he pulled her
underwear back and kissed her quickly and swiftly on the top of her vagina, on
her mons pubis.
respect to this offence, there were two Form 1 offences taken into account, both
of which consisted of indecent assaults. The
first Form 1 offence (Sequence 9)
occurred whilst Victim 2 and the applicant were in his bedroom, with Victim 2
lying on his bed.
The applicant peeled back her underwear and kissed her hips
and groin around her bikini line making her feel uncomfortable. The
second Form
1 offence (Sequence 11) occurred when the applicant had given Victim 2 a lift in
his car to a friend’s house. As
they arrived at the house, the applicant
indicated to Victim 2 that she owed him a kiss on the lips for giving her a
lift. Victim
2 kissed the applicant, as he demanded, and got out of the
offences against Victim 1 occurred in 2021, namely between 27 years and 30 years
after the offences against Victim 2. The initial
occasion of criminality
(Sequence 2) occurred one afternoon, after school, in the applicant’s
alone with Victim 1. He commenced his criminal
conduct of intentionally sexually touching a child aged between 10 and
by kissing her on her lips, neck and breast area, which was taken
into account with respect to Sequence 1.
1, an offence of aggravated sexual intercourse with a child between 10 and 14
years, arose consequent upon the applicant’s
continuing criminal conduct,
when he removed Victim 1’s school uniform and underwear and then
proceeded to kiss Victim 1’s
vagina several times. He then followed this
conduct by inserting his index finger into her vagina. This continued for a
short time,
before the applicant stopped and then redressed Victim 1. The
digital penetration, by the applicant, of Victim 1, constituted the
charge of aggravated sexual assault, namely Sequence 3.
next three charges, being two offences of aggravated sexual intercourse with a
child and a further Form 1 charge of intentionally
sexually touching a child,
occurred on a different and subsequent occasion, when Victim 1 was at the
applicant’s home and under
his authority. During the course of a game of
hide and seek, Victim 1 hid between the desk and chair in a computer room. She
found by the applicant, who lifted her onto his bed and removed her school
uniform and underwear. He kissed her on the lips, neck,
breast and stomach area,
which conduct amounted to an offence of intentionally sexually touching a child,
Sequence 4, which was taken
into account on a Form 1. The applicant then held
Victim 1’s knees and kissed the inside of her vagina. This conduct
constituted
an offence of aggravated sexual intercourse, Sequence 5. The conduct
continued for a short period before the applicant inserted his
index and second
finger inside Victim 1’s vagina. This digital intercourse made Victim 1
feel very uncomfortable and she felt
pain. It continued for a short time. This
last episode constituted a further charge of aggravated sexual intercourse,
being Sequence
Investigation
2 first disclosed the applicant’s offending in 2016, when she told her
mother what had occurred. She ultimately attended
a police station in October
in early December 2021, Victim 1 disclosed to her mother that she had been
touched inappropriately by the applicant. A report
was made to the police and
Victim 1 participated in a number of recorded interviews in mid-December 2021.
police, thereafter, obtained a surveillance device warrant. A telephone call
was initiated and recorded on 16 December 2021,
during which the applicant made
some admissions, although they could not be regarded as entirely fulsome.
Remarks on Sentence
two victims made Victim Impact Statements, which were put before the Judge at
the proceedings on sentence. There was no doubt
that the applicant’s
conduct had significant adverse effects on both of the victims, which the Judge
Judge noted that the applicant had pleaded guilty at an early opportunity and
was entitled to a discount of 25% on any sentence
which might be imposed upon
his consideration, the Judge identified salient features of each offence and the
general contextual matters, such as the respective
ages of the applicant and
each victim, and the relationship between them. With respect to Victim 1, the
Judge assessed the objective
seriousness in this way:
(1) Sequence 1: mid-range of objective seriousness;
(2) Sequence 3: just above the mid-range of objective
seriousness;
(3) Sequence 5: just above the mid-range of objective
seriousness;
(4) Sequence 6: above the mid-range of objective seriousness
and towards the higher end of the range
respect of Victim 2, the Judge assessed the objective seriousness in this
(1) Sequence 4: within the mid-range of objective seriousness;
(2) Sequence 8: just below the mid-range of objective seriousness;
(3) Sequence 10: just below the mid-range of objective seriousness.
as the applicant’s subjective case was concerned, his Honour concluded
that personal deterrence was a significant factor
in the sentencing of the
applicant. He accepted that, whilst the plea of guilty entered early in the
proceedings reflected an admission
by the applicant in respect of his offending
and some element of remorse, his Honour was not persuaded that the applicant
any real remorse in the course of the pretext telephone call referred to
Honour noted that, in the expert report of the forensic psychologist, there was
a total absence of remorse in the applicant’s
engagement with the
psychologist, and his Honour found that the applicant had never recognised the
harm inflicted upon either victim.
Honour noted that the forensic psychologist had assessed the applicant at a very
low risk of re-offending or sexual recidivism.
However, his Honour found that
assessment “
difficult to accept
”. His Honour drew attention
to the significant period of over 20 years between the initial offending and the
reoffending, and
found that the psychologist’s
” that the advanced age of the applicant
substantially lowered the risk for future sexual reoffending as being:
“difficult to reconcile with the objective facts of the offender
committing the most recent offending when in his early to
his Honour did note that, given that the applicant would be sentenced to a
lengthy term of imprisonment, the risk of offending
would be lessened by reason
of his age at the time of his release back into the community. His Honour noted
that the applicant had
expressed a willingness to engage in appropriate courses
to assist with his rehabilitation, but remarked:
“... that must be done in the context of the offender having some insight
into his offending and having some expressions of
remorse, both of which are
Honour took into account the applicant’s prior good character, and noted
that his clean record was not relevant in terms
of assisting him in the
commission of the offences.
Honour made a finding of special circumstances and determined to impose an
aggregate sentence.
table which is an Attachment to this judgment substantially reproduced from the
Crown’s submissions, sets out various features
of the offending, the
sentence indicated by the Judge for each of the sequences, and the starting
point for those indicative sentences
prior to application of the 25% discount
for the applicant’s early plea of guilty.
aggregate sentence imposed by the Judge was 13 years imprisonment with a
non-parole period of 8 years and 8 months.
1 challenges the Judge’s assessment of objective seriousness.
order to succeed on this ground, given that the assessment of objective
seriousness is an evaluative exercise, upon which minds
may reasonably differ,
it is necessary for the applicant to show that the particular characterisation
given by the sentencing Judge
to an offence was not reasonably open: see
Dawkins v R
[2018] NSWCCA 278
[2006] NSWCCA
[2016] NSWCCA 66
approach to the assessment of the evaluation of the objective seriousness of any
offence accords with the statement of Simpson
J, namely that it
... should be approached intuitively and based upon the general
experience of courts in sentencing for the particular offence
[2004] NSWCCA 434
(2004) 150 A Crim R 575
particular, I note that Spigelman CJ said, at [37], in
“37. Characterisation of the degree of objective
seriousness of an offence is classically within the role of the sentencing
in performing the task of finding facts and drawing inferences from those facts.
This Court is very slow to determine such
matters for itself or to set aside the
judgment made by a first instance judge exercising a broadly based discretion.
The question
must be whether or not the particular characterisation which her
Honour gave to the circumstances of the offence was open to her
is also worth noting the remarks of Simpson J in
at [46], which
are in these terms:
“46. The assessment of the objective seriousness of an
offence is quintessentially for the sentencing judge. It is, if not
a finding of
fact, then the exercise of an evaluative process akin to fact finding or the
exercise of a discretion. As such it is
reviewable in this Court only on the
principles stated in
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
importance of respecting the role of a first instance judge should never be
underestimated. It is not the function of this Court
to substitute its own view
of objective seriousness for that of the first instance judge. That is not
because objective seriousness
is something determined by reference to the
evaluation of the credibility of witnesses, in respect of which it is
conventionally
held that the first instance judge is in a superior position. It
is because it is a fundamental aspect of the appellate system. Each
officer in the hierarchy has his or her own function, and those at appellate
level need to take care not to trespass upon
the role of those at first
Honour went on to remark that it was necessary for first instance judges to make
clear findings of fact and clear evaluations of such matters as
objective seriousness
”. She cautioned that absence of clarity in such
findings may result in the need for an appellate court to undertake the task
is also important to note that, in undertaking the assessment of objective
seriousness, the sentencing Judge is doing so with respect
to a particular
offence, but within the range of seriousness for that particular offence. In
Ibbs v The Queen
[1987] HCA 46
(1987) 163 CLR 447
at 452, the Court;
Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Toohey and Gaudron JJ, said:
“In a case of sexual assault, a sentencing judge has to consider where the
facts of the particular case lie in a spectrum at
one end of which lies the
worst type of sexual assault perpetrated by any act which constitutes sexual
penetration as defined.”
applicant submits that each of the assessments of objective seriousness made by
the Judge, respectively, for each offence, were
not reasonably open to him.
approaching the task of considering the applicant’s challenge, it is
necessary to bear in mind that describing assessments
of objective seriousness
involves the use of language which is notoriously inexact.
part of the assessment of objective seriousness, a sentencing Judge is obliged
to consider the conduct which occurred, other features
of the offence and the
surrounding circumstances. Areas for enquiry include, but are not limited to,
the age of the victim, the age
disparity between the victim and the offender,
any relationship between the victim and the offender, particularly if there is a
relationship, the period of time over which offences occurred, whether
there was any, and if so what degree of, force or coercion,
or compulsion, the
use of threats or pressure before or after the offence, and what effect the
offence had on the victim. The location
where the offences occurred is also
relevant to an assessment of the objective seriousness of the offending. This is
by no means
a comprehensive or mandatory list.
1 of the proposed appeal challenges the objective seriousness of the offences as
assessed by the sentencing Judge of the offences
against Victim 1.
the sentencing hearing, the applicant submitted that each of Sequences 1, 3, 5
and 6 fell below the mid-range of objective seriousness.
The Crown submitted
that the Judge would assess the objective seriousness of Sequences 1 and 3 as
falling above the mid-range, and
the objective seriousness of Sequences 5 and 6
above the mid-range of objective seriousness, towards the
higher end of the range
”. In each of those last two Sequences, the
Crown’s submission made it plain that it was submitting that those
fell towards the higher end of the mid-range of objective seriousness.
findings of the Judge placed the level of objective seriousness for Sequences 1,
3 and 5 as somewhere between the assessments
contended for by each of the
applicant and the Crown. With respect to Sequence 6, the Judge accepted the
Crown’s submission
in the assessment of the objective seriousness.
my view, allowing for the imprecision of language surrounding the way in which
objective seriousness may be described, it cannot
be said that the assessments
of the sentencing Judge of the objective seriousness of the Sequences relating
to Victim 1 were not
open to him. There were significant features which
justified such assessment. Whilst the particular acts themselves may have tended
to suggest that the offending conduct fell below the mid-range of objective
seriousness, when other features were taken into account,
the sentencing
Judge’s assessment of objective seriousness was clearly open to him. Those
features included the fact that,
at the time of offending, the victim was at or
around the bottom end of the prescribed age range for the offence. There was a
significant
difference in age between the applicant who was 74 or 75 years old,
and Victim 1 who was aged 10 at the time. As well, the familial
relationship of
the applicant to the victim, together with the fact that the victim was in the
care of the applicant, and, finally,
that the offending occurred at the
victim’s home, were all relevant matters to be considered in addition to
the actual conduct
itself. In combination, all of those matters fully justified
the assessment of objective seriousness which the sentencing Judge reached.
am unpersuaded that the assessments of the sentencing Judge were not open to him
and, accordingly, I would not uphold Ground 1.
Grounds 2 and
is convenient to deal with these grounds together, as the applicant’s
submissions did.
grounds, it is submitted, are related because the finding that personal
deterrence was a significant factor in the sentencing
of the applicant is
related to the sentencing Judge’s finding about the applicant’s
prospects of rehabilitation.
is necessary to set out the remarks in [94] of the sentencing judgment. His
Honour there said this:
“94 The offender’s lack of insight into his
offending, including its devastating impact on the victims, as well as
of any real remorse, does not bode well in terms of the offender’s
prospects of rehabilitation. Whilst the offender
has expressed a willingness to
engage in appropriate courses, that must be done in the context of the offender
having some insight
into his offending and having some expressions of remorse,
both of which are lacking.”
is appropriate to note that, in the preceding paragraph in the sentencing
Judge’s Remarks, he had declined to accept, as
he was entitled to, the
finding of the psychologist retained to provide a report on sentencing, that the
applicant was at a very
low risk of reoffending.
applicant submits that [94] of the sentencing remarks reflects erroneous
reasoning, in that it suggests that the sentencing Judge
concluded that the
applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation and risk of reoffending were
inextricably linked to the existence
of remorse and insight, neither of which
the sentencing Judge found the applicant to possess.
applicant submits that this reasoning supported that conclusion that significant
weight should be given by the sentencing Judge
to personal deterrence.
the extent that the applicant submits that the reasoning of the sentencing Judge
that rehabilitation was conditional upon remorse
and/or insight, such a
conclusion was in my view contrary to authority.
a matter of principle, the existence of remorse is not a prerequisite to a
finding that an offender has prospects of rehabilitation.
As Giles JA (with whom
Hidden and McCallum JJ agreed) said in
Alseedi v R
[2009] NSWCCA 185
when dealing with a sentencing Judge who had held that he could not make a
finding that an offender had good prospects of rehabilitation
continued to maintain his innocence, this:
“His [Honour’s] only stated reason for declining to find good
prospects of rehabilitation was that the appellant continued
to maintain his
innocence. That is by far from necessarily inconsistent with unlikelihood that
he would re-offend; there can be rehabilitation
without confession, and
offenders found guilty after a trial are not all but automatically deprived of a
finding of good prospects
of rehabilitation unless they then acknowledge their
guilt. ...”
position was well summarised by Bellew J (with whom Macfarlan JA and Adamson J
[2014] NSWCCA 183
, where his Honour
“Counsel for the appellant properly pointed out that a failure to express
remorse does not disentitle an offender to a finding
that his prospects of
rehabilitation are good: ... . However, remorse remains a major factor in
determining whether an offender is
likely to re-offend. Its absence renders it
difficult to reach such a determination ... .” (references omitted)
the sentencing Judge’s remarks at [94], his Honour’s remark that the
lack of any real remorse “
did not bode well
applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation is undoubtedly a finding
consistent with legal principle, and is unexceptional.
real substantive challenge is made to the following sentence, which is in these
“Whilst the offender has expressed a willingness to engage in appropriate
courses, that must be done in the context of the
offender having some insight
into his offending, and having some expressions of remorse, both of which are
sentencing Judge was entitled to find, for reasons he set out at [92], that the
applicant lacked any real remorse. It seems clear
in the sentencing remarks
under challenge by the applicant, that the sentencing Judge has accepted that
the applicant was willing
to engage in appropriate courses.
a finding was properly based upon the expert report tendered on behalf of the
applicant, from Kris North, a forensic psychologist.
In that report,
Ms North recorded this:
“21 In relation to his risk for recidivism, [the
applicant] was assessed as posing a
Level I Very Low Risk
recidivism according to a review of his risk factors, indicating a 2.8%
risk of sexual recidivism within the following
five (5) years. A risk
level within this range does not indicate a need for offence-specific
treatment and it is likely he would
be found ineligible for offence-specific
treatment programs within the custodial setting as these programs prioritize
higher risk
offenders. [FRP] was, however, willing to participate in any
courses available to him within the custodial setting and understood
he would be
placed on the Child Protection Register and subjected to supervision upon
his release into the community.”
his Honour observed that the finding of a low risk of reoffending or sexual
recidivism, set out in the paragraph to which I
have just referred, was
difficult to accept
”, he did accept that the risk of
reoffending would be diminished by the advancing years of the applicant,
particularly whilst
serving a sentence of imprisonment.
considered the submissions and, in particular, the Crown’s submissions
that the sentencing Judge was entitled to view
the applicant’s prospects
of rehabilitation as guarded, I cannot accept the Crown’s submissions that
the sentencing Judge’s
remarks, at [94], ought not be interpreted as a
finding that some insight into, or expression of remorse for, the
applicant’s
offending are preconditions to his engagement in appropriate
treatment courses and thereby are relevant to his prospects of
rehabilitation.
manner in which his Honour expressed these findings was, in my view, erroneous
as a matter of principle and was not based on any
factual material which was
before him in the sentencing proceedings. I am also persuaded that the reasoning
in the challenged passage
affected the finding of the sentencing Judge that
personal deterrence was a “
significant factor
sentencing of the applicant. Personal deterrence was undoubtedly a relevant
factor to be taken into account. However,
the erroneous conclusions expressed by
the Judge have had the Judge enter error in his consideration of the extent of
the need for
personal deterrence to be take into account in the sentencing
Accordingly,
I would uphold Grounds 2 and 3.
light of my conclusion about Grounds 2 and 3, which will result in the need to
re-sentence the applicant, it is inappropriate to
consider whether the sentence
imposed was manifestly excessive.
Resentencing
of the applicant proceeds on the basis that the evidence before this Court is
the same as the evidence before the sentencing
Judge. No additional evidence was
led on the hearing of the appeal which was sought to be taken into account in
resentence.
have earlier set out a summary of the applicant’s offending. I have also
expressed the view that the findings of the sentencing
Judge as to the objective
seriousness of the conduct were open to him. As well, it is noted that, although
there was a challenge
to the aggregate sentence as being manifestly excessive,
it was not submitted, other than by reference to the alleged errors in
the objective seriousness of the offences, that any one or other
indicative sentence was erroneous.
applicant is now 79 years old. He will turn 80 in a little under six
months’ time. The offences were undoubtedly serious.
There was a
significant age variation between the applicant and each of the victims at the
time of the offences, and, as well, a
close familial relationship between the
applicant and each of the two victims.
accept that the applicant showed little remorse for his offending, but on the
other hand, having regard to the unchallenged opinion
of Ms North, it is
appropriate to accept her finding based upon the reasoning in her report that
the applicant has a very low risk
of reoffending or sexual recidivism. I find no
difficulty in accepting that finding. After all, the applicant did not have a
history of committing criminal offences other than for the offences for
which he stood to be sentenced. Those offences occurred 20
years, or more,
apart. Particularly, as the sentencing Judge found, the applicant would be quite
advanced in age when he is released
from custody and having regard to his
willingness to undertake appropriate treatment, there is every reason to
conclude that he has
reasonable prospects of rehabilitation.
regard to these conclusions, I do not accept that the Court should reach a
conclusion that no lesser sentence than that imposed
on the applicant by the
sentencing Judge is warranted.
my view, the Court should proceed to fix an aggregate sentence which reflects
these more favourable findings.
into account all of those matters, including the need for some accumulation
– particularly between the two distinct sets
of offending by the
applicant, I would propose that the appeal be upheld and that the sentence
imposed in the District Court on 20
October 2023 be quashed and that the
applicant be sentenced in the way described below.
propose the following orders:
(1) Appeal upheld.
(2) Quash the sentence imposed by the District Court on 20 October 2023.
(3) Impose an aggregate sentence of imprisonment of 10 years and 6 months
to commence on 16 December 2021 and expire on 15 June 2032
(4) Impose a non-parole period of 7 years to commence from 16 December 2021 and
expire on 15 December 2028.
I agree with Garling J.
FRP (273 KB, rtf)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (340 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter