URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/72.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Acisulu v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATCD 72; (21 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Acisulu v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 72
Hearing Date(s):
30 August 2024; 8 November 2024
Date of Orders:
21 August 2025
Decision Date:
21 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
G Sarginson, Deputy President
(1) The respondent, Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd, is
to pay the applicant, Ali Acisulu, the sum of $3,403.24
immediately.
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW – breach of contract – Uber driver –
deactivation of access to Uber app – breach of contract
- assessment of
damages – whether sufficient evidence to prove loss
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law 2010 (NSW) (ACL)
Fair Trading Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Abdalla v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATCD 7
Bell Solar Pty
Limited T/as Sunboost v Anderson
[2021] NSWCATAP 278
[1994] HCA 48
(1994) 181 CLR 387
Najafi v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCATCD 153
[2017] HCA 2
(2017) 340 ALR 368
Rehman v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd
Sabouni v Revelop Building and Developments Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC
Singh v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATCD 4
The Owners-Strata Plan
No 2661 v Selkirk
[2024] NSWSC 760
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Ali Acisulu (Applicant)
Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd (Respondent)
Representation:
Applicant (self-represented)
Solicitors:
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00013018
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
proceedings involve a claim by a former Uber driver for $10,000 in compensation
or damages. The applicant alleges that he was
“wrongfully
terminated” by Uber from having access to its service application (Uber
proceedings in the Tribunal were filed on 10 January 2024. In the application
filed with the Tribunal, the applicant states that
he is an independent
contractor, who entered into an agreement with Uber in 2019. The application
states that Uber had terminated
his access to its app on 7 February 2021 on the
basis that the applicant had verbally abused a customer and made threatening
application states that the applicant was earning $749.09 per week as a driver
on the Uber platform. He denies that he breached
the Uber Community Guidelines,
and asserts he was not given a fair opportunity to deny the allegation.
proceedings were listed for a directions hearing before Rosser PM on 16 February
2024. The proceedings were set down for hearing,
with procedural directions for
the filing and serving of documentary evidence. Further, the following relevant
procedural directions
“8. The Tribunal notes that it is not in dispute that the claim is a
consumer claim and has been lodged within time the Tribunal
further notes that
the applicant seeks damages of $10,000. The issues for determination will
(a) did the respondent breach (or repudiate) its contract with the applicant by
deactivating the account?
(b) if so, what loss has the applicant suffered as a result of the breach or
repudiation?
9. The parties have for legal representation, on condition that the respondent
is not to make an application for costs if it is successful.”
Applicant’s Points of Claim and Documentary Evidence
8 March 2024, the applicant filed his documents.
documents were:
of Claim. The Points of Claim alleged that the applicant “agreed to the
Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd Uber B.V. Services Agreement
in approximately 2019”
and began “transportation services” as an Uber “driver
partner”. The applicant
states he signed the agreement electronically. The
applicant states that he was “making $749.09 per week net”.
applicant alleges that Uber had terminated the service agreement on 7 February
2021. The basis of the termination was that the
applicant had allegedly breached
the Community Guidelines due to “verbally abusing a rider and making
threatening remarks.”
The applicant states that Uber had not provided him
with a reasonable opportunity to dispute the allegation for appealed the
to terminate his access to the app.
applicant claims $10,000 in damages or compensation for financial loss due to
the alleged wrongful termination of his access to
the Uber App. He does not seek
reinstatement of access to the Uber App.
Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd and Uber B.V. Service Agreement (updated 1 December
Uber Community Guidelines Australia and New Zealand.
Statutory Declaration of the applicant dated 6 March 2024. The statutory
declaration is brief. It states the “accusations
made against me are all
false and not valid;” that the applicant “always treated by
passengers with the utmost respect
and integrity and have followed Uber’s
Community Guidelines and Policies;” and that the applicant had
“frequently
encounter intoxicated riders who would complain about the
surge pricing and lodge a report in order to get a refund and a free
email from the applicant to that email states that on approximately 7 February
2021, Uber restricted the applicants access to the
platform on the basis of a
“false accusation” that he had verbally abused a rider and made
threatening remarks. The email
states the allegation was false, and it was
“common practice” customers to make false allegations against
obtain a free trip or other discount. The email states that the
applicant seeks to be reinstated to access to the Uber App within
10 days, or he
would commence legal proceedings.
exchange through the Uber App between Uber and the applicant. On 6 February
2021, the applicant received the following:
This is Sam from the Community Operations team at Uber. We have received a
concerning report from your rider from a recent trip where
you were involved in
a verbal altercation. Due to the nature of this feedback, with temporarily
removed your access to the Uber app
while we investigate further. If you have
any information as to why this feedback may have been received, you can let us
replying to this message and will take this on board. We look forward to
hearing from you.”
applicant responded as follows:
“I went to pick them up there was six of them they were drunk and were
still drinking and I told them they can’t drink
in the car and they
weren’t wearing masks and refused to wear it and also want to sit in the
front seat which they’re
not allowed to do and they were arguing with me
and I told them sorry I can’t keep six people in the car as no one can sit
in the front seat due to Covid. Then I started driving away and they swore at me
and threw the beer bottles behind me and ran after
the car and threatened to
bash me. The neighbour has witnessed the whole thing.”
applicant then sent a more detailed response as follows:
“I went to pick up the passengers and there was six of them and they were
all drunk. They still had bottles and drinks in their
hands so I advise them
they can’t drink them in the car. They were also not wearing masks and
were refusing to wear them when
I advise them of the Covid safe Uber policy.
Because there were six of them one want to sit in the front seat. I advise them
couldn’t sit in the front seat as per the Covid guidelines bylaw.
This is when all the passengers got hostile and angry and
began verbally abusing
me with swearing at me. I was fearful of my safety as they were not cooperating
with the rule so I advise
them to get another Uber that can fit them as per the
guidelines and began to drive off. When I was driving off they threatened to
bash me and some of the passengers through the beer bottles at my car. I felt
very unsafe as they also began chasing after my vehicle.
The neighbours of the
passengers witness the whole incident.”
7 February 2021, Uber sent the following to the applicant:
This is Sam here from the Community Operations team at Uber. We received a
report from one of your riders that you verbally abused
them and made
threatening remarks towards them. We have looked into this matter further and as
a result of our review we will be
ending our partnership with you effective as
of this email. It was not a swift decision as we value each and every driver who
to partner with Uber. Reports of behaviour of this nature are extremely
concerning and are in direct violation of our Community Guidelines;
as such, in
the interests of maintaining the safety of all users of the Uber app a decision
was made to deactivate your account as
a result of this feedback. We take the
welfare of our riders and driver-partners very seriously here at Uber so we hope
you can understand
our position. This decision is final, please do not attempt
to contact Uber again regarding this matter. We wish you the best of
the future and thank you for your time using the Uber app.”
email sent by the applicant on the Uber App dated 23 September 2023. The
applicant asserts the decision to terminate his access
to the Uber App was
unfair, and denies that he verbally abused any customer or engaged in
threatening conduct. The applicant sought
reactivation of his account, or he
will take legal proceedings.
email from Uber dated 23 September 2023 from “Michael” stating that
Uber had “reviewed your concern” and
had “escalated this
matter to our community operations team”.
email from the applicant on 23 September 2023 a response by Uber to his demand
to re-activate the Uber account.
email from “Ruby” of Uber dated 24 September 2023. That email states
as follows:
Thank you for letting us know you want to have your deactivation reviewed. We
have looked into this and unfortunately have not decided
not to proceed with
your request. Based on our review we see that you have not provided any further
information since your last review
request, where the decision was to uphold
your deactivation. We appreciate your time using the Uber in which you the best
future endeavours.”
screenshot of the applicants driver profile on Uber. The profile stated that the
applicant had done 5188 trips and had a 4.84 Star
document purporting to be a summary of the applicant’s earnings before the
deactivation of the Uber account, and after deactivation
of the Uber account.
The document is prepared in a table form. The document asserts that the
applicant had:
(1) Gross earnings prior to deactivation of the Uber driver account on 7
February 2021 of $65,225.80.
(2) Deductions (Uber service fee; other charges from Uber; and charges from
third parties such as tolls) of $23,923.90.
(3) Net earnings of $41,292.87 net weekly earnings from Uber of $794.09 per week
(calculated as $41,292.87 divided by 52).
(4) Nil earnings from Uber after 7 February 2021.
Uber “Tax Summary for the Period FY 2019/2020”. That document stated
that for the relevant period the applicant had
“transportation
income” of $64,742; “other income” of $483; and “other
potential deductions”.
The “other potential deductions” were
“Uber service fee (transportation leads) of $15,066.38; “other
from Uber” of $1,247.80; “charges from third parties
(tolls/airport/government) of $7,618.75 and “on trip mileage”-17,771
Uber “Tax Summary for the Period 2021/3”. That document only shows
one fair income on 6 February 2021 (total amount
Respondent’s Documents and Written
Submissions
respondent filed documents and submissions on 10 April 2024 and 1 July
documents filed on 10 April 2024 are superseded by the documents and submissions
of 1 July 2024. Accordingly, those documents
and submissions are detailed.
documents and submissions are as follows:
of Ms H. McCormick dated 1 July 2024. The affidavit states Ms McCormick is a
“Solicitor engaged by Uber” and
her affidavit is based on her
“review of Uber’s internal records related to this matter and the
enquiries I have personally
made of Uber in relation to factual matters made in
these current proceedings lodged by the Applicant.”
the affidavit does not set out the ‘personal enquiries’ made with
any witness other than an email exchange with
“PFK Sydney (Uber’s
registered office)” on 17 and 18 January 2024.
it sets out Uber’s policies; procedures; the applicant’s user
‘star ratings;’ and summarises the complaints
is asserted the following complaints about the applicant were
(1) 22 November 2019-the applicant was verbally aggressive towards other drivers
and told the passenger he would drop the passenger
off in the middle of the
street if there was excessive traffic at the destination, which made the
passenger feel unsafe.
(2) 11 March 2020-the applicant drove erratically and did not know where he was
(3) 8 June 2020-the applicant was “very rude” and left the passenger
in an “unsafe space”.
(4) 9 July 2020-the applicant was verbally aggressive and swearing at other
drivers and told the passenger he does not accept dogs,
despite the passenger
booking a pet friendly Uber.
(5) 15 August 2020-the applicant was verbally aggressive and swearing to towards
other drivers.
(6) 24 October 2020-the applicant had to be asked by the passenger to wear a
(7) On 13 December 2020, the applicant was “rude” to a passenger
over the phone and “cancelled the job” after
the passenger had
walked to the agreed pick up point. The message from the passenger to Uber
stated the driver was “rude”
and “unprofessional”
because: “The driver was in the correct spot when we try to call him, he
was really rude,
yelling us by phone. We coordinate to walk where he was but
when we arrived the place he just cancelled the job. I am really disappointed
with the service because we are with my parents who are 70 and 75 years old
walking back for nothing. I am expecting to receive my
(8) On 6 February 2021, the applicant had made racist remarks towards other
drivers and made the passenger “uncomfortable”.
The complaint on the
Uber App from the passenger relevantly states “the driver made several
racist remarks during the journey”.
There are no details of the
“racist remarks”. There is are no details of the applicant refusing
to pick up passengers.
affidavit also contains:
(1) Uber Services Agreement.
(2) Uber Community Guidelines
(3) Map details of some of the trips of the applicant that were subject to
complaints.
respondent also provided written submissions dated 1 July 2024. Those
submissions asserted that the applicant had failed to prove
any cause of action
and failed to prove any loss. The submissions refer to two unreported decisions
of General Members of the Tribunal
Hearings on 30 August
2024 and 8 November 2024
applicant appeared and had assistance from a Turkish interpreter booked by the
Tribunal. A Solicitor, Ms Murray-Baptista, appeared
the hearing on 30 August 2024, the documentary evidence of the parties was
admitted into evidence, subject to weight and relevance.
Ms McCormick was not
present, but it was stated she was available for questioning by audio-visual
link. The applicant did not seek
to question her.
applicant gave evidence by affirmation. He denied the allegations made that
formed the basis the decision of Uber to terminate
his access to the Uber
Application. In particular, he denied the alleged conduct on 6 February 2021,
and stated that 7 persons had
tried to get into the vehicle (when it only had
the capacity for 6); the passengers had alcohol with them; and the was
with bottles.
applicant stated that he understood, and had complied with, the Uber Community
Guidelines and the complaints against him had no
foundation. He believed they
were false complaints motivated by passengers who sought to obtain a credit or a
applicant was cross examined on 30 August 2024. He remained steadfast that he
had not breached the Uber Community Guidelines and
his termination was
unjustified. The applicant stated that he had waited approximately 2 years and
11 months from the date of his
deactivation from the Uber app to bring
proceedings in the Tribunal because he was working as a driver with Didi. He
accepted that
he had not provided any earning documentation from Didi. The
applicant stated he had not been driving for Didi at the time he had
driving for Uber.
Unfortunately,
the Turkish interpreter had to leave before the hearing was able to conclude.
Accordingly, the hearing was adjourned
part heard.
hearing resumed on 8 November 2024. A Turkish interpreter was present throughout
the hearing. There was further cross examination
of the applicant. The applicant
continued to deny the conduct that Uber had relied upon to deactivate his access
to the Uber app.
There were certain events that he asserted he could not
remember. Both parties then made closing
submissions.
Consideration
some unknown reason, the written submissions of the respondent did not refer to
a number of reported decisions of the Tribunal
involving similar disputes. Those
decisions are
Najafi v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCATCD 153
Rehman v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATCD 3
Singh v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATCD 4
Abdalla v Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATCD 7
). In each of those decisions, the Tribunal held the relationship
between the applicant and the respondent constituted a consumer
claim to which
the Tribunal had jurisdiction under
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) (FT Act).
Tribunal proceedings were filed in January 2024, less than 3 years from the date
that the applicant was deactivated from the Uber
App. The potential cause of
action of the applicant are breach of contract (
) and unfair small business contract terms under
Australian Consumer Law 2010
(NSW) (ACL)
). The proceedings have been brought within the 3 year limitation
period in s 79 of the FT Act.
, the Tribunal set
out in detail the Uber Service Agreement and the Uber Community Guidelines.
There is no material difference in
the Uber Service Agreement and Uber Community
Guidelines in this matter, and it is unnecessary to set those provisions out
for the purpose of this decision.
this matter, no argument was advanced by the applicant that the Uber Services
Agreement contained unfair contract terms. In
, the issue of
whether certain terms of the agreement were unfair contract terms under ss 23-25
of the ACL (NSW) was raised and Robertson
SM stated, without having to
conclusively determine the issue, at [110] that:
“...to the extent that the last sentence of clause 4 of the Services
Agreement permits the respondents to deactivate or restrict
access to the Driver
App without notice or cause, or on the basis of a complaint the details of which
have not been disclosed to
the driver and the veracity of which has not been
tested, that provision is void as an unfair contract term.”
the operation of ss 23-25 of the ACL was not raised in this matter it is
unnecessary and inappropriate to consider those provisions.
the Tribunal held that breach of the Service
Agreement by Uber when determining that the driver not be reinstated would
breach of contract, and (subject to proof of loss) establish a cause
of action to which the Tribunal. In
, the Tribunal stated as follows
(at [147]-[152] and [160]):
“When assessed objectively, the terms of the contractual agreement require
that the following occur before a termination is
legally justified under cl.
16(b) of the Services Agreement:
There is a material breach of the terms of the agreement, which includes the
Community Guidelines.
The breach is sufficient, by reason of either the number of breaches for the
seriousness of the particular breach to justify termination.
If a review is conducted because the driver has requested a review or
reconsideration, that review must be conducted in a way that
genuinely considers
the reasons and explanation put forward by the driver as to whether or not there
is a material breach or breaches
sufficient to justify termination of the
agreement. Accordingly, whether or not a “material breach” has
occurred, and
an internal review of the decision to deactivate access to the app
must involve consideration of the following matters:
(a) The nature of the alleged breach.
(b) The number of alleged breaches.
(c) The number of the alleged breaches in comparison to the number of trips
performed by the driver and the drivers overall rating
by passengers.
(d) The drivers explanation in response to the alleged breaches.
In construing the terms of the contract, including implying into the contract
requirements for a genuine review of the decision to
do to deactivate on the
merits, the Tribunal is not suggesting that the terms of the contract, or
business efficacy, require an extensive
or elaborate review process of a type
equivalent to a review of an administrative decision by a government department.
However, there
must be some minimum or threshold standard for the efficacy of a
review, otherwise the contractual term is devoid of any meaning.
The contract between the parties is a commercial agreement. It is arguable that
the bargaining power of the parties is unequal. However
any legal provisions
dealing with legislation that provides a remedy to unconscionable conduct, or
unfair contract terms, are separate
issues to interpretation of terms of the
contract and whether or not the contract has been breached.
Further, just as the safety and comfort of passengers is important, so is the
decision by the respondents whether or not to terminate
the Services Agreement
based on “material breach” by the driver. In this matter, the
applicant had been working for over
3 years full time driving for Uber, and the
decision to terminate caused his income to immediately cease.
Rehman v Rasier Pacific Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATCD 3
Ellis SC SM did not set out in detail contractual principles in respect of
interpreting the terms of the contract. However, the
Senior Member made the
following comments at [143]:
“It is convenient to here note that Uber did not contend that the words
in its sole discretion”
in the Agreement meant that any
decision as to deactivation was a matter for Uber, did not have to be
reasonable, and could not be
reviewed. Indeed, the fact that Uber suggested its
decision was reasonable provide support the two points: first, that the decision
to deactivate must be made on reasonable grounds; secondly, that the decision to
deactivate can be reviewed by the Tribunal.”
Although broad comments regarding “reasonable grounds” may be apt to
conflate administrative law principles with contractual
principles, the approach
taken by the Tribunal in this matter to construing the terms of the contract is
not obviously inconsistent
with the approach taken by Ellis SC SM in
. If there are no reasons provided as to why the review sought by
the driver was rejected, it is difficult to conclude that a genuine
The Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has proved, on the balance of
probabilities that he was not in breach of an essential
term of the contract or
had committed sufficient breaches of non-essential terms as of August 2023. The
respondents were not justified
in terminating the Service Agreement.
Accordingly, the respondents have repudiated the agreement, and the applicant is
entitled to
damages if loss caused by the breach is proved.”
this matter, the applicant denies the conduct alleged by the passengers. The
conduct does not involve serious matters such as inappropriate
sexual comments
and sexual assault under the provisions of the Community Guidelines. No detailed
dangerous driving complaints are
made. The complaints, as set out on the Uber
App, are vague. There is no evidence from any of the persons who complained,
brief comments in the Uber app. The number of complaints are moderate
in the context of the amount of driving performed by the applicant
relevant period. The respondent did not provide any evidence that there was any
genuine internal consideration or review
of the decision to terminate the
respondent from access to the Uber app.
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has proved breach of contract by the
respondent in respect of the decisions to terminate
access to the Uber App and
refuse to reinstate access.
Assessment of Damages
was pointed out in
Services Agreement between the parties allows Uber to terminate the agreement
without any breach of the Service Agreement
or Uber Community Guidelines with 30
days’ notice.
Accordingly,
if damages are proved, they are limited to 30 days of net loss of income (i.e.
gross income less expenses) for the reasons
discussed in
the Tribunal set out the
applicable legal principles for damages for breach of contract. Those principles
are well established (see,
for example,
Bell Solar Pty Limited T/as Sunboost
[2021] NSWCATAP 278
). Contractual damages are
assessed from the perspective of putting the innocent party in the position it
should have been had the
breach not occurred and the contract performed.
However, if a party fails to prove loss caused by the breach, it may either only
be awarded nominal damages; or no damages at all. A respondent may also prove
that the applicant’s conduct is the cause of
Black J stated in
Sabouni v Revelop Building and Developments Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC 31
“The damages to which RBD is entitled...is the monetary sum which, so far
as money can, represents “fair and adequate
compensation for the loss or
injury” which it sustained by reason of that breach or repudiation:
Commonwealth v Amann Aviation
[1991] HCA 54
(1991) 174 CLR 64
at 116 per Deane J. The
Court must do the best it can to make a reliable assessment of damages, where
damages are difficult to assess,
including where a party has failed to lead the
best evidence of damages: Commonwealth of Australia v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
at 83, per Mason CJ and Dawson J, 125 per Deane J, 153 per Gaudron J. In
Uszok v Henley Properties (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 31
, Beazley JA
observed that:
“Where there has been an actual loss of some sort, the common law does not
permit difficulties of estimating the loss in money
to defeat the only remedy it
provides for breach of contract, an award of damages....Such damages should not
be nominal only, notwithstanding
that the award may be difficult to
assess...” (Citations omitted)
On the other hand, the case law also recognises that damages must be proved with
a degree of precision which reflects the proof that
is reasonably available to
the parties: State of New South Wales v Moss
[2000] NSWCA 133
(2000) 54 NSWLR 536
(Granny Smith) Pty Ltd v Thiess Contractors Pty Ltd
[2003] HCA 10
(2003) 77 ALJR 768
In Schindler Lifts Australia Pty Ltd v Debelak
[1989] FCA 311
(1989) 89 ALR 275
at 319, Pincus
J noted that “if the evidence called on behalf of [the plaintiff] fails to
provide any rational foundation for
a proper estimate of damages, the Court
should simply decline to make one”. That approach was approved by Brooking
(Vic) Pty Ltd v Tsiloglou
[1994] VicRp 16
[1994] 1 VR 237
at 243 and by the Court of
Appeal in Troulis v Vamvoukakis
[1998] NSWCA 237
where Gleeson CJ observed that,
where damages were susceptible of evidentiary proof, but there was an absence of
raw material to
which good sense may be applied, “[j]ustice does not
dictate that ... a figure should be plucked out of the air”. That
has been approved in subsequent cases, including McCrohan v Harith
[2010] NSWCA
, where McColl JA (with whom Campbell JA and Handley AJA agreed) held
that an estimate of damages, in the nature of a “guess”,
be made where precise evidence of the damages suffered could have been adduced,
but was not. I followed that decision
in Re Hair Industrie Penrith Pty Ltd, Hair
Industrie Merrylands Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWSC 1578
, on which I have drawn
for the summary which appears above.”
is well established that evidence is to be assessed on the basis of the ability
of a particular party to adduce evidence on the
relevant issue and that the
Tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of the occurrence or existence of a fact
before it can be found
[1994] HCA 48
(1994) 181 CLR 387
391-392 and
[2017] HCA 2
(2017) 340 ALR 368
this matter, the applicant has provided limited evidence of his loss of net
income (gross income less business expenses). If his
figure of $794.09 net loss
per week was accepted his daily net loss is $113.44, and the applicant’s
damages are $3,403.24 (30
days of net income), subject to the Tribunal being
satisfied he sustained 30 days of loss.
applicant’s 2019-2020 income from Uber was the basis of assessment of
loss, his yearly net income from Uber was $41,292.07.
That equates to $794.08
per week, so there is no material difference to the amount that the applicant
put forward as his calculation
difficulty the applicant faces is that he has provided no financial or income
records regarding what he has earned from Didi and
when he started to earn
income from Didi. As discussed previously, the applicant’s oral evidence
at the hearing was that he
started as a Didi driver after he ceased as an Uber
driver and he did not drive for both Uber and Didi at the same time. The
did not provide any bank statements or income tax returns. His
evidence to establish loss is dependent upon his documentary evidence
earnings from Uber and his oral evidence.
Uber did not explore in cross examination to any extent when the applicant
started to work for Didi or how much he was earning.
If the Tribunal is
satisfied the applicant has provided sufficient evidence to establish loss
caused by the respondent’s breach
of contract beyond mere speculation or
guesswork (even if the evidence is imperfect and the loss is difficult to
estimate), the onus
shifts to Uber to establish that the conduct of the
applicant is the cause of his loss, such as not driving for Didi and earning
income from Didi. As Leeming JA stated in
The Owners-Strata Plan No 2661 v
[2024] NSWSC 760
The reference to
British Westinghouse
is to Viscount
Haldane’s statement that in a claim for breach of contract the plaintiff
is under a “duty” to take
all reasonable steps to mitigate
its loss. That language is not to be understood as representing the
law in Australia, even in cases
of breach of contract. I am bound by
what was said by the Court of Appeal in
Karacominakis v Big Country
Developments Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWCA 313
10 BPR 18,235
A plaintiff who acts unreasonably in failing to minimise his loss from the
defendant’s breach of contract will have his damages
reduced to the extent
to which, had he acted reasonably, his loss would have been less. This is often
misleadingly referred to as
a duty to mitigate, although the plaintiff is not
under a positive duty. The plaintiff does not have to show that he has fulfilled
his so-called duty, and the onus is on the defendant to show that he has not and
the extent to which he has not (
TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd v Hayden Enterprises
(1989) 16 NSWLR 130).
Since the defendant is a wrongdoer, in
determining whether the plaintiff has acted unreasonably a high standard of
conduct will not
be required, and the plaintiff will not be held to have acted
unreasonably simply because the defendant can suggest other and more
conduct if it was reasonable for the plaintiff to do what he did (
Portugal v Waterlow and Sons Ltd
[1932] UKHL 1
Pilkington v Wood
[1953] Ch 770
Investments Pty Ltd v Forma Stereo Consultants Pty Ltd
That is why the Court of Appeal has, repeatedly, made reference to
the “so-called” duty to mitigate:
Galafassi v Kelly
(2014) 87 NSWLR 119
Edwin Davey Pty Ltd v Boulos Holdings Pty
[2022] NSWCA 65
20 BPR 42,355
Bak v Glenleigh Homes Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWCA
Considering
that the applicant is limited to 30 days of loss, the evidence of the applicant,
although not extensive, is sufficient
for the Tribunal to be satisfied that
there was a 30 day period after 7 February 2021 where he would have driven for
Uber had he
not been wrongfully deactivated from the Uber App and was not
otherwise driving for Didi. The Tribunal is not satisfied the applicant’s
conduct is the cause of his loss.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is satisfied that he has sustained loss in the amount of
(1) The respondent, Raiser Pacific Pty Ltd, is to pay the applicant, Ali
Acisulu, the sum of $3,403.24 immediately.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (295 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter