URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/267.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barr v Macquarie University [2025] NSWCATAD 267; (29 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Barr v Macquarie University
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 267
Hearing Date(s):
27 August 2025
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Decision Date:
29 October 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
D Ziegler, Senior Member
(1) Leave is granted under
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) for the applicant’s complaint of direct disability discrimination
against the respondent, in relation to the decision
to refuse the
applicant’s application for re-enrolment in its PhD program, to
(2) Leave is refused under
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) for the balance of the applicant’s
complaints to proceed.
(3) The applicant’s “Application
for Miscellaneous Matters” filed on 13 June 2025 is dismissed.
Catchwords:
HUMAN RIGHTS — discrimination — equal opportunity —
disability discrimination — leave required for complaint
— whether complaint lacking in substance — principles applying to
grant of leave.
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE — whether a non-publication
order should be made.
Legislation Cited:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Community Services (Complaints,
Reviews and Monitoring) Act 1993
Victims Rights and Support Act 2013
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Cases Cited:
ACE v State of NSW (TAFE Commission and DET (No 2)
[2011] NSWADT
Aljami v Macquarie University
[2019] NSWSC 1026
Bassili v The Star Pty
[2016] NSWCATAD 167
Carroll v Department of Family and Community Services
[2015] NSWCATAD 82.
Carroll v Tokdogan
[2015] NSWCATAD 200
CBL v Sydney
Water Corporation
[2017] NSWCATAD 220
Chalker v Murrays Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWCATAD 282
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
The University of Technology Sydney
[2018] NSWCATAD 113
Commissioner of
Corrective Services v Aldridge
[2000] NSWADTAP 5
Commissioner of Corrective
Services v Aldridge (EOD)
[2000] NSWADTAP 5
Dutt v Central Coast Area Health
[2002] NSWADT 133
Ekermawi v Administrative Decisions Tribunal of New
South Wales
[2009] NSWSC 143
Frost v TAFE NSW (No 2)
[2019] NSWCATAD
GVQ v Children’s Guardian
[2025] NSWCATAD 160
Jones v Ekermawi
[2009] NSWCA 388
Kostov v Ecclesia Housing Limited (No 3)
[2018] NSWCATAP
Langley v Niland
[1981] 2 NSWLR 104
Pendrick v Commissioner of Police,
NSW Police Force (No 2)
[2022] NSWCATAD 27
Prakash v Bobb Borg Enterprises
[1999] NSWADT 73
Seltsam Pty Ltd v McGuiness
[2000] NSWCA 29
49 NSWLR 262
State of New South Wales (Justice Health) v Dezfouli
NSWADTAP 69
Wecker v The Delegate (the decision maker) to the President of
the NSW Anti-Discrimination Board
[2014] NSWCA 372
Wickstead v Browne
[1992] NSWCA 272
Wong v Office of the Board of Studies NSW (No 4)
[2012] NSWADT
Xu v Sydney West Area Health Service
[2006] NSWADT 3
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Philippa Barr (Applicant)
Macquarie University (Respondent)
Representation:
Self Represented (Applicant)
Bartier Perry Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00222180
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Barr (the applicant) is currently an undergraduate student and former staff
member of Macquarie University. The dispute involves
decisions by the University
to refuse Ms Barr’s application for re-enrolment in its PhD program, to
ban her from part of the
University’s campus, and to suspend her
undergraduate student enrolment. The applicant alleges that the
University’s
conduct involves disability discrimination and victimisation
in breach of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) (the Act).
issues I must decide are:
(1) whether to grant leave for the applicant’s complaints of disability
discrimination and victimisation against the University
to proceed before the
Tribunal; and
(2) whether to make an order prohibiting the publication or broadcasting of the
applicant’s name and any information that might
enable the applicant to be
identified in the proceedings.
the hearing the applicant confirmed the scope of her complaints for the purposes
of her application for leave to be as follows:
(1) a complaint of discrimination on the ground of disability in relation to:
(a) the decision of the University made on 21 March 2023 to refuse the
applicant’s PHD re-enrolment application;
(b) the decision of the University made on 7 March 2023 to ban the applicant
from the University’s “Arts Precinct”;
(c) the decision of the University made on 14 June 2023 to suspend the
applicant’s undergraduate student enrolment; and
(2) a victimisation complaint in relation to the decision to suspend the
applicant’s undergraduate student enrolment made on
14 June 2023.
the reasons that follow I have decided to grant leave for part of the
applicant’s complaint to proceed in the Tribunal and
to refuse leave for
the balance of her complaint. I have also decided to refuse the application for
a non-publication order.
The application for leave and applicable
person may make a complaint to the President of Anti-Discrimination NSW (the
President) on their own behalf alleging that a person
has contravened a
provision of the Act:
s 87A(1)(a)(i)
of the Act.
12 September 2024 the applicant lodged a complaint with the President against
the respondent (the University) and another party
alleging discrimination and
victimisation.
President accepted for investigation:
(1) One complaint of disability discrimination in the statutory area of
education, against the University, for events/conduct alleged
to have occurred
from 4 March 2023 to 26 July 2024;
(2) One complaint of victimisation in the statutory area of education, against
the University, for events/conduct alleged to have
occurred from 4 March 2023 to
26 July 2024.
President declined to accept the balance of the applicant’s complaint
s 89B(2)(b)
of the Act).
the President decides to accept a complaint under
, she must investigate
that complaint:
of the Act. If the President is satisfied at any time of
the investigation that the complaint is lacking in substance, she may decline
the complaint in whole or in part:
s 92(1)(a)(i).
A complaint will be "lacking
in substance" if it can be demonstrated that there exists no factual basis for
the allegations or that
the complaint is “not reasonably arguable”:
Langley v Niland
[1981] 2 NSWLR 104
Chalker v Murrays
Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWCATAD 282
23 April 2025 the President decided to decline the complaint under
s 92(1)(a)(i)
of the Act, on the ground that the complaint was lacking in
such circumstances the President must refer the complaint to the Tribunal if she
has received a written request from the complainant
as here, a complaint is referred to the Tribunal at the request of a complainant
, that complaint may not be the subject of proceedings before the
Tribunal without the leave of the Tribunal:
of the Act.
Tribunal does not have power to review the initial decision made by the
President to decline part of the complaint under
s 89B(2)(b):
Act. See also,
Wecker v The Delegate (the decision maker) to the President of
the NSW Anti-Discrimination Board
[2014] NSWCA 372.
Tribunal has power to grant, or to refuse to grant, leave for that part of the
complaint accepted for investigation by the President
and referred to the
Tribunal under
of the Act:
of the Act.
gives the Tribunal an unfettered discretion to grant leave for a complaint
to proceed:
Jones v Ekermawi
[2009] NSWCA 388
Ekermawi v Administrative Decisions Tribunal of New South Wales
(“Ekermawi”). That discretion must be exercised
having regard to the purpose of the legislative scheme established by
and be guided by the consideration that the refusal of leave will finally
determine the complainant’s rights under
that scheme:
at [32]. The question of leave involves evaluating whether
it is “fair and just” to grant or refuse leave in the particular
circumstances of the case:
at [36], [37];
In deciding whether to grant leave, the Tribunal may have regard to the grounds
which the President took into account in
declining a complaint under
at [38] explained what is meant
by fairness and justice in the context of the discretion
Anti-Discrimination Act
That requires the position of both parties to be considered. Whatever the
contest between the parties might be, the question of leave
must be determined
having in mind the purposes of the Act, which includes precluding unlawful
discrimination and to permit those
who have been so discriminated against, a
remedy. Given that the legislation does not require all complaints to be
investigated and
dealt with, this means that while on the one hand, an obviously
meritorious complaint will not be refused leave, where, for example
other, it is apparent that the complaint lacks substance, or where the
complaint is already being redressed elsewhere, leave
may be refused, if
that is what justice dictates.
an act is done for two or more reasons, and one of the reasons consists of
unlawful discrimination under the Act (whether or not
it is the dominant or a
substantial reason for doing the act), then, for the purposes of the Act, the
act is taken to be done for
that reason:
of the Act.
applicant’s evidence must be taken at its highest, that is, everything the
applicant has put in evidence is accepted as
true and then the Tribunal
determines whether she could possibly succeed in her complaint:
Bobb Borg Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWADT 73
parties have a lengthy and complex association. The President’s report,
including attachments, is close to 600 pages in
length and the parties submitted
several hundred pages of additional materials prior to the leave hearing. It is
not necessary for
the purposes of this leave decision to delve into all the
details of the parties’ history. I have set out below a summary of
relevant background insofar as it is relevant to the application for leave.
1999 and 2004 the applicant was enrolled as an anthropology undergraduate in the
University’s Faculty of Arts.
June 2016 the applicant enrolled in the University’s PhD program through
its Faculty of Arts. She withdrew from the PhD program
on 12 July 2021. During
that five-year period of enrolment, the applicant had been granted several
extensions of time and leaves
of absence.
applicant was a staff member within the University’s Faculty of Arts, in
various roles and capacities, from July 2021 to
17 February 2023.
December 2022, after having been unwell for several months, the applicant was
diagnosed with a health condition. The applicant’s
general practitioner
wrote several letters to the University advising that the applicant required
accommodations, such as extensions
for academic deadlines and ergonomic
adjustments.
18 February 2023 to 14 May 2023 the applicant was neither a student nor a
permanent, part-time or casual member of staff. However,
the applicant had a
connection with the University during that period in various capacities: she was
an alumna of the University;
she delivered a paid lecture at the University, and
she was in what she describes as a “pre-enrolment” phase which
among other things, having meetings with potential PhD supervisors.
24 February 2023 the applicant contacted Professor Greg Downey (the Interim Dean
of the School of Social Sciences) and Chris Houston
(the applicant’s
nominated principal supervisor for her PhD thesis) regarding a request for an
ergonomic adjustment (a large
monitor) due to a health condition.
the same day Professor Downey wrote an email to Chris Houston. It is not
necessary to set out the full content of that email. In
summary, Professor
Downey said that the applicant was neither employed by the University nor a
student, that she was causing significant
problems for HR due to “the
number of people that she is harassing”, that there was discussion about
terminating her
and not allowing her to re-enrol, that her expulsion from the
University was likely, and that he would not be supporting the applicant
access to personnel or resources on campus. The email concludes by saying
“as far as I can tell, the best case scenario
for her is that she goes
away and finishes her thesis. Virtually everything she touches turns into a
burned bridge”.
an email from Professor Downey to two staff members dated 27 February 2023
(which appears to be in relation to a proposed meeting
with the applicant)
Professor Downey states “Philippa is unpredictable (as folks with her
condition often are). I do not know
if she will actually show up.”
7 March 2023 the University sent a letter to the applicant formally requesting
that she not attend the main work areas of the University’s
Arts without prior written approval from the Executive Dean. At that time the
applicant was not a student. The reason
given for the request was the
applicant’s conduct in dealing with other staff. The letter stated
“For several months
you have sent multiple emails to staff members setting
out a range of allegations and demanding particular outcomes... The nature
number of your emails is harassing and distressing to certain members of the
Faculty.” The letter went on to say “we
are prepared to revisit this
request later in the year or of course if at any stage you are enrolled as a
student or employed in
the Faculty”.
applicant made a formal application for readmission to the University’s
PhD program on 8 March 2023. At that time the University’s
required an application for readmission to be made within two years of
withdrawal. The application for re-enrolment was
made within that timeframe.
applicant had previously made enquiries as to whether the two-year time limit
could be extended by nine months. On 31 October
2022 Associate Professor Fiona
Miller wrote to the Faculty of Arts Associate Dean expressing her support for an
extension, citing
the applicant’s “serious health issues as well as
the stress and disruptions of Covid-lockdowns”. On 31 October
Associate Dean responded, copying the applicant, stating that she would be happy
to support this request. Despite this,
the applicant did not apply for an
extension and made her application for re-enrolment within the two-year
applicant says that in the months leading up to her application for re-enrolment
into the PhD program, two faculty members - Chris
Lyttelton and Chris Houston -
had communicated to her that they were willing to supervise her PhD.
Nonetheless, on about 21 March
2023 the University informed the applicant that
her application for readmission to the PhD program was refused due to a lack of
availability
of a suitable supervisor with the necessary expertise to facilitate
the research program.
6 April 2023 the applicant appealed the University’s decision to refuse
her readmission to the University’s Academic
Appeals Panel. Her appeal was
unsuccessful. The reason provided by the Panel was “this decision is not
appealable under any
Macquarie University police and/or procedure, as the
decision was made on the basis of academic judgement”. The appeal decision
referred to a policy of the University which states the Executive Dean of the
Faculty in which the applicant is to be registered
is to be satisfied that
adequate supervision and facilities are available. The appeal decision also
states “Following receipt
of this appeal I contacted Sariah Sorial,
Associate Dean Research Training and Performance from the Faculty of Arts who
advised that:
‘I can confirm that the Faculty is not able to provide
appropriate supervision for Ms Barr’s project. I have spoken to
Professor Ronika Power and Professor Chris Housten, and both have confirmed that
they cannot supervise the project to completion.
The decision was reached on
that basis.’”
15 May 2023 to the present, the applicant has been an undergraduate student
enrolled in a Bachelor of Science. At the time of
the hearing she was on a leave
of absence.
30 May 2023 four staff members wrote an email to human resources and executive
staff in the University’s Arts Faculty to
“express alarm that [the
applicant] has been permitted to re-enrol ...given her known history and ongoing
practices of intimidation,
bullying and harassment, of both staff and fellow
students both on and off campus.”
2 June 2023 the University’s Head of Complaints, Appeals and Misconduct
wrote to the applicant. The email refers to the University’s
Student Code
of Conduct and to clause 6(1) which requires that students must not:
- interfere with the ability of the University community or any associate of the
University to engage in or enjoy any University
activities or to access, occupy,
use or move about University property; or
- do anything which may bring the University into disrepute including by making
or publishing false or misleading statements relating
to the University.
email goes on to say that the University has “serious concerns about the
manner in which you previously have and continue
to communicate with and about
staff members” and instructs the applicant to avoid contact with certain
staff members.
14 June 2023 the University wrote to the applicant informing her that her
enrolment as a student was suspended, and that she was
banned from the
University’s “Arts Precinct”, on the ground that her conduct
may constitute misconduct and may
also amount to an imminent threat of
misconduct. The University informed the applicant that the suspension was to
take effect immediately
and continue until 24 July 2023.
7 July 2023 the applicant made three formal complaints to the University, two of
which were withdrawn in April 2024. The complaints
addressed a range of matters
including a failure to provide reasonable adjustments, victimisation and
disability discrimination.
21 July 2023 the University wrote to the applicant noting, among other things,
concerns about the number of emails the applicant
had sent to staff and
students, the content of emails which “repeatedly raise the same
unsubstantiated allegations or issues”,
and “the manner in which you
have chosen to involve persons unrelated to the nature and content of the issues
you raise rather
than through appropriate management channels or in accordance
with available procedures”. The email informed the applicant
University has decided not to extend the current suspension and ban but that the
applicant should not engage in the following
conduct: contact certain faculty
members; use Faculty of Arts established group emails to raise personal
grievances or issues about
her perceived treatment at the University; or enter
the Faculty of Arts building or the Faculty of Arts precinct on the
University’s
main campus.
1 September 2023 the applicant made a further formal complaint to the University
alleging, among other things, disability discrimination.
20 February 2024 the University sent a letter to the applicant informing her
that the ban on her access to the Arts Precinct and
Faculty of Arts building was
being renewed and continued.
5 April 2024 the University wrote to the applicant informing her that complaints
Conduct Procedure. The letter
informed the applicant that the University had identified significant and
ongoing wellbeing harm from
the applicant’s conduct and had determined,
citing obligations under the
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(NSW), that
the applicant was not to contact certain faculty members, use Faculty of Arts
established group emails to raise personal
grievances or issues about her
perceived treatment at the University, or enter the Faculty of Arts building or
the Faculty of Arts
precinct on the University’s main campus.
12 September 2024 the applicant’s complaint was lodged with the
Leave granted in relation to the complaint of direct
disability discrimination in connection with the PhD re-enrolment
of the Act sets out what is discrimination on the ground of
disability.
49B What constitutes discrimination on the ground of disability
(1) A person (
the perpetrator
) discriminates against another
the aggrieved person
) on the ground of disability if the
perpetrator—
(a) on the ground of the aggrieved person’s disability or the
disability of a relative or associate of the aggrieved person,
aggrieved person less favourably than in the same circumstances, or in
circumstances which are not materially different,
the perpetrator treats or
would treat a person who does not have that disability or who does not have such
a relative or associate
who has that disability, or
(b) requires the aggrieved person to comply with a requirement or
condition with which a substantially higher proportion of persons
have that disability, or who do not have a relative or associate who has that
disability, comply or are able to comply,
being a requirement which is not
reasonable having regard to the circumstances of the case and with which the
aggrieved person does
not or is not able to comply.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) (a), something is done on the
ground of a person’s disability if it is done on the
ground of the
person’s disability, a characteristic that appertains generally to persons
who have that disability or a characteristic
that is generally imputed to
persons who have that disability.
of the Act defines “disability” to mean:
(a) total or partial loss of a person’s bodily or mental
functions or of a part of a person’s body, or
(b) the presence in a person’s body of organisms causing or
capable of causing disease or illness, or
(c) the malfunction, malformation or disfigurement of a part of a
person’s body, or
(d) a disorder or malfunction that results in a person learning
differently from a person without the disorder or malfunction, or
(e) a disorder, illness or disease that affects a person’s
thought processes, perception of reality, emotions or judgment
or that results
in disturbed behaviour.
person’s “disability” means not only a disability that the
person actually has, but also a disability that the
person is thought to have,
or that a person had or is thought to have had in the past, or that a person
will have, or is thought
will have in the future:
is unlawful under s 49L(1) of the Act for an educational authority to
discriminate against a person on the ground of disability
by refusing or failing
to accept his or her application for admission as a student, or in the terms on
which it is prepared to admit
him or her as a student.
is also unlawful under s 49L(2) of the Act for an educational authority to
discriminate against a student on the ground of disability:
(a) by denying him or her access, or limiting his or her access, to
any benefit provided by the educational authority, or
(b) by expelling him or her, or
(c) by subjecting him or her to any other detriment.
discrimination is usually referred to as direct discrimination or indirect
discrimination. To establish a complaint of direct
disability discrimination in
relation to the PhD enrolment decision, the applicant would need to prove that
in the same or similar
circumstances, the University would not have refused to
enrol a person who did not have her disability.
part of the test is often referred to as the “differential
treatment” test. The applicant has submitted that in these
proceedings
there is an actual comparator for the purposes of assessing differential
treatment - being the applicant herself prior
to her diagnosis. Whether or not
she is correct about this, if there is no actual comparator with whom to compare
the applicant,
then a hypothetical comparator may be considered:
Central Coast Area Health Service
[2002] NSWADT 133
Commissioner of Corrective Services v Aldridge
[2000] NSWADTAP 5
Bassili v The Star
[2016] NSWCATAD 167
addition to establishing differential treatment, at least one of the reasons for
the alleged treatment must have been the applicant’s
disability. This part
of the test is often referred to as “causation”:
Commissioner of
Corrective Services v Aldridge
[2000] NSWADTAP 5
as here, there is no direct evidence of discrimination on the ground of
disability, a causal link between a disability of the
applicant and the alleged
treatment would have to be established by inference from the available facts.
Any such inference must be
logical and reasonable and must show that a
connection is probable. An inference cannot be made where more probable and
explanations are available on the evidence:
Seltsam Pty Ltd v
[2000] NSWCA 29
; (2000) 49 NSWLR 262;
is common ground that the University is an educational authority for the
purposes of s 49L and that the decision to refuse the
applicant’s
re-enrolment application is a “detriment” for the purposes of
applicant has not clearly specified the nature of her disability for the
purposes of these proceedings. However, she refers to
a number of medical
conditions with which she has been diagnosed, including a gastro-intestinal
infection and an immunological condition.
Medical evidence before the Tribunal
supports a finding that she has been diagnosed with several health conditions
and for the purpose
of these leave proceedings I am prepared to accept that she
has a disability at least within the meaning of that term in paragraph
its definition in
University’s evidence is that at the time the PhD readmission application
was being decided, all students seeking readmission
into its PhD programs were
required to comply with various policies. It says that as the applicant chose
not to apply for the 9-month
extension to her candidature application, her
readmission application was subject to the following requirements:
(1) Part H of the
Graduate Research Admissions Policy
which stated that
where a student has withdrawn from or discontinued their course, the University
may authorise a period of enrolment
(of not more than three months full time
equivalent) suitable for the thesis to be submitted, within two years of
withdrawal;
(2) Clause 51 of the
Graduate Research Variations to Candidature Policy
which stated that where a candidate’s enrolment has ceased, they must
apply for readmission within two years if they wish to
return and, where
re-admitted after withdrawal or discontinuance, a period of enrolment sufficient
for satisfactory completion of
the thesis and submission will be determined by
the Graduate Research Academy on recommendation of the Faculty Associate Dean,
Training and Performance, and will not exceed three months; and
(3) Clause 20 of the
Higher Degree Research Rules
which stated that the
Executive Dean of the Faculty in which the Applicant is to be registered is to
be satisfied that adequate supervision
and facilities are available.
University says that accordingly, readmission was subject to the availability of
adequate supervision to enable submission of
the applicant’s thesis within
the specified time, and that because of clause 51 of the
Graduate Research
Variations to Candidature Policy,
the application for readmission had to be
the subject of an independent recommendation by Faculty Associate Dean, Research
and Performance, in this case Professor Sorial, and also the subject of
a determination by the Graduate Research Academy (GRA) upon
receiving the
recommendation of Professor Sorial.
University also refers to the fact that the refusal decision was the subject of
an independent appeal and findings which affirmed
the University’s
decision. It submits, citing
Aljami v Macquarie University
[2019] NSWSC
, that the decision was a matter of academic judgment which is not amenable
to review by the Tribunal.
University further submits that the correspondence from Professor Downey is not
representative of the University’s position
in relation to the application
for readmission. It says Professor Downey’s comments about the applicant
are no more than an
expression of a personal viewpoint that must be assessed
against the “overwhelming evidence that the application for readmission
was subject to the University’s formal and independent assessment
difficulty for the University is that there is in fact little evidence before me
of the process the University applied in determining
the applicant’s
enrolment application. Whilst the University has provided evidence of the
policies relevant to PhD candidature,
there is scant evidence of how those
policies were applied in this instance. There are records suggesting that
Professor Sorial was
consulted, but little evidence as to the process followed
by Professor Sorial in making her recommendation. There is also no evidence
to which, if any, other persons were involved in making the refusal decision, of
whether, or the extent to which, Professor Downey
was involved in the process or
influenced the decision, of the steps followed by the University in reaching the
refusal decision,
or of all the factors the University considered in making the
refusal decision. Although the decision was appealed, the University’s
appeal panel did not review the decision on its merits, stating that the appeal
is “not appealable under any Macquarie University
policy and/or
procedure”. Therefore, it is difficult to assess, on the limited evidence
provided, whether the refusal decision
was indeed merely one of academic
judgment, or whether there were other factors at play.
this context it is relevant that only several weeks prior to the applicant
submitting her application for re-enrolment, she had
made requests for
accommodations due to her health issues, and that shortly afterwards Professor
Downey had, in emails to other staff
members, referred in a disparaging manner
to the applicant and to her “condition”. Although Professor Downey
specify the nature of the applicant’s “condition”, it
is likely he was referring either to an actual disability
of the applicant, or
to a perceived disability of the applicant.
relevant is that in the period leading up to the refusal decision, both Chris
Lyttelton and Chris Houston had informed the applicant
that they were willing to
supervise her thesis.
Professor Downey’s senior role in the University’s Arts Faculty, his
disapproving references to the applicant and
to her “condition”, the
close temporal connection between that email correspondence and the refusal
decision, and the
assurances given to the applicant by Chris Lyttelton and
Chris Houston about supervision, and in light of the dearth of evidence
the Tribunal with regard to the decision-making process, I find that an
inference could possibly be drawn that the refusal
decision was not purely one
of academic judgment, and that one of the reasons for the refusal decision was
the applicant’s
disability or a perceived disability of the applicant.
these reasons it is not apparent that the applicant’s complaint of direct
discrimination regarding the refusal decision
is not without substance and in
those circumstances, it is neither fair nor just to refuse leave in relation to
that part of the
complaint. In forming this view I am cognisant that key factual
issues are likely to be affected by evidence in the possession of
the University
and that material in summonsed documents or answers on cross examination may
lead to the proof of factual matters
Xu v Sydney West Area Health Service
[2006] NSWADT 3
Wickstead v Browne
[1992] NSWCA 272
(1992) 30 NSWLR 1.
such circumstances it is appropriate that leave be granted so that the factual
issues in dispute can be determined by the Tribunal.
applicant says that the PhD refusal decision also involved indirect
discrimination because the University imposed an “unadjusted”
production and submission timetable while the applicant was unwell – and
that this was a condition with which a substantially
higher proportion of
students without her disabilities could comply.
establish ‘indirect’ disability discrimination, the applicant would
have to prove the matters in s 49B(1)(b) of the
Act. In summary, those matters
(1) that the University required her to comply with a requirement or
(2) that a substantially higher proportion of students without her disability
can comply with that requirement;
(3) that the applicant did not, or was not able to comply with the requirement
or condition; and
(4) that the requirement or condition was not reasonable in all the
circumstances.
I understand it, the applicant is saying that the relevant requirement or
condition was the University policy which requires applications
for readmission
to the PhD program to be made within two years of withdrawal, combined with the
policy which states that upon acceptance,
the period of enrolment must not
exceed three months. The applicant has not explained why this was a requirement
with which she could
not comply (and I note there is an inherent tension between
such a submission and the applicant’s claim of direct discrimination).
applicant also has not explained how she would prove that this is a requirement
which a substantially higher proportion of persons
without her disability comply
or are able to comply.
any event, assuming she could establish these matters, she would also need to
prove that the University’s policy is not reasonable
having regard to the
circumstances of the case. The relevant factors when considering reasonableness
were summarised by the Tribunal
Wong v Office of the Board of Studies
[2012] NSWADT 128
Accordingly, in determining a condition or requirement was 'not reasonable' the
Tribunal must have regard to the nature and extent
of the discriminatory effect
of the requirement and consider this in the light of:
(a) the reasons for the requirement, including any commercial (or practical)
considerations;
(b) whether the requirement is appropriate and adapted to its purpose and has a
logical and understandable basis;
(c) whether there is a less discriminatory option, which accommodates of the
needs of the aggrieved person and the possibility of
alternative action which
would achieve the object of the condition and be less discriminatory; and,
(d) any other relevant circumstances.
applicant has not articulated in what way the University’s policy was
unreasonable. In any case, as discussed above, prior
to applying for readmission
to the PhD program, the applicant made inquiries about applying for a nine-month
extension due to her
health issues, and received assurances that the University
would be amenable to such a request. Despite this, she decided not to
extension and instead applied for re-enrolment within the standard period. In
such circumstances the likelihood that the
Tribunal would be satisfied that the
thesis production and submission timetable was unreasonable in all the
circumstances is remote.
these reasons it would not be fair and just to grant leave for the
applicant’s complaint of indirect discrimination in relation
refusal decision to proceed before the Tribunal.
Leave refused
in relation to the complaint of discrimination in connection with the Arts
Precinct ban and the suspension of enrolment
discussed above, it is unlawful under s 49L(1) of the Act for an educational
authority to discriminate against a person on the
ground of disability by
refusing or failing to accept his or her application for admission as a student,
or in the terms on which
it is prepared to admit him or her as a student.
is also unlawful under s 49L(2) of the Act for an educational authority to
discriminate against a student on the ground of disability:
(a) by denying him or her access, or limiting his or her access, to
any benefit provided by the educational authority, or
(b) by expelling him or her, or
(c) by subjecting him or her to any other detriment.
establish a complaint of direct disability discrimination in relation to the
Arts Precinct ban and the decision to suspend the
applicant’s
undergraduate enrolment, the applicant would need to prove that in the same or
similar circumstances, the University
would not have:
(1) banned a person who did not have her disability from the Arts Precinct;
(2) suspended a student who did not have her disability.
initial decision to ban the applicant from the University’s Arts Precinct
was made in March 2023. At that time the applicant
was not a student and
therefore s49(2) cannot apply. As the decision does not involve a refusal or
failure to accept an application
for admission as a student, or the terms on
which the University was prepared to admit the applicant as a student, s 49L(1)
cannot apply. Therefore, to the extent that the complaint of disability
discrimination involves that decision, it is lacking in substance.
the University does not dispute that the decisions made after the applicant
became a student in May 2023 to ban the applicant
from the Arts Precinct and to
suspend her enrolment are “detriments” for the purposes of s
with the refusal decision, in the absence of any direct evidence that the
applicant’s disability was the real, genuine or
true reason for the
actions of the University in banning the applicant from the University’s
Arts Precinct and suspending her
enrolment, a causal link between the
applicant’s disability and the University’s conduct would have to be
established
by inference from the available facts.
applicant refers to a number of factors which she asserts support such an
inference being made, including: the emails from Professor
Downey; that there
was no formal misconduct investigation; that she had sought adjustments; that
she was denied procedural fairness;
that during the period of the ban she held
roles at other universities without incident, and that those advocating the ban
her workplaces and public events. She also says her academic successes
and positive relationship with the Associate Dean of Science
from her first
semester of studies undermine the respondent’s position that there is any
threat or real risk to the safety
of staff or students.
note the applicant also says the ban was unreasonable and disproportionate when
compared with sanctions imposed on others in comparable
circumstances. However,
she has not provided evidence supporting this submission.
University submits that it is clear from the correspondence relevant to these
decisions that they were based on its assessment
of the applicant’s
behaviour and its concerns about the effect of her conduct on the health and
safety of staff. It says that
conduct relates to a very large amount of
correspondence from the applicant making repetitive, unreasonable and
unsubstantiated allegations
and statements to staff and students. The evidence
before the Tribunal includes copious contemporaneous correspondence. That
correspondence
includes a letter from four staff members to the University,
dated 30 May 2023, containing serious allegations about the applicant’s
behaviour and its effect on staff welfare, as well as numerous letters from the
University to the applicant providing details of
the applicant’s behaviour
and why it has formed the view that the behaviour is, or may be, in breach of
the University’s
code of conduct and may amount to misconduct or an
imminent threat of misconduct.
with the PhD refusal decision, the reasons for the University’s decisions
to ban the applicant from part of its campus
and to suspend her enrolment -
namely concerns about the applicant’s behaviour and its impact on members
are abundantly clear from the contemporaneous evidence. That
evidence offers a more probable and innocent explanation than the circumstances
put forward by the applicant, which effectively invite the Tribunal to draw an
inference of disability discrimination on the basis
of supposition and
conjecture.
applicant made submissions the effect of which is that the behaviour complained
of by the University is a symptom of her health
conditions. However, there is no
material before the Tribunal that would support
a finding that the behaviour in question - making
repetitive,
unreasonable and unsubstantiated allegations and statements to staff and
students - is a symptom of her gastro-intestinal
infection, her immunological
condition or any of her other health conditions, or is a characteristic that
appertains generally to
people with the applicant’s disability, or that is
generally imputed to such persons: s 49B(2) of the Act. In this regard
is vague medical evidence of the applicant’s health conditions
compromising her “communication patterns” but nothing
which would
support a finding that her disability causes or is thought to cause the kinds of
behaviour complained about by the University.
the University conducted a “formal” investigation or gave the
applicant an adequate right of reply are not determinative
issues. The issue is
whether the evidence could reasonably support an inference that the decisions to
suspend the applicant’s
enrolment and to ban her from parts of the
University campus were wholly or partly motivated by her disability. In my view
the likelihood
of this being the case is remote.
the extent that the applicant complains of direct discrimination in relation to
the decisions to ban her from the Arts Precinct
and to suspend her undergraduate
enrolment, this complaint is lacking in substance.
applicant has also made allegations of indirect discrimination but has not
clearly identified a requirement or condition that
the University imposed on her
in connection with the Arts Precinct ban or the suspension of enrolment that a
substantially higher
proportion of students without her disability can comply
with. Therefore, a complaint on this ground also lacks substance.
these reasons it would not be fair and just to grant leave for the complaint of
disability discrimination with respect to the
Arts Precinct ban or the
suspension of the applicant’s undergraduate enrolment to proceed before
the Tribunal.
Leave refused in relation to the victimisation
section 50 of the Act, it is unlawful for the University to subject
the applicant to “any detriment in any
circumstances”
on the ground that the applicant has alleged that
the University “has committed an act which, whether or not the allegation
so states, would amount to a contravention of this Act”:
50 Victimisation
(1) It is unlawful for a person (the discriminator) to subject another
person (the person victimised) to any detriment in any circumstances
ground that the person victimised has—
(a) brought proceedings against the discriminator or any other person under
(b) given evidence or information in connection with proceedings brought by
any person against the discriminator or any other person
under this Act,
(c) alleged that the discriminator or any other person has committed an act
which, whether or not the allegation so states, would
amount to a contravention
of this Act, or
(d) otherwise done anything under or by reference to this Act in relation
to the discriminator or any other person,
or by reason that the discriminator knows that the person victimised intends to
do any of those things, or suspects that the person
victimised has done, or
intends to do, any of them.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the subjecting of a person to a
detriment by reason of an allegation made by the person if the
allegation was
false and not made in good faith.
prove victimisation the applicant would have to prove that:
(1) she did one or more of the things listed in s 50 (a) – (d) of the Act,
which I will refer to as the “trigger”;
(2) the University subjected her to a detriment; and
(3) the detriment was on the ground that the applicant did one of the things
listed in s50(a) – (d) of the Act, which I will
refer to as
“causation”:
Carroll v Department of Family and Community
[2015] NSWCATAD 82
applicant first made a complaint or complaints to the University alleging
discrimination and victimisation on 7 July 2023. She
made a further complaint to
the University on 1 September 2023 and lodged her complaint with the President
in September 2024.
accept that these actions would amount to “triggers” for the
purposes of s 50(1)(a) of the Act.
is no evidence before me that prior to 7 July 2023 the applicant did any of the
things in s 50(1), or that the University knew
or suspected that the applicant
had done or intended to do any of those things.
applicant has alleged that the detriment she has suffered is the decision to
suspend her enrolment as a student and ban her from
the University campus made
on 14 June 2023. As that decision predated all of the above
“triggers”, it cannot be said
that the applicant was subjected to
that detriment on the ground of any trigger and therefore her complaint on that
basis is lacking
in substance.
for completeness, I will also consider whether there would be any substance to a
complaint that the subsequent decisions
made by the University with regard to
the Arts Precinct ban and the student suspension breached s 50 of the Act.
relevant conduct of the University is as follows:
(1) The letter of 21 July 2023 informing the applicant that the suspension would
not be extended but that she was not to engage in
certain conduct, including not
building or precinct.
(2) The letter of 20 February 2024 informing the applicant of its determination
to continue the ban due to ongoing concerns arising
from the applicant’s
(3) The letter of 5 April 2024 informing the applicant of the outcome of its
investigations into complaints by staff, advising the
applicant that numerous
measures had been put in place to ameliorate the consequences of the
applicant’s conduct, that the
University determined to take no further
action and that the applicant was directed not to enter the Arts Faculty
precinct or building
and not to contact certain persons as set out in the
the purposes of these leave proceedings I accept that the bans and restrictions
set out in those letters are “detriments”
for the purpose of s
next question is whether the applicant can prove causation by showing that the
detriments arose because of, or that they could
be attributed to, the triggers
discussed above.
there is no direct evidence of causation, a causal link between the complaints
and detriment would have to be established by inference
from the available
is no logical or reasonable inference available on the evidence before the
Tribunal that the University’s conduct towards
the applicant was because
of, on the grounds or, or related, to the applicant’s complaints of
discrimination. The letters of
21 July 2023, 20 February 2024 and 5 April 2024
all deal with a course of conduct which predated the applicant’s
complaints.
Moreover, it is clear from those letters and contemporaneous
correspondence that the reason for that course of conduct was the
University’s
concerns about the applicant’s behaviour. A more
logical and reasonable inference would be that the reason for the
of the bans and restrictions was the University’s desire to
address concerns about the applicant’s behaviour, than that
the reason for
those detriments was because she had complained of discrimination.
the applicant’s evidence at its highest, I find that the likelihood that
the Tribunal would find a causal connection
between the applicant’s
complaints of discrimination and victimisation and the decisions to ban her from
parts of the University
and to suspend her enrolment is remote.
Accordingly,
the complaint of victimisation lacks substance and it would not be fair and just
to grant leave for this part of the
complaint to proceed before the Tribunal.
Application for non-disclosure and non-publication orders
13 June 2025 the applicant lodged an “Application for Miscellaneous
Orders” seeking an order under
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (the NCAT Act) prohibiting the publication or
broadcasting of the applicant’s name and any information that might enable
the applicant to be identified.
University opposes such an order. The parties both stated at the hearing of the
leave application that they rely on the respective
written submissions and
supporting documents which they have filed in relation to this application.
applicant relies on written submissions and supporting documents provided to the
Tribunal on 2 August 2025, 28 August 2025 and
5 September 2025. The University
relies on written submissions and supporting documents provided on 14 August
2025 and its further
submissions provided by email on 2 September 2025.
of the objects of the NCAT is Act that the Tribunal has processes that are "open
and transparent": s 3(f).
hearing by the Tribunal is to be open to the public unless the Tribunal orders
otherwise: NCAT Act, s 49(1). This reflects the principle
State of New South Wales (Justice Health)
[2008] NSWADTAP 69
Kostov v Ecclesia Housing Limited (No 3)
NSWCATAP 221
Frost v TAFE NSW (No 2)
NSWCATAD 12
Tribunal “may” make certain non-disclosure orders under s 64(1) of
the NCAT Act, if it is satisfied that “it
is desirable to do so by reason
of the confidential nature of any evidence or matter or for any other
reason”. The orders the
Tribunal may make include an order prohibiting or
restricting the disclosure of the name of any person (including identifying
information
lodged with or received in evidence by the Tribunal: s 64(1)(a)
and (c) and
prospect of embarrassment and stress affecting a complainant is generally
“an insufficient basis for departing from the
general rule that the
Tribunal’s proceedings should be conducted
principle of open justice means that “the power contained in s 64 should
be exercised sparingly”:
Carroll v Tokdogan
NSWCATAD 200
applicant submits that a non-publication order is desirable in these
proceedings. In her written submissions in chief filed in
relation to this issue
she says in summary that publication of her name or identifying details may
cause her psychological harm,
and prompt threats and interference from
[redacted]. The applicant relevantly submits:
(1) She is protected by an apprehended personal violence order (APVO) issued by
NSW Police, in February 2025, following harassment,
intimidation and threats
from [redacted].
(2) The applicant is undergoing treatment for health conditions, which her
treating medical practitioners have confirmed are exacerbated
by psychological
(3) The online publication of Tribunal decisions would generate a fear that the
subject of the APVO may identify the applicant, monitor
the proceedings and
attempt to contact the University or otherwise interfere in the proceedings.
This prospect causes the applicant
significant psychological distress which may
deter her, and others in similar circumstances, from engaging with lawful
dispute resolution
mechanisms.
(4) NCAT Policy 2 “Publishing Reasons for Decision” says that
anonymisation of parties is routine in matters involving
Victims Rights
and Support Act 2013
(NSW) and community welfare legislation within the
meaning of the
Community Services (Complaints, Reviews and Monitoring) Act
(NSW). This matter “engages with the policy objectives
underpinning the
Victims Rights and Support Act
, particularly the need to avoid
re-traumatisation through public exposure of sensitive matters”.
applicant has provided to the Tribunal supporting documents including medical
records and evidence of the APVO.
her written submissions in reply the applicant raises additional issues which
were not addressed in her submissions in chief. She
says, in essence, that
anonymisation is desirable because:
(1) the proceedings will involve sensitive medical information; and
(2) the proceedings will involve evidence of contested incidents, which, if
published alongside the applicant’s name, will
cause “lasting damage
despite never being substantiated”.
am not persuaded that it is desirable in this instance to make a confidentiality
order for the following reasons.
accept that the applicant is currently protected by an APVO following an
incident involving [redacted] who was alleged to have become
smashed a window and thrown items at the applicant. However, there is no
evidence that supports the applicant’s assertion
that the publication of
her name or identifying information in the proceedings would prompt that person
to monitor, or otherwise
seek to interfere in, the proceedings. Moreover, there
is no evidence that the University or any potential witness in the proceedings
could be influenced by such a third party. If the applicant has concerns in this
regard they would appear to be speculative.
whilst there is evidence before me that the applicant’s health conditions
may be exacerbated by psychological stress,
and that the behaviour of the
[redacted] has been a stressful experience for the applicant, there is no
medical or other evidence
that addresses how the publication of the
applicant’s name in the proceedings might affect her psychological or
physical health.
Again, the applicant’s concerns in this regard appear to
be speculative and without substance.
submission with regard to the
Victims Rights and Support Act 2013
Community Services (Complaints, Reviews and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) is misconceived. These are not proceedings under the
Victims Rights and
Support Act
, nor indeed under any community welfare legislation (as that
term is defined in the
Community Services (Complaints, Reviews and
Monitoring) Act
. The proceedings involve a dispute under discrimination
legislation between an individual and a tertiary education institution about
alleged discrimination and victimisation.
am also not persuaded by the applicant’s submission regarding untested
allegations. In support of this submission she refers
to events which occurred
in May 2023 where she says staff at the University made various unproven
allegations about the applicant.
To the extent that allegations may be made
against the applicant in the proceedings I agree with the submission of the
that these proceedings are no different to any other.
Proceedings before the Tribunal invariably involve allegations being made
against parties, some of which will ultimately not be established on the
evidence. The fact that such allegations might be embarrassing
or humiliating is
generally not a sufficient basis for departing from the requirement of open
will of course be situations in which a suppression order will be desirable for
other reasons. For example, in
ACE v State of NSW (TAFE Commission and
[2011] NSWADT 77
- which the applicant relies upon in her
submissions - the Tribunal was satisfied that a suppression order was desirable
the application was not brought merely to avoid damage to reputation or
“embarrassment”, but rather to prevent the misuse
of sensitive
information regarding the applicant's mental health. However here, neither party
has filed its pleadings, evidence or
submissions and it is not yet known what,
if any, allegations the University will make in relation to the applicant. In
such circumstances
I cannot be satisfied that a non-disclosure order is
desirable at this early stage of the proceedings.
with regard to the applicant’s health information, when making this
decision there has been no need for me to delve
into the details of the
applicant’s health information. I have identified in very broad terms some
of the applicant’s
health conditions and whilst I accept this is personal
information to which there is attached a degree of sensitivity, I am not
that it is of sufficient sensitivity to justify a non-publication
order. It is not yet apparent whether, or to what extent, it will
necessary to disclose sensitive health information when the substantive
proceedings are decided. Thus, the application for non-disclosure
on this basis
is premature.
University has suggested, without making any concessions, that an appropriate
balance might be struck if the Tribunal was to make
an order that redacts from
publication all of the applicant’s sensitive health information that may
be the subject of evaluation
by the Tribunal in any proceedings. The
applicant says she does not consent to such an order and presses for an
anonymisation order.
She submits that as the proceedings involve disability
discrimination, the Tribunal’s reasons will necessarily traverse the
applicant’s diagnoses, functional impacts and prognosis and that a
“redaction-only order would either (a) produce heavily
opaque reasons
(undermining open justice), or (b) prove unworkable in practice”. I do not
agree. Until such time as the parties’
pleadings, evidence and submissions
are before the Tribunal in the substantive proceedings, it will not be at all
clear whether,
or the extent to which, the applicant’s sensitive health
information will need to be traversed at the hearing or discussed
Tribunal’s reasons for decision.
that it has not been necessary to refer to sensitive health information in this
decision, and that it is not yet known what,
if any, health information will be
relevant when deciding the substantive proceedings, I am not satisfied that the
applicant’s
concerns about this issue are a reason for making an
anonymisation order, or a redaction order, at this time.
applicant’s written submissions refer to a number of other authorities
which she says support her position. I will briefly
address each of
(1) The facts in
CBL v Sydney Water Corporation
[2017] NSWCATAD 220
distinguishable from the present case because there the non-publication order
was not opposed by the respondent and was made
in circumstances where there was
a statutory obligation as to confidentiality as set out in
Public Interest Disclosures Act 1994
(2) CME v The University of Technology Sydney
[2018] NSWCATAD 113
instructive because the decision does not disclose the nature of the
applicant’s personal details which were relevant
to the making of the
non-publication order.
(3) The facts in
GVQ v Children’s Guardian
[2025] NSWCATAD 160
are distinguishable from the present case. There a non-publication order was
initially put in place because the Tribunal was concerned
that the identity
of a victim or witness (including a child with disability in a
school setting) could be disclosed. The Tribunal
decided not to lift the order
so as to protect the identity of persons who had alleged sexual assault and
sexual misconduct by the
applicant and to protect the identity of the
applicant’s children.
(4) Pendrick v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force (No 2)
NSWCATAD 27
concerned an application under s 64(1)(d) of the NCAT Act which
deals with non-disclosure of evidence and documents to some or all
parties to the proceedings. There is no such application before me. Thus, beyond
the general statements made in that decision
justice, the decision is not relevant to the issues I must decide.
all of these reasons I am refusing the application for non-disclosure
appropriate, it is open to the applicant to renew the application at a later
date (ie when the substantive proceedings are being
(1) Leave is granted under
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
for the applicant’s complaint of direct disability discrimination against
the respondent, in relation to the decision
to refuse the applicant’s
application for re-enrolment in its PhD program, to proceed.
(2) Leave is refused under
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
for the balance of the applicant’s complaints to proceed.
(3) The applicant’s “Application for Miscellaneous Matters”
filed on 13 June 2025 is dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
04 November 2025 - Redaction of third party details at para 108, 112 and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (344 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter