URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/138.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Singh [2025] NSWCATOD 138; (8 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Health Care Complaints Commission v Singh
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 138
Hearing Date(s):
17 & 18 May 2023
Date of Orders:
8 October 2025
Decision Date:
8 October 2025
Occupational Division
O Shub, Senior Member
J Harrington, Professional Member
Professional Member
J Sillince, General Member
(1) The Respondent is guilty of Complaints 1, 2 and 3 and
is found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct.
(2) The matter is adjourned to 27 and 28
November for hearing of Stage 2.
(3) Costs are
Catchwords:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – health care professional – Nurse
– criminal charge – theft of drugs – assault
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Crimes Act 1900
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW),
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Cases Cited:
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
(1960) 104 CLR 186
[1960] HCA 40
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Ugendra Singh
(Respondent)
Representation:
Maybury (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Applicant)
McGirr & Associates (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2022/00301834
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
publication of the name of Person A referred to in this decision is
prohibited.
REASONS FOR DECISION
reasons for the complaint brought by the Applicant appear from the Complaint
lodged with the Tribunal under Case No. 2022/00301834
dated October 2022 and
filed with the Registry on 10 October 2022.
its Complaint, the Health Care Complaints Commission:
"HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Mr Ugendra Singh ("the practitioner") of NSW being a nurse registered under the
National Law,
COMPLAINT ONE
Pursuant to section 144(a) of the National Law, the practitioner has been
convicted of/been made the subject of a criminal finding
for a criminal offence
BACKGROUND TO ALL COMPLAINTS
The practitioner was first registered as a nurse in NSW on 17 January 2003
On 6 May 2020, the practitioner was charged with the following criminal
• Use poison etc so as to endanger life (Domestic
Violence)' pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
• 'Larceny as bailee' pursuant to
• 'Possess/attempt to possess prescribed restricted
substance pursuant to
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
• 'Common Assault (Domestic Violence)' pursuant to s61
Crimes Act 1900
At the time the practitioner was charged:
• Person A was the practitioner's wife and they had been
married for approximately 18 years;
• the practitioner was employed as an Intensive Care
Nurse at Liverpool Hospital and had held that position for approximately
On 18 January 2022, the practitioner was sentenced to a Community Correction
Order ('CCO') for a period of 12 months. The CCO will
expire on 17 January 2023.
In addition, an Apprehended Domestic Violence Order was made against the
practitioner for the protection
of Person A.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
1. On 18 January 2022, the practitioner was convicted of larceny in relation to
the stealing of vials of Propofol from Liverpool
Hospital on 3 May 2020, under
Crimes Act 1900
2. On 18 January 2022, the practitioner was convicted of larceny in relation to
the stealing of vials of Propofol from Liverpool
Hospital on 4 May 2020, under
Crimes Act 1900
3. On 18 January 2022, the practitioner was convicted of assaulting Person A
Crimes Act 1900
on 5 May 2020, in circumstances where they were in a
domestic relationship [count 4]
COMPLAINT TWO
The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section
139B(1)(b) of the National Law In that the practitioner
has contravened
of the National Law
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
1. The practitioner failed to notify the National Board, within seven days, that
he had been charged on 6 May 2020 before a NSW Court
with the following offences
punishable by 12 months imprisonment or more:
(a) Use poison etc so as to endanger life (Domestic Violence) pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
(b) Larceny as bailee pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
(c) Common Assault (Domestic Violence) pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
COMPLAINT THREE
Pursuant to
section 144(e)
of the National Law, the practitioner is otherwise
not a suitable person to hold registration as a nurse
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
1. On 5 May 2020 at around 11am, the practitioner deceptively administered
Propofol to Person A in the following circumstances:
(a) Person A advised the practitioner that she was feeling dehydrated;
(b) the practitioner offered to administer a Saline solution intravenously to
(c) Person A laid on a mattress in the lounge room;
(d) the practitioner inserted a cannula Into the back of Person A's left
(e) Person A lost consciousness;
(f) Person A regained consciousness at approximately 6:20pm,
(g) Several empty vials of Propofol were found scattered next to the mattress
that Person A lost consciousness on."
REPLY TO THE COMPLAINT
Respondent filed a reply to the Complaints as follows:
(1) In respect to the allegation that the Respondent "...has been convicted
of/been made the subject of a criminal finding for a
criminal offence in NSW",
the Respondent replied as follows:
PARTICULAR:
"On 18 January 2022, the practitioner was convicted of larceny in relation to
the stealing of vials of Propofol from Liverpool Hospital
on 3 May 2020, under
Crimes Act 1900
"The Respondent admits this particular of the complaint."
PARTICULAR:
"On 18 January 2022, the practitioner was convicted of larceny in relation to
the stealing of vials of Propofol from Liverpool Hospital
on 4 May 2020, under
Crimes Act 1900
"The Respondent admits this particular of the complaint."
PARTICULAR:
"On 18 January 2022, the practitioner was convicted of assaulting Person A under
Crimes Act 1900
on 5 May 2020 at Hebersham, in circumstances where they
were in a domestic relationship."
"The Respondent admits this particular of the complaint."
The Respondent admitted each of the particulars of Complaint One.
(2) In respect of the allegation that the Respondent "... is guilty of
unsatisfactory conduct under s139B(1) of the National Law in
practitioner has contravened section130(1) of the National Law", the Respondent
replied as follows:
PARTICULAR:
"The practitioner failed to notify the National Board, within seven days, that
he had been charged on 6 May 2020 before a NSW Court
with the following offences
punishable by 12 months imprisonment or more: (a) Use poison etc so as to
endanger life (Domestic Violence)
pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900; (b)
Larceny as bailee pursuant to s125 Crimes Act 1900; (c) Common Assault (Domestic
Violence) pursuant to s 61
Crimes Act 1900
"The Respondent admits this particular of the complaint."
The Respondent admitted the only particular of Complaint Two.
(3) In respect of the allegation that the Respondent "pursuant to
the National Law, ... is otherwise not a suitable person to hold registration as
a nurse", the Respondent replied as follows:
PARTICULAR:
"On 5 May 2020 at around 11am, the practitioner deceptively administered
Propofol to Person A in the following circumstances: (as
(a)‑(g) therein)."
"The Respondent denies this particular of the complaint."
The Respondent denied the only particular of Complaint Three.
NATURE OF THE JURISDICTION
nature of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is to protect the public and to
maintain proper standards in the profession of nursing.
The effect of any
decision is not to punish the Respondent.
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
[1960] HCA 40
High Court said:
"Although it is sometimes referred to as "the penalty of disbarment" it must be
emphasised that a disbarring order is in no sense
punitive in character. When
such an order is made, it is made from the public point of view for the
protection of those who require
protection and from the professional point of
view in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to loss of privilege."
3B of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) ("the National
Law"), provides that:
3B Objective and guiding principle [NSW]
In the exercise of functions under a NSW provision, the protection of the health
and safety of the public must be the paramount consideration.
The interests of the public includes patients or potential patients of the
Practitioner concerned.
observed by Basten JA in
Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
"... The purpose of any order consequent upon a finding that a complaint has
been proved is said to be protective of the interests
of the public at large but
more particularly patients or potential patients of the practitioner concerned.
However, the public interests
include, indirectly, the standing of the medical
profession and the maintenance of public confidence in the high standards of ...
practitioners. There is also an element of deterrence or, to put it more
positively, encouragement to other practitioners to recognise
the importance of
complying with professional standards and the risks of failing to do so. The
powers of a Tribunal having two members
of the medical profession should, at
least in relation to professional standards be accorded a degree of flexibility
which might
not necessarily be accorded to a Tribunal differently constituted."
determining the appropriate orders to be made, the paramount consideration for
the Tribunal is the protection of the health and
safety of the public pursuant
to s3B of the National Law.
Respondent was charged with larceny as set out in Complaint One and the
particulars to Complaint One. The Respondent was charged
with failing to notify
the National Board within seven days that he had been charged of an offence
punishable by 12 months' imprisonment
Respondent has admitted those aspects of the Complaint and therefore they do not
remain a live issue.
Complaint included an allegation that the Respondent is otherwise not a suitable
person to hold registration as a nurse and listed
particulars of that complaint.
The Respondent has denied Complaint Three and the particulars of Complaint Three
and as such this
is the only live issue in Stage 1 of the matter for the
Tribunal to determine whether, in light of the circumstances of the alleged
offence and the surrounding evidence, the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that
the Respondent is not a fit and proper person to
remain registered as a
APPLICANT'S EVIDENCE
Tribunal had available to it written reasons for a decision by the Nursing and
Midwifery Council ("the Council") under s150 which
is set out below:
INTRODUCTION
Mr Ugendra Singh is a 45-year old registered nurse. Mr Singh first registered in
2003 on the basis of a Bachelor of Nursing undertaken
at University of Western
On 7 May 2020, the Council received an own motion complaint from the Health Care
Complaints Commission (HCCC). The complaint alleged:
• NSW Ambulance paramedics attended an address in NSW after a woman
requested emergency services at 7 pm on 5 May 2020
• Mr Singh allegedly administered what he said was a saline drip at 11am
due to concerns the 38-year-old woman was dehydrated
• The woman regained consciousness around 8 hours later and called the
• A crime scene was established, and NSW Police seized numerous vials of
Propofol and medical equipment
• Mr Singh was arrested al the scene and charged with four offences:
­ Use poison etc. as to endanger life (DV)
­ Possess/attempt to, prescribed restricted substance
­ Common assault (DV)
• Mr Singh appeared at court on 6 May 2020 where he was refused bail and
remanded in custody.
On 7 May 2020, the Council referred Mr Singh for section 150 proceedings due to
the serious nature of the allegations.
Section 150 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) (the
National Law (NSW)) provides for the Council to impose
conditions on or to
suspend the registration of a registered nurse for the protection of the public
or generally in the public interest.
Action taken under section 150 is intended
to be interim and may be reviewed under section 150A. The full text of these
and other relevant provisions is set out at Attachment 2.
An urgent hearing before the delegates of the Council, Bethne Hart, Jennifer
Thommeny and Karen Hay, was held on 14 May 2020. Mr
Singh did not attend the
proceedings due to being on remand and the hearing was not recorded. A list of
the documents to which the
Council delegates had regard is at Attachment 1.
The central issue for us to consider is whether Mr Ugendra Singh poses a risk to
the safety or health of the public that warrants
action to be taken by the
Council. We may also consider whether it is generally in the public interest for
the Council to take action.
To determine this issue, we must answer the
following subsidiary questions:
a. What information is available about Mr Singh's conduct?
b. What information is available about Mr Singh's current employment?
c. What information is available about Mr Singh's health?
d. What information exists about earlier complaints, complaint findings or
Tribunal decisions concerning Mr Singh?
If we conclude that Mr Ugendra Singh does pose a risk to the safety or health of
the public and that the public interest warrants
action, then we must also
consider the following questions:
i. Are there conditions that could be imposed to minimize that risk?
ii. If not, should Mr Ugendra Singh's registration be suspended?
What information is available about Mr Singh's conduct?
According to the complaint from the HCCC, Mr Singh was arrested at the scene and
charged with four offences:
• Use poison etc. as to endanger life (DV)
• Possess/attempt to obtain prescribed restricted substance
• Common assault (DV).
Mr Singh appeared in court on 6 May 2020 and was refused bail. NSW Police allege
the viaIs of Propofol and medical equipment were
taken from Mr Singh's
The Council await further information from the HCCC regarding Mr Singh's current
location on remand.
What information is available about Mr Singh's current employment?
According to Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) records,
Mr Singh is employed at Liverpool Hospital within
South Western Sydney Local
Health District (SWSLHD) with a recorded start date of 7 May 2017.
Further details about Mr Singh's secondary employment is not available at this
What information is available about Mr Singh's health?
There is no information available about Mr Singh's current health status.
What information exists about earlier complaints, complaint findings or
Tribunal decisions concerning Mr Singh?
On 7 January 2004, Mr Singh disclosed to the Nurses Registration Board of NSW
that he was convicted of:
• Common assault against his spouse on 7 April 2003 and entered a good
behaviour bond
• Driving with a middle range PCA on 29 September 2003, with his licence
suspended for 9 months.
The matter was closed with no further action.
Having regard to our assessment of the information and evidence relevant to the
above issues we conclude that Mr Singh does pose
a risk to public health and
safety and the public interest which requires us to take action, because of the
following factors:
a. There are allegations of serious criminal conduct
b. NSW Police allege the vials of Propofol and medical equipment were taken from
Mr Singh's workplace
c. Although Mr Singh is on remand at this time, it is in the public interest to
take action.
We are of the view that the imposition of conditions cannot address these risks
to public safety and the public interest concerns,
and Mr Singh must be
Pursuant to section 150(1)(a) of the National Law (NSW) the delegates suspended
Mr Ugendra Singh's registration on 14 May 2020 and
referred the matter matter
for consultation to the HCCC pursuant to section 150D of the National Law (NSW).
We are of the view that
the matter should be dealt with as a complaint for
investigation.
Applicant provided a transcript of an interview of the Respondent conducted on 6
May 2020. The main thrust of the interview related
to the removal of the drug
Propofol from the hospital and the background to his intentions in respect of
the use of that drug. However,
the transcript included questions relating to an
allegation by Person A that she informed the Respondent that she was feeling
and the Respondent mentioned that he had saline available and that he
could insert a cannula and saline “drip” into her
body. She claimed
that she had much later woken up feeling a bit disorientated and not knowing
what was going on. She alleged that
she approached the Respondent as she had
seen empty bottles of Propofol and wanted an explanation. In response to these
allegations
the Respondent said that he had no recollection of any such event or
conversation. When asked whether he had any idea why she would
make up such
allegations, the Respondent stated that he did not know apart from the reason
that he had mentioned that if she separated
from him she could access Centrelink
Applicant provided a transcript of an interview with Person A which took place
on 6 May 2020.
A repeated the fact that she was telling the Respondent that she was really
dehydrated, that her lips were very dry, she was
not feeling well and she wanted
to go to the hospital. She stated that the Respondent suggested that she should
not go to the hospital
because of the COVID19 pandemic at that time. He stated
that he had a bag of fluids at home that he could administer to her. She
hesitant but he convinced her to do so. She confirmed that he put a cannula on
her left hand and put a dressing with an extension
so that the fluid could flow
into the body. When the Respondent had done that, he left her for a few moments
as he was going to get
a flush which was normal saline. She stated that she did
not see it and the next thing that she remembers is that she blacked out.
However, she stated that prior to blacking out she saw the Respondent with a
syringe and asked him what was going on but she could
not finish answering. She
has no further knowledge of what happened until she woke up some hours later and
found empty vials of Propofol
lying next to the mattress on which she had been
Applicant also provided copies of numerous statements from members of the Police
who received a call from Person A and who attended
at Person A's residence, all
of which relate to the allegations made in Complaint Three and the Particulars
to Complaint Three.
Applicant provided a toxicologist's report which deals with the drug Propofol,
its effects and risks but the report indicates
that he is not able to determine
what quantity of Propofol was administered to Person A.
papers provided by the Applicant included the court documents from the charges
brought against the Respondent and confirm that
the Respondent was convicted of
the theft of the Propofol from his employer and convicted of common assault.
RESPONDENT'S EVIDENCE
Respondent provided a statement to the Tribunal in which he dealt with the
relationship between himself and Person A, the difficulties
associated with that
relationship and the stroke and depression suffered by the Respondent. The
evidence of the Respondent dealt
with the reasons for removing the Propofol from
the Respondent's employer, his intention being to use it for pest control at his
property. He spoke of the events leading up to 5 May 2020 and the fact that
Person A saw the Propofol and he explained his intentions
in respect of it.
Respondent then related the events of 5 May 2020 which are set out verbatim
62 On Tuesday. 5 May 2020. at about 6 00 am I was woken up by [Person A] doing
the laundry
A visit to the shops
63 At around 8:00 am, I received a text message from Liverpool Hospital asking
that evening. I had a
conversation with [Person A] In Hindi:
(a) I said to [Person A] "They've got a shift available tonight".
(b) She said "No don't take the shift – you've been working all this
while, have some rest. Can I have some money? I want to
send it to my mum for
Mother's Day".
(c) I said "I only have fifty dollars in my wallet".
64I handed [Person A] the $50 note from my wallet.
(a) I said to [Person A]: "Keep this – I'll get some more money when we go
to the ATM".
65 At about 9 00 am, we drove to the Westfield Shopping Centre at Mount Druitt.
I drove us and [Person A] sat in the front passenger
seat. This took us about
five·(5) minutes.
66 Upon parking at the shopping centre [Person A] remained in the car and I
walked inside the complex to withdraw money from the
67 When I put my ANZ debit card in the ATM and I entered the wrong PIN number
twice. I was concerned that the card would be taken
by the ATM so I decided not
to make another attempt.
68 From the ATM, I went to Coles and purchased the buns for the hotdog sausages
I had planned to cook for dinner that night.
69 When I returned to the car and I had the following conversation with [Person
A] in Hindi:
(a) I said to [Person A]: "I have forgotten my PIN number. I cannot withdraw the
money - - we can wait until 9:30 until the bank
(b) [Person A] replied: "No I do not want to wait, it's only Tuesday, you can
get the money later".·
70 From Mount Druitt we drove to the shops situated. This also took about five
(5) minutes. I bought a bottle of Southern Comfort
bourbon from "Harry's
Liquor".· Again, [Person A] remained in the car.
71 I returned to the car. I went into an Indian store down the road called "CK
Mart" and purchased some sweets.
72 I again returned lo the car, and we drove back to the Property. I estimate
that the time was about 9:30 am.
73 I recall putting the buns on the New Kitchen benchtop in the Entertainment
74 After about 9:30 am, I sat on the couch in the Living Room with [Person A].
We watched an Indian movie on Netflix called "Baadshaho".
I recall drinking some
of the whiskey I had purchased earlier during the movie.
75 About an hour or so into the movie, at about 11:00 am [Person A] turned to
(a) [Person A] said to me: "Look I don't think it's a good idea. I think you
should go outside and if you want to watch it, you can
(b) I said "Okay".
76 I decided to go into the Entertainment Area. I remember paying some bills and
texting my sisters to check up on them. I had texted
my younger sister at about
1:32 pm. I have included a screenshot from my younger sister's mobile phone
showing an SMS she received
at 1:32 pm as Exhibit US-6.
77 At some point of the text messages. I realised that the propofol remained in
the boot in the car. I went to the car, and retrieved
the remaining vials and
78 I recall making two (2) or three (3) trips. I put the remaining propofol in
the Old Kitchen with the other propofol I had placed
there the day earlier.
79 When I went to the car, and returned to the Property, I did not see [Person
A] on either the couch or mattress in the Living Room.
80 I returned to the couch in the Entertainment Area. Sometime between about
1:30 pm and 2:00 pm I fell asleep on the couch.
81 Between about 5:00 and 5:30 pm [Person A] woke me up by gently shaking me.
(a) [Person A] said to me: "I am hungry, can you make me something to eat".
82 When she woke me up [Person A] was wearing the same clothes as when I had
last seen her on the couch in the Living Room.
83 I cooked hotdogs for us to eat, as well as reheating the leftovers, in the
New Kitchen.
84 As we were eating, I noticed that [Person A] was drowsy, slurring her words
and unsteady on her feet. I asked [Person A] in Hindi:
(a) I said: "What have you done? What have you taken?"
85 Person A] did not reply. I was concerned about [Person A]'s welfare so I
decided to take about seven (7) pictures of her on my
phone. I wanted to show
[Person A] the photos to her later, so I could later show her what her condition
was at the time.
86 [Person A] screamed at me in Hindi and tried to stop me from taking her
photo. We had the following conversation:
(a) [Person A] yelled· "Stop taking photos- stop!'
(b) I said: ·"I'll show them to you later, see when you are like this".
87 I have included the photographs I took on my mobile phone at approximately
88 After [Person A] finished eating. she moved inside the Property from the
Entertainment Area. I recall seeing that [Person A] locked
the sliding doors
connecting the Entertainment Area to the rest of the Property.
A visit from NSW Police
89 After I saw [Person A] locking the doors. I decided to return to sleep and I
fell asleep on the couch in the Entertainment Area.
90 The next event I remember is being woken up by the sound of the sliding doors
in the Entertainment Area being loudly opened.
91 I looked up from the couch and I saw NSW Police officers standing at the door
of the Entertainment Area."
Respondent then related the charges when he was arrested and charged with the
following offences:
(1) use of poison etc. so as to endanger life (domestic violence) pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
(2) larceny as bailee pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
(3) possession/attempt to possess, prescribed restricted substance pursuant to
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
(4) common assault (domestic violence) pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
the matter came to a hearing the most serious of the initial charges, namely the
use of poison etc. as to endanger life, was
withdrawn by the New South Wales
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
his evidence the Respondent has denied that he administered the drug Propofol to
Person A and sought to indicate that she
might well have attempted suicide.
Respondent provided a statement of Dr Leanne Hunt, a registered nurse, who has
worked with the Respondent for a number of years.
The details of her statement
are as follows:
1My name is Dr Leanne HUNT.
2I am 54 years of age. I began my career In nursing In 1992 as a registered
nurse and progressed to a position of CNC (trauma) and
3I am currently employed In the following roles:
(a)since about 1997, I have been a registered nurse working at Liverpool
Hospital, within the Intensive care unit, and now work casually
(b) since about 2011, I have been a Senior Lecturer in Nursing and Deputy
Director, Clinical Education (Nursing) in the School of
Nursing and Midwifery at
the Western Sydney University;
(c) since about 2020, I have been a professional member of the NSW Nursing and
Midwifery Council; and
(d) since about mid-2022, I am a part-time professional member for disciplinary
proceedings commenced In the NSW Civil and Administrative
Learning about Ugendra's criminal conduct
4 I have known Ugendra in a professional capacity for approximately 15 years,
and throughout that time, I have worked with him in
the intensive care unit of
Liverpool Hospital.
5 In about May 2020, I learned through media articles and gossip around
Liverpool Hospital that Ugendra had been arrested and charged
with serious
offences relating to the theft of propofol from the hospital, and the allegation
that he administered the propofol to
his wife with the intention of killing
Remarks about propofol
6 A few weeks prior to Ugendra being arrested, I recall working with him in the
Intensive care unit making a bed in anticipation
for a new patient.
7 I recall making mundane conversation with Ugendra as we were making the bed.
At a point during the conversation, I recall the following
exchange (and doing
the best I can to recall the words used):
(a) Ugendra said: "I take propofol home to kill the cockroaches."
(b) I said: "Do you?"
8 I thought that Ugendra's comment about propofol was bizarre because I did not
understand how he would get the cockroaches to drink
propofol. I concluded that
Ugendra was joking and did not think much about It until I came to learn of his
9 On about 2 June 2020, I arranged to attend an audiovisual conference via Zoom
with Ugendra who had been remanded in custody.
10 During the conversation with Ugendra, I recall the following exchange (and
doing the best I can to recall the words used):
(a) I said: "Do you remember the conversation we had a few weeks ago?'
(b) Ugendra said: "Oh yes - I do remember that. I'll tell my lawyer."
Ugendra's work at Liverpool Hospital
11 I came to learn that Ugendra was making an application for bail in the
Supreme Court of NSW from colleagues at Liverpool Hospital.
12 I recall being asked by either Tony BOGDONOVSKI or Bibek ADHIKARY if I was
prepared to sign a reference for Ugendra in support
of his bail application.
13 I signed the reference and I recall that about 100 other staff at Liverpool
Hospital also signed the reference.
14 I was aware that at the time that I signed the reference, that Ugendra was
facing serious criminal charges including an allegation
that he administered
propofol with the intention of killing his wife.
15 As previously stated, I have worked with Ugendra for over a decade. Ugendra
is an expert practitioner with a lot of years of experience.
Ugendra mentored
new and younger nurses. Ugendra was always very willing to help everybody. It is
for this reason that if Ugendra
is allowed to practise as a nurse again, I would
be prepared to provide him with supervision and mentorship."
ORAL EVIDENCE
cross examination initially centred on whether or not the Person A had advised
AHPRA of a prior conviction to which she replied
that she had not notified them.
The cross examination then turned to questions about whether she had a different
name to her current
name and in particular to a marriage which she had
previously had to a Robert Codell. It was then put to her that she had entered
Australia without referring to the prior conviction and had not notified Ahpra.
She stated that she had never changed her name and
that she did not recall using
the name Codell when she came to Australia.
cross examination then moved on to Person A’s knowledge of Propofol and
whether she had access to it in her work. She stated
that she had read about
Propofol but did not have access to it. In regard to her allegation that the
Respondent said he would give
her a saline drip she was asked whether she knew
what saline bag would looked like and that when she was hesitant to take the
she stated that that was because she knew that the saline which they had
in the garage was old. Person A was cross examined about
discussions with the
various police officers and the social worker and ultimately asked why she
waited 40 to 45 minutes to phone
the police. She stated that she took that
length of time while she spoke to the Respondent. She was cross examined on the
of her sleep. Ultimately she agreed that she woke earlier and it was put
to her that she therefore took two hours to call the police.
was cross examination in relation to the bottles of the Propofol and syringes
and tourniquet in respect of all of which Person
A indicated that she saw the
syringes and noted that there was a milky white substance in them. Person A was
cross examined on the
fact that in May of 2020 she had drunk washing liquid to
which she agreed. It was then put to her that she had also drunk nail polish
which she denied and the cross examination then went to whether she had seen a
psychologist following the washing liquid incident
but denied having been given
any advice to do something about it. Questions were put to her about allegations
of attempts on her
life and asked to agree that she was held overnight at the
Mount Druitt Hospital for examination relating to an attempt at deliberate
harm. Her response was that it was back in 2002 and did not remember. It was
then put to her that there was an allegation of
ingesting about 200 millilitres
of nail polish and she agreed. It was then put to her that on 5 May 2020 she
attempted to take her
own life. She denied this. Cross examination then turned
to various allegations that she had made against the Respondent in February
when she alleged that the Respondent had pushed her into a coffee table. On 9
July 2004 she again made a false allegation against
him. Again it was put to her
that on 18 November 2007 she alleged that he came home drunk and started abusing
her and calling her
a slut. She disagreed with that.
was also put to her that on 5 May 2020 she told the police that she had never
seen Propofol in the house before to which she responded
that she did not recall
the conversation.
cross examination then turned to the time after she heard that the charges of
injecting her with Propofol had been withdrawn and
the fact that she was
extremely upset. She was referred to visits to Westmead Hospital to be treated
and that she was very upset
and wanted an anti depressant. She denied ever
having thoughts of suicide. It was put to the Respondent that she had told her
and family about her separation and divorce and the reason why she
maintained the position of her version of events is that she was
ashamed that
this was her second divorce. She denied this. That concluded the cross
examination of Person A and the witness was excused.
Applicant closed its case.
Respondent was called to give evidence.
Respondent in its opening pointed out that Complaints 1 and 2 were admitted and
that it was ultimately a question of Complaint
3 a very serious allegation of
him having injected her with Propofol. He admits to taking the Propofol but not
to having injected
Person A with it. It is suggested that the video shows that
when the police arrived they found him asleep on the sofa and he said
had been asleep for about two hours that is around 7:00pm. He pointed out that
her being awake at around 5:00pm fits with
his version. The Respondent in
opening suggested that they would be making submissions that Person A was not a
credible witness and
that she had agreed to swallowing washing liquid but not to
the second allegation of swallowing nail polish. He pointed out that
was told about the case against the Respondent being dropped she talked about
“going to get into her car and ending
everything”. She was detained
under the Mental Health Act and conceded that she had not received any
treatment. The Respondent
submitted that this was consistent with the idea that
this is likely if not probable that she injected herself with the Propofol.
was pointed out in opening that from the video one can see, when she was talking
is not near where a cannula would
be inserted. The policeman also indicated that the place pointed out did not
look fresh.
Respondent was then called and the Tribunal was referred to the two statements
made by the Respondent on which the Respondent
Respondent was then cross examined. Cross examination commenced with reference
to the fact that the Respondent had been married
in 1988 and that following an
assault on his then wife the marriage ended.
was charged and pleaded guilty to that assault and stated that the reason he
pleaded guilty to the assault because he had slapped
his wife and was not
represented. He denied that he had threatened his wife with a knife when she
wanted to leave the house but he
stated that he did not remember that. He was
asked to state whether that did or did not happen to which he then stated that
not happen.
matter was then adjourned to 30 January 2025 and cross examination of the
Respondent was resumed.
cross examination turned to the previous allegations of common assault against
him including common assault against his previous
wife. In respect of the common
assaults in Australia the Respondent was taken to Mount Druitt and charged and
that he pleaded guilty
to that. He was asked whether he recalled what was
alleged against him in relation to the common assault to which he stated he did
not remember exactly but that it was about pushing her. He was then referred to
having been stopped by the police while driving and
told them that he had had
five to six beers between 8:00am and 3:00pm. He was taken to the police station
and tested the results
of which showed 0.9g alcohol per 100mL blood, which is
above the legal limit of 0.05. He was charged and found guilty. It was put
him that he drank more than five to six beers and that it was important that he
was being truthful. It was suggested that he told
the police a lesser amount to
lessen the offence. He disagreed with that.
was referred to the charge of larceny and the fact that he pleaded guilty to
that. He was asked whether he had a lawyer and was
given advice by the lawyer.
He also admitted that he knew that the Magistrate would rely on that statement
regard to the common assault allegation he was asked whether the reason that he
pleaded guilty to the common assault was that because
it happened; which he
was then cross examined in relation to the Propofol and asked where he had put
it. He stated that he had put that in a cupboard
on the first occasion and that
on the second occasion it was left in the car. He was asked about Person A
complaining of being dehydrated
to which he stated that she never said that. He
was then asked why that was put into the Statement of Facts, he stated that he
not know. He was asked whether he offered to administer a saline drip which
he denied. He was then asked why he agreed to that in
the Statement of Facts and
it was suggested that in presenting this document and signing it he made an
untruthful allegation to the
Magistrates Court. The Respondent stated that he
did not wish to answer that question and that on advice from his solicitors he
that he would answer that question if a certificate against incrimination
is given. The certificate against incrimination was given
and his response was
to the effect that Mr Maybury and all the people in the room may not realise
what it is like being in a prison
for six months for something that he did not
do. Sleeping with people you don’t know and you don’t know whether
up the next morning. He was not prepared to go back to the prison so he
pleaded guilty to a common assault charge so his plea of
guilty to a common
assault charge was the preferable way. It was put to him that he conveyed an
untruth to the Magistrates Court
to which he stated that he did not agree.
was asked questions about whether he slapped Person A and he stated that he did
not slap her. He was asked questions about a letter
that he had written to the
presiding judge in the criminal case and when he related to the facts he said
that he was remorseful for
his actions. He stated that he did that because there
was a plea bargain. It was put to him that if it didn’t happen why did
say that he was remorseful, and that he said it because it did in fact happen.
He disagreed with that.
examination turned to his visits to Dr Lemmings who the Respondent had been
consulting and asked whether he did tell him that
he in fact did these things.
He stated that that was not correct. He was asked whether he told Dr Lemmings
that he was charged and
was remorseful which he denied.
Respondent was asked whether he was on bail at the time of these proceedings and
were there certain conditions imposed on him.
He agreed. It was put to him that
under the conditions he was not allowed to attend any place serving alcohol to
which he agreed.
He also responded to the fact that in order to not go back to
jail he needed to comply. He was asked if he ever breached that condition
stated that he had not. It was put to him that he did however go to a place
selling alcohol and gave an explanation that he wanted
to get some change as his
mother needed it; so he went there to get some change and Person A saw him. He
was asked whether there
was no other place to get change, he stated that there
was but that he had passed it. He was asked how long he was at the pub and
stated that it was about five to ten minutes.
was asked whether he had a $50 note. He confirmed that he did and was asked
whether he went to the pub and asked for change. He
stated that they have change
machines and it was therefore put to him that he could have got the change and
left. He was asked whether
he went to the bar and got a drink which he confirmed
but he stated that when he saw Person A he did not finish his drink and left.
was asked why it is that if he was so fearful of going back to jail he went to a
pub and had a drink to which he responded that
he was not thinking straight. It
was put to him that he had no respect for the law and that is why he did it,
which he said was not
cross examination then moved to the stealing of the Propofol and the fact that
his explanation was that he took it to deal with
cockroaches. He was referred to
certain photographs showing a gap in the doors where the cockroaches were coming
in and was asked
whether he thought of doing something else to deal with it. He
called someone to come and deal with it. One person said he would
not come and
the other quoted $200 plus. He said that that was too much so he went and bought
2 x 2 litres of Mortein to spray and
bought nozzles to spray it around.
examination then addressed the alternatives for dealing with cockroaches and was
questioned on the fact that he purchased spray
for cockroaches on 17 March 2020.
He was asked why he had not used the spray by 4 May 2022. His only response was
that it was a very
bad problem but gave no explanation as to why he had not used
it prior thereto. Once he decided to deal with the matter in May he
steal the Propofol from his employer and in explanation he stated that Propofol
is a sticky substance so he believed that
he could get the cockroaches to stick
to the ground and then spray them with a destructive spray.
cross examination then moved on to the handling of the Propofol. According to
his evidence he stated that he placed the initial
Propofol in the cupboard in
the kitchen and stated that his wife knew that it was there. He was then asked
questions in relation
to the additional Propofol that he removed from the
hospital the next day. He was asked questions as to why some of the Propofol
not in boxes while others were and he stated that that was just how he took it.
He stated that he spoke to his sister at 1:32pm
and went straight to sleep after
that. He was asked questions in relation to the CCTV camera where he went to the
car after 3:00pm
when he said that he was asleep. His answer was that he must
have lost time or the sequence of events.
was put to him that the reason he stated that Person A did not want to live
anymore was because he wanted to show that she was
trying to kill herself. He
then said that that was not the case, but when asked whether he alleged that she
was administering the
Propofol to herself he said he did not know what
APPLICANT'S SUBMISSIONS
Applicant provided submissions on the question of the obligations of the
Tribunal and accepts that the Applicant has the onus
of proof in relation to the
Complaint. The Applicant however indicated that there were a number of troubling
aspects to the Respondent’s
version of events and the manner in which
events unfolded which tell against him being accepted as a witness of
(1) that the Respondent was prepared to steal restricted substances from his
workplace on not 1 but 2 occasions, on his version to
avoid paying $300 or $400
to a pest controller;
(2) that the Respondent’s explanation for why he took the Propofol is
addressed below;
(3) that the Respondent was prepared to break his bail conditions, which he
accepted he knew was very serious and could mean he went
change' from licensed premises. There were other places such as service stations
he could have tried, but
his evidence was he thought this was the best place,
and he could not possibly simply not get change for his family member. The
would find this was a lie and he went there for his own purposes, but
in any event going there to `get change' then staying for a
drink was clearly
something he knew was improper and yet he did it anyway. It also does not align
with his evidence that he pleaded
guilty to the assault charge even though it
was untrue because he would, in essence, do anything to avoid prison;
(4) that the Respondent's version of events has changed at times, such as:
(a) the Respondent told Police he brought the Propofol home and when he got home
he just “left them in the cupboard”,
he just took it straight home
to the cupboard “Yeah”. That version was given in conjunction with
him telling Police that
he had spent most of the day on 5 May 2020 sleeping,
that he had fallen asleep just after midday and woken up at 5:00pm;
That version is plainly untruthful, based on the CCTV footage which shows the
Respondent going back and forward to the car several
times in the afternoon of 5
May 2020 to retrieve a few boxes of Propofol at a time from his car boot;
(b) when confronted with the objective evidence that, firstly what he had said
secondly, put paid to the
suggestion he had simply spent the whole afternoon sleeping, the Respondent's
change of tack was to have
this unconvincing exchange with Police when they
asked him about the CCTV footage:
Respondent "I remembered it was in the car and it needed to be in the fridge'
[The Respondent's evidence in the proceedings was it
does not in fact need to be
stored in the fridge]
Police "So the boxes contained Propofol"
Respondent "Yes"
Police "You said you were asleep during this time"
Respondent "I did sleep, yes. "
Police "Why did you do so many trips to the car?"
Respondent "Because I remembered that there was more in the car"
(c) when confronted with the apparent anomaly and questioned as to why he made
so many trips to the car separated in time, the Respondent
gave evidence that
after the first trip he got distracted because he remembered he had a bill he
had to pay on the internet. This
evidence was wholly unconvincing, and in any
event does not explain why there were 3 trips separate in time, rather than 2.
It should be noted the objective evidence also does not align with the
Respondent's evidence in his statement, whereby he got all
the Propofol from the
car and then fell asleep on the couch between 1:30 and 2:00pm;
(d) the Respondent told Police he was going to use a syringe to spray the
Propofol around his premises but in cross examination,
no doubt having realised
the ridiculousness of that statement, he said that he was going to use the pump
he had bought to spray the
Mortein he had purchased to also spread the Propofol;
(5) the Respondent's explanation for why he took photos of Person A in the
late afternoon or early evening of 5 May 2020 is bizarre.
He says he took photos
because she was slurring, drowsy and unsteady, that he was worried and wanted to
show her later how she was
behaving, but he had no explanation for why in those
circumstances he took a few still photos instead of a video;
(6) the Respondent's evidence in the witness box to the effect that when
stealing the Propofol he had no clue discovery would lead
disciplinary issues or him losing his job was ridiculous. He told Police
immediately after being caught that he was really
scared he would probably lose
his job. In answer to questions from the Tribunal he gave evidence that in his
many years working at
Liverpool Hospital there had been training about the
seriousness of taking things.
(7) this evidence under pressure in the witness box was an example of the
Respondent simply refusing to accept that he was aware of
the seriousness of his
actions, and to demur or downplay his misconduct. It showed he was prepared to
say things that simply were
not true to paint himself in a better light.
cockroach explanation is the Respondents false, manufactured explanation as to
why he stole the Propofol. It is worth considering
in some detail, and it
unfolded like this:
(1) the Respondent said he had the pest trouble and could not afford a pest
controller;
(2) he said he had been Googling, and Propofol could be used to deter
cockroaches;
(3) his plan was to spread the Propofol around the house and then spray with
Mortein afterwards.
(4) he had bought some Mortein to spray around the house in this manner, but it
should be noted that he purchased this on 17 March
2020, some 7 weeks before the
events the subject of the application, and despite him saying how bad the pest
problem was, he had
not used it in that time;
(5) he took the Propofol to spread around because it was oily and sticky, and he
thought if insects came into contact with it, it
would slow them down so he
could then go and spray them with Mortein (even though the Mortein he purchased
was an outdoor spray that
he agreed in his evidence was to create a barrier to
prevent insects); and
(6) in cross examination he said he had not turned his mind or given thought to
using any other sticky substance to execute his plan.
No doubt this was because
his plan was an unbelievable concoction.
is then the difficulties with the evidence about how the Propofol got into the
house, the Respondent clearly initially trying
to convey he got home and brought
it all in, until confronted with the CCTV footage.
story about the cockroaches is a falsehood. It beggars belief that the
Respondent would put his job on the line to steal a restricted,
pharmaceutical substance to try and slow down cockroaches by randomly spraying
(a mere 600mL of ) Propofol around his house
so that he could then kill them. It
was a lie to the Police when put on the spot that the Respondent has wedded
himself to. The Tribunal
should find that the Respondent deliberately lied to
Police and in his evidence in this Tribunal about his reason for stealing the
Propofol. That has a devastating and damning impact on his credit, and certainly
The Respondent is prepared
to lie and change his version as suits him.
brings us to his evidence as to the events of 5 May 2020 in general. Put simply,
it should be rejected. His evidence that he
went out to the back room and did
not see Person A again until after he awoke from his nap (whenever that really
was) must be rejected,
particularly given it was originally prefaced on him
going to that room and sleeping from 12:00pm to 5:00pm, but we now know he
through the main section of the house several times throughout the
evidence was that on the last occasion that he took Propofol to the cupboard,
after his trip to the car around 3:30pm, the Propofol
was all still there. That
is untrue. What in fact was happening was that he was going back and forward to
the car to get more Propofol
to administer to Person A. On his version between
3:30pm and 5:00pm Person A must have found the Propofol and self administered it
(seemingly an extremely large quantity in a short period, given the Police found
12 empty vials). Moreover, based on the paraphernalia
found by Police, it seems
to be suggested she self administered it through a cannula line and a push
syringe, which seems a bizarre
way of self administration particularly because
this would have made her insensate almost immediately.
A's evidence that he offered to give her saline, inserted a cannula then she
passed out (inferentially due to him administering
Propofol instead) should be
accepted. Person A was clearly a person who had been caused significant distress
by the Respondent. Her
evidence about this issue was forthright, direct and
consistent. She had Propofol in her blood. There is no reason to reject her
evidence and prefer the Respondent's, or to reject her evidence at all. She was
clearly distressed when Police arrived, consistent
with the awful events that
had befallen her.
Respondent cannot be believed. The Tribunal should find he has tailored his
version to Police and the Tribunal, knowing it was
false, to avoid or minimise
the consequences of his actions, in the same way he presented himself to the
Local Court to try and do
RESPONDENT'S
SUBMISSIONS
Respondent has made submissions in relation to the onus of proof and how the
Tribunal should assess that and has then turned to
the evidence of Person A
whose evidence it submits should be rejected by the Tribunal. In relation to
that evidence the Respondent
commences with arguments in relation to the
untruths which Person A has told in previous allegations of assault and which
were concerned about. In relation to Person A’s motive to be
untruthful the Respondent states that Person A harboured wicked
motives to give
and later maintain a fictitious narrative of events. The Respondent also
referred to previous attempts at self‑harm
and/or suicide attempts and
indicated that on that basis it should be determined that an explanation of the
injection of Propofol
should be seen as an attempt to commit suicide.
Respondent submitted that Person A self administering Propofol would be a
plausible alternative account to a calculated and deliberate
attempt to murder
her. It would be the common experience and well within the expertise of the
Members of the Tribunal that a previous
suicide attempt is the largest single
factor predictive of future suicide risk and death by suicide. This alternative
may also offer
a cogent explanation for the logical inconsistencies the
Respondent will draw the Tribunal’s attention in the balance of these
submissions. In support of that allegation a report by a forensic toxicologist
following analysis of journal articles cited in her
report that there have been
“numerous reports of Propofol being abused mainly by medical professionals
due to their easy access
to this drug”.
Respondent then moved onto the events of 5 May 2020 and early 6 May 2020.
Respondent submitted a number of instances of discrepancies in the period after
she awoke and her communications with the police.
In light of the various
communications to which the Respondent referred the Respondent submitted that
the Applicant’s submission
that Person A’s evidence was
“straightforward, consistent and compelling”. The Respondent
submitted that it was
hardly straightforward, consistent and compelling.
Respondent relied heavily on conversations with the police and the ambulance
authorities and in particular to statements about
what the police saw in respect
of the insertion of a cannula with the constable stating that upon inspection
Person A’s left
hand he saw “two small red marks on the back of her
left hand one closer to her wrist and one closer to her knuckles”.
A “pointed to the red mark closer to her wrist and said this is new. This
is where he put it” and “pointed
to the mark closer to her knuckle
and said this is a scar”.
Respondent dealt with the insertion of a cannula for receiving a saline infusion
and the fact that she was told that the Respondent
was going to bring a saline
solution bag and her statement that she did not see him with a saline bag and
that she saw a milky substance
in a vial. The Respondent submitted that this is
highly unlikely as she would have known the difference between putting up a
bag and working with something other than a saline bag which would have
been clear. The Respondent raised serious doubts about Person
A’s version
of the insertion of the cannula and the fact that according to her version the
Respondent, a trained nurse with
over 20 years of experience would require at
least five separate attempts before succeeding – twice on her right hand
times on her left hand. The Respondent submitted that this would be a
most unlikely situation to arise with the experience that the
Respondent has as
Respondent stated that it was curious that Person A did not contact emergency
services either New South Wales Police or New South
Wales Ambulance upon waking
despite knowing the 000 number. Notwithstanding a grave allegation and the fears
she held for her safety
she waited about 40 to 45 minutes after confronting the
Respondent before using Google to find the number of Mount Druitt Police
Station. Further the Respondent submitted that the toxicology report of Dr Van
Nieuwenhuijzen stated that he was unable to determine
whether the Propofol was
administered voluntarily or not nor is he able to determine how much Propofol
was administered. The toxicological
evidence only shows that Propofol was in
Person A’s system. It states that that proposition is consistent with the
Respondent’s
assertion that Person A had self‑administered the
Respondent submitted that the risk of detection and inevitable prosecution would
have been obvious to the Respondent, however
the Respondent submitted when
interrogated that the counterfactual is wildly implausible. First, the
Respondent was a competent intensive
care nurse, who was aware that he used his
swipe key to access the propofol from the ICU pharmacy of Liverpool Hospital.
if it was not obvious to any investigator where the Respondent could
have obtained the vials, the Respondent was also aware that
the propofol was
likely to be traceable, like all medications, by their unique batch numbers
(that is precisely how NSW Police approached
this task). Second, if the
Respondent truly wished to seriously harm Person A, this was not a cunning plan.
The Respondent would
have been the obvious suspect, and the weapon used would
have sealed his fate. The Commission would have the Members of this Tribunal
believe that the Respondent, having committed a heinous felony, left himself at
the mercy of law enforcement by taking a nap. Third,
and related to the second,
instead of fleeing when the means and opportunity presented itself - at 12:24pm,
or 3:04pm, or 3:36pm
being times which the Commission has asserted the
Respondent was injecting Person A, the Respondent returned, continued to offend,
and inexplicably did not seek to conceal or destroy incriminating evidence.
Fourth, the Respondent left damning evidence exposed
where the only witness who
could accuse him of criminality had been "knocked out". In those circumstances,
it is nonsensical that
the Respondent:
(1) did not seek to dispose of any of the paraphernalia said to have been used
to commit the offence;
(2) did not seek to dispose of the substance or evidence of its existence where
the vials could have easily been traced to Liverpool
Hospital — his place
of employment;
(3) despite having access to the CCTV, did not attempt to delete or wipe the
hard drive when he knew that he was captured on it;
(4) was polite and cooperative with law enforcement in the manner described
without any knowledge that the NSW Police officers had
located the blue plastic
bag secreted in a different room in the house.
Fifth, the Puncture Allegation is illogical. If Person A is to be believed,
the pathways to the puncture marks on both of her hands
is binary — either
the Respondent attempted to cannulate Person A on at least five (5) separate
occasions before succeeding
— twice (2) on her right hand, and three (3)
on her left; or he made further attempts after Person A was unconscious. The
would have the experienced nursing practitioners of this Tribunal
accept that the Respondent failed to properly cannulate Person
A where, by
Person A's own account, she was not physically resisting its insertion having
consented to a saline drip. Again, given
the Respondent's experience and study,
this seems highly improbable.
Respondent’s account does not beggar belief, as described by the
Commission by pointing out that the Respondent bears no
onus. Although it is
conceded that the Respondent’s explanation for stealing the Propofol is
unusual, the Respondent had foreshadowed
his purpose for taking the Propofol
with Dr Hunt before 5 May 2020 and where the Respondent’s conduct that
evening having committed
a heinous offence is intuitively irrational, the
Respondent submits that his evidence ought to be preferred over Person
DECISION AND REASONS
Tribunal having read the evidence contained in all of the exhibits provided to
the Tribunal, having heard the evidence presented
by the Applicant and the
evidence given by the Respondent, having reviewed the various additional
documents which were tendered and
having considered the submissions made by the
Applicant and the Respondent, the Tribunal is satisfied that the complaint made
the Applicant against the Respondent as set out in the Complaints 1 and 2 by
admission and therefore require no reasons. In respect
of Complaint 3 the
Tribunal has come to the conclusion that the Complaint is proven and that the
Respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional
misconduct.
basis on which the Tribunal has come to that conclusion is that the Tribunal
noted the submissions by the Applicant and the Respondent
that the onus of
proving the Complaint rests with the Applicant; and that as the version
presented by Person A and the version presented
by the Respondent are
diametrically opposed, it is imperative for the Tribunal to form a view on the
two witnesses and to determine
whose version of the events the Tribunal finds
more acceptable.
A gave evidence of the events on the day and was extensively cross examined on
issues relating to her credibility including
past allegations of assaults on her
person and also on an assault committed by Person A some many years before this
became clear that there were aspects of her evidence which were challenged and
which indicated that in various instances she had
either lied or failed to
disclose the truth. This position certainly called into question her credibility
but in respect of the events
of the day, notwithstanding that there were
differences in her evidence given to the police on the day or made by her
subsequently,
the main issue for testing the evidence of Person A was the
testing of the implication by the Respondent that Person A had administered
vials of Propofol to herself in an attempt to commit suicide. The evidence of
Person A was clear in that she had discussed with
the Respondent the fact that
she was feeling dehydrated and the Respondent stated that he would take some
saline liquid which he
had in the garage and would administer saline to her to
rehydrate. She was to some extent concerned about having the saline administered
to her but ultimately agreed for the Respondent to do so. In her evidence she
stated that she was concerned when the Respondent did
not hang a saline bag in
the normal way and when the Respondent was administering the liquid she noted
that it looked murky and not
clear. However by the time she asked the Respondent
why that was so she was already drowsy and only woke up some considerable time
there were doubts about the credibility of Person A it was extremely important
for the Tribunal to then hear the evidence of the
Respondent and to consider the
credibility of the Respondent as there was a direct conflict on the specific
issue relating to the
administering of the Propofol. The Respondent also gave
evidence in various forms and there were various contradictions in evidence
given by the Respondent. Turning to the evidence of the day the evidence which
the Respondent gave was to the effect that he went
to obtain saline from the
garage. He denied that he ever administered any Propofol to the Respondent and
in order to confirm that
position he stated that he had spoken to his sister at
approximately midday at a time when Person A was asleep and that immediately
thereafter he went to sleep himself and was only woken by the police after they
had been called by Person A.
issue of the handling of the Propofol is important in that in the evidence of
the Respondent he stated that he had brought home
six vials of Propofol which he
had stolen from the hospital at which he worked and that the following day he
had again taken six
vials from the hospital and brought those home. The sequence
of events which were his evidence was that he had put the six vials
cupboard in the kitchen and on the following day had left the vials in his car
and that he had brought them into the house
at some point of time on the day. In
cross examination the Respondent was challenged on the timing of the placing of
the additional
vials in the cupboard and was shown CCTV footage of his security
system in which it was clear that he made three trips to the car
to bring in
additional vials of Propofol in a period of time between 3:30pm and 4:00pm. This
was in direct conflict with his evidence
that he went to sleep shortly after
having spoken to his sister and that he remained asleep for several hours.
Counsel for the Applicant
sought to receive an explanation for the conflict in
that evidence and the Respondent was unable to give any convincing evidence
to how it happened that he could be brining vials of Propofol into the house
when he alleged that he had been sleeping. A further
concerning element of his
evidence on this issue was that he claimed that the vials of Propofol were
placed in the cupboard but in
a discussion with the police he stated that he had
gone out to bring the vials in so that he could put them in the fridge. He
that he had said that as his position had always been that the vials
could be kept in the cupboard.
considering the fact that Propofol was found in Person A’s body after
examination forces the Tribunal to consider the likelihood
of how that came to
was no suggestion at any time that there was any person other than Person A and
the Respondent in the house on that day. Accordingly,
if the Respondent denies
that he administered the Propofol the implication must be that Person A
administered it herself in order
to commit suicide. It is for that reason that
evidence was lead of two previous instances where Person A swallowed soap liquid
on one occasion nail polish.
Tribunal was concerned about this implication in that there were 12 vials of
Propofol which were found alongside where Person
A had been sleeping and that
they were empty. It is difficult to imagine that a person could in the space of
time alleged have administered
12 vials of Propofol to herself.
further concern which the Tribunal had with the Respondent’s evidence is
the explanation which the Respondent gave for why
he stole the Propofol in the
first place. His explanation was to the effect that he was concerned about an
excessive number of cockroaches
that were entering the house through access
points and that he had sought to have that dealt with by a pest control expert.
The quotations
were in the range of $400 and he decided that he could not spend
that amount. Therefore months before this incident he went to Costco
purchased Mortein liquid and a spray to spray the surrounding area and to kill
the cockroaches. The Respondent was challenged
on the fact that if he was so
concerned about the cockroaches what was his reason for not utilising the
Mortein that he had purchased
and that months had passed before he then
determined to use the Propofol in conjunction with the Mortein.
further area in which the Tribunal were concerned about the credibility of the
Respondent was in relation to the criminal trial
brought against him and in
which he reached a plea bargain with the prosecution in order to not have to be
returned to prison where
he had been held prior to the hearing and not on bail.
The answer which he gave was that he was so afraid after the hearing and when
was released on certain conditions namely that he was not permitted to enter any
premises where alcohol was served and then he
relayed to the Tribunal an
incident when he needed to change a $50 note and which he then went into a pub
to do so. He was challenged
on the fact that he was not permitted to go into a
pub and that he could have changed the $50 note at some other place. He could
not give a valid answer to that challenge. In addition he was asked whether he
immediately changed the money and then left immediately
but responded that he
had just gone and bought a beer. He was seen by Person A and he therefore left
immediately. That is inconsistent
with the suggestion that he entered into a
plea bargain in order to avoid the possibility of being returned to jail. On
balance the
Tribunal formed the view that the Respondent was prone to make
statements that were extremely self‑serving even in situations
were largely not credible.
up the evidence with its flaws of Person A and the evidence of the Respondent
with its flaws the Tribunal is comfortably
satisfied that the Respondent’s
version should be rejected and accordingly, as there was no other possible way
in which Propofol
could have got into Person A’s body, that the Respondent
is guilty of the allegations contained in Complaint 3 and that this
professional misconduct.
concludes Stage 1 of this matter and the issues relating to the question of
orders to be made will be determined after the Stage
2 hearing which has been
(1) The Respondent is guilty of Complaints 1, 2 and 3 and is found guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct.
(2) The matter is adjourned to 27 and 28 November 2025 for hearing of Stage
(3) Costs are reserved.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the New South Wales Civil and Administrative
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (362 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter