URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/76.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BOH v Engineering Solutions and Services Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICPD 76; (29 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
BOH v Engineering Solutions and Services Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICPD
RESPONDENT:
Engineering Solutions and Services Pty Ltd
Employers Mutual NSW Limited
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W27381/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Michael Snell
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
29 October 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
is granted to the respondent, pursuant to
Personal Injury
Commission Act 2020
, to be represented by an Australian legal
practitioner.
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
this decision is to be
de-identified consistent with the approach taken at first instance.
appellant’s application to extend time for the bringing of the appeal
pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
Personal Injury Commission Rules
is refused.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – application to extend time for the bringing of
an appeal pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
and r 133A of the
Personal Injury Commission
; ‘exceptional circumstances’ – application of
Bryce v Department of Corrective Services
[2009] NSWCA 188
of the 1998 Act and ‘fresh evidence’ on appeal –
Australia Ltd v Strickland
[2013] NSWCA 351
; extension of time to appeal
Jackamarra v Krakouer
[1998] HCA 27
195 CLR 516
Nanschild v Pratt
[2011] NSWCA 85
Shapkin v Lorenzato
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
Respondent:
Mr P Lichaa, solicitor
Bartier Perry Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
BOH v Engineering Solutions and Services Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPIC
PRINCIPAL MEMBER:
Mr J Harris
DATE OF PRINCIPAL MEMBER’S DECISION:
5 February 2025
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
names of BOH (the appellant), companies associated with the appellant, and a
witness (BOJ) were deidentified pursuant to rule
132 of the Personal Injury
Commission Rules 2021 (the Rules) when the first instance decision of Principal
Member Harris (the Principal
Member) was
I have used the same
pseudonyms in this appeal decision.
appellant suffered injury on 24 December 2020 when he fell from a ladder in the
course of his employment with Engineering Solutions
and Services Pty Ltd (the
respondent). He was admitted to John Hunter Hospital on 24 December 2020. The
appellant was discharged
later the same day. He did not resume work with the
respondent. The respondent’s insurer, Employers Mutual NSW Limited (EML),
accepted liability to make weekly payments of compensation and medical expenses.
issued a dispute notice pursuant to s 78 of the
Workplace Injury Management
and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) dated 28 February
in which it denied further
liability. An application for review led to the denial of liability being
maintained.
The current proceedings
were commenced by way of the ARD dated 9 October 2024. The matter was heard by
the Principal Member, who
conducted extended preliminary conferences on
12 November 2024 and 26 November 2024, and a hearing on 14 January 2025.
The appellant
was unrepresented and the respondent was represented (by leave) by
Ms Coleman, solicitor (on the first two occasions) and by Mr Lichaa,
solicitor (on the third occasion). At the hearing on 14 January 2025, the
respondent’s solicitor advised that the appellant
had received weekly
payments for 173 weeks and thus was “in the section 38
appellant claimed weekly compensation from 16 April 2024 on a continuing basis.
The reasons described the appellant as having
received more than 130 weeks of
weekly compensation. The reasons noted the respondent admitted “soft
tissue injuries to various
body parts but denied injuries by way of spinal
fractures, internal puncture wound, post-traumatic stress disorder, spinal
compression,
hypertension, whiplash, chronic pain syndrome or thoracic
appellant said he had been in paid employment since mid-November 2024. He had
documents that went to the “nature and extent”
of this work. The
respondent was given leave to rely on
Workers Compensation
(the 1987 Act). Although psychiatric injury was not pleaded in the
ARD, it was agreed at the hearing that the appellant alleged psychiatric
which the respondent disputed.
Certificate of Determination was issued on 5 February 2025, accompanied by the
Principal Member’s reasons. The Principal Member
found the appellant had
suffered, since 10 April 2024, from a psychiatric condition caused by the work
injury. He found the appellant
had not proved the other disputed injuries
resulted from the work injury on 24 December 2024. He found that at all times
April 2024 the appellant had current work capacity. He found the
appellant had not established “the statutory pre-condition”
38(3)(c) of the 1987 Act. There was an award for the respondent on the claim for
weekly compensation pursuant to s 38. There
was a general order that the
respondent pay the appellant’s expenses pursuant to s 60 of the 1987
Act from 10 April 2024 to
date and continuing related to the psychological
injury. There was liberty to apply in respect of any s 60 dispute. There was an
order for deidentification prior to publication to include, at least, pseudonyms
for the appellant and associated companies.
PRINCIPAL MEMBER’S REASONS
Principal Member set out the issues in a fashion generally consistent with the
discussion above.
The Principal
Member observed the appellant was “obviously suffering from a psychiatric
condition associated with his chronic
pain”. The Principal Member noted
the appellant had “recently commenced employment” which required
questioning
on this topic. The Principal Member said he advised the parties that
material in the admitted documents would not be considered unless
subject of submission. He said he had attempted to explain s 38 of the 1987 Act
to the appellant and advised him that
his evidence did not address s 38(3)(c).
He said the appellant declined an invitation to discontinue the proceedings and
obtain further
Principal Member set out, in point form, the appellant’s submissions in
The Principal Member
described the appellant’s oral evidence. He noted the respondent had given
notice it wished to question
the appellant on his financial records. The
Principal Member said the process adopted was that the appellant, assisted by
the Principal
Member’s questioning, responded to specific questions raised
by the respondent in correspondence, following production of the
appellant’s bank accounts. The reasons at [25] to [39] set out the
appellant’s responses. The appellant agreed he was
employed in two jobs.
He had been unsuccessful in getting work for his business. He had completed a
degree in civil engineering in
2023 and was seeking work from home in that
business. The appellant said he had completed an RSA course and looked for work
Principal Member referred to a Quantum corp report. ASIC documents showed the
appellant was the sole director and shareholder
of a named company until
5 September 2024. Accompanying documents described its services, which
were, in general terms, of an engineering
nature. The Principal Member referred
to the company’s website and said it held itself out as “highly
capable of undertaking
complex civil engineering projects”, although it
appeared it had “undertaken no
Principal Member referred to a detailed statement from the appellant dated
23 April 2024 and revised on 5 October
I will not seek to
summarise the Principal Member’s summation in any detail. It said the
appellant stated that, in his fall
from a ladder, he suffered injury to his
shoulder, thoracic spine and possibly a head injury. The appellant stated that
forcibly impacted the ladder and a metal tool inflicted a
“puncture wound on the left hip which became dislocated”. He
that on the day following the injury he awoke “in severe pain in the head,
back, eyes and entire spinal region”.
The Principal Member referred to a
“further comprehensive statement dated 25 April 2024”. The appellant
said the injuries
demonstrated “partial incapacity for work”. He
said he suffered “spinal and rib fractures, head and neck injury,
lower back dislocation and extensive musculoskeletal damage as well as
psychological injury”. The appellant referred
to breaches of the
Health and Safety Act 2011
The Principal Member set out the appellant’s description of his injuries
in this statement:
“[The appellant] described his injuries as
head injury which involved traumatic brain injury, cervical whiplash including
disc herniations causing nerve compression, two broken ribs affecting the
chest wall shoulder and neck, thoracic kyphosis resulting
in significant pain
and functional limitation, dislocated hip, puncture in the lumbar region causing
significant functional impairment,
issues in the thoracic spine and moderate
hypertension.”
appellant described himself as suffering whole person impairment of
“approximately 51%”. Recent certificates of incapacity
issued by the
appellant’s general practitioner indicated “soft tissue injury to
neck, back, hips, knees, lower legs,
axillae and somatic symptom disorder and
certified the [appellant] with no current work capacity”.
Principal Member referred to the appellant’s attendance at John Hunter
Hospital on the date of accident:
“The clinical notes indicate
that the [appellant] had a fall from a ladder of 2.5m, injury in the mid
thoracic and right scapular
pain with a denial of neck pain and nil motor or
sensory deficit. There was no head strike, no loss of consciousness and no
of neurological symptoms or other
Principal Member summarised reports of the multiple scans undergone by the
appellant between 24 December 2020 and 8 February
He summarised treating
medical reports from Dr New (a qualified orthopaedic surgeon), Mr Awit (a
treating psychologist), Dr Pope
(a treating neurosurgeon), Dr Nazha (a treating
pain physician), Dr Waqar (a treating psychologist), Dr Chow (a treating pain
specialist),
Dr Yu (a treating pain specialist), Dr Coleman (a general
practitioner) and Dr Havryk (a treating respiratory and sleep disorder
physician).
Principal Member summarised a report from Dr Gorman, a consultant physician,
dated 22 August 2024. Part of the doctor’s
speciality was pain medicine.
Dr Gorman was qualified by solicitors who previously acted for the appellant. Dr
Gorman concluded the
appellant presented with widespread symptoms associated
with psychological distress, he diagnosed “somatic symptom
The doctor considered this diagnosis was consistent with
“widespread pain focus with no organic
abnormalities”.
Principal Member referred to reports from Dr Nagesh, a psychiatrist qualified by
the respondent. Dr Nagesh diagnosed major depression.
He initially considered
the worker to be totally incapacitated, although changed this view when he
became aware the appellant was
working full-time. The doctor considered the
appellant had the capacity to work full-time in suitable duties running his own
The Principal Member
summarised the report of Dr Hale, an orthopaedic surgeon qualified by the
respondent, dated 7 February 2024.
Dr Hale considered the “diffuse
body pain” was inconsistent with any musculoskeletal diagnosis. Dr Hale
referred to previous
references to “chronic pain syndrome and possible
PTSD as a result of the work related injury” but described this as
his “area of expertise”. The Principal Member stated he regarded Dr
Hale’s conclusion on capacity as an
expression of fitness for work based
on the musculoskeletal
diagnosis”.
Principal Member dealt with the appellant’s hospital admissions in 2024.
He said the appellant “was admitted to hospital
involuntarily on at least
three occasions in 2024 following threats of violence against third parties
associated with the denial
o[f] liability by the insurer, prior proceedings and
suggestions of self-harm”.
The Principal Member said there was an involuntary admission to St
Vincent’s Hospital on 6 June 2024. The records referred
to “chronic
pain and extensive somatic complaints”. The Principal Member quoted from
Dr Davis, a psychiatric registrar,
who said there were “[m]ultiple
symptoms that are largely illogical and don’t make medical sense”.
The reasons
quoted the following passage from the views of Dr
“I believe that [the appellant] is psychotic, with
prominent somatic delusions and some persecutory delusions and misinterpretation
of normal body sensations. Some of the paranoia reinsurance agency, may be based
in reality, re-surveillance for fraud. His Mood
is incongruent. Diagnosis -
somatic symptom disorder requires a further period of observation. Diagnosis
psychotic depression.”
Principal Member quoted from the handwritten notes of Dr Huber, also a
psychiatric registrar who treated the appellant at St Vincent’s
On 26 July 2024 she referred to the appellant’s “sense of injustice
which had driven various behaviours including
intimidation and threats towards
staff of the insurer and suicidal ideation which had now become chronic”.
Dr Huber wrote that
the appellant agreed his symptoms fulfilled the criteria for
somatic symptom disorder. Dr Huber thought it likely “his fall
caused the syndrome”.
Principal Member said he accepted the appellant had a “belief that there
are serious issues with his body not explained
by a multitude of scans which are
basically [normal] and otherwise represent mild age-related issues”. He
said the appellant
failed to make full and proper disclosure of his taxation
returns and bank statements. He referred to the appellant’s taxation
return, and an amended return, for the 2024 financial year. The Principal Member
concluded the appellant understated his income in
both of these documents,
indicating a preparedness to deceive others for personal
The Principal Member
rejected the respondent’s submission that the appellant’s
“late disclosure of recent employment
[was] adverse to the
[appellant’s] credit”. The Principal Member said there was “no
attempt to hide the work ...
and indeed this employment was
volunteered”.
Principal Member noted the respondent’s submission that the appellant was
“inconsistent and inaccurate” in medical
histories. The Principal
Member contrasted histories provided to Dr New and Dr Nagesh (in September 2022
and November 2023 respectively)
regarding the appellant’s social and
personal life, with the history provided at St Vincent’s Hospital on 25
He accepted this represented an example of a lack of proper
disclosure and inconsistency in histories to medical
practitioners.
Principal Member referred to inconsistencies in the reporting of prior
depressive symptoms. Dr Waqar recorded a psychiatric history
“associated
with bullying at school and terrorist attacks in Lebanon”. The Eastern
Suburbs Community Health Service,
in August 2015, recorded a history of
“suicidal ideation in the context of a relationship breakdown”. A
subsequent note
taken by a GP recorded “a history of suicide threats when
in crisis”. The Principal Member contrasted this with the history
Dr Nagesh on 22 November
in which the appellant
“denied any previous history of mental illness”. (I note in that
history the appellant did say
he was exposed to bombs when aged 16 and that a
psychologist said he felt there was PTSD stemming from [the appellant’s]
childhood”.)
The reasons described the appellant misquoting doctors
– the appellant told Dr Nazha that Dr Chow recommended “opioid
base medication when Dr Chow made no such recommendation”. The Principal
Member said the appellant repeatedly submitted there
was documented radiological
evidence of a spinal fracture. When pressed, he said an unknown doctor had told
him this. The Principal
Member described the appellant’s submissions on
this topic as “plainly wrong and misleading” and “another
example casting doubt on the [appellant’s] credit and
reliability”.
Principal Member referred to “threats made by the [appellant] against the
insurer’s representatives and his former
solicitors”.
threats made in phone calls on 4 June 2024 of violence and mass casualties
(described in an email dated 4 June 2024) which
led to police attending the
appellant’s home and taking him to St Vincent’s Hospital, where he
was involuntarily admitted.
Principal Member noted the threats extended to possibly blowing up a building,
physical violence against his former solicitors
and violence against doctors and
employees of the insurer.
Principal Member noted the respondent’s submission that the threats went
The Principal Member
said he “put this pattern of behaviour to one side” on the credit
issue; he had “formed an
adverse view of the [appellant’s]
credit” in any event. He said: “others may consider that the conduct
relates to credit”. He noted “portions of the conduct seem
to have been accepted by the Courts as due to a psychiatric
condition and
accordingly”.
Principal Member dealt with the appellant’s assertion that he had suffered
a spinal fracture in the work injury. The Principal
Member rejected the
appellant’s assertion that his experience as a civil engineer qualified
him to provide an opinion on whether
the fall from 2.5 metres would cause
multiple injuries and spinal fractures. There was no medical or radiological
evidence to support
the presence of a spinal fracture. Having regard to his view
of the appellant’s credit, the Principal Member did not accept
appellant’s hearsay evidence of an unknown doctor saying there was a
spinal fracture. He was not satisfied the work injury
caused a spinal
Principal Member dealt with the ‘disputed physical injuries’. He
listed the following injuries that were accepted
respondent:
“Strain of muscle, fascia and tendon at neck
level; Unspecified sprain of left hip; Strain of muscle, fascia and tendon of
back; Contusion of left lower leg; Unspecified sprain of right hip; Injury
of axillary nerve, unspecified arm; Contusion of right
lower leg.”
respondent also accepted the appellant “sustained a single episode of a
major depressive disorder”. The disputed injuries
were described in the
relevant dispute notice:
“We dispute that you have suffered
any spine fractures, internal puncture wound, post-traumatic stress disorder,
spinal compression,
hypertension, whiplash, chronic pain syndrome or thoracic
kyphosis as claimed as a result of your injury at work on 24 December
Principal Member said the appellant had not explained how his degree in civil
engineering provided him with the expertise to comment
on the causal nexus
between the work injury and the disputed physical injuries. The Principal Member
said there was a lack of contemporaneous
complaint and a lack of medical opinion
to support causation of the disputed injuries. The Principal Member accepted
that the work
injury caused fractures of the right 3
ribs. This was consistent with the whole body bone scan dated 29
April 2021 (which showed uptake consistent with trauma) and with
contemporaneous hospital notes showing pain in that region.
Principal Member said that, apart from general comments in medical certificates,
there was no medical evidence to show the disputed
injuries were caused by the
work injury. There was otherwise no medical evidence that the effects of the
disputed injuries were ongoing
when liability was declined in April 2023. The
Principal Member said he was not satisfied the disputed injuries were caused by
work injury. This was subject to the psychological injury, which the
Principal Member then dealt
Principal Member rejected a submission that he was obliged to make a specific
psychiatric diagnosis. He repeated and adopted his
own reasons in
BFZ v Inner
West Council
He said the
presence of a ‘pain condition’ was supported by Drs Nazha, Waqar,
Chow, Yu, Havryk and Coleman. Drs Davis
and Huber, psychiatric registrars at St
Vincent’s Hospital, supported the conclusion that there was a somatic pain
Principal Member said the conclusions of Drs Davis and Huber were “clearly
based on their clinical assessment ... [t]heir
reasoning is well explained and
based on an appreciation that there was and is no underlying physical basis for
the [appellant’s]
ongoing complaints of chronic pain”. The Principal
Member said Drs Davis and Huber were aware there was no spinal fracture.
opinions were part of the St Vincent’s Hospital records. It was reasonable
to conclude that Dr Huber had the benefit
of the material that was before
Dr Davis about two months previously on the earlier involuntary admission.
The Principal Member said
Dr Gorman supported a diagnosis of somatic pain
disorder. He said Dr Gorman also acknowledged “widespread pain focus with
organic abnormalities”. The Principal Member said the opinion of
Dr Gronow was consistent with the absence of ongoing physical
injuries but
with an ongoing psychiatric component. He considered Dr Williams, the
appellant’s general practitioner, also supported
a diagnosis of somatic
form disorder in her
certificates.
Principal Member discussed the opinion of Dr Nagesh. He concluded the doctor did
not address the body of medical evidence that
supported a psychiatric diagnosis
“in the form of a somatic form disorder”. He described Dr
Nagesh’s opinion as
“an outlier” and deficient in explanation.
The Principal Member said the presence of an ongoing psychiatric condition
supported by the frequent hospital admissions (albeit involuntary) and the
threats made against others. The Principal Member
referred to the
respondent’s submission that there were other causes for the
appellant’s psychiatric condition. He noted
it was only necessary that the
injury be a material contributing factor to the ongoing condition (citing
Murphy v Allity Management Services Pty
). The Principal Member
said he found that the appellant had “an ongoing psychological condition
caused by the work
Principal Member dealt with whether the effects of injury continued. He was not
satisfied there was an ongoing physical basis
for the appellant’s pain. He
found the work injury materially contributed to the ongoing psychological
condition. The medical
reports showed the appellant was convinced there was a
physical basis for the symptoms caused by the work
Principal Member dealt with ‘work capacity’. He quoted the
definitions of ‘suitable employment’ (in s
32A), and of
‘current work capacity’ and ‘no current capacity’ (in cl
9 of Sch 3) to the 1987 Act. He was
not satisfied the appellant had
‘no current work capacity’ having regard to his activities post
injury, which included
finishing his degree in civil engineering (in 2023),
setting up a business and undertaking some work. He was fluent in languages,
obvious intelligence, youth and computer skills. He was attempting to work from
“some incapacity flowing
from the psychiatric condition”; he did not accept there was “an
underlying physical basis
for the chronic pain symptoms”. He accepted Dr
Gorman’s opinion that the appellant was fit for office-based
Principal Member said it was difficult to determine ‘current work
capacity’ given the adverse credit finding and the
absence of relevant
evidence on the topic. He said the appellant bore the onus of establishing the
extent of his ‘current work
capacity’. He went to the gym every two
or three days. He accepted the appellant was not working in his own business,
the lack of income in the financial records. He accepted there was a
“chronic level of pain ... which would restrict the [appellant]
working full-time”. He accepted the appellant could work in sedentary
employment “for a significant and majority
part of full-time hours”.
His entitlement would be pursuant to s 38 of the 1987
Principal Member turned to the issue of whether there was an entitlement
pursuant to s 38. He said that the appellant could not
succeed pursuant to
s 38(2) due to his rejection of the appellant’s allegation that there was
‘no current work capacity’.
He said any entitlement to weekly
compensation would be pursuant to s 38(3) and would be subject to the
pre-conditions in that subsection.
The Principal Member accepted the
appellant’s evidence that he worked “more than 15 hours [per] week
in the first week
of December [2024] and from early January [2025]”. He
concluded the appellant had established the pre-condition in s 38(3)(b)
the first week of December 2024 and from when further employment commenced in
early January 2025.
Principal Member referred to his own decision dealing with s 38(3)(c) in
Roberts v University of
and said he adopted
his earlier reasons. I note the question of the Commission’s jurisdiction
to make an award pursuant to
s 38 of the 1987 Act was subsequently dealt with by
Phillips P in
Fletcher International Exports Pty Ltd v
The President in
accepted that the remarks of Arbitrator Harris (as he then was) in
represented “the proper approach to s 38 disputes and
the Commission’s power to deal with them”. The Principal
Member said
his consideration of s 38(3)(c) relied on his findings regarding the
appellant’s capacity, a rejection of the appellant’s
credit unless
corroborated and the absence of evidence on the issue.
Principal Member said there was an absence of evidence consistent with his
findings, dealing with the appellant’s ability
to undertake additional
work, that would increase his current weekly earnings. The Principal Member said
the appellant had an ability
to undertake sedentary work in his profession. The
remuneration of a civil engineer would clearly exceed that of a casual labourer
at a hotel or performing unskilled work in a store. The Principal Member found
the appellant was not entitled to weekly compensation
for the period claimed as
the appellant had not established the pre-condition in s 38(3)(c) of the 1987
Principal Member stated that he received no assistance from the appellant
regarding the claim for past s 60 expenses in the alleged
sum of $48,000. He
made a general order pursuant to s 60 of the 1987 Act, for those injuries found
to be ongoing, from the date of
denial of liability, which was 10 April 2024.
The order related to the ongoing psychiatric condition caused by the injury. It
to include pain medication, which was incidental to the psychiatric
condition. The Principal Member said the insurer should reinstate
future s 60
expenses with respect to the somatic pain condition. It followed the appellant
had not succeeded in his claim for the
cost of future surgery to remove
“extruded discs at the back of the ribs”. There was liberty to apply
in the event of
dispute regarding the s 60
Principal Member accepted the respondent’s concession that pre-injury
average weekly earnings (PIAWE) were $1,550 from 1
April 2024, to be increased
to $1,580 from 1 October 2024. He rejected a submission from the appellant that
the PIAWE should have
increased from 4 October 2024 when his rent
Principal Member ordered de-identification of his reasons, with no objection
from the parties, pursuant to r 132 of the Rules.
This had regard to the
sensitive personal information dealt with and the safety, health and wellbeing
of the appellant.
RECONSIDERATION APPLICATION
appellant filed an application for reconsideration of the Principal
Member’s decision, originally dated 16 May 2025 and
accompanied by
submissions in support dated 19 May 2025. It appears to have been rejected by
the Commission for procedural reasons,
and a further reconsideration application
was lodged, dated 20 May 2025. The current Presidential appeal pursuant to
s 352 of the
1998 Act was filed on 31 May 2025 and registered on 3 June 2025.
The matter was referred to the Division Head, Workers Compensation
who issued a
Direction dated 5 June 2025. The Division Head directed that the reconsideration
application should be dealt with by
the Principal Member prior to the appeal
being dealt with.
Principal Member dealt with the reconsideration application in a decision dated
19 June 2025.
He rejected a
claim by the appellant that he was declared “psychiatrically
incompetent”. He described the appellant’s
conduct of the first
instance proceedings. He said he was, and remained, satisfied that the appellant
was competent to pursue and
argue his claim. The Principal Member referred to an
allegation that the appellant was not informed he could discontinue the
proceedings.
The Principal Member said this was inconsistent with the
transcript, which confirmed the appellant was advised of the availability
discontinuance. The reasons at [20] of the reconsideration decision confirmed
the appellant was told he could discontinue and
declined this option. The
appellant had, in earlier proceedings, discontinued and then
recommenced.
Principal Member referred to an allegation that there was an imbalance of legal
representation. He gave examples of his attempts
to assist the appellant. He
said he led the appellant through various aspects of his evidence and repeatedly
questioned the respondent
on the scope of its submissions and cross-examination.
He warned the respondent that it would lose the right to be represented if
failed to afford proper assistance; the respondent was not permitted to brief
counsel. The Principal Member said the appellant
previously had solicitors. The
record showed the appellant was told he was entitled to free representation and
elected to pursue
the matter “without legally aided
representatives”. The Principal Member said s 48 of the
Personal Injury
Commission Act 2020
(the 2020 Act) allowed a discretion for an insurer to be
represented when a worker was not. The appellant did not object to the
being legally represented. The Principal Member said that if
objection had been taken, he would have permitted the respondent to
represented. The matter was complex and complicated further by the
appellant’s recent disclosure of post-injury employment.
The appellant had
a history of threats directed to the insurer. This would have made presentation
of the case a concern. The appellant
repeatedly disrupted the respondent’s
presentation of its case, such that presentation by a non-lawyer would have been
difficult. The Principal Member rejected the submission that
representation of the respondent led to procedural
unfairness.
Principal Member noted a submission that there was error in his finding that
psychological injury predated the work injury. The
Principal Member noted the
appellant succeeded on the allegation of psychological injury in any event. The
suggested error would
not have had relevant consequence. The Principal Member
noted a submission that there was no dispute regarding the nature of his
physical injuries. He said some physical injuries were undisputed; the extent of
these and whether the effects continued were in
issue and were addressed in the
appellant submitted he was denied an order pursuant to s 60 of the 1987 Act. The
Principal Member said there was an order pursuant
to s 60 in respect of the
psychological injury, the effects of which continued. There was liberty to apply
in respect of this order,
which had not been
The Principal Member
noted a suggestion by the appellant that he had a weekly entitlement under s 37
of the 1987 Act. The Principal
Member noted the worker had been paid over
130 weeks of weekly compensation; his potential entitlement arose under s 38 of
Act. The Principal Member said the statutory preconditions to an order
under s 38(3) were explained to the appellant during the
Principal Member referred to the discretion to reconsider found in s 57 of the
2020 Act. He declined to exercise that discretion.
He said the
appellant’s submissions regarding procedural fairness were more
appropriately pursued in his appeal. The Principal
Member did not consider the
respondent required leave to appear on the reconsideration application. He said
the appellant made various
“incorrect assertions” on the
reconsideration application, and the respondent was able to assist with detailed
to the transcript.
reconsideration application
RESPONDENT’S APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO BE LEGALLY
REPRESENTED
48 of the 2020 Act relevantly provides:
proceedings in respect of a claim within the meaning of the
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
, the Commission must refuse to
permit an insurer to be represented by an Australian legal practitioner if the
claimant is not represented
by an Australian legal practitioner unless leave is
granted by the Commission under subsection (4).
(4) The Commission may, on the application of an insurer, grant leave
for an insurer to be represented by an Australian legal practitioner
satisfied that—
(a) the representation would enable the matter to be dealt with more
efficiently, taking into account the complexity of the matter,
(b) it would be unfair not to allow the insurer to be represented
because the insurer is unable to represent the insurer effectively,
(c) it would be unfair not to allow the insurer to be represented,
taking into account fairness between the insurer and other parties
proceedings.
(5) The Commission may at any time revoke leave it has granted under
subsection (4).
(7) The Commission must take into account any written submission
prepared by an Australian legal practitioner acting for a party
to proceedings
and submitted by or on behalf of the party (whether or not the party is
represented by an Australian legal practitioner
at any conference or hearing in
the proceedings).”
respondent seeks leave, pursuant to s 48 of the 2020 Act, to be legally
represented by an Australian legal practitioner in the
current appeal. It
submits the matter is complex and it will be more efficient if the respondent
has legal representation. It submits
it would be unfair to the insurer if such
an order is not made as the insurer cannot represent itself
effectively.
appellant’s submissions in reply acknowledge the application, but do not
specifically oppose (or consent) to
I accept that it may well be
of assistance to the Commission, on the appeal, to have the assistance of a
legal practitioner acting
on behalf of the respondent. I note the Principal
Member granted such leave in the proceedings at first instance. Neither party
sought an oral hearing of the appeal proceedings. In my reasons below, I
make orders for the appeal to be dealt with ‘on the
papers’. I note
s 48(7) of the 2020 Act. I grant leave to the respondent to be represented
by an Australian legal practitioner.
It would, in any event, have been necessary
that I take into account the written submissions prepared by the
respondent’s solicitors.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
pursuant to s 352(3) of the 1998 Act have been
Principal Member’s decision was issued on 5 February 2025. The
appellant’s appeal was filed on 31 May 2025 and registered
on 3 June 2025,
well outside the 28‑day period stipulated in s 352(4) of the 1998 Act. An
extension of time is necessary if
the appeal is to proceed. This is dealt with
GROUNDS OF APPEAL AND APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS
appeal is brought against the decision dated 5 February 2025. The
appellant’s notice of appeal was registered on 3 June
2025 (see [40]
above); it was out of time and contained neither grounds of appeal nor
submissions. A delegate of the President issued
a Direction dated 3 June 2025
requiring that multiple deficiencies be addressed before the appeal would
proceed. On the same date,
the Presidential Unit of the Commission furnished the
appellant with a link to Procedural Direction WC3, which relates to procedure
Presidential appeals. The letter additionally gave contact details of potential
avenues to obtain legal assistance, through the
Independent Legal Assistance and
Review Service (ILARS), the Law Society of NSW and LawAccess NSW. The appellant
forwarded three
pieces of correspondence to the Registrar, all dated 5 June
2025. In the first of these he sought an extension of time pursuant to
r 133A of the Rules and set out three grounds of appeal pursuant to s 352
of the 1998 Act. In the second he set out five grounds
of appeal, three of which
were an expanded restatement of those already put. The fifth of these grounds
involved an application to
admit new evidence. The third document contained the
appellant’s “detailed submissions in support of [his] appeal”.
grounds of appeal and submissions are set out in the appellant’s longest
letter dated 5 June 2025:
Ground 1: Error of Law
– Misapplication of
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Statement of Issue:
The Member erred in law by misapplying
Compensation Act 1987
, leading to an incorrect determination of my
entitlement to weekly compensation.
Statement of Facts:
I sustained a significant physical injury and a resultant psychiatric and
psychological injury during the course of my employment.
Medical evidence
confirms that I have no current work capacity.
According to
Section 38(1)
Workers Compensation Act 1987
injured worker who possesses no current work capacity is entitled to receive
weekly payments amounting to 80% of their average
weekly earnings prior to the
injury, applicable during the third entitlement period, which extends beyond 130
weeks. The decision
rendered by the Member did not adequately apply the relevant
provision, leading to an unjust denial of my rightful weekly compensation.
individual in question has disregarded any relevant medical findings and claims,
thereby engaging in work that is ill-suited
to their capacity. This has resulted
in exacerbated disabilities and exploitation, culminating in circumstances that
have led to
involvement in sex trafficking as a means of generating income for
survival, placing them at significant risk of homelessness.
Orders Sought:
I respectfully request that the Commission set aside
the Member's decision regarding weekly compensation and determine that I am
to weekly payments in accordance with Section 38 of the Act and medical
Ground 2: Error of Fact – Incorrect Finding on the Onset of
Psychiatric Injury
Statement of Issue:
The Member made an error of fact by concluding
that my psychiatric condition did not predated [sic] the workplace incident,
to the medical evidence presented.
Statement of Facts:
The medical reports authored by Doctor Chow and
Dr Hamid Waqar, dated 23rd June 2022 and 25th March 2022 respectively,
elucidate that
my psychological symptoms, notably major depression, began
subsequent to the workplace incident that occurred on 24th December 2022.
psychiatric disorder arose as a consequence of disputes related to insurance,
coupled with experiences of medical torture through
the claim period and
involvement in sex trafficking to pay medication and living.
The Member’s finding disregards the contemporaneous
medical evidence, which clearly links the onset of my psychological condition
the workplace incident and psychiatric condition result from torture and
exploiation [sic]. This misinterpretation of the evidence
constitutes an error
Orders Sought:
I request that the Commission correct the factual error
and acknowledge that my psychiatric injury arose as a direct result of the
workplace incident and insurance torture as well trafficing [sic].
Ground 3: Procedural Unfairness – Lack of Proper Guidance on
Withdrawal of ARD
Statement of Issue:
The Member failed to ensure procedural fairness by
not providing adequate guidance regarding the withdrawal of the Application for
Review of Determination (ARD) and not assessing my capacity to self-represent.
Statement of Facts:
As a self-represented litigant, I was not informed
of the implications of withdrawing the ARD. There is no record of any advice or
assessment of my capacity to make such a decision.
Procedural fairness requires that self-represented parties
are given appropriate assistance to understand the proceedings. The absence
such guidance in my case constitutes a breach of procedural fairness.
Orders Sought:
I request that the Commission acknowledge the
procedural unfairness and take appropriate steps to rectify the situation,
reconsideration of the withdrawal of the ARD.
Ground 4: Unreasonable Exercise of Discretion – Denial of
Entitlement to Medical Expenses and Weekly Bene
Statement of Issue:
The Member’s decision to deny entitlement to
medical expenses and weekly benefits under
Sections 60
Compensation Act 1987
represents an unreasonable exercise of discretion.
Statement of Facts:
My claim includes medical expenses related to both
physical and psychiatric injuries sustained during the workplace incident and
torture incident caused by the insurer. The denial of these expenses
overlooks the statutory provisions that entitle injured workers
to reasonably
necessary medical and treatment expenses arising from their injuries.
Section 60(1)(a)
Workers Compensation Act 1987
provides that an employer is liable to pay the cost of any medical or related
treatment that is reasonably necessary as a result
of a work injury.
Additionally,
Section 65A
outlines special provisions for psychological and
psychiatric injuries. The Member's decision failed to consider these provisions
appropriately.
Orders Sought:
I request that the Commission set aside the
Member’s decision regarding medical expenses and weekly benefits and
determine that
I am entitled to compensation for all reasonably necessary
medical treatments related to my injuries, including physical and psychiatric
Ground 5: New Evidence – Emergence of Material Evidence
Post-Decision
Statement of Issue:
New evidence has emerged post-decision that was
not available during the initial proceedings, however the patient disclosed them
which substantiates the inadequacies of the treating doctors and
medical examiners, leading to continued physical suffering and exacerbation
mental health issues.
Statement of Facts:
The newly presented evidence encompasses
‘Quantitative and technological Engineering of CT/Spect, MRI, and
X-ray.’ The
findings reflect a notable accuracy in identifying medical
conditions, revealing the extensive harm inflicted upon the individual,
has been consistently dismissed by the insurer. The documented evidence within
the liability dispute correspondence underscores
a clear pattern of negligence
and abuse, directly correlating with the injuries and offences committed and
currently commiting by
the personal injury comission [sic], employer and the
This new evidence is material and has the potential to
significantly impact the outcome of the case. It reinforces the assertion that
psychological and psychiatric conditions are fundamentally linked to the
injuries and mismanagement by the employer and insurer.
Orders Sought:
I request that the Commission admit the new evidence
and reconsider the case in light of this material information.”
appellant deals with the extension of time to appeal in the shorter of his
letters to the Registrar dated 5 June 2025, in which
“Pursuant to
Personal Injury
Commission Rules 2021
, I seek an extension of time to lodge my appeal beyond the
statutory period. The reasons for this request are as follows:
Exceptional
Circumstances:
Due to unforeseen personal circumstances, including
psychological, psychiatric and physical damage, I was unable to prepare and
the appeal within the prescribed timeframe. The determination made by the
insurance provider, in conjunction with the member, has
resulted in an
exacerbation of the disability, surpassing the initial expectations stemming
from the injury itself.
Demonstrable
and Substantial Injustice:
Failure to grant this extension would result
in a significant injustice, as I believe there are substantial grounds upon
original decision should be reviewed, as there are financial hardships
and currently working as a sex worker to feed my self [sic].”
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
respondent identifies multiple procedural deficiencies in the appellant’s
appeal. The appellant’s grounds are expressed
in general terms, the
paragraphs are not numbered, there is no chronology, there are no transcript or
authority references. The respondent
submits the appellant failed to serve a
sealed copy of the Application to Appeal and
attachments.
respondent opposes the appellant’s application for an extension of time in
which to bring the appeal. It submits ‘exceptional
circumstances’
are not present. Every worker, if he or she is to succeed, has suffered an
injury. Incapacity for work does
not constitute ‘exceptional
circumstances’. Such applications are ordinary, not exceptional. The
respondent submits while
it may be unusual for an appellant worker to be
self-represented, this does not constitute ‘exceptional
circumstances’.
It submits it is not unusual for a worker to seek
compensation for incapacity. The respondent submits the appellant has,
throughout,
been entitled to free legal representation through the Independent
Review Office. It submits the appellant was informed of his right
representation by the Principal Member in the proceedings at first
It submits the
appellant was represented by four legal firms during the proceedings, and by a
named firm as at 20 January 2025, prior
to issue of the Certificate of
Determination on 5 February 2025, and prior to expiry of the appeal period on
5 March 2025.
respondent submits the financial hardship of a worker is not a relevant
consideration in dealing with whether r 133A is
respondent refers to the appellant’s application to admit fresh evidence,
being Dr Awit’s report dated 5 October 2024
and Dr Faux’s
report dated 30 August 2024. The respondent submits this evidence was in the
original proceedings; it is not
The respondent refers
to the appellant’s application to rely on a report that the appellant
himself prepared, dated 19 May
2025 (the document headed “Quantitative and
technological Engineering of CT/SPECT, MRI and X-Ray”, discussed below).
The respondent submits the appellant “cannot provide objective expert
evidence on his own claim”. It submits the appellant
has not explained how
he is qualified to reach the conclusions contained in that
The respondent seeks
leave to rely on fresh evidence set out at [38] of its submissions.
APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS IN REPLY
appellant submits ‘exceptional circumstances’ “emerge”
on the basis of the gravity and severity of the
injury. The appellant submits
his “psychological injury is primary, stems from brain damage, clearly
demonstrated by the reduction
of grey matter in the provided scans, as
identified by our engineering quantitative research, which was regrettably
overlooked by
the insurance provider. The cerebrospinal fluid escaped beyond the
fractured bones, resulting in significant harm to the brain, compounded
direct impact sustained during the fall from a considerable
submits he is entitled to weekly compensation because of the seriousness of his
The appellant confirms
that the fresh evidence he relies on is that headed “Quantitative and
technological Engineering of CT/SPECT,
appellant sets out its “Response to Grounds”, which constitute
submissions in reply to those of the respondent. The
appellant makes a general
submission that the submissions of the respondent are “devoid of any
critique, are excessively lengthy,
unwarranted, and serve only to divert
attention from the principal issues”. It makes the following submissions
that it describes
as a summary of the grounds:
: The appellant submits the finding that there was a
pre-existing psychological condition, which deteriorated following the injury,
involved factual error. The appellant submits the Principal Member “did
not explicitly conclude there was a pre-existing psychological
condition, but
the absence of a proper causation and contribution analysis renders the findings
unintelligible”. The appellant
and submits the
Principal Member was required to distinguish between secondary psychological
injury and primary psychological conditions.
There was error of fact and law and
the respondent’s submission on Ground No. 1 should be rejected.
: The appellant submits it involved error that the Principal
Member and the respondent’s solicitors concurred on several occasions
regarding the psychological illness stemming from the injury. The appellant
makes various observations regarding what the respondent
: The appellant submits he was not given adequate guidance
regarding withdrawal of his Application and assessment of his capacity
self-represent. He submits there is no record of these matters being the subject
of advice. He submits this constituted a breach
of procedural fairness.
: The appellant submits the weekly compensation to which he
was entitled was “terminated due to misconduct involving insurance
medical professionals following the third entitlement period.” He was
obliged to resume work before he was fully recovered,
which exacerbated his
injuries and reduced his capacity. He was entitled to additional weekly
compensation beyond that already paid.
: The appellant submits the Principal Member exercised his
discretion unreasonably in denying weekly compensation and medical expenses
respect of the psychiatric injury, given the protective scope of ss 60 and 65A
of the 1987 Act.
: The appellant, in his submissions in reply, has added a
sixth ground. He submits: “The statutory scheme under Section 38 supports
ongoing entitlement if either no current work capacity or limited work capacity
with indexed earnings and inability to earn more
ON THE PAPERS
52(3) of the 2020 Act provides:
“(3) If the Commission
is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection
with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and
enabling legislation without holding any conference or formal
regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents that are before me,
and the submissions by both parties that the
appeal can proceed to be determined
on the basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information to proceed
‘on the papers’ without holding any
conference or formal hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
There is no reason to conclude that an oral hearing would assist
in determining the appeal.
SUBMISSIONS DEALING WITH THE DECISION OF STATE OF NEW SOUTH
WALES v CULHANA
decision of the Court of Appeal in
State of New South Wales v
on 17 July 2025. This decision is significant as regards the approach to be
taken by a Presidential member in dealing with
an appeal pursuant to s 352 of
the 1998 Act. The Commission issued a direction dated 31 July 2025 inviting the
parties to provide
supplementary submissions with respect to
its effect on this appeal, the appellant by 7 August 2025 and the respondent by
17 August 2025.
respondent’s supplementary submissions were undated and headed
“Respondent’s submissions in respect of
State of New South Wales
[2025] NSWCA 147
”. It referred to its appeal submissions at
[63], where it submitted that a finding that the appellant had a pre-existing
psychiatric
condition was open to be made and did not constitute an error of
fact or law. It referred to a finding by the Principal Member that
“a contribution from other events to the ongoing psychological
issues”. It submitted this was the only correct
finding that could have
been made on the evidence, including that of the treating psychologist. It
referred to the Principal Member’s
finding on credit. It submitted that,
in any event, the finding that there was a psychiatric condition caused by the
work injury
was not challenged by the respondent and was advantageous to the
appellant. It submitted that, if there was a finding on appeal that
there was no
contribution from other events, there ought to be no material change to the
Principal Member’s findings or orders.
appellant put on submissions that were undated and headed
“Appellant’s submissions in respect of
State of New South Wales v
[2025] NSWCA 147
”. The appellant described “a change in
the legal standard – specifically, that appeals necessitate a
comprehensive
re-evaluation of causation instead of simply determining if a fact
was ‘open’ to the member”. The appellant submits
victim is not required to prove that your psychological distress was exclusively
the result of the workplace injury –
merely that it played a significant
role.” He submits:
clarified that
appeals under s 352 should entail a thorough re-examination of all evidence,
rather than merely assessing whether
a finding was ‘open’. This
indicates that the Tribunal is not required to evaluate comprehensively whether
the psychiatric
injury of the victim van be correctly linked to the workplace
incident, in accordance with our medical evidence, and whether external
factors were not permitted to be exaggerated, given that the offenders are
indeed criminals. The PIC did not adhere to this
standard in the vivitms [sic,
victim’s] case, rendering their conclusions about causation legally
inadequate.”
appellant additionally refers to the “Insurer’s Conduct as
Aggravating Factors”. The appellant sets out a schedule
referring to
multiple provisions of the Crimes Act, NSW, the ACT Crimes Act and the
Commonwealth Criminal Code. This appears to relate
to proposed Federal Court
proceedings and cites conduct such as assault, torture, tampering with evidence,
forgery and perverting
the course of justice.
APPELLANT’S APPLICATION TO EXTEND TIME
352(4) of the 1998 Act provides:
“(4) The appeal must be
made within—
(a) 28 days after the decision appealed against is made, or
(b) a longer period determined or allowed, whether generally or for the
kind of proceedings, in accordance with the Commission rules.”
133A of the Rules relevantly provides:
Extension of time for making certain applications
(1) This rule specifies the procedure for determining a period of time,
longer than the statutory period, within which 1 of the following
relevant application
) may be made—
(a) an appeal under the 1998 Act, section 352,
The listed provisions specify that a relevant application must be made within
the statutory period or a longer period determined or
allowed in accordance with
these Rules.
(2) A party seeking to make a relevant application after the end of the
statutory period may make an additional application (an
application
) for an order determining a longer period within which the
party may make the relevant application.
(3) An extension application—
(a) must be made at the same time as the relevant application to which
it relates, and
(b) must be in the approved form, and
(c) must include full details of the arguments relied on in favour of
granting the order, and
(d) is taken to form part of the relevant application for the purposes
of the requirements relating to service under rules 123 and
(4) The extension application must be decided by the following (the
decision-maker
(a) for an appeal under the 1998 Act, section 352—a presidential
(b) otherwise—the President.
(5) The decision-maker may make the order if satisfied by the party
making the extension application, in exceptional circumstances,
that to lose the
right to make the relevant application would work demonstrable and substantial
(6) In this rule—
statutory period
(a) for the 1998 Act—the period specified in section 352(4)(a),
Some principles
Shapkin v Lorenzato
Stern J said:
“The principles
governing an extension of time are not in doubt:
Jackamarra v Krakouer
(1998) 195 CLR 516
[1998] HCA 27
(Brennan CJ and McHugh J). In
Tomko v Palasty (No 2)
(2007) 71 NSWLR 61
[2007] NSWCA 369
Basten JA (Hodgson and Ipp JJA agreeing) identified four factors of general
relevance (although these are by no means exhaustive
of the matters that may be
relevant): (1) the length of the delay; (2) the reason for the delay; (3)
whether the applicant has a
fairly arguable case; and (4) the extent of any
prejudice suffered by the respondent to the application. The plaintiff bears the
burden of persuading the Court that there are proper grounds to grant an
application for an extension of time:
Nanschild v Pratt
[2011] NSWCA 85
, [41], [44].”
Jackamarra v Krakouer
Brennan and McHugh JJ observed that, in the context
of an application for an extension of time to lodge an appeal, “the
to the application has a vested right to retain the judgment, the
subject of the appeal. To grant the application for an extension
of time is to
put at risk a vested right of the
respondent”.
In the same
case Kirby J said:
“It is for the party seeking to persuade
the decision-maker that [the extension] should be granted. Such persuasion will
depend upon the provision of an acceptable explanation of how the time
default occurred.”
Nanschild v Pratt
McColl JA (Campbell JA agreeing)
“The discretion to extend time is given for the sole
purpose of enabling the court to do justice between the parties. This means
the discretion can only be exercised upon proof that strict compliance with the
rules will work an injustice upon the applicant.
In order to determine whether
the rules will work an injustice, it is necessary to have regard to the history
of the proceedings,
the conduct of the parties, the nature of the litigation,
and the consequences for the parties of the grant or refusal of the application
for extension of time:
Gallo v Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
(1990) 64 ALJR 458
(at 459) per McHugh
(5) of r 133A raises the issue of ‘exceptional circumstances’. The
Court of Appeal, in
Bryce v Department of Corrective
the requirement of ‘exceptional circumstances’ in the equivalent
provision in subr (11) of r 16.2 of the former
Workers Compensation Commission
. Allsop P (as his Honour then was) (Beazley JA, as her Excellency
then was and Giles JA agreeing) said:
“A question arises in
the circumstances as to whether the phrase ‘in exceptional
circumstances’ is a jurisdictional
fact required to be proved objectively
or whether it is one of the matters in respect of which the Presidential member
must be satisfied.”
“Whether or not there are exceptional circumstances and whether in
those circumstances it is shown to the satisfaction of the
Deputy President that
demonstrable or substantial injustice would occur if leave were not granted is a
composite expression in the
rule to be dealt with within jurisdiction, and all
of the matters identified by the Deputy President in [23] can be seen as
to the consideration of that composite
expression.”
provision governing the extension of time, in the current form of the rule, is
not identical with that at the time
was decided. The phrase
‘in exceptional circumstances’ in r 133A(5) occurs (as it did
in the earlier form of the provision)
in the middle of the rule. I note the
passage from
Parisienne Basket Shoes Pty Ltd v Whyte
at [8], in which Dixon J said:
“It cannot be
denied that, if the legislature see fit to do it, any event or fact or
circumstance whatever may be made a condition
upon the occurrence or existence
of which the jurisdiction of a court shall depend. But, if the legislature does
make the jurisdiction
of a court contingent upon the actual existence of a state
of facts, as distinguished from the court’s opinion or determination
the facts do exist, then the validity of the proceedings and orders must always
remain an outstanding question until some other
court or tribunal, possessing
power to determine that question, decides that the requisite state of facts in
truth existed and the
proceedings of the court were valid. Conceding the
abstract possibility of the legislature adopting such a course, nevertheless it
produces so inconvenient a result that no enactment dealing with proceedings in
any of the ordinary courts of justice should receive
such an interpretation
unless the intention is clearly
expressed.”
Application
of the above passage to the construction of r 133A(5) is appropriate, as it was
to the rule in its previous form in which
it was considered in
phrase ‘in exceptional circumstances’ should be considered “as
a matter within jurisdiction as opposed to
a precondition in the operation of
Yacoub v Pilkington (Australia)
Campbell JA (Tobias JA
and Handley AJA agreeing) dealt with the phrase ‘exceptional
circumstances’, in the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
. His Honour at
[66]–[67] said:
San v Rumble (No 2)
(2007) NSWCA 259
–[69], I gave consideration to the expression
‘exceptional circumstances’
in a different statutory context
to the present. Without repeating that discussion in full, I shall state
such of the conclusions
as seem to me applicable in the construction of
(a) Exceptional circumstances are out of the ordinary course or unusual, or
special, or uncommon. They need not be unique, or unprecedented,
or very rare,
but they cannot be circumstances that are regularly, routinely or normally
encountered:
R v Kelly (Edward)
[1999] UKHL 4
[2000] 1 QB 198
(b) Exceptional circumstances can exist not only by reference to quantitative
matters concerning relative frequency of occurrence,
but also by reference to
qualitative factors:
R v Buckland
[2000] EWCA Crim 1
[2000] 1 WLR 1262
[2000] 1 All ER 907
(at 1268; 912–913).
(c) Exceptional circumstances can include a single exceptional matter, a
combination of exceptional factors, or a combination of
ordinary factors which,
although individually of no particular significance, when taken together are
seen as exceptional:
Ho v Professional Services Review Committee No 295
[2007] FCA 388
(d) In deciding whether circumstances are exceptional within the meaning of a
particular statutory provision, one must keep in mind
the rationale of that
particular statutory provision:
R v Buckland
(at 1268; 912–913).
(e) Beyond these general guidelines, whether exceptional circumstances exist
depends upon a careful consideration of the facts of
the individual case:
v Independent News Auckland
[1996] NZHC 2245
[1996] 2 NZLR 184
Consideration of the extension application
The length of the delay and the reasons for it
Principal Member’s decision was issued on 5 February 2025. The period to
appeal pursuant to s 352(4)(a) of the 1998 Act
was 28 days after the decision
was made. The appeal was filed on 31 May 2025 and registered on 3 June 2025, a
little less than three
months out of time. The delay is relatively substantial.
appellant’s submissions refer to “unforeseen personal circumstances,
including psychological, psychiatric and physical
damage”. He submits he
was “unable to prepare and submit the appeal within the prescribed
timeframe”. He submits
determinations by the insurer and the Principal
Member resulted in an exacerbation. The appellant does not indicate whether he
any assistance in considering and/or preparing an appeal, when and in what
appellant does not proffer medical or other evidence in support of the
submission that he was either incapable of, or hindered
in, the preparation and
submission of his appeal from 5 February 2025 to 31 May 2025.
respondent submits the appellant was legally represented by a firm of solicitors
as at 20 January 2025, then during the period
to the issuing of the
decision on 5 February 2025, and then before the appeal period expired. The
appellant’s submissions are
silent regarding whether he had legal
representation in the lead up to the expiration of the appeal period, or
subsequently while
time was running. The appellant’s submissions say
nothing about whether he was advised (or was otherwise aware) of the time
limitation, whether he was advised to institute an appeal (or not to), the
source of any advice, when he received any such advice,
and whether and how he
acted on any such advice.
respondent seeks leave to rely on ‘fresh
Section 352(6)
of the 1998 Act provides:
“Evidence that is fresh
evidence or evidence in addition to or in substitution for the evidence received
in relation to the
decision appealed against may not be given on an appeal to
the Commission except with the leave of the Commission. The Commission
grant leave unless satisfied that the evidence concerned was not available to
the party, and could not reasonably have
been obtained by the party, before the
proceedings concerned or that failure to grant leave would cause substantial
injustice in
provision contains “... two threshold questions. They arise as
alternatives and are set out in the second sentence of the
provision.”
documents, the subject of the respondent’s leave application, both
postdate the Principal Member’s decision and
fall within the first of the
alternatives in subs (6). The appellant put on submissions in reply dated
29 July 2025 (31 July 2025
in the appellant’s index of documents).
The appellant’s submissions in reply at [26] acknowledged the respondent
an application to rely on fresh evidence but did not make a meaningful
submission in opposition to it.
first piece of ‘fresh evidence’ relied on by the respondent is an
authority to act, signed by the appellant and directed
to EML (the insurer),
received from Masselos & Co Lawyers, dated 20 January
It authorised EML to
supply that firm with any documents and information the firm may request. The
second piece of evidence is a
letter from CMC Lawyers, directed to iCare Workers
Insurance, dated 16 April 2025. The letter referred to “[The appellant]
Engineering Solutions and Services”. It stated that CMC Lawyers acted on
behalf of the appellant and gave notice of an intended
claim for common law
two documents, the subject of the respondent’s leave application, go to
the knowledge and actions of the appellant during
the period of delay. They are
relevant to the appellant’s explanation and to exercise of the
Commission’s discretion
to extend time. I give leave to the respondent,
pursuant to s 352(6) of the 1998 Act, to rely on these documents. The earlier
dated 20 January 2025, predated by about two weeks the issue by the
Commission, on 5 February 2025, of the Principal Member’s
decision. It is
consistent with the appellant having solicitors acting for him from prior to the
issue of the decision the subject
of the proposed appeal. The second document is
consistent with the appellant having instructed a further firm of solicitors
his rights in respect of the injury, by no later than 16 April 2025. This
was well prior to the filing of the current appeal on 31
May 2025. These
documents are consistent with the respondent’s submission described at
[78] above. They are not contradicted
or explained by evidence from the
Principal Member made factual findings, relevant to the appellant’s
capacity, in his reasons at [244]. The appellant completed
a Bachelor of Civil
Engineering in 2023, he set up a business in 2023/24, he held himself out as an
integral component of, and undertook
research work for, the business. In
November 2024 he completed an RSA course, he worked part-time at hotels in late
2024. He had
other work in early 2025. I do not understand the appellant,
in this appeal, to challenge the accuracy of these findings. He does,
third ground, dispute the appropriateness of the work he undertook.
appears the appellant also pursued other activities during the period from 5
February 2025 to 2 June 2025. He acted for himself
on a reconsideration
application in respect of the Principal Member’s decision, prior to the
appeal being lodged. The material
includes a document headed “Submission
for Review and Reconsideration (s 57 PIC Act)” dated 16 May 2025.
There is a second
document headed “Resubmission of Reconsideration
Application”, variously dated 16 May 2025 and 20 May 2025. The document
states it was initially rejected by the Commission on 14 May 2025 for procedural
reasons. It states it was served on the “other
parties” on 15 May
2025. The document, directed to the Registrar, consists of four to five pages of
submissions in support
of an application to reconsider the Principal
Member’s decision. This application is discussed above under the heading
“Reconsideration
Application”.
appellant relies on a document headed “Quantitative and technological
Engineering of CT/SPECT, MRI and X-Ray”. The
document is attributed to the
appellant at “[redacted], [email address], Dep. of Biomedical Engineering,
Western Sydney University,
Sydney, NSW, 2000. 19/05/2025.” It is over 60
pages in length and apparently of a technical nature. The appellant’s
submissions
in support of the appeal, at “Ground 5: New Evidence”,
“New evidence [that] has emerged post-decision that
was not available during the initial proceedings, however the patient [sic]
disclosed them verbally which substantiates the inadequacies of the treating
doctors and medical examiners ...”.
document comprising the ‘fresh evidence’ describes an “A-frame
defective ladder with a vertical aspect of three
meters [sic]”. The
document includes a “Case Injury” (effectively a case study by the
appellant about himself).
This describes a “backwards fall directly above
it. The ladder’s feet caused two pins to be embedded in the thorax and
scapular region of the upper right side, resulting in a head injury”. It
describes multiple other injuries and continues, “The
patient was so
traumatized by the experience that he believed I [sic] was on a verge of death,
as he had been hissing prior to landing.”
The history of scans that
follows commences from 24 December 2020 (the appellant’s date of injury).
The material referred to
in the ‘new evidence’ includes a chest
x-ray from John Hunter Hospital dated 24 December 2020. The ‘fresh
attaches copies of multiple scans and x-rays, with descriptions
of what they are said (by the author of the “Case Injury”)
This includes a fracture at T5, fractures of the third, fourth, fifth and sixth
ribs, a dislocated “flying rib bone”,
intestinal damage, acute
fractures of C3 and C4, a comminuted fracture of T12, a comminuted fracture of
L1, ligamentous disruption
at T1–2, shoulder injury to the scapula and
rotator cuff, a fracture of the right scapula, compression fractures of T12 and
L1 and traumatic disc herniation at T2–T3.
appellant, in his letter to the Registrar dated 5 June 2025, set out his
“detailed submissions in support of my appeal”.
He sought leave to
rely on the above ‘fresh evidence’ document as “[n]ew evidence
that has emerged post-decision”.
period of delay is relatively lengthy. The reason for the delay is not
adequately explained. The explanation given is vague and
uninformative. The
appellant submits that “[d]ue to unforeseen personal circumstances,
including psychological, psychiatric
and physical damage, I was unable to
prepare and submit the appeal within the prescribed timeframe”. The
submission is vague
regarding what symptoms relevantly affected the appellant,
when, and in what way they restricted or delayed the appellant in the
preparation of his appeal. The respondent submits the appellant had legal
representation during part of the period constituting the
delay. This is
consistent with the ‘fresh evidence’ relied on by the respondent.
The appellant’s explanation of
delay does not deal with the role of any
solicitors who acted for him, when they acted, what advice the appellant
received, why an
appeal was not lodged while the appellant had solicitors, or
why any solicitors ceased to be instructed. The explanation does not
explain why
or how the appellant was unable to file an appeal until 31 May 2025 yet was able
to attend to activities such as acting
on the reconsideration application and
drafting the document the subject of the ‘fresh evidence
application’ on which
he seeks to rely. The inadequate explanation of the
delay is a factor that counts against the appellant’s application to
Exceptional circumstances
observed in the discussion of
above, the presence of
‘exceptional circumstances’ should be considered as a matter within
a precondition to the operation of the jurisdiction.
The statutory context in which the phrase was considered by Campbell JA in
was different to that in which the phrase is employed in r 133A of
the Rules. The construction and application of r 133A is subject
to ss 4 and 42
of the 2020 Act. The observations of Campbell JA in
assistance in dealing with the application of the phrase ‘special
circumstances’ in r 133A.
respondent argues the fact that the appellant suffered an injury at work, and
has an incapacity, does not of itself constitute
‘exceptional
circumstances’. Such circumstances in the Commission are ordinary, not
exceptional.
respectfully agree with Campbell JA, in the passage of
above, that in deciding whether circumstances are ‘exceptional’
within the meaning of a particular statutory provision,
one must keep in mind
the rationale of that provision. Rule 133A(5) of the Rules is a beneficial
provision that provides for an extension
of time in circumstances where to lose
the right to make an application “would work demonstrable and substantial
injustice”.
It is necessary to consider the prospects of success of the
proposed appeal.
Campbell JA said that exceptional circumstances “need not be
unique, or unprecedented, or very rare, but they cannot be circumstances
are regularly, routinely or normally encountered”. I respectfully agree
with this observation, which is consistent with
the reasons of the plurality in
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
“This Court has stated on many occasions that the
task of statutory construction must begin with a consideration of the text
itself. Historical considerations and extrinsic materials cannot be relied on to
displace the clear meaning of the text. The language
which has actually been
employed in the text of legislation is the surest guide to legislative
intention. The meaning of the text
may require consideration of the context,
which includes the general purpose and policy of a provision, in particular the
it is seeking to
references)
circumstances identified by the appellant, in support of the application for an
extension of time, were that he had suffered an
injury and that there was
associated incapacity. As the respondent correctly submitted, such circumstances
are routinely encountered
in the Commission. If there were other matters
explaining the delay, they were not identified in the appellant’s
submissions
in support of the extension.
appellant has not established the presence of ‘exceptional
circumstances’. Consistent with the decision in
, this does
not preclude an extension, but it is a matter that militates against the
extension of time.
The prospects of success
appeal does not, in my view, have reasonable prospects of success. The
discussion of the grounds of appeal that follows is based
on the grounds as set
out in the appellant’s longer piece of correspondence dated 5 June 2025.
This correspondence followed
the issue of a Direction, by a delegate of the
President, dated 3 June 2025 (see [51] to [52] above) setting out the matters
needed to be rectified before the appeal could proceed.
Ground No. 1
appellant, dealing with Ground No. 1, submits payment of weekly compensation to
an injured worker with no current work capacity
extends beyond 130 weeks. He
submits medical evidence confirms he has “no current work capacity”.
He submits he has been
denied his “rightful weekly compensation”.
This submission is contrary to the Principal Member’s factual findings.
Principal Member, after referring to the definitions of ‘no current work
capacity’ and ‘current work capacity’
in cl 9 of Sch 3 to the
1987 Act (which he reproduced) specifically found that the appellant did not
fall within the definition of
an injured worker with ‘no current work
capacity’. The Principal Member referred to the medical certificates on
the appellant relied, describing these as “brief and unexplained
certificates of capacity”. He said this certification
“inconsistent with the obvious fact that the [appellant] is undertaking
some work”. The Principal Member at [244]
of the reasons referred in
detail to the appellant’s post-injury capabilities. These included
completing a degree in civil
engineering (in 2023), setting up a business,
completing an RSA course and working part-time in
The Principal Member
concluded the appellant was capable of working “in sedentary employment
for a significant and majority
part of full-time hours”. The factual
finding that the appellant had current work capacity was well-open on the
evidence and
is one with which I agree. The consequence of this was that the
appellant, contrary to his submissions on this ground, was not entitled
weekly compensation pursuant to s 38(2) of the 1987
This is probably sufficient
to dispose of the appellant’s submissions on this ground, which proceed on
the basis he has ‘no
current work capacity’. For completeness, it is
appropriate that I also refer to the Principal Member’s reasons dealing
with s 38(3) of the 1987 Act.
the circumstances the appellant’s potential entitlement to ongoing weekly
compensation was pursuant to s 38(3) of the 1987
“(3) A worker (other than a worker with high
needs) who is assessed by the insurer as having current work capacity is
to compensation after the second entitlement period only if—
(a) the worker has applied to the insurer in writing (in the form
approved by the Authority) no earlier than 52 weeks before the
end of the second
entitlement period for continuation of weekly payments after the second
entitlement period, and
(b) the worker has returned to work (whether in self-employment or
other employment) for a period of not less than 15 hours per week
receipt of current weekly earnings (or current weekly earnings together with a
deductible amount) of at least $155 per
(c) the worker is assessed by the insurer as being, and as likely to
continue indefinitely to be, incapable of undertaking further
employment or work that would increase the worker’s current weekly
Notwithstanding
the references in s 38(3) of the 1987 Act to assessment by the insurer,
I accept the correctness of the conclusion
by Phillips P in
International Exports Pty Ltd v Lee
that the Commission has jurisdiction to
hear disputes about a worker’s entitlement pursuant to s 38 of the 1987
Principal Member found the appellant had satisfied the pre-condition in s
38(3)(c), for the first week in December 2024 and then
from when employment with
[redacted] commenced in early January 2025. However, the Principal Member was
not satisfied the appellant
had established, on the probabilities, that he was
“incapable of undertaking further additional employment or work that would
increase [his] current weekly
(a requirement
of s 38(3)(c)). The Principal Member referred to the reasons dealing with s
38(3)(c) in his earlier decision of
He stated that he adopted
those reasons. In his earlier decision the Principal Member said the word
‘indefinitely’, in
context, was “akin to an unknown or
non-specific period”. It did not mean
The Principal Member
said his conclusion that the appellant had not discharged his onus on this issue
relied on his findings about
the appellant’s capacity, his rejection of
the appellant’s credit unless corroborated and the absence of evidence on
Principal Member said there was an absence of evidence, consistent with his
findings, on the appellant’s ability to earn
and the extent to which the
appellant could undertake additional employment that would increase his current
weekly earnings. The
Principal Member observed that the appellant had “an
ability to undertake sedentary work in his profession. The remuneration
civil engineer will clearly exceed the remuneration of a casual labourer at a
hotel or performing unskilled work in a store”.
The Principal Member
concluded the appellant had not satisfied the pre-condition in s 38(3)(c)
and was not entitled to weekly compensation
for the period
I agree with the
Principal Member’s analysis and findings on this issue.
Principal Member’s reasons in this regard included his finding on credit.
The Principal Member dealt at length with the
appellant’s credit. He said
he did “not accept the [appellant’s] evidence unless there is
corroborative evidence”.
Adverse comments relevant to credit, made by the Principal Member, are referred
to above in my reasons at [18], [19], [20], [23]
and [35]. The Principal Member,
in his reasons at [150] to [158], identified “examples of a pattern that
[the appellant] is
inaccurate in his reporting”. The Principal Member said
that the appellant’s statements, that there was documentary evidence
spinal fracture, were “plainly wrong and misleading”. He rejected
the appellant’s submission that, where there
were inconsistencies,
“the medical records are wrong and that histories have been incorrectly
recorded by various medical
practitioners”.
The Decision in Culhana
dealing with the prospects of success of the present appeal it is necessary to
have regard to the decision of the Court of Appeal
decision Leeming JA said:
“No one doubts that questions of law
must be determined afresh by a Presidential member if it is said that the member
Nor is it doubted that where the member has seen the applicant or other
witnesses and made findings of fact based on their evidence,
the member will be
in a position of advantage over a Presidential member who will, in the ordinary
case, determine the appeal on
“If the Presidential member, after making appropriate allowance for the
advantages enjoyed by the member, would reach a different
conclusion on a
question of fact, he or she should not shrink from giving effect to
plurality said:
“A court of appeal is bound to conduct a
‘real review’ of the evidence given at first instance and of the
reasons for judgment to determine whether the trial judge has
erred in fact or law. Appellate restraint with respect to interference
trial judge’s findings unless they are ‘glaringly improbable’
or ‘contrary to compelling inferences’
is as to factual findings
which are likely to have been affected by impressions about the credibility and
reliability of witnesses
formed by the trial judge as a result of seeing and
hearing them give their evidence. It includes findings of secondary facts which
are based on a combination of these impressions and other inferences from
primary facts. Thereafter, ‘in general an appellate
court is in as good a
position as the trial judge to decide on the proper inference to be drawn from
facts which are undisputed or
which, having been disputed, are established by
the findings of the trial
references)
way in which the appellant gave evidence was a little unusual, clearly intended
by the Principal Member to accommodate the appellant’s
status as an
unrepresented litigant. The appellant gave evidence and was cross-examined by
the respondent’s solicitor. The
evidence-in-chief and cross-examination
were carried out, to an extent, through the Principal Member. The Principal
Member saw and
heard the appellant give evidence and made findings based on his
acceptance or rejection of that evidence. This is consistent with
the Principal
Member being in a ‘position of advantage’ compared with mine, in
dealing with the appellant’s credit.
I do not regard the Principal
Member’s credit finding as ‘glaringly improbable’ or
‘contrary to compelling
inferences’. The Principal Member did not
specifically indicate his findings on credit were made on the basis of
If he did not enjoy such a position of advantage, I would not,
in any event, disturb the Principal Member’s credit finding.
careful reasons dealing with the appellant’s taxation returns and with
inconsistencies and inaccuracies in the medical
histories. He concluded there
was “a pattern that [the appellant] is inaccurate in his reporting”.
The Principal Member
described the appellant making repeated submissions that
“there was documented radiological evidence showing a spinal
until eventually conceding there was no such document. He
ultimately said his (the appellant’s) “view of the scans showed
fractured spine” and “an unknown doctor told him there was
one”. The Principal Member described this as “misleading”
“casting doubt on the [appellant’s] credit and
reliability”.
I accept the
correctness of the Principal Member’s assessment of credit.
Ground No. 1 would not succeed.
appellant put on a Response to the respondent’s submissions (described in
the reasons at [57] to [59] above as the appellant’s
‘submissions in
reply’). In that document the appellant’s complaint regarding how
his weekly claim was dealt with
was set out as Grounds Nos. 4 and 6 (see [59]
above). The material in those submissions does not add usefully to the
discussion above
dealing with Ground No. 1.
Ground No. 2
No. 2 is expressed by the appellant in various ways; it essentially alleges
error in the finding of the Principal Member that
there was a pre-existing
psychological injury. The appellant submits contemporaneous medical evidence
links the onset of the psychiatric
condition to the workplace incident, and
subsequent disputes related to insurance, medical torture and exploitation. The
appellant’s
submissions in reply describe this ground as Ground No. 1.
Principal Member noted s 294(2) of the 1998 Act required that he give a brief
statement of his reasons for determination. The
Principal Member discussed the
appellant’s credit at some
He stated he had
formed an adverse view of the appellant’s
Principal Member summarised the extensive medical
In the course of
this he referred to multiple medical histories, some of which touched on the
appellant’s history prior to
the injury on 24 December 2020. This included
reference to his experiences before coming to Australia, his sexual orientation
an attendance at a Community Health Service in
The Principal
Member’s ultimate finding on injury was made at [234] to [236] of the
reasons. He found there was a contribution
from “other events” to
the ongoing psychological issues but that, applying
, it was only
necessary to find the work injury was a material contributing factor to the
ongoing condition. He found the appellant
suffered from a pain condition that
was caused by the work injury, and the perception of chronic pain was a material
contributing
factor to the ongoing psychological condition.
finding of injury was one in the appellant’s favour. It did not involve
error. It applied an appropriate test on causation.
If it did involve error the
appellant could not establish that any error was material to the outcome. Ground
No. 2 would not succeed.
Ground No. 3
ground involves an alleged breach of the rules of procedural fairness, on the
basis the appellant was not informed of the implications
of withdrawing his
Application, nor was his capacity to self-represent assessed.
appellant pursued a similar argument in the reconsideration application that was
dealt with in the Principal Member’s decision
dated 19 June 2025 (see [41]
above). The appellant, prior to commencement of the current proceedings, had
discontinued earlier proceedings.
This was specifically raised in the current
proceedings in discussion at the preliminary conference on 12 November
“PRINCIPAL MEMBER: Well, with respect, ... this case was
filed four weeks ago. I’m dealing with this case and this case
commenced four week ago.
[BOH]: Haven’t I filed it previously?
PRINCIPAL MEMBER: That was - - -
[BOH]: And I went - - -
PRINCIPAL MEMBER: That was discontinued and the case starts again when you
refiled four weeks
the same date there was discussion regarding the prospect of the appellant being
legally represented:
“PRINCIPAL MEMBER: You realise
you’re adversely affecting your case by not getting legal representation?
[BOH]: I know. What can I do?
PRINCIPAL MEMBER: Well, it’s free, it’s legally-aided and
I’ve had countless people say that and it’s legally-aided
there’s lots of lawyers that will act for you so you’re entitled to
legal representation. So you can take it up,
it’s a legally-aid scheme,
that’s what you can do but if you don’t get it I’m not
assisting you beyond being
an umpire and trying to assist where
“MS COLEMAN: Member, ..(not transcribable 00:46:16).. been our position
that this matter is not well prepared and that it should
be discontinued so that
[the appellant] can seek legal advice.
PRINCIPAL MEMBER: That’s a matter for [the appellant].
MS COLEMAN: There’s nothing further I need - - -
PRINCIPAL MEMBER: That’s a matter for [the appellant]. I’ve
already said that he should get legal advice, it’s not
a matter for the
insurer. I’ve told him he should get legal advice, it’s a matter for
him whether he discontinues or
not. It’s not a matter for the insurer,
“PRINCIPAL MEMBER: You understand this case is being seriously defended
by the other side? You understand they’re disputing
your claim?
[BOH]: Yes.
PRINCIPAL MEMBER: You understand your case would be assisted by legal
representation which is provided free to you?
[BOH]: I do but I find it hard to - - -
PRINCIPAL MEMBER: You understand - you understand you’re making
mistakes in the preparation of your case by not having legal
representation?
PRINCIPAL MEMBER: Well, I can tell you, sir, you’re making mistakes and
it’s not assisting your
preparation.”
“PRINCIPAL MEMBER: Yes, I understand that, ... This is a directions
hearing, we’re not arguing your case today. ... at
the hearing
you’ll have to refer me to the evidence, filed evidence. That’s why
I asked you in the directions to get
legal representation. You’ll have to
take me to the evidence that supports your case rather than just saying that
in pain and that’s why you should win. You’ll have to
refer to the medical evidence and your own statements.
[BOH]: Correct. I do - - -
PRINCIPAL MEMBER: And I want you to - and - and when we start the hearing
I keep on saying page reference, I will keep on saying page
where is the evidence in support of this. Do you understand that?
[BOH]: Yes. Yes.”
“PRINCIPAL MEMBER: ... the problem about acting for yourself is every
time you say something it can be used against you.
[BOH]: That’s okay.
PRINCIPAL MEMBER: I put in writing that you should get legal advice but
you’ve declined that.
[BOH]: That’s okay. That’s
Direction issued by the Commission on 12 November 2024 included various
procedural orders, together with the following:
applicant is again advised that he should contact the Independent Review Office
to obtain free legal advice.
” (emphasis in original)
appellant, in his submissions in reply dealing with Ground No. 3, submits he was
“not given adequate guidance regarding
withdrawal of his Application and
assessment of his capacity to self-represent”. He submits this constituted
of procedural fairness”. This submission is inconsistent
with the transcript and is rejected. There is no basis to conclude
the appellant
required assistance in understanding both the concept of discontinuance and that
discontinuance was available to him
if he wished. It was a procedure he had
utilised in his previous proceedings. The Principal Member repeatedly informed
the appellant
of the availability of legal aid and strongly encouraged him to
take advantage of the scheme. The appellant did not do so. Ground
No. 3 would
not succeed.
Ground No. 4
ground is described as Ground No. 5 in the summary in the appellant’s
submissions in reply. The appellant submits there
was an unreasonable exercise
of discretion in denying him weekly compensation and medical expenses. He refers
to ss 60 and 65A of
the 1987 Act and submits the Principal Member failed to
consider these provisions “appropriately”.
65A forms part of Division 4 of Part 3 of the 1987 Act; it relates to the
recovery of lump sum compensation in respect of
psychological and psychiatric
injury. Such a claim was not pursued in the current proceedings and s 65A is
irrelevant to the current
proceedings. To the extent that this ground deals with
whether the appellant had an ongoing entitlement to weekly compensation, that
topic is dealt with in the discussion above dealing with Ground No. 1.
appellant submits he was denied medical expenses in respect of both his
psychological and physical injuries. He submits the Principal
decision to the contrary, regarding both physical and psychiatric care, should
be set aside. He is entitled to reasonably
necessary medical treatment,
“including physical and psychiatric care”.
Principal Member dealt separately with liability pursuant to s 60 of the 1987
Act, for each of physical care and psychiatric care.
This is clear from the
Certificate of Determination dated 5 February 2025. In that document the
Principal Member at [1] found the
appellant “suffers from a psychiatric
condition caused by the work injury from 10 April 2024”. The Principal
reasons at [279] said: “I note that the insurer should be
reinstating future s 60 expenses with respect to the [appellant’s]
pain condition.”
the Certificate of Determination at [2] the Principal Member found that, save
for the ongoing psychological injury, the appellant
had failed to establish that
“the work injury caused the disputed injuries referenced in these
reasons”. This finding
at [2] encompassed all of the disputed physical
injuries alleged. The Principal Member dealt with these at [182] to [195] of the
finding in the Certificate of Determination at [2] was a finding of fact, it did
not involve the exercise of discretion. The disputed
injuries were set out at
[185] of the reasons. The Principal Member, clearly correctly, did not accept
the appellant was qualified
to give a medical opinion on the causal link between
the work injury and the disputed physical
Principal Member accepted there were two right rib fractures due to the work
injury, as this was consistent with abnormalities
on a whole body scan dated 29
April 2021 and with the contemporaneous hospital notes. These fractures did not
form part of the “disputed
injuries”. The Principal Member referred
to an absence of contemporaneous complaint in respect of the disputed injuries.
referred to evidence from Dr Gronow and Dr Hale, that did not support the
appellant’s case, and Dr Pope, who said the various
scans showed only
age-related changes. The Principal Member said there was no medical evidence,
“apart from general comments
in certificates of capacity”, to
establish a causal connection between the work incident and the disputed
Principal Member’s reference to the often-limited probative force of
certificates of capacity is generally consistent with
the reasons of Keating P
DHL Exel Supply Chain (Australia) Pty Ltd v
in which his
Honour said:
“The certificates are of little probative value
in the absence of a medical report to explain them or to set out the history
which they are based:
Greif Australia Pty Ltd v Ahmed
NSWWCCPD 229
6 DDCR 461.
Principal Member said:
“194. There is otherwise no medical
evidence that these disputed injuries were ongoing at the time when the
respondent denied
liability in April 2023.
am not satisfied that the disputed physical injuries were caused by the work
injury save as the discussion of the psychological
injury set out below.”
the above passages, the Principal Member accepted the continuing effects of a
psychological injury that resulted from the work
injury on 24 December 2020. The
consequence was that there was an order for the ongoing payment of expenses
pursuant to s 60 of the
1987 Act in respect of the psychological injury. The
Principal Member did not accept that the disputed injuries (which were physical
in nature) were caused by the work injury on 24 December 2020. He additionally
concluded there was no medical evidence that the effects
of the disputed
injuries continued beyond the date to which the respondent made voluntary
payments of compensation. The consequence
of these findings was that further
compensation pursuant to s 60 of the 1987 Act, in respect of the physical
injuries, was not payable.
Further compensation pursuant to s 60 of the 1987
Act, in respect of the found psychological injury, was payable. The Principal
reasons in this regard, with which I agree, do not involve error.
No. 4 would not succeed.
Ground No. 5
No. 5 refers to the ‘fresh evidence’ in the document headed
“Quantitative and technological Engineering of
CT/Spect, MRI and
X-ray” (see [85] to [87] above).
evidence in the case indicates the appellant became qualified in the field of
civil engineering in 2023. There is no suggestion
the appellant has any
qualifications or experience in the field of medicine. In
Dixon J dealt with
the appropriateness of a motor vehicle repairer, with ten years’
experience, giving evidence about the likely
speed of a vehicle involved in a
collision, on the basis of damage to one of the vehicles. His Honour, dealing
with the admissibility
of evidence given over objection on this issue,
“... his conclusion would involve a problem far beyond
his capacity and qualifications and one to which he did not purport to
himself. It was not evidence based upon a branch of knowledge or an art in which
the witness was skilled but a wild and unsophisticated
conjecture.”
evidence does not establish the appellant has an appropriate background, in
training or experience, to equip him to provide the
‘fresh evidence’
on which he seeks to rely. Additionally, he seeks to give the evidence in his
own case. He is not independently
objective and impartial, which would reduce
any probative value the fresh evidence might have. To place reliance on the
evidence’ would be contrary to r 73 of the Rules, which
Guiding principles for applicable
proceedings
The appropriate decision-maker for applicable proceedings must, when
informing itself or themselves on any matter in the proceedings,
have regard to
the following principles—
(a) evidence should be logical and probative,
(b) evidence should be relevant to the facts in issue and the issues in
(c) evidence based on speculation or unsubstantiated assumptions is
unacceptable,
(d) unqualified opinions are unacceptable.”
No. 5 would fail.
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant, in its submissions in reply (see [59] above) has purported to add a
further ground (Ground No. 6) in the following
statutory scheme under Section 38 supports ongoing entitlement if either no
current work capacity or limited work capacity
with indexed earnings and
inability to earn more is proven.”
purported ground was added without leave, which was not sought. The appropriate
course is that I ignore it.
It would not have assisted the appellant. Whether the appellant had an ongoing
weekly entitlement pursuant to s 38 of the 1987 Act
is dealt with above in
the discussion of the merits of Ground No. 1.
follows from the above discussion that the appeal does not have reasonable
prospects of success. There is no injustice to the appellant
if the extension of
time to bring the appeal is refused.
Conclusion on the extension application
respondent does not submit it would suffer prejudice if time were extended. It
would lose its vested right to retain the decision
at first instance, to the
extent that it succeeded in resisting the claim, other than the award in the
appellant’s favour for
medical and related expenses resulting from the
proved psychological injury.
regard to the discussion above, I have concluded:
(a) the period of the delay is moderately substantial, a little less than three
(b) the appellant’s explanation does not adequately explain the period of
the delay or the reasons for it;
(c) ‘exceptional circumstances’ are not present;
(d) the appeal does not have reasonable prospects of success, and
(e) loss of the right to make the relevant application would not work
demonstrable and substantial injustice.
Consideration
of the relevant factors does not support the extension of time which the
appellant seeks.
is granted to the respondent, pursuant to
Personal Injury
Commission Act 2020
, to be represented by an Australian legal
practitioner.
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
this decision is to be
de-identified consistent with the approach taken at first instance.
appellant’s application to extend time for the bringing of the appeal,
pursuant to s 352(4) of the 1998 Act and r 133A of
Personal Injury
Commission Rules 2021
is refused.
Michael Snell
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
29 October 2025
BOH v Engineering Solutions
and Services Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPIC 34
(the reasons),
Application to Resolve a
Dispute (ARD), pp 32–39.
ARD, pp 40–50.
14/1/25 (T3), T3 5.12–18.
Reasons, [4]–[5].
Reasons, [6]–[7], [10].
Reasons, [3]–[10].
Reasons, [13]–[14], [18], [20].
and 10. Reasons, [44].
Reasons, [45]–[46],
[70]–[105].
[106]–[112].
[113]–[118].
[119]–[122].
[124]–[130].
Vincent’s Hospital clinical notes, Application to Lodge Additional
Documents 7/1/25, p 83. Reasons,
[133]–[134].
[139]–[144].
[145]–[149].
[150]–[153].
[154]–[163].
See Reply, pp
[164]–[165], [170].
Reasons, [164], [169]
Reasons, [172].
[174]–[181].
24, 34 and 358.
[186]–[195].
, [11]–[26].
Reasons, [196]–[199].
Reasons, [200]–[219].
[2015] NSWWCCPD 49
[230]–[236].
[237]–[241].
[242]–[249].
[251]–[259].
[260]–[269].
NSWWCC 25 (
[2023] NSWPICPD 67
[270]–[275].
[276]–[281].
[282]–[284].
[285]–[288].
Engineering Solutions and Services Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPIC 283
(reconsideration decision).
Reconsideration decision, [13]–[17],
Reconsideration decision,
Reconsideration decision,
Reconsideration decision,
Reconsideration
decision, [45].
Reconsideration application,
Respondent’s submissions,
Appellant’s submissions in reply,
Respondent’s submissions, [6]–[10], [12].
Respondent’s appeal
submissions, [25]. Transcript of hearing 12/11/24 (T1), T1
Respondent’s appeal submissions,
Respondent’s
appeal submissions,
(Dr Awit) and p 257 (Dr
Respondent’s
appeal submissions, [45]–[46],
Appellant’s submissions in response,
Appellant’s
submissions in response,
Appellant’s submissions in response,
Appellant’s submissions in response,
[2025] NSWCA 157
[1998] HCA 27
Tomko v Palasty (No 2)
[2007] NSWCA 369
71 NSWLR 61
[2011] NSWCA 85
[2009] NSWCA 188
[1938] HCA 7
[2007] NSWCA
Respondent’s submissions,
Chep Australia Ltd
v Strickland
[2013] NSWCA 351
, (per Barrett JA, Macfarlan JA agreeing),
Notice of opposition,
Notice of opposition,
[2009] HCA 41
[2023] NSWPICPD 67
[266]–[270].
, [99], [103].
Reasons, [270]–[275].
Reasons, [136],
[2019] HCA 28
[136]–[163].
[136]–[173].
Reasons, [172].
[70]–[122].
Reasons, [75], [92], [114],
[154]–[156].
38.17–31. See also T1 43.32–44.22,
43.32–44.17.
Transcript 26/11/24 (T2), T2
[2011] NSWWCCPD
, [86]–[100].
[1949] HCA 59
Bale v Mills
[2011] NSWCA 226
, [56]–[57], [61].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.87 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter