URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/289.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Qiu v Building Professionals Board [2013] NSWADT 289 (16 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Qiu v Building Professionals Board
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 289
Hearing Date(s):
16 August 2013
Decision Date:
16 December 2013
General Division
Judge K P O'Connor, President
P Hayward, Non-judicial Member
Respondent's decision is varied as follows:
1. Mr Qiu is
reprimanded.
2. Mr Qiu is fined the sum of $7000, payable within 28 days
of receipt of notice of this decision.
3. A condition is imposed on his
accreditation requiring him to provide a copy of any complying development
certificate he issues
within two days of its issuance to an accredited certifier
approved by the Board. This condition is to take effect once the Board
of the accredited certifier, and is to remain operative for two years from the
date of the approval. These arrangements
are to be made within 60 days of the
issuance of this decision.
4. Liberty is given to either party to apply
on two days' notice in respect of the terms of the above condition.
the meantime the condition imposed by the stay order requiring Mr Qiu to provide
a copy of any complying development certificate
he issues to the Board within
two days of its issuance is to be continued.
Catchwords:
PROFESSIONAL DISCIPLINE - Accredited Certifier - Review of disciplinary
decision - standards in relation to issuance of construction
certificates in
respect of residential development projects - Board finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct - ten allegations
found proven - orders of reprimand, fine
and suspension from issuing construction certificates for two years - eight of
the allegations
found proven pressed at review hearing - seven findings upheld -
finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct - disciplinary order
Building Professionals Act 2005
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Building Professionals Act
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Cases Cited:
Director General, Department of Fair Trading v Cohen
[2000] NSWFTT 3
Director General, Department of Infrastructure, Planning and Natural
Resources v Boulle
[2006] NSWADT 43
Principal judgment
Ting Jian Qiu (Applicant)
Building Professionals Board
(Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
J Cotton, Lovegrove Solicitors (Applicant)
A Grey, Building
Professionals Board (Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
is an application for review of a disciplinary determination of the Building
Professionals Board. The review applicant is Ting
('Tony') Jian Qiu, an
accredited certifier, registration no BPB 0333.
Board Determination
23 May 2013 the Board disciplinary committee determined, following investigation
of a complaint by the investigative staff of the
Board, that he had engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct 'as defined under
Professionals Act 2005
(BP Act)'. It made disciplinary orders.
Board's disciplinary jurisdiction is conferred by s 31 of the BP Act which
31 Decision after investigation of complaint
(1) After the Board has completed an investigation into a complaint against
an accreditation holder, the complaint is to be dealt
with in accordance with
this section.
(2) The Board may apply to the Tribunal for a disciplinary finding against an
accreditation holder under Division 5 if it is satisfied
that there is a
reasonable likelihood that the accreditation holder will be found guilty by the
Tribunal of unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct or it
may instead exercise the functions conferred on it by subsection (4).
(3) (Repealed)
(4) If the Board is satisfied that the accreditation holder is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct,
the Board may
take any one or more of the following actions:
(a) caution or reprimand the accreditation holder,
(b) by order impose such conditions as it considers appropriate on the
accreditation holder's certificate of accreditation,
(c) order that the accreditation holder complete such educational courses as
are specified by the Board,
(d) in the case of an accredited body corporate, order an accredited
certifier who is a director or employee of the body corporate
to complete such
educational courses as are specified by the Board within the time specified by
(e) order that the accreditation holder report on his, her or its practice as
an accredited certifier or building professional at
the times, in the manner and
to the persons specified by the Board,
(f) order the accreditation holder to pay to the Board a fine of an amount,
not exceeding 1,000 penalty units, specified in the order,
(g) order the accreditation holder to pay to the complainant such amount (not
exceeding $20,000) as the Board considers appropriate
by way of compensation for
any damage suffered by the complainant as a result of the unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional
misconduct,
(h) suspend the accreditation holder's certificate of accreditation for such
period as the Board thinks fit,
(i) cancel the accreditation holder's certificate of accreditation,
(j) disqualify the accreditation holder from being an accredited certifier
director of, or otherwise being involved in the management
of, an accredited
body corporate or a specified accredited body corporate for such period
(including the period of his or her lifetime)
as may be specified by the
(k) in the case of an accredited body corporate, disqualify an accredited
certifier director of the body corporate from being an accredited
director of, or otherwise involved in the management of, the body corporate for
such period (including the period of his
or her lifetime) as may be specified by
the Board, but only during any period when the body corporate holds a
certificate of corporate
accreditation,
(l) order that the accreditation holder cannot re-apply for a certificate of
accreditation within such period (including the period
of his or her lifetime)
as may be specified by the Board,
(m) order that no further action is to be taken by the Board in relation to
the complaint if satisfied that the accreditation holder
is generally competent
and diligent and that no other material complaints (whether or not the subject
of a disciplinary finding)
have been made against the accreditation holder.
(5) The Board is to dismiss the complaint against the accreditation holder if
it is satisfied that the accreditation holder is not
guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct.
(5A) When considering what action should be taken under subsection (4) in
relation to an accreditation holder, the Board is to take
into consideration any
previous disciplinary action taken against the accreditation holder. This
subsection does not limit any other
matter that the Board may take into
consideration.
(6) An order of the Board under this section takes effect on a date specified
in the written statement of the decision given under
section 32 or, if a
statement is not required to be provided under that section, on a date specified
in a notice in writing served
on the person the subject of the complaint. Any
such date must be a date occurring on or after service of the statement or
on the person the subject of the complaint.
19 of the BP Act provides:
professional misconduct
, in relation to an accreditation
holder, means conduct that is unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of the
accreditation holder's certificate of accreditation.
unsatisfactory professional conduct
of an accredited certifier
means any of the following (whether consisting of an act or omission):
(a) conduct occurring in connection with the exercise of the accredited
certifier's functions as a certifying authority that falls
short of the standard
of competence, diligence and integrity that a member of the public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably competent
accredited certifier,
(b) a contravention of this Act, the
Environmental Planning and Assessment
Strata Schemes (Freehold Development) Act 1973
Strata Schemes (Leasehold Development) Act 1986
, or the regulations under
any of those Acts, by the accredited certifier, whether or not the accredited
certifier is prosecuted or
convicted for the contravention,
(c) a contravention by the accredited certifier of a law (whether or not a
New South Wales law, and whether or not the contravention
is an offence) that
relates to the functions or obligations of a person as an accredited certifier
or the holder of an equivalent
authorisation, or involves fraud or dishonesty,
whether or not the accredited certifier is prosecuted or convicted for the
contravention,
(d) a failure to comply with a statutory or other duty, or a contractual
obligation, imposed on the accredited certifier by or in
accordance with a law
(whether or not a New South Wales law) that relates to the functions or
obligations of a person as an accredited
certifier or the holder of an
equivalent authorisation,
(e) the exercise by the accredited certifier of functions as a certifying
authority in a partial manner,
(f) the wilful disregard by the accredited certifier of matters to which the
accredited certifier is required to have regard in exercising
functions as a
certifying authority,
(g) a failure by the accredited certifier to comply with any relevant code of
conduct contained in the accreditation scheme,
(h) a failure by the accredited certifier to comply with a term or condition
of the certificate of accreditation,
(i) a failure by an accredited certifier to comply with an order of the Board
or the Tribunal under this Act,
(j) a failure by the accredited certifier, without reasonable excuse, to
comply with a direction or requirement under
(k) wilfully misleading or obstructing the Board in the exercise of any
function under this Part or
(l) any other improper or unethical conduct of the accredited certifier that
indicates that the accredited certifier is unfit to properly
carry out the
duties of an accredited certifier,
(m) any conduct specified by a provision of this Act as being capable of
being unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct or any
other conduct prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
definition.
Board examined Mr Qiu's conduct in respect of five developments in the City of
Canada Bay, a municipality in greater Sydney:
3 High Street,
Concord (four allegations, allegations 1 and 3 found proven)
57 Wellbank
Street, Concord (four allegations, all found proven)
Street, Concord (two allegations, allegation 1 found proven)
Avenue, Russell Lea (four allegations, allegations 1, 3 and 4 found proven)
Street, Concord (one allegation, found not proven).
total ten allegations affecting four developments were found proven.
Board made the following disciplinary orders:
- A reprimand.
- A fine of $20,000, payable within 28 days of the determination.
- Imposition of a condition on his certificate of accreditation, which
removes his authority to issue complying development certificates
(CDCs) within
the meaning of the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Act), effective from 3 June 2013 to 3 June 2015 (inclusive).
determination included the following statements:
'6. The decision on penalty is an aggregation of the proven matters listed in
the investigation report; and
7. The Committee took into consideration previous disciplinary action taken
against Mr Qiu, having regard to the Board's Disciplinary
Guidelines.'
Review Application
21 June 2013 Mr Qiu applied to the Tribunal for review of the Board's decision.
The Tribunal's review jurisdiction is conferred
by s 33 which
Person may apply to Tribunal for a review of disciplinary
finding of Board
A person in respect of whom the Board has made a disciplinary finding may
apply to the Tribunal for a review of that finding and any
action taken by the
Board under
a directions hearing on 25 June 2013 the Tribunal endorsed consent orders
staying the orders of the Board until disposal of the
review application by the
Tribunal. Mr Qiu agreed to a condition that he provided copies of CDCs to the
Board within two days of
them being issued. The Board gave an undertaking that
it would remove the determination from its public web site until disposal of
review application by the Tribunal.
provisions of the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
govern the exercise by the Tribunal of its jurisdiction to review reviewable
decisions. The primary provision is
which provides:
Determination of review by Tribunal
(1) In determining an application for a review of a reviewable decision, the
Tribunal is to decide what the correct and preferable
decision is having regard
to the material then before it, including the following:
(a) any relevant factual material,
(b) any applicable written or unwritten law.
(2) For this purpose, the Tribunal may exercise all of the functions that are
conferred or imposed by any relevant enactment on the
administrator who made the
(3) In determining an application for the review of a reviewable decision,
the Tribunal may decide:
(a) to affirm the reviewable decision, or
(b) to vary the reviewable decision, or
(c) to set aside the reviewable decision and make a decision in substitution
for the reviewable decision it set aside, or
(d) to set aside the reviewable decision and remit the matter for
reconsideration by the administrator in accordance with any directions
recommendations of the Tribunal.
Board filed all relevant material, as required by s 58 of the ADT Act, including
the investigation report, and the Board's reasons
for decision. The parties
filed written submissions as follows: applicant's submissions, 23 July 2013;
expert report obtained by
applicant from Mr Brendan Bennett, Building Surveyor,
Accredited Certifier, Grade 1, Director, City Plan Services, 1 August 2013;
respondent's submissions divided into two parts: submissions as to allegations
found proven, submissions as to disciplinary orders,
Applicant's Case
Qiu's application for review had attached to it 'submissions in support of
review', dated 21 June 2013. His case is outlined there.
He stated, see para 19,
(i) for most of the proven allegations he denies that any adverse
disciplinary finding should be made against him;
(ii) even if some of the errors alleged were made, he denies that (even when
seen cumulatively) the errors are sufficient to justify
a finding of
'unsatisfactory professional conduct';
(iii) if, nonetheless, it is considered that he is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct, he seeks a review of the disciplinary
orders, in the
following respects: (a) the imposition of a condition that he not be able to
approve complying development certificates
for a period of two years; and (b)
the amount of the fine, which it is submitted is excessive.
The Hearing
hearing proceeded on 16 August 2013, before a panel constituted in the usual way
for disciplinary proceedings involving accredited
certifiers - one presidential
judicial member of the Tribunal, and a non-judicial member with relevant
expertise (on this occasion,
Mr Philip Hayward, a registered surveyor of
hearing, the Board, represented by Mr Grey, legal officer, did not press three
of its adverse findings: i.e. High Street, Concord
development, allegation 3
(accordingly allegation 1 remains alive); Wellbank Street, Concord development,
part of allegation 2 (accordingly
allegations 1 and 2 as to one part, 3 and 4
remain alive; and Fairview Street, Concord development, allegation 1
(accordingly no
allegations remain alive in respect of this development). It
pressed all the proven allegations in respect of 7 Seabrook Avenue,
result is that the certifier's conduct remains in issue in respect of three
developments, and there are seven allegations found
wholly proven to be
reconsidered, plus one found proven in respect of one of its two
hearing Mr Qiu accepted that there had been a number of errors on his part, in
line with the advice provided in Mr Bennett's expert
report. Only two
allegations were in contest: Wellbank Street, allegation 4; and Seabrook Avenue,
allegation 3.
evidence was given by: Mr Bill Oslan, Senior Investigator, Building
Professionals Board; Mr Bennett; and Mr Qiu.
Function of CDCs
will be evident from the narrative to this point, the Board's concern in respect
of the certifier's conduct in respect of each
of the developments related to his
issuance of CDCs. The allegations that remain alive divide into two types: Mr
Qiu issued a CDC
in circumstances where the law did not permit this method of
approval; or Mr Qiu issued a CDC that certified to compliance with the
the matter certified was non-compliant.
power given to accredited certifiers to issue a CDC is a significant one. It
combines the functions of a development consent and
a construction certificate.
Generally speaking, the CDC procedure is able to be used to certify and approve
developments of a relatively
minor character.
certifier's authority is given by s 85A of the EPA Act:
85A Process for obtaining complying development certificates
(1) Application
An applicant may, in accordance with the regulations, apply to:
(a) the council, or
(b) an accredited certifier,
for a complying development certificate.
(2) (Repealed)
(3) Evaluation
The council or accredited certifier must consider the application and
(a) whether or not the proposed development is complying development, and
(b) whether or not the proposed development complies with the relevant
development standards, and
(c) if the proposed development is complying development because of the
provisions of a local environmental plan, or a local environmental
relation to which the council has made a development control plan, that
specifies standards and conditions for the complying
development, whether or not
the proposed development complies with those standards and conditions.
(4) A council or accredited certifier must not refuse to issue a complying
development certificate on the ground that any building
product or system
relating to the development does not comply with a requirement of the
Building Code of Australia
if the building product or system is
accredited in respect of that requirement in accordance with the
regulations.
(5) A council, an employee of a council and an accredited certifier do not
incur any liability as a consequence of acting in accordance
with subsection
(6) Determination
The council or an accredited certifier may determine an application:
(a) by issuing a complying development certificate, unconditionally or (to
the extent required by the regulations, an environmental
planning instrument or
a development control plan) subject to conditions, or
(b) by refusing to issue a complying development certificate.
(7) The council or an accredited certifier must not refuse to issue a
complying development certificate if the proposed development
complies with the
development standards applicable to it and complies with other requirements
prescribed by the regulations relating
to the issue of a complying development
certificate.
(8) The determination of an application by the council or accredited
certifier must be completed within the period prescribed by the
regulations (or
such longer period as may be agreed to by the applicant) after lodgment of the
application.
(9) In determining the application, the council or the accredited certifier
must impose a condition that is required to be imposed
under Division 6 in
relation to the complying development.
(10) There is no right of appeal against the determination of, or a failure
or refusal to determine, an application for a complying
development certificate
by a council or an accredited certifier.
(10A) Payment of long service levy
Where a council or accredited certifier completes a complying development
certificate, that certificate is not to be forwarded or
delivered to the
applicant, unless any long service levy payable under
Building and Construction Industry Long Service Payments Act 1986
where such a levy is payable by instalments, the first instalment of the levy)
has been paid.
(11) Post-determination notification
On the determination of an application for the issue of a complying
development certificate:
(a) the council or accredited certifier must notify the applicant of the
determination, and
(b) the accredited certifier must notify the council of the determination,
(c) if the determination is to issue a complying development certificate, the
council or accredited certifier must notify any other
person, if required to do
so by the regulations, in accordance with the regulations.
(12) For the purposes of subsection (7),
development standard
a provision of a development control plan that would be a development standard,
within the meaning of section 4, if the
provision were in an environmental
planning instrument.
aim of the Codes SEPP is explained at cl 1.3:
Aims of Policy
This Policy aims to provide streamlined assessment processes for development
that complies with specified development standards by:
(a) providing exempt and complying development codes that have State-wide
application, and
(b) identifying, in the General Exempt Development Code, types of development
that are of minimal environmental impact that may be
carried out without the
need for development consent, and
(c) identifying, in the complying development codes, types of complying
development that may be carried out in accordance with a complying
development
certificate as defined in the Act, and
(d) enabling the progressive extension of the types of development in this
Policy, and
(e) providing transitional arrangements for the introduction of the
State-wide codes, including the amendment of other environmental
instruments.
Codes SEPP,
What development is complying development?
(1) Development that is specified in a complying development code that meets
the standards specified for that development and that
complies with the
requirements of this Division for complying development is complying development
for the purposes of this Policy.
(2) For the purposes of subclause (1), development that is specified includes
any specified limitations as to the land on which that
development may be
carried out.
each of the three cases that remain under notice, the primary allegation is that
Mr Qiu misclassified the new residential dwelling
the subject of the CDC as
being two storeys or less, when it exceeded that limit. Developments that
exceeded two storeys were not
exempt from the usual requirements of a
development consent followed by a construction certificate. They can not be the
a CDC. Codes SEPP 3.2 provides, further to cl 1.17:
3.2 New single storey and two storey dwelling houses
The erection of a new single storey or two storey dwelling house is
development specified for this code.
two of the cases there are further allegations going to other aspects of the
(1) 3 HIGH STREET, CONCORD (ALLEGATION 1)
Allegation 1 (paraphrased): Mr Qiu issued CDC PC12110 dated 12 March 2012
for the erection of a dwelling at the above address in contravention
of sections
85A(3) and 85A(6) of the EPA Act 1979. Specifically, the dwelling exceeded the
number of storeys provided in cl 3.2 under
Division 1 of Codes SEPP.
endorsed plans referred to three elements - a garage, a ground floor and a first
floor. The main set of plans included a 'basement
floor' plan.
Oslan, the investigator, concluded that the endorsed CDC drawings for which Mr
Qiu issued the certificate reflected that the development
was a three storey
dwelling 'in some parts' - specifically, part of the bathroom at basement level,
part of the dining room at ground
floor level, and part of the retreat at first
floor level - when stacked together they form a three storey building. He
a drawing submitted by Mr Qiu in his defence, and noted that it did not
show the relationship between the elements shown in the CDC
Bennett agreed with Mr Oslan's assessment. Mr Bennett had interviewed Mr Qiu,
and considered that he had incorrectly interpreted
the position of the lower
ground en suite bathroom to align with the internal void due to the consistent
basement floor level. He
noted that upon realising that there was an issue he
requested the drawings be corrected and issued an amended CDC (9 May
Tribunal is satisfied, as found by Mr Bennett, that there were 3 storeys
including the basement garage. It is apparent that the
amended CDC was only
issued by Mr Qiu after he had been alerted to the problem.
(2) 57 WELLBANK STREET, CONCORD (ALLEGATIONS 1, 2.1, 3 AND 4)
Allegation 1 (paraphrased): Mr Qiu issued CDC PC11704 dated 18 July 2011
for the erection of a dwelling and swimming pool at the above
contravention of sections 85A(3) and 85A(6) of the EPA Act 1979. Specifically,
the dwelling exceeded the number of storeys
provided in cl 3.2 under Division 1
of Codes SEPP.
plans provided for a basement floor, a ground floor and a first floor. They
showed a driveway entering the ground level of the
front of the site, to the
right side of the dwelling and then following the contour of the land downwards
to a garage below the house.
Oslan found that the endorsed drawings depicted a dwelling that was a three
storey one 'in some parts' - specifically, part of
the single garage at basement
level, part of the gallery at ground floor level, and part of the gallery at
first floor level. He
considered that when stacked they produced a three storey
building. In his initial reply to the Board, Mr Qiu said that based on
(Building Code of Australia) definition the basement is not considered a storey
as the floor level of the storey immediately
above is less than 1 metre above
ground floor. This explanation was rejected, as the relevant definition is that
contained in the
Standard Instrument - Principal Local Environmental
. It defines a basement as a 'storey'.
are the relevant definitions:
means a space within a building that is situated between
one floor level and the floor level next above, or if there is no floor
the ceiling or roof above, but does not include:
(a) a space that contains only a lift shaft, stairway or meter room, or
(b) a mezzanine, or
(c) an attic.
means the space of a building where the floor level of
that space is predominantly below ground level (existing) and where the floor
level of the storey immediately above is less than 1 metre above ground level
(existing).
Bennett expressed some sympathy for Mr Qiu's misinterpretation. While he agreed
with Mr Oslan that Mr Qiu had fallen into error,
he said that he had applied a
'BCA' approach (i.e. a Building Code of Australia approach) to the assessment of
how basement areas
of dwellings with two storeys above ground were to be treated
in determining whether a dwelling might still be classified as two
noted that the relevant amendment to the Codes SEPP occurred on 28 February
2011, and the CDC under notice was issued on 18 July
2011. He said that there
was a great deal of industry confusion at the time of these amendments, and
differing opinions as to the
required interpretation. He referred to the
activities of the Department in undertaking training seminars in the run-up to
the commencement
of these amendments to the Codes SEPP (December 2010), and the
number of interpretative documents that have been issued by the Department,
the debate on their meaning, which he said continues.
assessment is that Mr Qiu seems to have misinterpreted the Codes SEPP and did
not count the basement as a storey.
Allegation 2 (paraphrased): Specifically, the dwelling had a setback to
the boundary with a public reserve that was less than the
3m provided in cl
3.19(a) under Division 2 of Codes SEPP. [The original allegation found proven
also referred to non-compliance in
respect of the swimming pool. This finding
was not pressed at hearing.]
3.19 Exceptions to setbacks
Despite any other clause in this Subdivision:
(a) a dwelling house or an outbuilding must have a setback of at least 3m
from a boundary with a public reserve, and ...
Qiu informed the Board that after he knew that the side boundary to the public
reserve had to be 3.0m, he immediately advised the
owner and asked him to stop
working on the site. As Mr Oslan noted in his report, this response amounted to
an admission.
Qiu conceded his error. He issued an amended CDC drawing (12 September 2011) and
the building was repositioned.
Allegation 3 (paraphrased). Specifically, the first floor balcony to the
dwelling was not provided with a privacy screen as required
by cl 3.23(2) under
Division 2 of Codes SEPP.
3.23 Privacy
(2) A new balcony, deck, patio, pergola, terrace or verandah and any
alterations to an existing balcony, deck, patio, pergola, terrace
or verandah
must have a privacy screen if it:
(a) has a setback of less than 3m from a side or rear boundary, and
(b) has a floor area more than 3m2, and
(c) has a floor level more than 1 metre above ground level (existing).
allegation is conceded. Mr Bennett agreed with Mr Oslan's and the Board's
finding. Mr Qiu's initial response was that because
the balcony was facing a
park, there was no privacy issue and therefore a screen was not necessary. It
will be seen that the standard
does not contain any qualification of this kind.
Mr Bennett noted that Mr Qiu had issued an amended CDC (12 September 2011) that
Qiu conceded his error. He noted that now the balcony fell within the 3.0m set
back, and there was no need for a screen.
Allegation 4 (paraphrased). Specifically, the required excavation work
exceeded that detailed in cl 3.29(1)(a) under Division 2 of
Codes SEPP.
3.29 Excavation of sloping sites
(1) Excavation associated with the erection of, or alterations or additions
to, a dwelling house or ancillary development (other than
a swimming pool) must:
(a) be not more than 1m below ground level (existing).
Board's finding was contested.
Oslan noted that the dwelling had basement level for car parking. He noted that
the subject site is a sloping one with a fall of
approximately 1 metre from the
front boundary to the rear boundary. He stated that according to the endorsed
CDC drawings, the levels
associated with the design of the basement show that
excavation work of at least 2.2m would be required to accommodate the structure.
Specifically, he said, the finished floor level at the top of the ramp leading
to the basement was depicted as s.f.l. 12.650, and
the proposed finished floor
level of the basement at the bottom of the ramp was depicted as s.f.l. 10.440,
thus amounting to a 2.21m
of difference in levels.
his reply to the Board Mr Qiu stated in part: 'The maximum excavation below
existing ground level is not specified in the definition.
If the basement area
is to be useable and comply with the BCA, the excavation depth must be more than
Bennett did not dispute Mr Oslan's assessment of the levels shown by the
drawings. However, he contended that cl 3.29 was simply
not applicable to the
dwelling in issue. Mr Bennett did not agree with the Board that the relevant
standard was cl 3.29. He considered
that cl 3.29 provides a standard relevant to
'earthworks and drainage within a general context to limit the ecological impact
a development on site'.
said that 'it is clear that this limitation does not apply to the construction
of a basement which is a development that is complying
development under Part 3
Division 1 of the Codes SEPP.' He referred to the general definition of
'basement', set out earlier in these
reasons (see para [31]).
noted that a basement as a non-habitable space for the purpose of cl 3.8.2.2. of
the BCA must have a minimum floor to ceiling height
of 2.1m for at least
two-thirds of the floor area of the room or space. Mr Bennett said that it is
impossible to predict footing
depths for a structure as in-ground circumstances
can require extended footing depths and/or piers. Such construction, he said,
regularly exceed 1.0m below existing ground level. In support of his view,
he referred to the definition of basement - it needs to
'predominantly' below ground level and the floor level of the storey above must
be less than 1m above ground level (existing).
his report, he noted that to achieve a BCA compliant ceiling height it is
necessary for a basement to be excavated at least 1200m
to 2200mm assuming a
100mm thick slab (excluding edge beams). He referred to the Department of
NSW Housing Code - Expansion to cover small lots/Discussion
dated 2010 and its statement at p 18:
It is proposed that additional excavation be allowed provided it is contained
within the footprint of the dwelling house or ancillary
development, and the
area is limited to:
25m2 in the
Small Lots Housing Code, and
40m2 in the
General Housing Code.
the time this was a discussion paper. We note (see extract at Appendix E of Mr
Bennett's report) that under the heading 'Basement
and Excavation', the paper
'Basements are currently not permitted under the General Housing Code, and
excavation associated with the erection ... of a dwelling
house is limited to a
maximum of 1.0m.'
paper then went on to outline the proposed amendment, as set out above, and
invited comment.
Bennett said if applied literally cl 3.29 would never allow for basements to be
was considerable discussion at hearing of the complications of these rules in
the case of sites that slope rearward from the
street frontage, as
relation to Mr Bennett's opinion, we consider that the rule in cl 3.29 is a
general rule that is applicable, as it is expressed,
to any 'excavation
associated with the erection of ... a dwelling house'. This accords with the
view expressed in the 2010 discussion
3.29 appears in Subdivision 6 of Division 2 of Part 3. Part 3 is headed 'General
Housing Code'. Division 2 is headed 'Development
standards for this code'. The
building issues the subject of this division are covered in Subdivisions 2-7,
and they are headed 'Site
requirements', 'Building heights and setbacks',
'Landscaping', 'Car parking and access', 'Earthworks and drainage' (Subdivision
where cl 3.29 appears), 'Ancillary development', 'Outbuildings' and
'Development standards for particular land' (such as bushfire
prone land).
strict provision needs to be understood in the overall framework of the policy
aims of the Codes SEPP. The instrument provides
for a streamlined process,
enabling the 'fast tracking' of various aspects of residential building works.
In our view it is understandable
that some caution would be shown in relation to
allowing fast tracking of more substantial excavation works. The instrument as
is presently framed means that more substantial footings excavation can not
be the subject of a CDC.
accept that the construction of a basement that is at or near the upper end of
the area limits specified would often normally require
more than 1.0m depth
excavation; and that as a practical matter many basements are built in a way
that allows someone to stand up
in them, and therefore would ordinarily be at
least 2.0m in height. Nonetheless, cl 3.4 is entirely silent on this matter, and
are not able to draw the inference that Mr Bennett does.
Consequently,
we agree with Mr Oslan's and the Board's interpretation of the
find the allegation proven.
note that the problem in this matter was resolved by the issuance of an amended
CDC after the Council alerted Mr Qiu to the problem.
(3) 7 SEABROOK AVENUE, RUSSELL LEA (ALLEGATIONS 1, 3 AND 4)
Allegation 1 (paraphrased): Mr Qiu issued CDC PC12099 dated 19 March 2012
for the erection of a dwelling and swimming pool at the
above address in
contravention of sections 85A(3) and 85A(6) of the EPA Act 1979. Specifically,
the dwelling exceeded the number
of storeys provided in cl 3.2 under Division 1
of Codes SEPP.
plans provided for a 'garage/laundry' basement level, a ground floor level and a
first floor level. The 'garage/laundry' level
included the following spaces:
garage, laundry, plant room, and - both external to the walls - a patio and a
5000L tank. The rear
yard had three elements, to the right as you enter, a
driveway from the rear street, Alison Street; a lawn with clothes hoist at
centre; and to the left side, a swimming pool, set close to the rear
Oslan found, and the Board and Mr Bennett agreed, that the endorsed CDC drawings
depicted a three storey dwelling in some parts
- specifically, the plant room at
basement level, the walk-in robe, and the en suite to bedroom 2 at ground level
and part of the
family room at first level when stacked together formed a three
storey building. The Board in its submissions noted that at the lowest
plant room as shown in the plans aligned vertically through the levels above to
cause the building to be three storeys.
Bennett noted that he had been advised by Mr Qiu that he issued an amended CDC
(6 November 2012) which deleted the plant room and
incorporated the sub-floor
area for the installation of the rainwater tank.
Qiu did not contest the Board's finding.
Allegation 3 (paraphrased): Specifically, the swimming pool (an 'ancillary
development') was not located as detailed in cl 3.14(3)
under Division 2 of the
Codes SEPP.
Board's finding was contested. The parties referred to the following
provisions:
Definitions (cl 1.5)
ancillary development
means any of the following that are not
exempt development under this Policy:
swimming pool
child-resistant barrier
parallel road
means, in the case of a lot that has boundaries
with parallel roads, the road that is not the primary road.
primary road
means the road to which the front of a dwelling
house, or a main building, on a lot faces or is proposed to face.
Setbacks of dwelling houses and ancillary development from
roads, other than classified roads
(1) A dwelling house and all ancillary development on a lot must have a
setback from the boundary with a primary road that is not
a classified road of
(a) the average distance of the setbacks of the nearest 2 dwelling houses
having a boundary with the same primary road and located
within 40m of the lot
on which the dwelling house is erected, or
(b) in any case where 2 dwelling houses are not located within 40m of the
(i) 3m, if the lot has an area of less than 300m2, or
(ii) 4.5m, if the lot has an area of at least 300m2 but less than 900m2,
(iii) 6.5m, if the lot has an area of at least 900m2 but less than 1500m2,
(iv) 10m, if the lot has an area of at least 1500m2.
(2) A dwelling house and all ancillary development on a lot must have a
setback from a boundary with a secondary road that is not
a classified road of
at least the following:
(a) 2m, if the lot has an area of at least 200m2 but less than 600m2, or
(b) 3m, if the lot has an area of at least 600m2 but less than 1500m2, or
(c) 5m, if the lot has an area of at least 1500m2.
(3) A dwelling house and all ancillary development on a lot must have a
setback from a boundary with a parallel road that is not a
classified road of at
(a) the average distance of the setbacks of the nearest 2 dwelling houses
having a boundary with the same parallel road and located
within 40m of the lot
on which the dwelling house is erected, or
(b) in any case where 2 dwelling houses are not located within 40m of the
(i) 3m, if the lot has an area of less than 300m2, or
(ii) 4.5m, if the lot has an area of at least 300m2 but less than 900m2,
(iii) 6.5m, if the lot has an area of at least 900m2 but less than 1500m2,
(iv) 10m, if the lot has an area of at least 1500m2.
(4) (Repealed)
3.34 Swimming pools
(1) Ancillary development comprising a swimming pool for private use must be
located on a lot:
(a) behind the setback area from a primary road, or
(b) in the rear yard.
Development for the purposes of a swimming pool is not complying
development under this Code unless it is ancillary to a dwelling
(2) The swimming pool water line must have a setback of at least 1m from a
side or rear boundary.
Qiu approved a set back of 1m from the (rear) allotment boundary with Alison
Street, applying cl 3.34(2).
Mr Oslan's opinion the operative provisions were cl 3.14(3)(a) and (b)(ii). He
found, and the Board agreed, that the endorsed CDC
drawings permitted a swimming
pool that had a nominated setback figure that was less than that detailed under
Codes SEPP, at cl 3.14
(3)(a) and (b)(ii). He noted that the development site
had an area of 451m2 and was located between two parallel roads known as
Avenue and Alison Street. He noted that the front door of the proposed
dwelling faced Seabrook Avenue and therefore he considered
it to be the primary
Board in its submissions at hearing focussed on para (a), noting that this was
the applicable standard here, averaged the set
backs of the neighbouring
dwellings and computed the average distance of the setbacks at 15.5m. Mr Oslan
confirmed this calculation
at hearing.
Backs and Lanes
is defined (Codes SEPP, cl 1.5)
a 'public road, with a width greater than 3m but less than 7m, that is used
primarily for access to the rear of premises, and includes
a nightsoil lane'.
Qiu regarded Alison Street as a 'lane'. His assessment of its primary purpose
fits with the depiction of the street in aerial photographs
showing only rear
yards along both sides of the street, which adjoin the street. The aerial
photographs show swimming pools in some
of the rear yards. In his submissions he
stated that he measured the width of Alison Street and it came in just under the
at 6.9m. This assertion has not been disputed.
Bennett expressed the opinion that cl 3.14 was a general standard that needed to
be read alongside the modified setback provisions.
Mr Bennett noted the amount
of attention given to setback modification by the Code.
is no question that Seabrook Avenue is a primary road, as the house faces
Seabrook Avenue. Alison Street is therefore a 'parallel
road' but it also
qualifies as a 'lane'.
3.15 to 3.20 all deal with setback modifications. They are
3.15 Setbacks of dwelling houses and ancillary development from classified
3.16 Setbacks of dwelling houses and outbuildings from side boundaries, and
built to boundary walls
3.17 Setbacks of dwelling houses from rear boundaries
3.18 Setbacks of outbuildings from rear boundaries
3.19 Exceptions to setbacks
3.20 Calculating setbacks
Bennett noted that cl 3.17(3) allowed for a dwelling house to abut a rear lane
for not more than 50 per cent of the length of that
boundary. Clause 3.17 has
general standards regarding setbacks of dwellings. Sub-clause (3) is an
exception to those standards. It
(3) Despite subclause (2), if the lot has a rear boundary with a lane the
building may have a building line that abuts that boundary
for not more than 50
per cent of the length of that boundary.
said that it could also qualify as a 'parallel road', and then the dwelling
house set back rules would come into play and produce
a very different result.
He presented this as an example of the contradictory tensions between the
general standard in cl 3.14 and
the specific problems to which cll 3.15 and
following were addressed.
Board in its determination simply stated that it 'disagreed with the submission
of Mr Qiu under cover of letter dated 6 May 2013
that Alison Street was not a
parallel road'. It did not engage with the submission, in particular the
lane/setbacks issue or give
reasons for this conclusion. (This approach is
characteristic of many of the rulings of the Board that this Tribunal has been
on to review, and assists neither the affected party nor the Tribunal. We
have commented in recent hearings on this problem, and
look forward to a change
in the way reasons for determination are written.)
our view, the disagreement over the way swimming pool setbacks are to be set in
circumstances of the present kind needs to be addressed
by clear advice from the
Department and the Board, or review of the Code's provisions.
our view, the interpretation Mr Qiu adopted was not untenable. The provisions do
not deal clearly with the circumstances where
a street qualifies as both a
'parallel road' and a 'lane'. In our view, if he made an error, it ought not to
be treated as one that
demonstrates unsatisfactory professional conduct. At
most, it was an error of judgement.
expert member, Mr Hayward, comments further that, in his opinion, the Board's
interpretation of the Codes SEPP on this point is
unsustainable and if upheld
would make it impossible to build a pool in the rear yard of an allotment with
two street frontages.
find this allegation not proven.
Allegation 4 (paraphrased). Specifically, the principal private open space
was not located as detailed in cl 3.25 of Division 2 of
Codes SEPP.
allegation goes to the 'Landscaping' provisions:
3.25 Principal private open space
(2) A lot, with a width measured at the building line of at least 10m, on
which a new dwelling house is erected must have at least
24m2 of principal
private open space.
(3) In this clause,
principal private open space
means an area that:
(a) is directly accessible from, and adjacent to, a habitable room, other
than a bedroom, and
(b) is at least 3m wide, and
(c) is not steeper than 1:50 gradient.
allegation is conceded.
Oslan noted from the endorsed drawings that all habitable rooms are located one
floor above any potential principal private open
space. Consequently there are
no habitable rooms that open to the open space of the property. In the original
submissions Mr Qiu
referred to a 'nearby' Study room 'near' the front yard, and
argued that it was a case of what is meant by 'direct access' and 'adjacent
In his report Mr Bennett agreed with the Board. He said in his opinion the
non-compliance could be rectified by swapping the
identified use of Bedroom 4
with the Study, removing the door/wall separating this space from the porch
doorway and corridor, and
ensuring that the 24m2 has a gradient of not more than
'UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT'
Board's reasons do not identify which of the many categories of 'unsatisfactory
professional conduct' set out in s 19 this case
is said to fall into. The
findings of the Board simply state that Mr Qiu has engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct 'as defined'
by the section. This approach is unfair to
certifiers the subject of disciplinary action, as some of the categories of
set out in s 19 are clearly more grave than others. We have in mind
particularly the categories that refer to conduct that involves
moral turpitude
and lack of honesty. We will proceed on the basis that it is the primary
category, category (a), into which the Board
has classified this case,
(a) conduct occurring in connection with the exercise of the accredited
certifier's functions as a certifying authority that falls
short of the standard
of competence, diligence and integrity that a member of the public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably competent
accredited certifier,
the Tribunal noted in
Director General, Department of Infrastructure,
Planning and Natural Resources v Boulle
[2006] NSWADT 43:
13 The most notable feature of the above definitions, so far as conduct
falling into category (a) is concerned, is that they do not
adopt the standard
found in the common law formulations of 'professional misconduct' - competence
as judged by one's peers in the
profession or occupation - but instead provide
for competence, diligence and integrity to be assessed by reference to what 'a
of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent accredited
certifier'. See further
Stapleton No 2
at [62] to [66] and
for Infrastructure and Planning v Conway (No.2)
[2004] NSWADT 159
will be seen we have entered findings of allegation proven in relation to seven
of the eight allegations that remain under notice.
of the three projects that have remained under notice involved the building of
substantial, new dwellings: 3 High Street, Concord
(estimated cost $380,000); 57
Wellbank Street, Concord ($385,000); 7 Seabrook Avenue, Russell Lea
($450,000).
is a case about competence and diligence, not integrity.
their main aspect, each of these developments had two primary residential
floors, with infrastructure (for example, service areas,
plant room, garage)
separately located in a third element that lay outside the primary two
residential floors. In our view, a disinterested
member of the public would
expect a certifier faced with this not uncommon equation to exercise great care
in ensuring that the development
fell within the strict limit of two storeys and
could therefore be the subject of a CDC. There is understandable concern in the
over too bulky and dominant development in residential neighbourhoods,
and the Codes SEPP seeks to strike a balance in that regard.
our view Mr Qiu failed to show the requisite level of competence and diligence
in his assessment of the way internal spaces were
configured in the plans. In
our view, a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct should be entered.
regard the misclassification of 3 High Street, Concord as the most significant
of the three matters. The as-built photographs illustrate
the extent to which
the bottom level was above street level, and this outcome we think should have
been seen on inspection of the
plans. Further, the applicant stated that the
height breach in relation to Concord remains uncorrected.
misclassification in the other two cases was less significant in its
consequences for the streetscape, as discerned from the photographs
unsatisfactory professional conduct. It has to be
seen as part of a wider
problem for Mr Qiu in applying the CDC standards. The excavations issue was hard
fought, but we agree with
the Board that Mr Qiu did err. On the other hand, we
agree with the submissions put on Mr Qiu's behalf and the opinion expressed
Mr Bennett that this is an area where some clarification is desirable.
the third case (Seabrook Avenue), we did not find the second allegation proven,
and the third allegation related to the issue of
direct access between habitable
space and the private open space. This error revealed difficulty on Mr Qiu's
part in properly reading
original submission to the Tribunal (the one attached to his application for
review) made a weak argument, as we see it, for the
proposition that an internal
study on the ground level could be said to have been directly accessible to the
front yard. The standard
is one of many that are important in promoting
habitability in dwellings. A disinterested member of the public, with a
understanding of the relevant rules, would have expected a certifier
to show caution in circumstances where all private living spaces,
bedrooms, family rooms and the like, were located one level above the ground
are satisfied that a global finding of 'unsatisfactory professional conduct' is
our view disciplinary orders should be made.
his submissions, in the event of a finding of unsatisfactory professional
conduct, nothing was said in opposition to the imposition
of a reprimand. We
affirm that element of the Board's orders.
Other Disciplinary Orders
Board referred to two previous disciplinary determinations affecting Mr
Reprimand. Fine
$3000. 13 December 2012. But the two breaches related to issuance of a
construction certificate, and secondly issuance
of an occupation certificate
prematurely. No details were provided.
Reprimand. Fine
$2000. 20 February 2013. Wrongful issuance of a CDC. No details were
case and the previous two are all ones that involve 'significant' or 'major'
infringements under the guidelines. Further this
is a category E matter under
the Board's Guidelines as it is the third disciplinary determination within a 12
month period, and therefore
can give rise to consideration of the serious step
of suspension or cancellation. The Board did not go that far. However, it did
take away Mr Qiu's right to issue CDCs for two years.
Grey for the Board made detailed written and oral submissions on the question of
the appropriate further orders. Mr Grey organised
his principal submissions by
reference to the list of the factors reflected in the Board's disciplinary
penalty guidelines, and drawn
Director General, Department of Fair
Trading v Cohen
[2000] NSWFTT 3
per K P O'Connor DCJ, Chairperson
(also the presiding member on this occasion).
case involved disciplinary proceedings against a licensed home building
contractor. In addition to factors of deterrence, personal
and general; and the
importance of upholding the objectives of the relevant legislation, the
following considerations might be relevant:
(a) the nature, width and extent of the contraventions
(b) the loss or damage and prejudice in consequence of the contraventions
(c) the circumstances in which the contraventions took place
(d) whether the licensee has been seen to have engaged in any similar
(e) the presence of fraudulent or dishonest intent and deliberation on the
part of the licensee
(f) the extent of carelessness or wilfulness of the conduct
(g) the efforts made to correct the situation and what measures have been
taken by the licensee
(h) what consciousness the licensee had and displayed of its obligations
under the relevant statute and to the owners
(i) the effect upon the licensee
(j) antecedents
(k) attitude, building history and future compliance
(l) the penalty range.
is not a case raising factor (e). We have no precise information on how these
problems came to light. There is a letter from
Mr Qiu's then solicitors replying
to council, which would suggest that at least some of the concerns originated
from the council.
The amended CDCs all bear dates that suggest on-site steps
were taken before the building works were completed to address most of
matters the subject of adverse findings. But again the material before us is
Qiu gave evidence. He showed a consciousness of the need to be more vigilant and
take more care when assessing projects with characteristics
similar to those
under notice in this case - two primary levels and an infrastructure level. As
part of the stay order, he agreed
to file his CDCs with the Board within 2 days
of issuing them. This provides a form of assurance to the community, in that it
as a deterrent against slack practice, and enables the Board to audit
compliance. On the other hand the Board should not be cast
into a relationship
of this kind to errant certifiers. It has more important functions to perform
than becoming a post box and, impliedly,
an audit point for errant certifiers.
his submissions Mr Qiu stated that he had been an accredited certifier since
January 2004. He said that his business, ACE Building
Approvals, handles
certification for about 400 developments a year, 95% being class 1/10 (i.e.
residential and related). The business
employs two people full time (himself and
an office manager) and two part time. This case has a feature the Tribunal has
several of the accredited certifier discipline cases, that of a small
practice with only one accredited certifier. Mr Qiu is in that
way isolated from
other accredited certifiers at the day to day level, and his ability to obtain
professional input is reduced. He
referred to using an A4 accredited certifier
and an accredited certifier - Engineer C7 & C15 - to assist with some
critical stage
inspections.
to the first of the two reprimand determinations referred to above, Mr Qiu said
that he made an error in relation to bushfire requirements
and has now attended
a Bushfire Prone Areas Seminar on 26 June 2013. He referred to the present case,
acknowledged that he had made
mistakes, and noted that the standards are
complicated, and in his opinion some clauses are not clear. Mr Bennett's report
Mr Qiu's perception in respect of some matters.
Qiu said that he had recently engaged an experienced town planner to review and
assess the requirements of the Codes SEPP. He said
that the town planner
provides a comprehensive report clause by clause. He expects that this process
will ensure that errors are
highly unlikely to recur. He presented written
testimonials from Mr Peter Katris, architect, Burwood NSW (16 July 2013) and Mr
Ng, Accredited Certifier (Civil Engineering), Baulkham Hills (19 July
our view, the fine should be reduced to a smaller sum, partly reflective of the
fact that now seven allegations have been found
proven, as compared to the ten
found proven before the Board, and the fifteen allegations pressed by the
Board's investigation team.
In our view, a fine of $7000 is sufficient.
Placement of Condition on Accreditation
are not inclined to go so far as to prevent Mr Qiu from issuing CDCs for two
years. His practice is overwhelmingly a residential
one, and removal of this
authority would, we think, have a devastating effect. On the other hand, we
accept that some intervention
is desirable.
its submissions the Board noted that the Codes SEPP will shortly be extensively
amended and expanded. In support of continuation
of the condition imposed by the
disciplinary committee, the Board said that while he was barred from issuing
CDCs, he would have
time to study the new Codes and participate in training,
thereby minimising the prospects of him falling into further error. We see
solution in the medium term as lying in a reporting option. We do not think the
reporting need be direct to the Board. In our
view the present protocol under
the stay order of him having to lodge CDCs within two days of their issuance
should continue, but
it would be sufficient if they were provided to a certifier
of standing approved by the Board. This would provide also the usual
having Mr Qiu involve himself in an ongoing professional relationship with
another accredited certifier. There may need
to be a fee settled with the
external certifier, we leave that to the parties to resolve. This system should
remain in place for
than invite the parties to reconvene to settle the terms of the order, we have
framed an order below which we consider sufficient.
Our orders include liberty
to apply if it is considered that the proposed condition needs to better
expressed, or has overlooked
an important matter.
Respondent's decision is varied as follows:
1. Mr Qiu is reprimanded.
2. Mr Qiu is fined the sum of $7000, payable within 28 days of receipt of
notice of this decision.
3. A condition is imposed on his accreditation requiring him to provide a
copy of any complying development certificate he issues
within two days of its
issuance to an accredited certifier approved by the Board. This condition is to
take effect once the Board
approves of the accredited certifier, and is to
remain operative for two years from the date of the approval. These arrangements
are to be made within 60 days of the issuance of this decision.
4. Liberty is given to either party to apply on two days' notice in respect
of the terms of the above condition.
5. In the meantime the condition imposed by the stay order requiring Mr Qiu
to provide a copy of any complying development certificate
he issues to the
Board within two days of its issuance is to be continued.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (184 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter