URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWRT/2002/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:11:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barnes v Westfield & Westfield [2002] NSWRT 27 (14 February 2002)
Barnes v Westfield & Westfield
[2002] NSWRT 27
(14 February
File No. 01/44167
RESIDENTIAL TRIBUNAL
: Barnes (Landlord)
: Westfield & Westfield (Tenants)
APPEARANCES
: The landlord was represented by Mr Martin on
29/11/01 and
Ms De Bono on 18/1/02;
The tenant appeared in
: 29 November 2001 and 18 January 2002 at
Legislative Provisions:
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
the premises left at the end of the tenancy in the same state as at the
commencement of the tenancy, fair wear and tear excepted?
Has the landlord
suffered loss? Was the rent increased in accordance with
The premises were not left in the same
state at the end of the tenancy - fair wear and tear
The landlord suffered loss as a
result of the breach.
The rent was increased
in accordance with
Condition report, compensation, rent, rent increase
REASONS FOR DECISION
Comprehensive oral reasons for decision were given on the day of the
hearing on 18 January 2002. The tenant now requests written
reasons for
APPLICATION
The landlord sought refund of the rental bond and compensation to cover
the cost of rent arrears and damage to the premises as follows:
Carpet cleaning $
Painting repairs $
Repairs to blinds $
Bench top repairs $
Cleaning of yard $
Window cleaning $
Rent 21/10/01 – 5/11/01 $
Damage and cleaning
Clause 13.4 of the residential tenancy agreement mirrors
section 26(1)(d)
, and the standard form residential tenancy agreement provided by the
and regulations. It states the tenant is obliged to leave the premises at
the end of the tenancy as nearly as possible in the same
condition (fair wear
and tear excepted) as set out in the condition report for the residential
premises at the commencement of the
tenancy. The Tribunal had regard to the
condition report at the commencement of the tenancy and at the end of the
tenancy and the
evidence of both parties.
It was noted the parties
disagreed about the condition of the premises at the final inspection. The
Tribunal made the following findings
having regard to the evidence of both
parties as set out below. For convenience I will deal with each item of the
claim in turn.
Carpet cleaning
The landlord relied upon
the ingoing and outgoing condition report. The condition of the floor coverings
at the commencement of the
tenancy was recorded as clean. At the end of the
tenancy the condition was recorded as "not steam cleaned".
There is no
requirement for a tenant to steam clean carpets at the end of a tenancy. The
landlord produced no evidence to establish
that the state of the carpets was not
as it was at the commencement of the tenancy, fair wear and tear excepted. The
claim was therefore
disallowed.
The landlord relied upon the ingoing condition report which recorded the
premises as clean throughout. At the commencement of the
tenancy the tenant
agreed with the description of the premises in the condition report, that it
clean throughout. The condition
at the end of the tenancy was recorded by the
landlord was generally unclean throughout and specifically as
Lounge: Windows dirty
Kitchen: Dishwasher dirty
Oven/Grill dirty
Blutak on walls
Bedroom 1: Door
Light fitting dusty
Bedroom 2: Door marked
Wall filthy
Venetians and sill dusty
Lounge: Cobwebs
Walls Dirty
Glass door dirty
Windows very
Bathroom: Bath dirty
Vanity requires
Toilet requires cleaning
Floor dirty
Shelves dusty
En suite: Toilet requires cleaning
Mirror streaked
Shower screen
Windows dirty
Compost left behind
Pots and dead plants
left behind
Weeds in garden
Rope left behind
deck need sweeping
The landlord relies upon the invoices of W.Pearlman
(No.806 128) of 6 November 2001 being:
$ 240.00 for cleaning and the
Invoice of Supreme Mowing of 12 November 2001 (No.13454) being $100.00 for
weeding, trimming, raking
and sweeping.
The tenant gave evidence that
the premises were not clean at the commencement of the tenancy. It was noted he
had agreed with the
ingoing condition report at the commencement of the tenancy.
He claimed the premises were left in the same condition as when he had
He also stated the premises were very clean at the end of the tenancy.
The tenant gave evidence that after the final inspection he told one of
the property managers he was going back to the premise to
do some further
cleaning. The inspection was in the morning of the 5 November 2001 and the keys
were returned in the evening of 5
November 2001 after further cleaning was
undertaken. Photos of the premises were taken in the evening of 5 November 2001
The tenant also claimed the garden was not clean and
tidy and not in good condition at the commencement of the tenancy. Again this
evidence was given despite recording in the condition report that the external
areas were in good condition at the commencement of
the tenancy.
tenant produced a photograph of the garden claiming it was in the same state as
at the commencement of the tenancy, that is poor
condition. The photo showed
some weeds and a few dead potted plants and other minor debris. The photo was
taken after the final
inspection when the tenant had gone back to the premise in
the evening.
In respect of the general cleaning the Tribunal had regard
to the ingoing condition report and the outgoing condition report. The
noted disagreement between the parties as to the state of the premises. The
Tribunal also noted it seemed that the tenant
did go back and do some extra
cleaning after the final inspection and prior to returning all the keys. The
tenant claimed the premises
were not clean at the commencement of the tenancy
despite what he noted in the condition report.
Put simply the final
inspection is just that, the "
inspection.
no obligation for a landlord to allow a tenant the opportunity to return to the
premises to rectify problems noted in the
condition report. The legislative
requirement is that the final inspection be undertaken as soon as practicable
after the end of
the tenancy, if possible in the presence of both parties. Both
parties are to complete the condition report. The landlord is then
entitled to
seek compensation for the reasonable cost of rectifying any damage or defects
noted which are beyond fair wear and tear.
In this instance it appeared
the final inspection was completed at the end of the tenancy on the morning of 5
November 2001. The
parties disagreed as to the state of the premises. The
landlord then arranged for a cleaner to go and clean the premises relying
the state of the premises recorded in the condition report. Meanwhile the
tenant retained the keys until the evening of 5 November
2001. He returned to
the premises later that same day and undertook further cleaning and then took
photos of the premises. There
was no evidence before the Tribunal that there
was any agreement between the parties that the tenant could undertake more
pending another inspection.
The Tribunal found that the
condition of the premises at the end of the tenancy must be determined at the
time of the final inspection.
Any further cleaning unbeknown or unauthorised by
the landlord is simply not relevant.
In determining the state of the
premises the Tribunal found that the evidence of the landlord was preferable
because it specifically
detailed each item requiring cleaning in the condition
report. The landlord’s evidence was specific and consistent in contrast
to the tenant’s evidence which was very general and somewhat
contradictory. According to the tenant the premises were variously
clean at the
commencement of the tenancy as recorded in his condition report and then not
clean at the commencement of the tenancy
as he claimed at the hearing. The
tenant also claimed the premise was very clean at the end of the tenancy, and
then in the same
condition as at the commencement of the tenancy. The evidence
was thus vague and very inconsistent.
The Tribunal accepted the landlord
had incurred a cost of $240.00 to undertake cleaning of the premises to render
it in the same condition
as it was as at the commencement of the tenancy.
In respect of the garden the Tribunal had regard to the ingoing
condition report and the outgoing condition report. The Tribunal
had regard to
the fact that the tenant agreed the garden was in good condition at the
commencement of the tenancy in the condition
report and now claimed that it was
not. Having regard to this evidence the Tribunal found that the garden
outdoors areas were not
in the same state as at the commencement of the tenancy,
fair wear and tear excepted. The Tribunal accepted the landlord had incurred
cost of $ 100.00 to rectify the areas.
Paint Repairs
The landlord sought the cost of a paint touch up to walls being $ 95.00.
The landlord relied upon the Invoice of Joe Paes No.75 of
7 November 2001.
The ingoing condition report noted the condition of the relevant walls
as follows:
Lounge: Few light scuff marks
Bedroom 1: Few
Bedroom 3: Chipped
The rest of the walls were undamaged
outgoing condition report recorded the following:
Lounge: Badly patched
Bedroom 1: 3 Hooks and scratches
Bedroom 2: White patch
Bedroom 3: Patched hook
Rear Lounge: Patched
disputed the tenant had put a number of hooks in the walls. He claimed they
were removed and filled with spak-filla. He
found some paint at the premises and
patched the walls with that paint.
The landlord’s evidence was
that the patch job was very poor. The landlord did not claim the cost of
repainting, simply the
cost of rectifying a poor patch job. The claim was
allowed on the basis the damage was beyond fair wear and tear. The landlord
not authorised the tenant to put hooks in the walls.
The landlord claimed the sum of $ 88.00 for the cleaning of
top floor windows. An extension ladder was required as the windows were
generally accessible.
There was no dispute the windows were note
cleaned. The tenant claimed the windows could not be reached.
Tribunal found the tenant was not required to clean inaccessible windows as this
was more akin to general maintenance which is
the landlords responsibility. As
such the claim was disallowed.
The landlord
claimed the cost of repairs to a venetian blind. There was no reference to any
damage to the venetian blind in the final
inspection report. The claim was
therefore disallowed.
The landlord claimed the
sum of $450.00 being approximately 40% of the cost of repairs to the kitchen
The ingoing condition report recorded the bench top as
undamaged. The outgoing condition report recorded the bench as damaged with
huge mark on the bench top.
Photos were produced showing the bench as
slightly scratched in part however in good condition with the exception of a
area badly damaged by water. The cost of rectification was $ 997.00
for the supply and installation of a new bench top. The landlord
was claiming
less than half the cost of replacement.
The tenant gave evidence that
his water filter had leaked over a period of time. He claimed wood was
inappropriate for bench tops
and in any event the benches were old at least 30
to 40 years old.
The Tribunal found having regard to the condition report
and photos that apart from some minor scratches the bench top was otherwise
very good condition at the commencement of the tenancy. The bench top was not
in any way consistent with the description given
by the tenant being 30 to 40
years old and in need of replacement.
At the end of the tenancy a large
part of the bench top was badly water damaged unable to be repaired and
requiring replacement.
The Tribunal found such damage to be beyond fair wear
and tear. The landlord was therefore entitled to claim the cost of replacement.
The Tribunal did not put a limited life span on a wood bench top in good
condition; in any event the landlord was claiming less than
50% of the cost
incurred. The sum was therefore allowed.
landlord claimed rent from 21 October 2001 to the day the tenant returned the
keys on 5 November 2001. The rent ledger recorded
the rent as paid to 21
October 2001. The tenant had fallen into rent arrears because he had refused to
pay the rent increase of
$ 50.00 per month from 3 May 2001. A copy of the
notice of rent increase was produced which complied with the requirements of the
. The tenant had been sent letters requesting he pay rent on time.
The tenant claimed that the rent was excessive because the landlord had
failed to carry out repairs to the premises being electrical
supply and the
plumbing. He had told the agent he would not pay the increase. No one raised
the issue of the rent increase with
him until 16/8/01 when he received a letter
reminding him to pay his rent on time.
The tenant gave evidence that he
did not receive the notice of rent increase. He also gave evidence that he
told the agent he would
not pay the increase as repairs were not being
undertaken by the landlord. The Tribunal found the rent was validly increased by
of a notice in accordance with the provisions of the
cannot withhold rent on the basis repairs are not being attended to. The
appropriate remedy is to apply to the Tribunal
for an order either that the rent
is excessive due to a reduction in services and facilities provided with the
premises or alternatively
for an order that the rent increase is excessive. The
tenant did neither of these things. He simply told the agent he would not
the increase. There was no evidence before the Tribunal that the landlord had
done anything to withdraw the rent increase.
The tenant was sent letters
reminding him to pay rent on time. Accordingly the tenant was ordered to pay
rent to 5 November 2001
being the final day of the tenancy and the day the keys
were returned.
Residential Tribunal
14 February 2002
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (29.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter