URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/75.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Christopher Downie) v Myron Zaboyak [2006] NSWCIMC 75 (1 June 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Christopher
Myron Zaboyak
20352337/05/2.
Hearing Date:
Date of Decision:
Legislation:
Occupational Health and Safety Act, 2000
Magistrate:
Representation:
Solicitor for the Prosecutor: Ms J Pike,
Dibbs Abbott Stillman, Solicitors.
Solicitor for the Defendant: Ms L Powell,
Taylor & Scott, Solicitors.
Counsel for the Defendant: Mr D Shoebridge.
Reasons For Decision
1. The defendant pleads guilty to a breach of
Occupational Health and Safety Act,
. The prosecution arises
following an incident on 3 December 2003 at Wagga Wagga in the State of New
South Wales where the defendant
carried on a business as a building
subcontractor providing carpentry services.
2. The Court has been
provided with an Agreed Statement of Facts which sets out the relevant
background facts and circumstances.
I do not propose to set those matters out
in full within the body of this decision. The facts are well known to the
3. It is sufficient to note that approximately 5 days prior to
the incident the defendant had entered into an agreement with an organisation
known as Apprentices Trainees Employment Limited (ATEL) whereby an apprentice
employed by ATEL would be placed with the defendant
so that the defendant would
have the assistance of an apprentice and the apprentice would have an
opportunity to receive practical
training by working with a qualified carpentry
tradesman. The Court was advised by the parties that this arrangement was akin
the relationship between a labour hire provider and a host employer with the
added feature that the employee in question was an apprentice.
The Court was
informed that the arrangement arises in the context of a scheme designed to
permit apprentices to receive appropriate
practical experience and training and
become qualified tradesmen even though the practical experience may well be
obtained with a
number of different host employers.
4. On 3 December 2003
the defendant was engaged in the provision of carpentry services as a
sub-contractor working at a residential
building site. The apprentice, Mr
Gregory Salmon, was also at the site. At approximately 7 a.m. the defendant
allocated a task
to Mr Salmon which required him to use a hand held circular saw
to rip pieces of timber on the site. At about 9.30 a.m. Mr Salmon
was holding
the circular saw with his right hand and was holding a piece of timber steady
with his left hand. As Mr Salmon was
re-aligning the circular saw it kicked
backwards and struck his left finger. As a consequence of the incident, Mr
Salmon suffered
an amputated index finger below the second joint on his left
hand. Mr Salmon was taken to hospital by the defendant and after treatment
able to return to work approximately 6 weeks following the
5. It is necessary for the Court to give consideration to the
objective seriousness of the offence. In the view of the Court the
safety was both obvious and foreseeable. The use of an electrically powered
circular saw is clearly an extremely dangerous
task if carried out by a person
who has not received appropriate training in how to handle such equipment. Mr
Salmon had not previously
used a circular saw to rip timber. In the view of
the Court it would have been a relatively simple matter for the defendant to
ascertain the level of skill and level of training of this 20 year old
apprentice.
6. It is clear that the defendant, being a self-employed
tradesman, who did not normally employ any staff, let alone apprentices,
have in place well established systems of risk assessments and formalised
training and induction procedures. However, he
had entered into an arrangement
whereby he would be responsible for the health, safety and welfare of an
apprentice and prior to
the incident the defendant had approximately 5 days to
talk to Mr Salmon and ascertain what he had experience in and what would be
novel task for him to perform. Further, he had ample opportunity to impress
upon Mr Salmon that, if by some oversight, he allocated
a task to Mr Salmon that
Mr Salmon had never previously performed Mr Salmon was to say so immediately and
appropriate training would
take place prior to the task being attempted.
Further, it would have been a relatively simple matter for the defendant herein
stand and watch whilst Mr Salmon performed each new task to satisfy himself
that Mr Salmon was capable of performing the task in
a safe fashion.
7. In this case there is some disagreement between the prosecution and
the defendant concerning clamps. Mr Salmon was using the
circular saw with one
hand whilst holding the piece of timber with his other hand. If the timber had
been clamped his left hand
would not have been at risk of being struck by the
saw when it kicked backwards. The prosecution alleges that the defendant
to have clamps on site that could have been utilised by Mr Salmon. The
defendant denies this claim and asserts that there were
clamps in the back of
his vehicle and that the clamps would have been available for Mr Salmon to use
if they had been requested.
In the view of the Court it is of little relevance
whether the clamps were available on site or not. It is clear that Mr Salmon
was not aware of either the availability of clamps or the safe system of work
which would have involved utilising clamps. Mr Salmon
had been performing this
work for some 90 minutes prior to the incident and the evidence suggests that
the injured worker performed
the task without using clamps, and was observed to
do so by the defendant without the defendant realising that Mr Salmon was
of the need to clamp the timber before cutting it.
evidence would suggest that the defendant was labouring under some
misapprehension concerning the level of experience and skill
of Mr Salmon.
The evidence before the Court is that Mr Salmon was a first year apprentice at
the time of the incident. That
means that he had not completed the
requirements either at TAFE or in terms of practical experience which would
permit him to progress
to the level of a second year apprentice. However, the
defendant was aware that Mr Salmon had been engaged in the industry for
of approximately 18 months and from that he assumed that Mr Salmon was a second
year apprentice moving rapidly towards commencing
his third year of
apprenticeship.
9. It appears to the Court that the defendant relied upon
an incorrect assumption as to the level of skill and experience of the injured
worker rather than taking appropriate steps to ascertain, as a matter of
positive fact, the level of skill and experience of Mr Salmon.
There is no
evidence as to any inquiries made by the defendant of ATEL concerning the areas
Mr Salmon was competent in and those
in which he had no training. There is no
evidence of the defendant sitting down with Mr Salmon at the outset and
discussing with
him in detail the training he had received at TAFE and the
practical experience he had received on other sites.
prosecution relies on well known authorities that express in the clearest terms
the importance of employers paying particular
attention to the need to be
vigilant in ensuring the safety of young, inexperienced and vulnerable
employees. The decision of his
Honour the Vice President, Mr Justice Walton in
Workcover v McDonalds Australia Limited
[2000] NSWIRComm 277
(2000) 95 IR 383
was referred to
in this regard in the prosecutor’s submissions. Mr Shoebridge of counsel
for the defendant
points out that
the defendant herein being a self-employed
carpenter who had not previously employed or supervised an employee, and
certainly not
an apprentice employee, could not validly be seen in the same
light as a large employer such as McDonalds. Whilst
that may be
correct as a
general observation, it does not assist the Court in assessing the objective
seriousness of the offence.
In the view
of the Court there is no basis for a
contention that young, inexperienced and vulnerable employees are entitled to
high level of
protection and vigilance when employed by a large organisation but
are entitled to a lower or lesser standard of
vigilance when they
are employed
by a small business or by a self-employed tradesman. In the view of the Court,
the better view
is that when an employer
elects to engage a young, inexperienced
or vulnerable employee, they assume a high level of responsibility
and safe-guard
the health, safety and welfare at work of that employee
irrespective of the size of the enterprise. Further,
where the employer
engaged in an inherently dangerous undertaking, such as the use of electrically
powered circular saws, the
required standard of
vigilance is higher and the
objective seriousness of any offence is likely to be increased as a
consequence.
11. I am satisfied that a general and a specific deterrence
factor should be included in any penalty imposed by the Court. Whilst
for the defendant submitted that the defendant has ceased employing other
persons and is most unlikely to re-offend I am
satisfied that a specific
deterrence factor is required. There is nothing to stop the defendant from
employing persons in the future
including apprentices and I am satisfied that on
the occasion that he elected to engage Mr Salmon as an apprentice he did so
pausing to give any serious consideration to how he was going to provide
the young man with practical experience whilst at the same
time ensuring his
health, safety and welfare in the workplace.
12. It is also submitted on
behalf of the defendant that the Court would note that this defendant had some
years of experience as
a safety officer employed by the CFMEU, the major
industrial organisation of employees in the building and construction industry.
The Court can accept that this background would suggest that the defendant has a
history of interest in and involvement in the field
of occupational health and
safety and that he has spent a number of years endeavouring to lift the
standards of occupational health
and safety in the building and construction
industry. Whilst that is, of itself, laudable I am by no means satisfied
employment history in any way mitigates against the seriousness of the
offence. The Court is entitled to adopt the view that this
defendant, because
of that background, should have been far more alert to the need to conduct an
appropriate risk assessment and
ascertain the level of Mr Salmon’s prior
experience before allocating tasks such as the use of a circular saw to rip
It is reasonable to assume that in his role of safety officer, the
defendant would have been highly critical of a building company
which allocated
dangerous tasks to an apprentice without an inquiry as to whether the apprentice
had performed the task before.
In the view of the Court this defendant should
have known better, especially as he had at an earlier time, acted in a full time
capacity as an occupational health and safety officer in the building and
construction industry.
13. There are subjective matters which mitigate in
favour of the defendant. One factor is the clearly genuine remorse and
displayed by the defendant. I am satisfied that the defendant is
well aware of the extent to which he has let himself down given
his history of
working in the industry in a role that was designed to improve and uplift
occupational health and safety standards.
It is clear that following the
incident the defendant did everything he could to assist the injured worker
which included taking
him to hospital, returning to the site to locate the
severed part of the finger and rush back to the hospital with it and, following
Mr Salmon’s rehabilitation to continue to engage him as an apprentice for
as long as he was financially able to do so.
14. I am satisfied that the
defendant has co-operated fully with Workcover following the incident and that
prior to Mr Salmon’s
appropriate occupational health and safety procedure that was developed to
that no such incident could re-occur. The defendant comes before the
Court with no prior convictions which is an excellent achievement
in an industry
which is notoriously dangerous. Further, counsel for the defendant asks the
Court to take into account the fact
that the defendant had essentially only 5
days experience as an employer. Previously he had worked as an employee or had
on his own as a self-employed tradesman. This was an entirely new
experience for him and to his very great regret, his inexperience
failure to make appropriate provision for supervising an apprentice. Further,
counsel for the defendant asked the Court
to take into account the
defendant’s weak financial position and his inability to pay any
substantial fine. The Court was
informed that the defendant owns no real
estate or other assets of any great value and that his most valuable asset would
tools of trade. Consequently a substantial fine would potentially
jeopardise his future employment.
15. The legislation provides for a
maximum penalty of $55,000 for a breach of
in circumstances where the
defendant is not an incorporated entity and has no prior convictions under the
legislation. The Court
has a jurisdiction to impose a penalty not exceeding
16. For the reasons referred to above I regard the objective
seriousness of the offence as being high. Taking into account the objective
seriousness of the offence, as well as the subjective factors in mitigation
including the defendant’s inexperience as an employer
and also taking into
account the financial position of the defendant I find that an appropriate
penalty in this case is $8,500.
The defendant is entitled to a discount for
the plea of guilty which was entered at the early stage of the proceedings.
accepts that the plea of guilty was entered at the first opportunity
following the defendant obtaining legal advice in relation to
the matter. In
those circumstances I propose to discount the penalty by 25%. Consequently the
defendant is fined the sum of $6,375.
There will be a moiety of the fine to the
Prosecutor.
17. The defendant is ordered to pay the Prosecutor’s
costs in the sum of $2,996.70.
18. The fine and the costs are to be paid
within 28 days at the Level 4 Registry of the Court, Downing Centre 143-147
Liverpool Street
Chief Industrial Magistrate
1 June 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (41.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter