URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/458.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v MA (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWDC 458 (7 November 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
R v MA (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 458
Hearing Date(s):
5 November 2025
Date of Orders:
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Newlinds SC DCJ
(1) In relation to Count 1, after taking into account the
25% discount for the plea of guilty with some rounding in his favour,
Offender is sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 10 years commencing on 4 June
2025 and expiring 3 June 2035.
(2) There will be a
minimum non-parole period of 6 years, expiring 3 June 2031, which is the first
day the Offender will become
eligible for parole.
Catchwords:
CRIME — Break, enter and commit serious indictable offence —
Offence being robbery
SENTENCING — Aggravating factors
— $100,000 stolen — Elderly victim at home alone — Unnecessary
and gratuitous
violence — Significant planning and premeditation —
Offender a serving New South Wales Police officer — Used information
gained during execution of search warrant to commit offence — Breach of
trust — General deterrence a weighty factor —
Reaction of people on
social media caused harm to victim over and above what ordinarily expected
— Taken into account as aggravating
facto under
s 21A(2)(g)
SENTENCING — Subjective considerations on
sentence — Special circumstances — Offender suffers serious mental
— PTSD from trauma exposed to during career as police officer
— Root cause of offending
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
s 21A(2)(g)
Cases Cited:
[2017] NSWCCA 48
[2013] NSWCCA 296
[2013] NSWCCA 281
R v Brewster
[1998] 1 Cr App R 220
R v Ponfield
[1999] NSWCCA 435
(1999) 48 NSWLR 327
Rex (Crown)
MA (Offender)
Representation:
A Charleston (solicitor) (Crown)
Solicitors:
ODPP (Crown)
Morrisons Law (Offender)
File Number(s):
2024/395259
Publication Restriction:
(1) The Offender be referred by the pseudonym “MA”.
The publication of any of the following information is prohibited: Anything
tending to reveal the identity of MA, in connection
with these reasons or the
evidence given in there proceedings.
(3) Orders (1) and (2) are to remain
in force for 20 years from 5 November 2025.
(4) The Victim be referred to
by the pseudonym “the Victim”.
(5) The publication of any
information that may reveal the identity of the Victim in connection with these
proceedings is prohibited.
(6) Orders (4) and (5) are to remain in force
for 20 years from 5 November 2025.
(7) These orders are to apply to all
media, including but not limited to print, radio, television, electronic,
internet and social
at 3 October 2024, the Offender, who I will refer to by the pseudonym
“MA,” had been for about 9 years, a serving police
officer in the
NSW Police Force.
that capacity, he had, in 2020, been involved in the execution of a search
warrant at the home of the Victim in far west NSW. Under
the authority of that
warrant, he and others searched the Victim's premises, during which there was
located a safe, containing a
large amount of cash. The money had nothing to do
with the crime being investigated.
years later, armed with that knowledge, the Offender, with a co-offender, drove
from Sydney to the same town for the express purpose
of breaking into the
Victim's property, and stealing whatever money was in the safe.
considerable amount of planning went into this operation. A car was borrowed,
jerry cans of fuel were filled so as to avoid the
need of filling up with petrol
on the long drive, mobile phones were left behind, and upon arrival at the
Victim’s residence,
the house was observed for some time.
things turned out, petrol was purchased on the trip. However, cash was paid for
those purchases.
purpose of the borrowed car, jerry cans, the payment of cash, and the leaving of
the phones behind was to avoid detection by police
for the crime that was
the evening of 3 October 2024, the Offender disguised his face with a stocking
or balaclava, and he and the Co-offender went into
the house without permission.
He knew the Victim was inside because he and the Co-offender had observed the
house that day.
Offender entered the house first. He broke in by pulling open the front door.
The Victim, who was 78 years’ old, was alone
in the kitchen. The Offender
roughly forced the Victim face down on the floor and cable tied his hands behind
Co-offender then entered the kitchen having come into the house shortly after
the Offender. He cable-tied the Victim’s feet
together. One of the
Offenders then tightened the cable ties, then used black tape to further tie the
Victim’s hands. The Victim
was in pain and undoubtedly terrified.
Offender then went into the room where he knew the safe was and began ransacking
the place looking for the key to the safe. Both
men questioned the Victim about
the location of the key to his safe. The Co-offender said, “
Stop lying.
If you don’t give us the key to the safe, we’ll chuck [you] in the
car and take [you] out to the dam
.” The Co-offender kicked the Victim
in the head. The Victim eventually told them where the key was, and the Offender
got it.. One of the Offenders told the Victim not to contact the
Offender used the key to the safe to open it and stole approximately $100,000 in
Australian currency. The two men then left the
up on the floor despite him asking that they untie him.
ten minutes after the Offenders left, the Victim was able to phone a neighbour
for help. The neighbour arrived to find him restrained
by the tape and cable
ties. The cable ties had cut into his skin, causing him to bleed and his knees
were grazed and bloodied from
being forced to the ground.
Victim suffered pain, impressions from the cable tie restraints, scattered
bruising, and abrasions on his knees. He felt scared,
violated, and no longer
safe in his own home. I will return to the non-physical impact of this crime on
the Victim.
leaving the property, the Offenders drove to another town in western NSW. They
took back roads from that point to avoid detection.
They stopped and disposed of
clothing, shoes, gloves, and torches, hiding these items in bushland about 20
metres from the road.
They then drove through the night and arrived back in
Sydney in the early hours of the following morning. The Co-offender returned
van to his friend. The Offender stored the cash.
Offender was arrested and charged. He has pleaded guilty and is before the Court
to be sentenced.
Approximately
$80,000 of the $100,000 stolen was recovered. The police still have it. I will
make an order for its return, but it
is important to recognise that the Victim
has been out of his money for more than a year. Even when returned, he will
still be short
The charges
Offender pleaded guilty at the Local Court to the offence of aggravated break,
enter, and commit serious indictable offence –
the serious indictable
offence being robbery ($100,000), pursuant to
offence carries a maximum penalty of 20 years imprisonment and has a 5-year
standard non-parole period.
Objective seriousness
conduct of the Offender, as described in the Agreed Facts, which I have
summarised, is, in my opinion, an extremely serious example
of this type of
offence involved significant planning and serious attempts to avoid detection.
On behalf of the Offender, it is submitted that
it cannot be fairly said, as the
Crown contends, that the offending was professionally planned, organised, or
do not accept that submission. Whilst the Offender, having no criminal record,
cannot be described as a professional criminal, that
does not mean that this
crime was not well planned and organised in, what can reasonably be described
as, a professional manner.
Certainly, quite sophisticated and multiple attempts
were made to avoid detection, both before and after the offending, all of which
must have been planned over a considerable period of time of at least days. No
doubt the Offender learned about these methods of
avoiding detection from being
a police officer.
Crown has emphasised the following factors, which I accept. They all support my
conclusion that the objective seriousness of the
offending is very
(1) The Offender knew the Victim was an elderly man at home alone;
(2) The Offender's time in the premises lasted about 30 minutes.
(3) The threatened use of violence;
(4) The actual use of violence;
(5) The offence was committed in company;
(6) The Offender engaged in ransacking the Victim's home;
(7) The Victim felt scared, violated, and no longer feels safe in his own home;
(8) The Victim suffered pain, impressions from the cable tie restraints,
scattered bleeding and bruising, and abrasions on his knees;
(9) The value of property stolen was $100,000, which is a significant amount for
offences of this kind.
Aggravating factors
are the following aggravating factors pursuant to
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Procedure
(1) The offence was committed in the home of the Victim:
(2) In my opinion, the offence involved gratuitous cruelty. The Victim had his
arms twisted behind his back and his hands and feet
cable tied. His hands were
further secured with black tape, before being placed on the ground. The Victim
was kicked in the head.
The Victim was then left tied up on the floor. He was an
old man compared to the Offenders. None of this cruelty was necessary for
robbery to succeed. The Victim was an old man who could have easily been
controlled by the two younger men;
(3) The Offender abused a position of trust in relation to the Victim. The
information in relation to the Victim's situation and
safe contents came to the
Offender through his role in the NSW Police Force. I will return to this aspect,
which I consider significant;
(4) The Victim was vulnerable. He was 78 years old and lived alone;
(5) The offence was part of a planned or organised criminal activity. There was
significant planning and premeditation for this offence.
Further, both before
and after the offence the Offender went to great lengths to avoid detection;
(6) The offence was committed for financial gain.
Mr Howell, who appeared for the Offender, has quite rightly submitted, it is
important that I do not double up between my consideration
of the objective
seriousness of the offending by taking into account, as I must, what actually
happened and then again take some
of those same factors into account when
considering aggravation. For example, the fact that the offence happened in the
described are all matters which I have taken into account when considering
objective seriousness of the offending. They are aggravating factors, but I must
be careful not to double count them so as to
arrive at a disproportionately high
far as the offence being committed for financial gain, whilst this is a one of
the statutory aggravating factors, it seems to me
that in an offence of robbery,
whilst it is not inevitable that the motive will be some sort of financial gain,
it will be commonplace.
I do not think it appropriate in the circumstances to
take that into account as an aggravating factor, again for that reason, but
because I have already determined that the money being stolen was a significant
part of the objective seriousness of the offending.
have sought to be cautious and have been conscious to avoid such double counting
in my approach and, where I have given significant
weight to a factor for the
purpose of determining objective seriousness, have sought to put to one side
that same matter when considering
aggravation.
Offender was suffering from various mental health issues at the time, which I
accept was partly causative of his offending. This
reduces his moral culpability
somewhat and I have taken it into account. The reason I say
” is that, notwithstanding the Offender has serious
mental health issues, as a serving police officer, he must have known just
morally wrong his conduct was and as the offending was the result of significant
planning, including a very long drive across
NSW on the day, where he had plenty
of time to change his mind, it is difficult to connect it directly to his mental
health issues
in a substantial way. That being said, I do accept that the
Offender’s mental health issues were the root cause of the offending,
although, the connection between PTSD and committing a planned robbery is, in my
opinion, tenuous.
The Offender’s subjective case
the time of the offence, the Offender was 36 years old. He was born in Albury
and is the youngest of three boys. His father worked
for a bank and his mother
as an aged care nurse. He had a normal and happy childhood and was not exposed
to any trauma. The Offender
completed both primary and high school and was
particularly interested in sport.
leaving school, the Offender worked in security before he joined the police in
2014. He married and had two children who are now
aged 10 and 7. He previously
had a child with a former partner when he was 22. His first child is now 15.
2021, the Offender’s marriage broke down. At the time of the offence, he
was living alone in an apartment south of Sydney.
Offender worked as a police officer for about nine years. He was in general
duties for between six and seven years before moving
into a detective unit. The
Offender’s goal was to ultimately become an Inspector. For several years,
he was ambitious, driven,
and aspired to advance in his career. During his
career however, he was exposed to traumatic incidents, including homicides,
fatal car accidents, the recovery of deceased people, victims of
assaults including sexual assaults, and child abuse material.
in 2019, the Offender began conducting a large number of data extractions from
mobile and computer devices containing images
of sexual assault and child abuse.
It was necessary, when assigned a matter of this nature, to view the material
and classify it
by severity to prepare briefs of evidence. By 2021, his mental
state had started to deteriorate, his marriage had failed, and he
was irritable,
agitated, depressed, and uninterested in activities. He started trying to avoid
certain types of jobs when at work.
He was particularly affected by several
cases, including the death of a baby, a near-fatal car accident where a female
victim sustained
serious physical injuries to her head and neck with lifelong
consequences, and the death of a young adult whom he had previously
victim in another case. In September 2023, there was a workplace incident in
which a probationary constable recklessly
pointed her firearm at him in the
police station. About five weeks later, the probationary officer did it again.
Throughout his time
as a serving police officer, he did not receive proactive
psychological support in relation to his repeated exposure to trauma.
October 2023, the Offender was showing many symptoms of a deteriorating mental
state and was referred by his general practitioner
to a psychologist Dr Olga
Lavalle on a background of sleep difficulties, anxiety, and depressive symptoms.
Dr Lavalle noted at the
time that the Offender was experiencing a wide range of
PTSD symptoms.
early January 2024, the Offender became overwhelmed at work. He called in sick
the day after and did not return to active duty.
His last day at work was 5
January 2024, and he was referred to the transition unit for medical discharge
from the police force.
this, the Offender’s life spiralled out of control. He began to drink
heavily and gamble, spending about $1,000 at
a time and up to $40,000 in total.
His mental state was generally poor, and he was self-destructive. He became
reckless. His mental
state in 2024 is summed up by psychiatrist Dr Nabil
“He explains that after stopping work, his symptoms worsened. At the time,
he was experiencing both depressive and anxiety
symptoms, as well as reliving
traumatic events through nightmares and flashbacks. He also had sleep
disturbances and difficulties
with eating.
He explains that during this period, he began drinking alcohol as a way to cope,
but this escalated over time. He also started gambling,
which became another
unhealthy coping mechanism. He describes this period as a downhill spiral,
explaining that he had thoughts of
self-harm and suicide. He tells me that he
did not want to die, but also did not want to live, feeling lost and
disconnected. He
explains that everything felt like a blur.”
Lavalle’s opinion is that, by January 2024, the Offender had developed a
major depressive disorder, with a notable decline
in his daily functioning and
self-care, with continued disrupted sleep and recurring nightmares, marked
decrease in appetite, increased
disorganisation, panic attacks, frequent
dissociative episodes, together with intense feelings of hopelessness,
worthlessness, and
December 2024, he was admitted to a Private Mental Health Facility. On
admission, his medications were changed. He identified his
concerns at that time
as poor sleep, nightmares, anxiety, rumination, low mood, irritability and
emotional dysregulation. He reported
having been sober for about a month but
said that before that he had been drinking 20-25 standard drinks most nights of
In March this year, he was again admitted to that facility for further
inpatient care.
diagnosis of PTSD was confirmed by consultant psychiatrist Dr Abdul Khan in
February this year and by Dr Nabil in March this year.
In Dr Khan’s
opinion, the Offender’s diagnosis of PTSD:
“first manifested around 2021, in the context of protracted work-related
traumatic incidents that he endured in the course
of his employment as a police
officer with the New South Wales Police Force.”
psychiatrist, Dr Adam Martin provides the following opinion about the
“it is noted that prior to the index offending, he had been diagnosed with
post-traumatic stress disorder and major depressive
disorder and had prior
psychological and psychiatric treatment. Of relevance is that a large amount of
information points to his
experience of various traumatic events through his
work with the police, to which mental health issues were attributed.
in my view, he has diagnoses of posttraumatic stress disorder and major
depressive disorder. He continues to report sustained low
mood and various
symptoms seen in PTSD such as sleep disturbance, emotional dysregulation,
hypervigilance, hyperarousal, avoidance
phenomena, dissociation and being
triggered by reminders of distress or trauma. Of relevance is that he was
reporting problems with
mental health issues and seeking
psychological/psychiatric treatment prior to the index offending.
I formed the view that there is likely to be an association between an impaired
mental state exacerbated by alcohol (used as a maladaptive
coping mechanism),
which impaired his judgment and consideration of the consequences of the
offending. He had been deemed incapable
of working as a result of mental health
issues, suggesting significant impairment, and with the likely effect of not
adequately considering
the consequences of his behaviour.”
Offender has retained the support of his family and friends. Dr Martin is of the
opinion his prospects of rehabilitation are reasonable
on the assumption he
engages with psychological and psychiatric treatment, is appropriately
medicated, and manages problematic coping
mechanisms such as alcohol and
gambling. He notes, however, that the Offender is at risk of ongoing symptoms of
PTSD and major depression,
which carry the potential for him to self-harm and
are likely to have a detrimental impact on his future capacity.
am satisfied that the Offender’s prospects of rehabilitation are good and
the chances of him reoffending are low.
Criminal history
Offender has no record of previous convictions and was a person of good
character. As a member of the NSW Police Force, he took
an oath to uphold the
rule of law in this State and did so for many years. His decision to commit this
offence is, to those who know
him, inexplicable in that context. His father
describes his family’s utter shock and disbelief at the news the Offender
involved in such an offence:
“Our first response on receiving the news of his arrest was that
“This is not [the Offender], this is not something in
offending does appear to be out of character, but in light of the extensive
planning involved, it is not possible to describe
it as an aberration in the
sense that it was a mistake made in the heat of the moment. However, I do accept
that his decision to
offend was, at least in part, a consequence of his mental
health issues which in turn are a consequence of his service as a police
officer. It was an aberration in the sense that it was inconsistent with his
previous good character.
Plea of guilty
Offender entered a plea of guilty in the Local Court and that plea was accepted
by the Magistrate in the proceedings before committal.
This entitles the
Offender to a reduction of 25 percent in any sentence that would otherwise have
been imposed. His early plea is
also some evidence of his acceptance of
responsibility, willingness to facilitate the course of justice, and
Remorse and contrition
Offender’s mother says her son:
“... is deeply remorseful for the crime he has been involved in and for
the impact this has had on the victim. These days,
[the Offender] struggles to
open up and talk about how he feels and his struggles. However, as his mum, I
can hear in his voice and
see in his eyes the pain he feels for what he did to
the victim. The pain and fear he would have caused the victim has been weighing
on [the Offender] each day since this all happened.”
father says:
“From the time of his arrest, his total humiliation, devastation and utter
remorse have been clear to us. He has felt shame
that his actions have caused
grief, particularly to the victim, but also to his loved ones. I believe he will
continue to reflect
on this for some considerable time.”
uncle gave similar evidence.
Martin also notes that, upon assessment, the Offender:
“... expressed remorse in relation to the offending, stating ‘as
soon as I did it, I felt bad’ and he said that
leaving the victim tied up
was harmful. He also expressed significant regrets in relation to the effect on
his own children of the
events in the expectation of receiving a lengthy prison
accept the above evidence. However, the Offender has not offered to repay the
missing money, which I feel points in the other direction
as far as insight is
concerned. A person who steals someone’s money, with a full understanding
of the lack of morality involved,
would at least offer to pay it back.
being said, I accept that he is deeply remorseful and ashamed of his
Time in custody
Offender has been in continuous custody since 11 June 2025. He spent a further
seven days bail refused following his arrest. His
sentence of imprisonment will
be backdated to commence on 4 June 2025.
Experience in
Offender has been in custody for approximately five months. He has been detained
at Parklea Correctional Centre in a Non-Association
(or “NA”) pod.
He is in a cell by himself and has little to no interaction with other inmates.
Lavalle is of the opinion the Offender is vulnerable in custody. She notes the
stress and isolation of custody has the potential
to worsen his symptoms of PTSD
and depression. She notes his risk of self-harm and suicide is real. Dr Martin
is also of the opinion
the Offender’s experience of custody will be
onerous. I accept that evidence and take it into account in the Offender’s
favour for the purpose of considering an appropriate sentence and also with
considerably more weight on the question of the non-parole
General principles for break and enter offences
principles for this type of offending are explained in various cases, including
the guideline judgment of
R v Ponfield
[1999] NSWCCA 435
(1999) 48 NSWLR 327
[1998] 1 Cr App R 220
[2013] NSWCCA 296
O’Grady v R
[2013] NSWCCA 281
”) at [43].
short, such offences are repeatedly described as very serious. To quote
"The invasion of people's homes and the plundering of their property is a social
evil from which the community looks for protection
to the law enforcement
agencies and the criminal courts"
The use of the search warrant information
stark and unusual fact here is that the Offender was a serving police officer at
the time and the information he had concerning
the Victim was obtained under
compulsion of law in circumstances of trust where the State had sanctioned the
Offender and others
to go into the Victim's home and search through his personal
and private affairs, for good reason. A search warrant is a State sanctioned
invasion of privacy. Search warrants are an important tool for detecting crime,
but the price is people’s otherwise private
affairs are examined by
notion that a serving police officer would then use information gained that way
to plan a robbery of a person subjected to a search
at a later date is one of
the reasons I consider the seriousness of this offending to be very high. It
wholly subverts the entire
concept of the State sanctioned invasion of privacy
by use of warrants. It is also important for another reason. Such conduct must
be deterred. Use of private information gathered by the process of search
warrants for anything other than proper purposes connected
to the administration
of justice is entirely unacceptable and must be deplored. Anyone considering
that sort of conduct must understand
that, if caught, they will be met with
stern punishment.
The impact on the Victim
have already mentioned the injuries suffered by the Victim and the trauma
involved in having his home invaded for the purpose of
of that is perhaps to be expected and is built into the significant penalties
imposed by Parliament.
this case, the Victim has provided an impact statement by letter which I accept.
He has suffered in a way perhaps not contemplated
by Parliament when imposing
the penalties, which I will explain. The search where the Offender obtained the
information about the
safe resulted in the Victim being charged and convicted of
a child sexual offence. Despite his conviction, he remains adamant that
fact innocent. I, however, proceed on the basis that he is guilty.
robbery received attention in the local media, which resulted in many people on
Facebook and other social media platforms commenting
that they felt that the
Offender was some sort of hero because he had assaulted and robbed a convicted
paedophile. This culminated
in many people, previously friendly to the Victim,
shunning him. He feels he has lost many friends and acquaintances, not as a
consequence
of his conviction, but as a consequence of the conduct of the
top of all this, he is understandably extremely aggrieved of the misuse by the
Offender of information obtained on the search warrant.
consider the consequences to the Victim to be extraordinary and over and above
what might be considered usual or expected. The Victim
had served his time for
his crime and was entitled to be left alone to live his life without being
bashed and robbed by a police
officer involved in investigating his crime. Let
alone, members of the public vilifying the Victim and praising the
time was spent debating the proper use of the evidence of the unusual
consequences of this case. In some quarters, the Offender
has been elevated into
a hero status, whilst the Victim has been branded the villain. This is, not just
wrongheaded, it is highly
unusual, although will perhaps become more common as
the cowardly use of social media allowing people to say outrageous things with
impunity increases. Ordinarily, right-thinking members of the general public
would feel sorry for the Victim and consider the Offender
to be a serious
impact to the Victim should be considered as victim impact for the purpose of s
Sentencing Procedure Act
. If one limits the consequences to the
Victim to pain, suffering, and trauma involved in not feeling safe in his home,
without diminishing
that impact, it is tolerably clear that those sort of direct
physical and emotional consequences are expected in this sort of offending,
such consequences are built into the significant penalty prescribed by
Parliament.
question is whether, for the purpose of s 21A(2)(g) of the
Procedure Act
, should this indirect emotional harm caused by cruel and
unthinking members of the public be taken into account as substantial harm?
Howell has submitted that, effectively because the consequences are so unusual
and would not have been reasonably foreseen by the
Offender, or any other
right-thinking person for that matter, there is effectively a break in the chain
of causation and that the
harm caused to the Victim by the public's unfair,
illogical, and mean response is not something that ought properly be sheeted
to the Offender.
disagree. Whilst I accept that this consequence was not foreseeable in the sense
that concept is understood in other areas of the
law and that there are other
people involved in causing that harm beyond the Offender, the fact is there is a
direct chain between
the Offender’s conduct and the harm, in the sense
that without the offending, it would not have occurred. The fact that the
conduct of unthinking strangers forms part of the links in that chain of
causation is, in my opinion, not relevant to a finding under
s 21A(2)(g). I
consider I should take it into account as significant harm over and above that
which is assumed within the charge
is common ground that the threshold imposed by s 5 has been passed and that no
other sentence other than full-time imprisonment
is appropriate.
behalf of the Crown, it is submitted that a lengthy period of imprisonment is
behalf of the Offender, the following submissions are made.
the offending cannot be understood without appreciating the material
contribution that the Offender’s underlying mental
condition made to his
decision to participate in the offence. The Offender would not have committed
the offence if his decision-making
was not impaired because of his PTSD and
major depression. His impairment contributed to his decision to participate in
the offence
in a material way. The Offender’s moral culpability is
reduced. It is also submitted that he is a less appropriate person to
example to others and consequently general deterrence should carry less weight.
His PTSD and major depression will also
mean that the custodial sentence that
must be imposed will weigh more heavily on him. This factor should reduce the
length of the
prison term, particularly having regard the conditions under which
his non-parole period will be served.
the Offender’s plea of guilty.
the Offender’s genuine and deeply felt remorse.
the fact he has no record of previous convictions and was a person of good
that with appropriate treatment of his underlying mental conditions the
Offender’s prospects for rehabilitation are good
and he is unlikely to
of these submissions is accepted, although I consider the connection between the
PTSD and the offending to be tenuous and the
significant premeditation involved
reduces the weight I give to that matter. Nonetheless, I accept that, if not for
his mental health
issues, the Offender would not have offended.
accept all of the matters put by the Offender and consider the Offender’s
subjective case to have some weight. I think it
highly unlikely that the
Offender will reoffend and therefore subjective deterrence has little part to
play in this exercise. That
all being said, I cannot let the Offender’s
subjective case overwhelm the very serious objective conduct. I consider very
considerable
weight must be given to general deterrence, that is deterrence that
is not just directed to the community generally, but a message
deterrence must be sent to all serving police officers and other people who,
through the offices they hold, have access to
personal and private information
of citizens obtained under compulsion of law. The message is, that to misuse
that information for
the purpose of stealing from those people is wholly
unacceptable, reprehensible, and will be met with very stern punishment.
accept that, because of the office he held, the Offender will suffer greatly
whilst in custody. However, it must be observed that
is but a natural
consequence of him misusing his office in the way that he did. He was well aware
of this potential consequence when
he chose to do what he did. Having said that,
the evidence of the Offender’s solicitor as to the conditions he is being
in at the present time is confronting. He is effectively in solitary
confinement and will remain so.
Crown has put before me a series of comparable cases which, consistent with the
authorities I have referred to, demonstrate that
crimes of this nature are met
with significant punishment of lengthy periods in custody. Each case turns on
its own facts and no
two cases will ever be exactly comparable.
all the circumstances, I consider a starting point is a term in custody of 13
years and 6 months imprisonment, from which there
should be deducted 25% to take
into account the early guilty plea.
leaves a head sentence of 10 years, with some rounding in the Offender’s
Special circumstances
light of the facts that the Offender has never been in custody before, has no
criminal record, is suffering from a series of mental
health issues, and will
suffer in custody greater than might otherwise be expected because of his former
occupation, I make a finding
of special circumstances. I propose to adjust the
period before he becomes eligible for parole quite significantly in his
minimum period the Offender ought spend in custody will be 6 years.
sentence will be backdated to 4 June 2025 to take into account the agreed period
that the Offender has already been in custody
referable only to this
orders are as follows:
(1) In relation to Count 1, after taking into account the 25% discount for the
plea of guilty with some rounding in his favour, the
Offender is sentenced to a
term of imprisonment of 10 years commencing on 4 June 2025 and expiring 3 June
(2) There will be a minimum non-parole period of 6 years, expiring 3 June 2031,
which is the first day the Offender will become eligible
for parole.
the consent of the parties, it is further ordered that:
(1) Pursuant to
Law Enforcement (Powers and Responsibilities) Act
(NSW), the cash in the approximate sum of $81,000 found on 23 December 2024
be delivered to the Victim.
(2) Pursuant to s 97(1) of the Victim Rights and Support Act 2013 (NSW), the sum
of $19,000 be paid out of the property of the Offender
(MA) to the Victim by way
of compensation for loss sustained through the offence for which the Offender
has been convicted.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (296 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter