URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sidebottom v AAI Limited t/as AAMI [2025] NSWPICMR 16; (21 May 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
Sidebottom v AAI Limited t/as AAMI
[2025] NSWPICMR 16
Philip James Sidebottom
AAI Limited t/as AAMI
MERIT REVIEWER:
Belinda Cassidy
DATE OF DECISION:
21 May 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; claim for
statutory benefits; claimant’s application to determine pre-accident
weekly earnings (PAWE); claimant self-employed
owner and director of a
demolition company and clothing business; PAWE assessed by insurer at $0.00;
insurer did not dispute claimant
was an earner or that the claimant’s
injuries prevented him from working; claimant denied being employed or receiving
claimant said he took money of the company to pay his personal and
living expenses as he needed it; company bank accounts confirm
transferred to personal account; company profit and loss statements show the
company operates at a loss;
– insufficient evidence about the
claimant’s company, its earnings, and arrangements to determine whether
claimant has
sustained a loss of earnings from the proceeds of his business;
insurer’s decision affirmed; no costs awarded; cases cited;
QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
Insurance v Iskander
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Shahmiri
BAH v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
Liu v QBE Insurance
(Australia) Limited
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
Issued under Division 7.4 of the
Motor Accident
Injuries Act 2017
Having considered the evidence before the Commission and the submissions of
the parties, I determine:
reviewable decision is affirmed.
claimant’s pre-accident weekly earnings are assessed at $nil.
A statement setting out the reasons for the decision is included
with this certificate.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
Sidebottom was involved in a motor accident on 11 September 2024. He was riding
a motorbike on the “Harbour bridge freeway,
near Anzac Bridge” when
a vehicle to his left pulled out from the left lane knocking the claimant across
the lane, onto a concrete
divider and back into the traffic.
was injured and made a claim for statutory benefits (including weekly income
support benefits) against AAMI. AAMI has accepted
liability to pay Mr Sidebottom
the statutory benefits to which he is entitled.
dispute has arisen in the claim about the amount of weekly statutory benefits to
be paid to Mr Sidebottom. Mr Sidebottom has referred
the dispute to the Personal
Injury Commission (Commission) for determination.
proceedings have been allocated to me to conduct the review. I have held three
preliminary conferences with the representatives
of the parties. At the third,
on 11 April 2024 a timetable was set for the determination of the dispute and
the delivery of these
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
General background to statutory benefits and
entitlement to weekly payments
Sidebottom’s claim is governed by the provisions of the
Motor Accident
Injuries Act
(the MAI Act). This legislation provides a scheme
for the compulsory third-party insurance of all motor vehicles registered in New
South Wales and a scheme of statutory benefits (under Part 3) and compensation
by way of lump sum damages (under Part 4) for persons
injured in motor accidents
in New South Wales.
benefits payable by the “relevant
in accordance with
Part 3 of the MAI Act include:
(a) weekly loss of income benefits for “earners” under Division 3.3,
(b) treatment and care benefits under Division 3.4.
3.6(1) provides the entitlement to the weekly loss of income benefits as
“An earner who is injured as a result of a motor
accident and suffers a total or partial loss of earnings as a result of the
injury is entitled to weekly payments of statutory benefits under this section
during the first entitlement period.”
3.6(2) provides for the calculation of the weekly payment of statutory benefits
during the first entitlement period as follows:
“... the rate
of 95% of the difference between the person’s pre-accident weekly earnings
and the person’s post-accident
earning capacity (if any) or post-accident
earnings, whichever is the greater...”
is a minimum payment set, a maximum payment set and if additional documentation
or information is required the insurer is required
to pay the claimant at the
minimum rate.
3.5 defines the various entitlement periods. The first entitlement period is the
first 13 weeks after the accident.
3.7 provides for a second entitlement period (65 weeks after the first 13 weeks)
on the same basis as the first (although
the rate is different) and s 3.8
provides for payments during the third entitlement period (after week 78) on the
basis of a loss
of earning capacity not a loss of actual earnings.
The calculation of loss of earnings and quantum of statutory
1 to the Act provides definitions for various words and expressions found in
Division 3.3 relevant to statutory benefits
for loss of earnings.
weekly payments can only be paid to an earner, there is a definition of
“earner” at cl 2 and that is a person who is
over the age of 15
“(a) was employed or self-employed (whether or not
full-time) ...
(b) before the motor accident, had entered into an arrangement
(whether or not an enforceable contract) [for employment or self-employment]
(c) was, immediately before the motor accident, receiving a
weekly payment or other payment in respect of loss of earnings under
this Act or
Compensation Act 1987
weekly payments can only be paid to an earner who has lost earnings, at
cl (1)3, the phrase “loss of earnings”
is defined and explained
a loss incurred or likely to be incurred in a
person’s income from personal exertion.”
person’s income from personal exertion is stated in cl 3 (2) to
“(a) the amount that is the income of the person
consisting of earnings, salaries, wages ... allowances and gratuities received
in the capacity of employee or in relation to any services rendered, and
(b) the proceeds of any business carried on by the person either
alone or in partnership with any other person, and
(c) any amount received as bounty or subsidy in carrying on a
the calculation of the loss of earnings requires depends upon the
claimant’s “pre-accident weekly earnings”,
that phrase is
defined and explained in cl 4 of the Schedule as
Pre-accident weekly
, in relation to an earner who is injured as a result of a motor
accident, means the weekly average of the gross earnings received
by the earner
as an earner during the 12 months immediately before the day on which the motor
accident occurred, unless subclause
(2) applies.
(2) In the following cases,
pre-accident weekly
, in relation to an earner who is injured as a result of a motor
accident, means—
(a) if, on the day of the motor accident, the earner was earning
continuously, but had not been earning continuously for at least
— the weekly average of the gross earnings received by the earner as an
earner during the period from when the earner
started to earn continuously to
immediately before the day of the motor accident,
(a1) if the earner was employed or self-employed during a period
or periods equal to at least 26 weeks during the first year of
the pre-accident
period, but was not obtaining earnings from any source at any other time during
the pre-accident period—the
average weekly gross earnings received by the
earner as an earner during the first year of the pre-accident period,
(b) if subclause (3) applies—the weekly average of the
gross earnings the earner received as an earner, or could reasonably
expected to receive, during the 12 months after the change of circumstance
referred to in the subclause occurred,
(c) if the earner is an earner by reason of having entered into
an arrangement with an employer or other person to undertake employment
commence business as a self-employed person—the average weekly gross
earnings that the earner could reasonably have been
expected to earn, but for
the injury, in employment under that arrangement.
pre-accident period
, in relation to a motor
accident, is the period of 2 years immediately preceding the motor accident.
(3) This subclause applies if, during the 12 months immediately before
the day of the motor accident, there was, as a result of
any action taken by the
earner, a significant change in his or her earnings circumstances that resulted
in the earner regularly earning,
or becoming entitled to earn, more on a weekly
basis than he or she was earning before the change occurred.
(4) For the purposes of this clause, an earner earns continuously if
he or she obtains earnings from permanent employment or from
a source that, on
the day of the motor accident, was likely to continue for a period of at least 6
months to provide earnings to
the earner on the same, or a similar, basis to the
basis on which the earnings were being provided as at that day.”
Dispute resolution
7 of the MAI Act provides for medical assessments, claims assessments and merit
reviews by the Commission’s Medical Assessors,
Members and Merit
dispute in issue between Mr Sidebottom and NRMA is a declared Merit Review
matter pursuant to Schedule 2(1)(a) of the MAI Act
that is “the amount of
statutory benefits that is payable under ... Division 3.3 (Weekly payments of
statutory benefits to
injured persons).”
BACKGROUND TO THE
claimant’s application for personal injury benefits (the claim form) was
19 September 2024.
15 November 2024 AAMI wrote to the claimant advising that his pre-accident
weekly earnings (PAWE) had been determined at $0 per
week based on a report from
Procare, its forensic accountant, the claimant’s taxation returns and the
claimant’s banks
statements.
15 November 2024, the claimant sought an internal review of that decision
decision not to pay me any income reimbursement is wrong. I earn a wage and work
very hard for it.”
“I was working 5 – 6 days a week just prior to my accident as is
evidence in my bank Statement. The money is clearly going
into my accounts and
all my personal direct debits come out. This is not rocket science. Two previous
CTP claims have been processed
with no issues as all and independent reviews
done as well.”
insurer issued its internal review decision on 29 November
affirming the original
decision. The insurer again relied on the claim form, several emails and a
report from its forensic accountants.
This is the reviewable decision in the
current proceedings.
insurer stated:
(a) the claimant was the sole director and shareholder in Dekonstruct Creating
Space Pty Limited (Dekonstrukt);
(b) deposits from the company into the claimant’s bank account was not
“income from personal exertion” because
it was not salary but may be
profit distribution or transactions between the claimant and the company;
(c) no salary, income or fringe benefits were declared in the company records;
no tax was withheld, no superannuation contributions
were made, deposits are not
described as salary or wage payments, the payments were not regular fixed
(d) no salary was declared in his tax returns, and
(e) a government pension was paid in the 2024 financial year.
insurer also noted that the claimant’s personal and work expenses were
paid by the company, and it appears funds were drawn
on the company bank account
or holding bank account to meet personal expenses.
noting the letter from the claimant’s accountant and citing the
definitions in the Act, the insurer cited the decision
El Ayoub v QBE
says “the profit or loss (earnings) of the company do not represent your
REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE
Claim documents
Sidebottom’s claim form was dated 19 September 2024. He says his home
address is in an inner west suburb of Sydney. He disclosed
a previous injury
which had occurred on 1 October 2022 identifying the claim number and other
insurer (Allianz). On 15 November 2024
the claimant advised NRMA he had been
involved in two previous accidents. In a message provided to the Commission on 1
April 2025,
the claimant has provided the claim number and insurer (also
Allianz) of the other earlier accident but no further details (such
as the date
of the claim or any statutory benefits paid in the claim) were provided.
claimant describes the accident and lists his injuries (broken 5
finger left hand, broken ribs 3 - 8 on the left side, lacerations, puncture
wounds, multiple stitches and bruising). He says he was
taken to St Vincents
Hospital and discharged on
17 September 2024. He says he was not suffering
from any illness or injury affecting the same or similar parts of his body at
time of the accident.
claimant discloses under “employment details” that he was the
“manager / demolition” of Dekonstrukt earning
$4,950 per week and
that he was not receiving Centrelink benefits at the
is an email from the claimant to the insurer dated 3 October 2024 which
“BAS and notice of assessments were not a true
indication of my earnings because they have obviously been prepared for taxation
purposes and minimising tax where possible”
Sidebottom also says he did not work at all from the middle of February to the
beginning of June 2024 saying, “this was the
very first holiday break I
have had from my company and work in many years.”
claimant had provided the insurer with bank statements and details of his
“mandatory” bills and mortgage payments
saying that “All of
these reports together paint the exact picture of my income”.
claimant sent an email to Procare (the insurer’s forensic accountant) on
24 October 2024. He says he is the only owner and director and the sole
person in, and working for the company. He says all money
that comes into the
company is earnt by him and “pays me and all my personal and business
says in this email that he is a site manager and also “on the
tools”. He said he manages personnel, all safety reporting,
time lines, cleanliness, rubbish removal, site tidying, inductions, briefings,
site walks and safety inspections. He also
does labouring on the tools where
is an email from the claimant to Procare dated 28 October 2024. Mr Sidebottom
says he has three accounts, a company account,
a holding account and a personal
account. He says, “All the money [is] treated as my personal
Sidebottom says if he is required to lodge reports with the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) this will take months and:
“... the result, which
I have already stated will be a next to zero income for company and individual
income as well. This is
exactly as it has been for years deliberately so to
minimise tax obligations.”
is an email from the claimant to the insurer’s expert dated 30 October
2024 which says in answer to a question “you
take drawing from Dekonstrukt
which are applied to meet your monthly outgoings /
obligations”:
“Yes, if I need money to pay bills or for
my own personal use I take whenever necessary, it is transferred to the holding
... then transferred again to my personal account.”
claimant also says in this email he has not lodged his 2023 and 2024 taxation
returns. The claimant’s legal representative
advised at one of the
preliminary conferences that these taxation returns had now been lodged with the
ATO. No notices of assessment
have been provided.
Sidebottom provided a signed statement dated 21 January 2025. He says:
(a) he is self-employed operating two businesses. His main business is a
demolition company called Dekonstrukt Creating Space Pty
Limited, and another
business called Philip James Styling which is a hobby bespoke clothing and
styling business [4] and [14];
(b) he described the accident at [6] – [7] and his injuries in [8];
(c) he says he has been certified unfit to work by his general practitioner
(d) before the accident he worked 5 – 6 days a week and earned at least
$990 per day [15];
(e) he has two bank accounts, a business and a personal account [15];
(f) income earned by Dekonstrukt is paid into his business account and he
“would transfer money to my personal account for
my personal and living
expenses”. He says in March and April 2024 Dekonstrukt earned about
$77,500 “which I transferred
and, or withdrew for my personal living
expenses” [16];
(g) his accountant’s letter from 28 November 2024 shows he ran a viable
business invoicing over $29,414 a month [17];
(h) he is the sole director of the company and “there are no other
employees in the business” [18];
(i) according to his accountant his business earned income of $214,134 plus GST
in the 12 months before the accident which is consistent
with his expenditure of
mortgage, insurance, car (and
motorbike) costs, two car loans, parking, rates
and utilities and monthly haircuts. He says at [21] there are other living
such as groceries, petrol and the basics, and
(j) his business relies upon his ability to work and as he has no capacity to
work, he has received no income and cannot meet his
personal expenses and is in
significant financial difficulty [22].
Accounting evidence
Claimant’s accountant
Pascoe, of Licorice Accounting and Finance Solutions sent an email to the
insurer’s expert on 30 October 2024. She said:
has continued to run his business ... even in times ... where he has been hired
as an employee, deriving income, having
tax withheld and superannuation paid by
the employer.
Over the years Phillip has increased his Director’s Loan, as he has
privately [subsidised] the company.
Therefore, over the last two years, he has not drawn a wage as he is drawing
down his director’s loan, thus no PAYG withheld,
nor superannuation is
needed to be paid.
If this facility was not available to him, he would be drawing wages, and
then the company would certainly [be liable] for PAYG Withholding
Superannuation.”
Pascoe wrote a “to whom it may concern letter” dated 28 November
Pasco says her firm has been the claimant’s accountant since July 2009.
She says he is the sole director and by his own
personal exertion has run a
“viable business” which invoices on average $29,414 plus GST per
“The claimant has been able to pay himself from his
company earnings, utilising cashflow, effective drawings from his
loan to satisfy the following personal monthly
lists the same expenses as the claimant in his statement.
says, “Mr Sidebottom has over the years built up a loan account, where he
has decided to withdraw from that loan. Therefore,
he is not at this time taking
wages but will be in the near future, once the loan is paid back to
also says that without the claimant’s personal exertion there would be no
means of paying Mr Sidebottom’s personal
expenses or the expenses of the
refers to Mr Sidebottom’s “agreements with the entity” being
his company.
Pascoe wrote a further letter which is dated 18 December 2024 and is addressed
to the claimant’s solicitor. She says:
(a) the claimant is the sole director of the company which operates his business
and “there are no other employees in the business”;
(b) that it is more appropriate to look at the reduction of gross business
income of the company rather than the claimant’s
(c) that the company earned $214,134 plus GST from 11 September 2023 to 11
September 2024;
(d) the company operated for 48 weeks in that time, which is average weekly
earnings of $4,461 plus GST, and
(e) the claimant’s inability to work would reduce the business income and
in fact without him the business generates no income.
Pascoe wrote a further letter to the claimant’s solicitor dated 22 April
2025 in which she says:
(a) the wages of $48,778 were paid to an employee and there are now no
(b) “As a tax [effective] decision, it was decided that Mr Phillip
Sidebottom draw down on a loan account whereby [the company],
owed Mr Sidebottom
a sum of money lent to it in his capacity as a director/shareholder of the
company”, and
(c) she restates the other matters, and that the reduction of gross business is
the way the claimant should be compensated.
Insurer’s expert accountant
Croft of Procare was qualified by the insurer to provide a report to the
insurer. The report is provided under cover of a letter
dated 5 November 2024.
The insurer has relied on this report in making its PAWE decision.
Croft confirmed he has complied with the professional requirements associated
with being a chartered accountant and that he has
prepared the report in
accordance with the Commission’s procedural directions for expert
Croft’s conclusion was that the deposits made to the claimant’s
personal account are not income from personal exertion
(a) they are not consistent with the definition of “salary”, but
(b) they may be a profit distribution or associated with transactions between
the claimant and the company.
Croft says at [24] that “salary” is “the annual sum of a
fixed, recurring (age) and non-discretionary payment
made on a consistent
periodic basis”. Mr Croft’s opinion is [25] that the deposits in the
accounts do not satisfy this
definition because:
(a) they are not declared as salary from the company in the claimant’s
taxation returns for 2023 and 2024;
(b) no tax has been withheld, or superannuation contributions made in relation
to these payments;
(c) the deposits are not described in a way that would indicate they are
“salary” or “wage payments”, and
(d) the payments are not consistent or fixed amounts and are not paid on a
recurring or periodic basis.
Croft expresses the view at [26]:
“It appears to me possible
that deposits received from the Company may be in the nature of a profit
distribution or associated
with transactions between the Claimant (as owner) and
the Company ... on the basis of statements made by the Claimant describing
payments received from, or made by the Company, and being for the purpose of
paying the Claimant’s expenses.”
Croft says:
(a) the claimant’s taxation returns do not indicate the claimant received
salary or wages and did not derive any other net
business income [27];
(b) his work and personal expenses are paid by the Company, he draws funds from
the company bank account or holding account to meet
his personal expenses, no
superannuation contributions are made, and no tax is paid by the company
(c) the claimant’s expenses paid by the company could be a fringe benefit,
but they are not included in his taxation return
(d) the bank statements do not identify any deposits as “salary” or
“wage”, the amounts transferred between
the claimant’s
accounts are not recurring or regular periodic payments and vary in amounts
Croft also notes there are no payments made by Allianz in these bank statements
and no income declared in the claimant’s
2023 or 2024 taxation returns in
respect of any statutory benefits paid by Allianz in respect of the October 2022
Other evidence
Sidebottom provided bank statements and a list of his monthly mandatory expenses
including his mortgage, phone, a Bentley Mulsanne
motor vehicle, a Landcruiser
motor vehicle, home and contents insurance, utilities and haircuts and so on
which total about $18,000.
claimant’s 2023 personal tax return declared the claimant’s postal
and home address to be in Glen Waverley, a suburb
of Victoria. He declared no
salary or wages, no allowances, earnings, tips or director’s fees, no
pensions and no personal
services income. He also declared no interest,
dividends or employee share scheme amounts. He did declare his private health
membership. He declared no deductions. If this return was lodged and
assessed, no tax would be payable.
claimant’s 2024 personal tax return also declared his postal and home
address to be in Glen Waverley, and again he declared
no income or deductions
but he did declare a tax-free government pension of $18,005. He also declared
his private health insurance.
He declared no deductions. If this return was
lodged and assessed, no tax would be payable.
claimant has provided copies of some of his bank statements both from his
business account and his personal account.
claimant’s quarterly BAS statement for January to March 2024 declared the
address of Dekonstrukt to be in Glen Waverley.
This document advised the ATO
that the business:
(a) had total sales of $66,033;
(b) collected GST on those sales of $5,957;
(c) spent $6,578 in GST on purchases for the business, and
(d) sought the sum of $621 from the ATO.
April to June 2024 BAS statement declared:
(a) total sales of $22,046 and non-capital purchases of $79,405;
(b) GST on sales in the sum of $2,004;
(c) the business spent $6,656 in GST on purchases, and
(d) the sum of $4,652was owed from the ATO to the business.
profit and loss statement of Dekonstrukt for 1 January 2023 to 15 January 2024
(a) total income of the business $371,821;
(b) the cost of sales (said to be materials, sub contactor and tip fees) of
(c) a gross profit of $104,568 (income less the cost of sales);
(d) wage expenses of $48,778;
(e) total expenses of the business $341,647 (profit less expenses), and
(f) a loss for the business of $246,359.
profit and loss statement does not indicate anything was paid in
director’s fees or that any amount was paid out in respect
of any loan to
the business from
Mr Sidebottom.
profit and loss statement from June to August 2024 shows:
(a) total income of the business $71,675;
(b) the cost of sales (materials and sub contactor) of $61,374;
(c) a gross profit of $10,301 (income less the cost of sales);
(d) no wage expenses;
(e) total expenses of the business $14,008 (profit less expenses), and
(f) a loss for the business of $6,545.
SUBMISSIONS FROM THE PARTIES
Claimant’s submissions
claimant documents the accident and his physical injuries at [3], [4] and at [8]
says he has developed a psychological injury
following the accident.
claimant notes at [6] that he returned to part time work in March 2025 and was
“paid $660 per day” and at [7] refers
to a report from Dr Conrad
dated 26 March 2025
which suggests
he is able to work 20 hours a week with restrictions.
claimant discloses at [9] he is in receipt of a pension from the Australian
Defence Force worth $18,000 per year.
claimant takes issue with the insurer’s accountant’s report.
[17] he submits he is self-employed and has operated “a profitable
business for more than 27 years”.
claimant refers at [18] to letters from his accountant and that the claimant has
operated Dekonstrukt as a sole director and that
no one else is involved in the
business and submits that the amount of income generated by the company depends
solely on the claimant’s
work in the company.
claimant submits at [19] that the “business proceeds” of Dekonstrukt
should be considered income from personal exertion
and the loss of
Dekonstrukt’s income (due to the claimant’s accident) should be
considered the claimant’s loss
of earnings.
claimant submits at [20] that the “income generated by the claimant”
is not a dividend and is not interest, rent,
superannuation benefit or sick
leave entitlement and is therefore not excluded from his earnings from personal
claimant submits at [21] that the case of
is distinguishable as
it involved two people in a business, particulars had been requested by the
insurer and the Merit Reviewer
but never received. The claimant submits the
decision refers to the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), addresses issues of
“earner” (not in issue in
Mr Sidebottom’s case) and does
not address the definitions or exceptions of “personal exertion” and
is not binding.
claimant submits at [22] and [23] that the claimant’s PAWE should be
calculated on the basis of the income Dekonstrukt generated
($214,134) which is
$4,461 a week which is an amount over the maximum weekly benefit prescribed by s
3.9 of $3,853.
claimant submits at [12]:
“In conclusion, in following the
speculative reasoning of [the insurer’s expert] leads to the absurd
finding that there
is no PAWE notwithstanding that the claimant is the only
person that “goes off to work”, is the person ‘that is’
Dekonstrukt and is person that is remunerated by those he performs work
Insurer’s submissions
insurer refers in its submissions at [2.1 – 2.5] to the claim form, the
emails from the claimant to the insurer and Procare
and his taxation returns.
The insurer at [2.6] – [2.11] relies on the report of Mr Croft. The
insurer notes the claimant’s
statement and Mrs Pascoe’s
correspondence.
insurer notes at [4.1] the claimant has filed no submissions and says he has not
explained the basis for the amount of $3,853
or $3,568 claimed in his schedule
of earnings.
insurer says at [4.5] the claimant’s company is a separate entity from the
claimant and that the company’s money is
not the claimant’s money
until the Company passes them on. The insurer relies on three cases in the
Commission at [4.6] and
says at [4.7] there is no evidence that the
claimant’s company has passed on any money to the claimant by paying
wages, director’s
fees or dividends.
Procedural matters
concerning the submissions
claimant’s application for internal review had not provided submissions
addressing the legislation or the case law. The
claimant’s application to
the Commission for Merit Review was not accompanied by any submissions either.
It was therefore not
clear on what basis the claimant was submitting that the
insurer’s decision was not the correct or preferable decision.
24 January 2025, the parties were notified that I requested submissions from the
claimant, and I directed they be filed by 31 January
2025. The claimant’s
legal representative requested an extension, and the time was extended to 7
February 2025. The time for
the insurer’s reply was extended to 17
February 2025.
preliminary teleconference was held on 21 February 2025. Ms Hill for the insurer
was present as was Mr Sciglitano, counsel for
the claimant. At that time no
submissions had been lodged by the claimant. Discussion occurred, the
legislation and case law were
discussed and a timetable was set for the
lodgement of the claimant’s submissions and any additional supporting
further preliminary conference date was set for 1 April 2025. Again, Ms Hill and
Mr Sciglitano represented the parties. The claimant’s submissions had
not yet been filed which was in breach of the previous
directions and a further
timetable was set.
the claimant’s submissions (which were dated 6 February 2025) had been
received, it should be noted that they were not
received in the Commission until
10 April 2025.
insurer’s submissions were filed with the Commission on 6 February 2025.
While the insurer reserved the right to make further
submissions upon receipt of
the claimant’s submissions, the insurer advised the Commission on 28 April
2025 that it did not
wish to make any further submissions.
the final preliminary conference on 11 April 2024, the claimant’s counsel
suggested that I would be assisted by oral evidence
from the claimant and sought
a hearing in person.
noted that I had a statement from the claimant, material from his accountant and
detailed submissions. I asked what additional evidence
or information Mr
Sidebottom would be able to provide to me. The claimant’s counsel advised
that there was no new evidence
that Mr Sidebottom was likely to provide.
the timetable I set after that preliminary conference I gave the claimant the
opportunity to provide additional documentary evidence
and both parties the
opportunity to provide additional submissions.
received some additional information from the claimant but no further
submissions from either party and remain of the view that
the Merit Review can
be conducted on the papers.
CONSIDERATION OF THE ISSUES
Reliability of the evidence
claimant has sent a number of emails to the insurer and the insurer’s
expert and has provided a statement. I have concerns
his evidence for the following reasons:
(a) the claimant says his address is in inner west Sydney and works in Sydney
yet his tax return says he lives in Melbourne and his
BAS return says the
business operates out of Melbourne;
(b) the claimant said in his statement he had two accounts, a business account
and a personal account. The email to Procare on 28
October 2024 suggests he had
three (not two) accounts;
(c) on 24 October 2024, Mr Sidebottom told Procare that he was the only person
working in the company and at paragraph [18] of his
statement he said there are
no employees in the business. However, the January 2023 to January 2024 profit
and loss statement identifies
$48,000 paid as wages and his accountant advised
that was wages paid to an employee of the company;
(d) on 3 October 2024, in an email to the insurer, Mr Sidebottom says the
financial documents including his tax returns “are
not a true indication
of my earnings”. On 28 October 2024 the claimant confirms that his company
and personal tax returns reflect
“zero income” which is a deliberate
strategy to “minimise tax”;
(e) Mrs Pascoe says the business operated for 48 weeks from
11 September 2023
to September 2024 however the claimant says he took a four-month holiday from
February to June 2024 which suggests
the business may have been operating for
much less than 48 weeks;
(f) Mr Sidebottom said in his application for internal review that he had made
two claims in respect of two previous accidents and
had no problem with either
of them (including internal reviews) which indicates payments had been made by
Allianz. The insurer’s
accountant cannot point to any payments from
Allianz in either of the claimant’s bank accounts and the claimant has
no evidence in response suggesting Allianz has paid the claimant any
benefits on the basis of a loss of earnings, and
(g) the claimant’s account said the claimant has run a viable business and
at paragraph 17 of the submissions the claimant
says he has run a
“profitable” business. In the profit and loss statement to January
2024 the company is shown as having
incurred a loss of close to $250,000. In the
June to August 2024 profit and loss statement the business has also run at a
$6,500. The evidence presented by the claimant is not of a viable or
profitable business.
are inconsistencies between the documents and the claimant’s statement and
therefore I will approach the evidence relied
on by Mr Sidebottom
claimant relies on a number of letters from Mrs Pascoe. She appears to be a
chartered accountant but is not a forensic accountant.
She has not prepared her
letters or given her opinions having regard to the Commission’s expert
code of conduct and she has
provided a number of disclaimers to her opinions. I
do however accept that she has familiarity with Mr Sidebottom’s financial
arrangements and accept her evidence about them as his current accountant. I do
not however accept her opinions as to her interpretation
of the law and how it
is to be applied.
claimant takes issue with the report of Mr Croft saying the claimant has not
been provided with the letter of instructions.
note Mr Croft has provided a list of the documents he was given and refers to
the request to assist the insurer with calculating
the claimant’s PAWE.
There is no evidence before me to suggest the claimant has requested the letter
of instructions or that
the insurer refused to provide it. I do not consider the
letter of instruction is necessary in order to undertake this Merit Review
do not propose deferring my decision to wait for it to be provided.
claimant also submits that Mr Croft did not prepare the report on his own and
“was assisted by members of his staff”
and that their identifies are
not disclosed.
note the covering letter to the Procare report refers to “our
findings” but the report signed off by Mr Croft refers
throughout to what
he has done, who he is and what his qualifications are. He has clearly stated
the report contains his opinions.
I note all of the emails in evidence before
the Commission appear to be sent by and from Mr Croft himself. There is no
in any of this material that he did not prepare the report on his own
and that the opinions expressed in the report are not his own.
I accept the
evidence in this report is expert evidence from Mr Croft based on the
information and documentation he had before him
at the time he wrote that
What is agreed and what is disputed?
starting point in a PAWE dispute is s 3.6(1) of the MAI
“An earner who is injured as a result of a motor accident
and suffers a total or partial loss of earnings as a result of the
entitled to weekly payments of statutory benefits under this section during the
first entitlement period.”
insurer does not appear to dispute that the claimant has not been able to work
for a period of time after the accident because
of the injuries resulting from
the motor accident, and the insurer does not appear to dispute that the claimant
is entitled to weekly
parties agree that the claimant is an earner.
note that the claimant would be an earner within the definition in Schedule 1,
cl (2) if he was receiving weekly payments from Allianz
in respect of his
earlier accident.
is clearly in dispute between the parties is the amount of the weekly payments
payable to Mr Sidebottom. In resolving such a
dispute, I am required to
(a) whether the claimant suffered a loss of earnings, and
(b) in calculating the loss of earnings, what is the PAWE?
What is the relevance of the corporate structure?
definition of “earner applies” to both employed persons and
self-employed persons. Self-employed persons may be sole
traders, they may be a
partner in a business, or they may run their business through a corporate
a number of merit review decisions referred to by the insurer including
QBE Insurance (Australia)
Insurance (Australia)
Merit Reviewer
Ruschen dealt with disputes about a claimant’s PAWE in circumstances where
the claimant ran a business through
a corporate structure. She referred in all
the cases to s 1.5.1 of the Cth and relied on the fact that a company is a
separate entity
with a “separate legal personality from the
claimant” and that monies received by the Company are not monies received
by the claimant unless and until they are passed onto the claimant by the
is not disputed that the claimant is self-employed. Mr Sidebottom runs his own
businesses (the demolition business and the hobby
clothing business) and he runs
them through a company structure. This creates a corporate entity distinct from
Mr Sidebottom who is the owner and operator of this business.
benefits accrue to the injured person, and an injured person is defined in
s 1.4 of the Act as a person who sustains “personal
injury. A company cannot maintain a claim for statutory benefits because the
corporate entity sustains no personal
or bodily injury. The focus therefore is
on Mr Sidebottom and his loss of earnings.
Has the claimant
suffered a loss of earnings?
3.6 (1) and 3.7(1) provide that if an injured earner “suffers a total
or partial loss of earnings as a result of the
injury” they are entitled
to weekly benefits.
1, cl 3(1) explains that a loss of earnings is a loss incurred or likely to be
incurred in a person’s income from personal
are three options provided in Schedule 1, cl(3)(2) depending upon the individual
circumstances of the particular claimant as
(a) “the amount that is the income of the person consisting of earnings,
salaries, wages, commissions, fees, bonuses, pensions,
retiring allowances and
retiring gratuities, allowances and gratuities received in the capacity of
employee or in relation to any
services rendered”;
(b) “the proceeds of any business carried on by the person either alone or
in partnership with any other person”, and
(c) “any amount received as bounty or subsidy in carrying on a
first option applies to employed persons and the second to persons who are
self-employed. Neither party has made any submission
Schedule 1, cl 3(2)(c) (bounties or subsidies) and there is nothing to suggest
it could or would apply to
Mr Sidebottom’s situation. The other options
are discussed below.
Has the claimant sustained a loss of
earnings as an employee?
Croft has clearly considered whether the claimant has lost earnings from
personal exertion in accordance with Schedule 1, cl 3(2)(a)
and expressed the
opinion that the money the claimant takes out of his business is not a form of
salary or wages.
Mr Sidebottom has made no submissions to the contrary.
Sidebottom has said he has managerial duties and is also onsite and “on
the tools”.
am not satisfied that the claimant has a loss of earnings from personal exertion
in accordance with Schedule 1, cl 3(2)(a) for the
following reasons:
(a) the claimant and his accountant maintain he was not an
“employee” but was self-employed;
(b) the claimant is the director of the company that operates two businesses;
(c) there is no contract of employment in evidence, the claimant did not receive
payslips, no tax was deducted from any payments
made and no superannuation was
paid to any fund on behalf of Mr Sidebottom;
(d) the wages identified in one of the profit and loss statements were not wages
paid to the claimant;
(e) the claimant has not declared any wages or salary in his tax return filed
with the ATO, and
(f) the bank records as analysed by Mr Croft do not indicate any regular
payments or regular amounts and the claimant says he draws
money out of the
company as and when he needs it.
Has the claimant sustained a loss of earnings as a self-employed
claimant appears to argue that the claimant’s income from personal
exertion comes within Schedule 1, cl 3(2)(b) and should
be “the proceeds
of any business carried on by the person either alone or in partnership with any
other person”. The
insurer has not provided any submissions to the
contrary, but Mr Croft appears to address this although he has not stated so
claimant argues that Mr Croft’s report contains “speculative
reasoning”. Mr Croft has said that the deposits
received in the
claimant’s personal bank account may possibly be profit distribution from
the company or payments made in accordance
with an arrangement between the
claimant and the company.
Pascoe has referred to there being a director’s loan between Mr Sidebottom
and his company. If Mr Sidebottom lent money
to the company to establish or
“subsidise it” as she said and was drawing down on that as
repayments of that loan, there
would need to be a loan agreement between the
company and Mr Sidebottom, the loan would appear as an asset on the
balance sheet and there would be a director’s loan account
recording the payments made to Mr Sidebottom. No evidence has been
presented by
the claimant to support the existence of this loan, the terms of it or the way
it has been treated in the company’s
balance sheet, the profit and loss
statement and the company’s tax returns.
Croft’s “speculation” concerning there being a profit
distribution is reasonable bearing in mind his report shows
he has been given no
documentation concerning the director’s loan and had not been provided
with the profit and loss statements,
no company documents or company tax
returns. The “speculation” is also reasonable bearing in mind the
business is not generating a profit and is in fact running at a
loss and the profit and loss statement does not include any reference
payments made to Mr Sidebottom or any loan repayments.
is, as has been stated, no dispute that Mr Sidebottom is self-employed. He says,
and his accountant supports him, that what
the company earns is what he earns,
that he takes what he needs from what the company earns, when he needs it.
the basis of this evidence, any loss of earnings experienced by Mr Sidebottom
must be based on Schedule 1, cl 3(2)(b) and is a
loss related to “the
proceeds of any business carried on by the person either alone or in partnership
with any other person”.
How is that loss of earnings to be calculated – what is the
claimant’s PAWE?
injured person’s loss of earnings which forms the basis of the weekly
payment of statutory benefit is determined by considering
the claimant’s
PAWE. This is defined and explained in Schedule 1, cl 4(1) and
“... the weekly average of the gross earnings received by
the earner as an earner during the 12 months immediately before the
day on which
the motor accident occurred, unless subclause (2) applies.”
have received no submissions as to whether any of the options in cl 4(2) may or
may not apply.
do not believe that cl 4(2)(a) applies. The evidence from the claimant and his
accountant is that he has been in business operating
his company for many years
and that the four months in which he or his company did not generate sales or
“earn” any income
was because of a holiday he took (as the owner of
the business) from February to June. While he may not have been physically
in the business from February to June 2024, Mr Sidebottom remained as
the sole owner and director of the business and was therefore
continuously” within the meaning of cl 4(4) in the 12 months before the
4(2)(1a) does not apply because there is no evidence that in the two years (104
weeks) before the accident (the pre-accident
period) the claimant only worked
for 26 weeks and obtained no earnings from any source in the other 78 weeks.
4(2)(b) does not apply because it is clear that cl 4(3) does not apply. While
there may have been a significant change in the
claimant’s circumstances
(the holiday from February to June 2024) this did not result in the claimant (or
his company) earning
more. Therefore cl 4(2)(b) does not apply.
is clear that cl 4(2)(c) does not apply as there is no evidence of the claimant
entering into any arrangement with any employer
or other person to commence new
employment or start a new business.
none of the options in cl 4(2) apply, the claimant’s loss of earnings must
be calculated in accordance with Schedule 1, cl
4(1) which means “the
weekly average of the gross earnings received ... during the 12 months
immediately before” the
date of the accident.
What does “during the 12 months” before the motor accident
claimant relies on the opinion expressed by Mrs Pascoe (on 18 December 2024)
that the company operated for 48 weeks and not 52
and she calculates the
claimant’s loss (adopted by the claimant in his submissions) by dividing
the income of the business
in that 48-week period $214,134 by 48 weeks to arrive
at her figure of $4,461.
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v
it was held that
the meaning of “earnings” (in the context of earnings as an earner)
is not defined in the MAI Act and
cannot be extrapolated from the definition of
“loss of earnings”. Harrison AsJ found the claimant’s earnings
the whole of the 12 months before the accident was to be divided by 52 even
though Mr Shahmiri did not work for 23 of those weeks
because of COVID-19.
Pascoe’s approach is therefore not, at law, correct and she should have
divided the total figure by 52 weeks which generates
the weekly average of
claimant has submitted that the figure calculated by Mrs Pascoe is over the
maximum amount provided for in s 3.9 of the Act and
has limited his claim to
that maximum amount which he says is the sum of $3,853.
claimant is not correct because s 3.9(2)-(7) provides for the maximum amount to
be indexed every year. The maximum amount on 1
December 2017 when the MAI Act
was proclaimed was the sum of $3,853 but it is currently, from 1 October 2024
the sum of $4,835. The
claimant could therefore be entitled to statutory
benefits in the sum of $4,117 being the earnings of the company (in the 12
before the accident) divided by 52 weeks.
“gross earnings received by the earner as an earner”
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v
a Merit Review
Panel determined that, in the case of a business owner and operator
“... the income from personal exertion refers to the
claimant’s share of the proceeds of the business, not the entire
of the business without any deductions.”
claimant’s PAWE was then calculated on the earnings of the business less
the expenses of that business. Mr Iskander operated
his business as a sole
trader not as a corporation.
parties’ attention was drawn to the Panel decision in
the 11 April 2025 preliminary conference report as stated in the report issued
to the parties after that preliminary conference.
I have received no submissions
from the claimant in relation to the
case and response to the
matters raised in the preliminary conference report.
my view, a self-employed person’s loss of earnings should not differ or
vary according to the type of structure adopted for
their business. If two
business earn the same “income”, the owner, operator and sole trader
should receive the same statutory
benefits as the owner, operator and director
of the business. It is their share of the proceeds of the business that forms
of their statutory benefits and their share of the proceedings of the
business should be interpreted in the same way. Therefore,
adopting the
reasoning from
, Mr Sidebottom’s income from his personal
exertion refers to his share of the proceeds of the business less expenses of
business and not the entire proceeds of the business without any
deductions.
Are the monies taken out of the business to be
taken into account?
note that Mrs Pascoe has not provided any work sheet or justification for her
figure of the income of the company being $214,134
plus GST. The claimant has
not provided any calculations of his own for this figure. Mrs Pascoe says this
sum is the earnings of
the company for September 2023 to September 2024. The
profit and loss statements provided by the claimant are for January 2023 to
January 2024 and from June 2024 to August 2024. It would appear from her letters
and emails that the figure of $214,134 (plus GST)
is the gross earnings (sales)
of the business before the cost of those sales or expenses associated with those
sales are deducted.
claimant has provided to the insurer, the insurer’s expert and his own
accountant a list of his regular monthly expenses
and says he also incurs
expenses associated with living (such as groceries and petrol). The claimant has
provided his business bank
accounts which shows that money is being transferred
to the claimant’s personal bank account. The claimant has provided
from his personal bank account which support his claimed pattern of
spending. While it is clear where the money comes from, (in terms
of the bank
accounts) it is not clear to me whether the money spent by the claimant on his
personal and living expenses is proceeds
from the company within the meaning of
the legislation.
claimant has said that he treats the income of the company as his own income and
takes from the company bank account what he wants,
when he needs it, to pay for
his personal expenses as well as the business expenses.
claimant’s personal and living expenses obviously do not appear on the
profit and loss statement of the company because
they are not business expenses.
The claimant’s taxation returns suggest he receives no money from the
company by way of wages,
dividends, distribution of profit or for services
because he declares no income at all in his tax returns. Mr Sidebottom has
he spends about $18,000 per month on personal recurring expenses and
on top of that, living expenses such as groceries and fuel which
estimated and he cites this as the evidentiary basis for his loss of earnings.
business expenses for the year January 2023 to February 2024 total $341,647
according to the profit and loss statement. If, in
that same period (January
2023 to February 2024) the claimant was taking $18,000 out of the company to pay
for his personal and living
expenses (the sum of $216,000 for the year), the
total income of the company should be at least $557,647. The company would need
to earn that much in sales in order for it to pay both the expenses of the
business and the claimant’s personal and living
total earnings of the company during that period however are stated to be only
$371,821 and out of that is deducted the cost of
sales ($267,253) and the
expenses of the company ($341,647) resulting in a loss to the company of
$246,359. If the company operates
at a loss, then there is no money “left
over” for the claimant to take out and spend on his personal and living
There is no evidence in the company documents that appears to explain
how the claimant’s living and personal expenses could
be funded by sales
of only $371,821.
report of Mr Croft says what the claimant takes out of the company may be a
distribution to him from the company or payments made
pursuant to some agreement
(such as a director’s loan) from the company. If what the claimant takes
out of the company is a
distribution of profits from the company, it might be
expected to be disclosed by the claimant as income in his taxation returns
it is not (presumably because there, on paper, no profit and therefore nothing
to distribute).
Pascoe suggests there may be a director’s loan, and the claimant has been
drawing down from it, however neither she nor
the claimant have provided any
evidence as to the terms and conditions of this loan or provided copies of the
director’s loan
account, the company balance sheet or its taxation
returns. If the payments made to the claimant are the repayment by the company
to him of a loan of money made by him to that company, it is not clear whether
this should be treated as earnings from his personal
exertion because the loan
would need to be repaid whether the claimant was exerting himself in the
business or not.
the claimant’s personal and living expenses are being paid out of monies
earned by the company, further evidence and explanation
of the corporate
structure and its operations are required in my view to explain how the company
can afford to pay the claimant’s
living and personal expenses in the light
of the stated level of its earnings and the stated level of its loss. In the
such explanation, it could be concluded the company is earning more
than is disclosed or there is some other (undisclosed) source
of funds from
which the claimant is paying his living and personal
What are the proceeds of the Dekonstrukt
businesses?
the proceeds of the Dekonstrukt business are to be used as the basis for the
claimant’s PAWE then the
case suggests it is the earnings
of Dekonstrukt less the expenses of Dekonstrukt that must be considered. Mrs
Pascoe has based her
calculation on the gross earnings of the business and has
not taken into account the cost of sales or the expenses of the business.
profit and loss statements of the claimant’s business are in evidence
before the Commission. In both documents, the expenses
of the business are
greater than the income of the business and the business has run at a loss.
the claimant’s loss of earnings is based on his share of the proceeds of
the business in the year before the accident, then
he has no loss of earnings
because the business appears to have no proceeds (after expenses) to share with
the claimant for the 12
months before the accident. Mr Sidebottom’s PAWE
would therefore be calculated as $nil.
current documentary evidence does not satisfy me that the money the claimant is
taking out of the business should be treated as
proceeds from the business
within the meaning of Schedule 1, cl 3(2)(b). The claimant has not established
that he personally has
sustained a loss of earnings based on the lost proceeds
from a business.
may be that the claimant can provide further evidence to the insurer and that
the insurer will then obtain a further report from
Mr Croft to explain how that
loan account is being treated in the books and records of the business and
presented to federal government
agencies. Mr Croft may also be able to explain
how the company can operate at a loss yet fund Mr Sidebottom’s personal
living expenses.
the light of the delays that have already occurred in this matter I do not
propose to defer to await this material. The claimant
may, should he choose,
marshal the additional evidence and seek a further decision from the insurer
before referring any further
dispute to the Commission.
am satisfied on the basis of the information before me that the insurer’s
decision concerning the claimant’s PAWE is
currently the correct and
preferable decision. I affirm the decision made by AAMI on 28 November 2024 and
that the claimant’s
PAWE is $nil.
terms of costs, the claimant makes no claim for the costs of his counsel and
solicitor. I note a dispute about the amount of the
claimant’s statutory
benefits is not a declared merit review matter in accordance with Schedule 1(1)
of the Motor Accident
Regulation 2017 and therefore no costs would be payable
under the Regulation had
Mr Sidebottom made a claim for costs.
The “relevant
insurer” is determined in accordance with s 3.2 of the MAI Act.
Page10 of the claimant’s
Page 10 of the claimant’s
There are various spellings of
the name of the company in the documents. I have not been provided with any
formal documents from
the company and have adopted the name provided by the
claimant in his claim form “Dekonstrukt Creating Space” through
these reasons.
[2022] NSWPIC MR 66.
The question posed by the claim
form is specific to Centrelink benefits not other pensions.
A copy of this report cannot be
located in the documentation provided.
Schedule 1, cl 2(2)(c).
[2022] NSWPICMR 31.
[2022] NSWPIC MR 66.
[2024] NSWPIC MR 65.
[2024] NSWSC 481.
[2024] NSWPICMR.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (630 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter