URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/443.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Watt [2025] NSWDC 443 (30 October 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 443
Hearing Date(s):
27 October 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Priestley SC DCJ
No formal orders will be made upon the
publication of these reasons on 30 October 2025. On that day, the court will
evidence and submissions of the parties concerning the appropriate
orders to make upon the return of the special verdict, and will
then on either
that day or an adjourned day, return the special verdict and at that time make
such other orders as are found to be
appropriate.
Catchwords:
CRIME — Property offences — Larceny — Armed robbery
— Offensive weapon— MENTAL HEALTH — Criminal
proceedings — Special Verdict
Legislation Cited:
Cognitive Impairment Forensic Provisions Act 2020
Criminal Procedure Act
Cases Cited:
R v Jackson
[2021] NSWSC 1404
R v Kennedy
[2025] NSWDC 251
[2021] NSWSC 1064
Principal judgment
Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
Hope Maree Watt (Offender)
Representation:
Director of Public Prosecutions for the
Solicitors:
Aboriginal Legal Service for the Offender
File Number(s):
2023/298515
Introduction and nature of the trial
accused, Hope Watt is charged on indictment with 2 counts, and with a third
count, count 3, in the alternative to count 2. Those
charges are alleged to have
occurred on 18 September 2023 at Tweed Heads, and are as follows:
(1) That the accused stole a knife set to the value of $60, being the property
of Kmart Australia Limited;
(2) That the accused whilst armed with an offensive weapon, namely a knife,
robbed Alexander Smith of a key and a motor vehicle;
(3) That in the alternative to count 2, the accused while armed with an
offensive weapon namely a knife assaulted Alexander Smith
with intent to take a
motor vehicle and took and drove that motor vehicle, without the consent of
Alexander Smith, the owner of that
motor vehicle.
10 September 2025 an order was made for the matter to proceed as a judge alone
Ordinarily,
in accordance with
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
("CPA"), the judgment
of the judge alone trial must include the principles of law applied by the judge
and the findings of fact on
which the judge relies, and also that the judge take
into account any warning required by any Act or law to be given to a jury.
the present case, the parties are agreed that the defence provided for by
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment Forensic Provisions Act 2020
Act"), is made out. As a consequence by s31 of the Act, if that section is
otherwise satisfied, the court may "at any time
in the proceedings" enter a
special verdict of act proven but not criminally responsible ("the special
is authority for the special verdict being entered even before a date has been
set for trial; see R v Jackson
[2021] NSWSC 1404.
a consequence a trial in which s31 operates may not require the same degree of
compliance with s133 CPA as a trial where s31 does
not operate.
[2021] NSWSC 1064
was, like the present trial, ordered to be heard by a
judge alone, and the defence of mental health impairment was raised at the
outset. The charge in that case was murder. At [15] Wilson J held "If the Court
is satisfied that the physical elements of the charge
of murder have been proved
by the Crown beyond reasonable doubt, the Court must consider the defence of
mental health impairment,
without at that stage considering the question of
proof of the mental elements of murder".
from [96], her Honour considered the "interplay" between
Procedure Act
("CPA") and s31 of the Act. Given the fundamental importance of
s133 of the CPA, it is appropriate to set out the passages in full
should be noted that by this stage of the judgment the physical elements of the
offence had been found to be established
beyond reasonable doubt):
Section 133
Criminal Procedure Act
gives a judge trying criminal
proceedings without a jury all of the powers that a jury would ordinarily
exercise, whilst also imposing
particular responsibilities or burdens on that
judge as the tribunal of law. Once a trial by judge order has been made,
ordinarily,
the judge exercises the functions of both tribunal of fact and
tribunal of law, with the trial proceeding in the usual course.
97 Section 31 of the MHCIFP Act provides for the court to enter a special
verdict in certain circumstances, at any time in the proceedings.
It is in these
31 Special verdict where defendant and prosecutor agree on impairment
The court may enter a special verdict of act proven but not criminally
responsible at any time in the proceedings (including before
the jury is
empanelled) if-
(a) the defendant and the prosecutor agree that the proposed evidence in the
proceedings establishes a defence of mental health impairment
or cognitive
impairment, and
(b) the defendant is represented by an Australian legal practitioner,
(c) the court, after considering that evidence, is satisfied that the defence
is so established.
98 The tension I perceive between the two provisions is that, a trial by
judge order having been made, the Court is obliged to comply
Criminal Procedure Act
, and formally record all of the principles of law
applied, and each of the factual findings relied upon in reaching the verdict,
paying heed to all of the warnings that a jury would be given had it been
empanelled. Section 31 of the MHCIFP Act permits the trial
judge to enter a
special verdict at any stage in the proceedings, as long as those things in ss
(a), (b) and (c) are satisfied. That
would suggest that, if the Court takes that
course, and enters a special verdict pursuant to s 31, it would not be necessary
to formally
record findings of fact, and all relevant principles of law and
warnings that the tribunal of fact would apply. The consequences
of that would
include, for example, the obviation of the need to explain those matters
referred to in s 29 of the MHCIFP Act.
99 Having considered the interplay between the two provisions, in my opinion
it is open to me at this stage to proceed pursuant to
s 31 of the MHCIFP Act
given that, although the Court is exercising the powers and functions of the
tribunal of fact, the Court retains
the powers and functions of the tribunal of
law, one of which is the function provided by s 31.
100 Accordingly, although I am well aware of those matters in s 29 of the
MHCIFP Act, and of the legal principles that apply to the
determination of a
matter such as this, I do not propose to consider them further for present
Tonga, and also in a case relied on by the accused of R v Kennedy
[2025] NSWDC
, the judgments set out some fundamental principles of law as would be
expected in a judge alone judgment, without being as fulsome
as might be
expected had the s28 defence not been raised. Notably, and logically, those
principles have particular relevance to establishing
whether the physical
elements of the charge or charges have been made out. It is appropriate that
this judgment follow that course.
Fundamental directions
direct myself that the onus of proof is "beyond reasonable doubt" and that the
Crown bears the burden of proof. The words "beyond
reasonable doubt" are
ordinary everyday words and that is how I understand them.
this is a criminal trial the burden or obligation of proof of the guilt of the
accused is placed squarely on the Crown. In this
case that burden relates to
establishing the physical elements of the charges. In respect of the defence
raised under s28 of the
Act, by s28(2) that is a question of fact that needs to
be determined by the fact finder on the balance of probabilities, with the
burden of proof being on the accused; that is, it is not a matter like an issue
of self defence that the Crown must establish beyond
reasonable doubt is not the
critical part of the criminal justice system is the presumption of innocence.
What it means is that a person charged with a criminal
offence is presumed to be
innocent unless and until the Crown persuades a jury that the person is guilty
beyond reasonable doubt.
Crown needs to establish beyond reasonable doubt the physical elements of the
offences, whereafter the s28 defence is to be considered.
Those physical
elements are:
(1) In respect of count 1 that the accused took a knife set which was the
property of Kmart;
(2) In respect of count 2, that when in possession of a knife the accused took
from Alexander Smith a key and a motor vehicle (hereafter
"the car");
(3) In respect of count 3 that when in possession of a knife assaulted Alexander
Smith and took and drove the car.
the Crown submitted, when limited to the physical elements, there is little if
anything to distinguish counts 2 and 3. One distinction
between them, apart from
the specific intent aspect of count 3, which is plainly not a physical element,
is that count 2 involves
robbery, and count 3 involves assault. A physical
element of robbery is the use of force or a threat, and the same can be said of
assault. Similarly to rob by definition means to take from (count 2, and here
the allegation is of driving the car away), and in
count 3 the physical element
is to take and drive away. It follows there is no difference in the physical
elements of counts 2 and
3, apart perhaps from the fact that count 3 by its
terms does not involve a key, yet it is certainly a factual necessity in the way
the events allegedly happened.
I note section 32 provides where a court enters the special verdict, it does not
result in a requirement for the court to
also enter a special verdict in respect
of an offence available for as an alternative to the offence. Whatever the
rationale for
this may be, the result is that should the special verdict be
entered for count 2, there is no requirement to also enter the special
for count 3.
is no issue raised by the accused that the physical elements of counts 1 and 2
are made out. The evidence in the Crown case
included CCTV footage that is not
contested, an ERISP interview in which frank admissions are made by the accused
to the acts constituting
the actus reus of counts 1 and 2, and there was
tendered under s191 of the Evidence Act agreed facts.
following summary is drawn from this evidence. I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt by this evidence that the physical elements
of counts 1 and 2, and also
count 3, are established. This is because by the CCTV the accused can be seen to
be entering and leaving
the Kmart store, the car can be seen to be entered by
the accused and driven away, and that this footage is entirely consistent with
the location and timing of the alleged offences. To be added to this is the
frank admissions made by the accused in her ERISP and
in the BWV.
18 September 2023 at about 2.55pm the complainant, Mr Smith, parked the car,
which belonged to him, in the car park of the Tweed
City shopping centre. At
that time the accused was seated nearby close to where the shopping trolleys are
placed in racks. The accused
and the complainant made eye contact. The
complainant walked into the shopping centre from his car and the accused
followed him.
The complainant walked into Coles. In evidence was a diagram of
the shopping centre which shows that in order for the complainant
Coles he needed to pass by Kmart. The accused watched the complainant enter
Coles, loitered near the entrance and then
moved away to enter Kmart. Inside
Kmart she walked to an area where knives were displayed and put a two-piece
knife set under her
arm and left the store without paying for the knife set. She
later told police she put it in her bag. The knife set was valued at
accused then walked through the shopping centre back to the car park and to the
complainant's car. She tried but could not
open the door. She crouched down near
the car. Whilst waiting she removed the larger of the two knives from the
packaging. The knife
was 10 to 15 cm in length.
accept this evidence, which, once accepted, self evidently, and beyond
reasonable doubt establishes the physical elements of count
1. That summary is
taken from the facts which are agreed to by the accused and which she also
agreed to in her ERISP.
complainant then walked back towards his car and saw the accused moving around
near the driver's side door. He recognised her
as the woman he had seen earlier
when he got out of his car. He asked her to get away from his vehicle and the
accused stated "gimme
your car key or I'll fucking stab you". The complainant
could see the accused holding a knife in her right hand. The complainant
and ran to the top of the car park yelling for help and the accused ran after
him. The accused caught up with the complainant
near the entrance to the
shopping centre and grabbed him by the hair. The complainant screamed for help
to a bystander who did not
accused swung the knife towards the head, torso and arms of the complainant
roundhouse motion at least 10 times. I note that there is a photograph in
evidence which is a still from the CCTV showing the
accused with her right arm
raised holding a knife and pointing it towards the complainant. The complainant
tried unsuccessfully to
push the accused away. In an effort to prevent the
accused from taking his car key he raised his right arm high in the air. The
managed to break the retaining clip of the car key fob and took the
the struggle over the key the complainant suffered scratches to the inside of
his left forearm, a cut to his left pinky finger
and a scratch to the back of
his right arm as well as soreness to his right shoulder and scalp.
the accused had taken the complainant's key she ran back to the car, got into
the driver seat and drove away. The complainant
chased her and took a photograph
of the back of the car as the accused drove away.
are the facts relied on for count 2 which I accept and as already noted satisfy
me beyond reasonable doubt that when in possession
of a knife the accused took a
key from the complainant and thereafter drove the car away so that the physical
elements of count 2
are made out.
following day the accused returned to the Kmart store, and was recognised by
staff who notified police. It was later that day
that she was arrested. The
police located her at a makeshift campsite in a reserve at Tweed Heads South
which was located not far
from the Tweed City shopping centre as demonstrated by
an aerial photograph annexed to the agreed facts.
she was located the complainant took part in an interview which was recorded on
body worn video. She was then later taken to
the police station and a formal
police interview conducted. It is in those two interviews that admissions were
made. No issue was
taken as to the way that either interview was conducted and
the appropriate caution was issued. That said the admissions were not
in accordance with the facts. For example at page 8 of the statement of
Detective Senior Constable Culgan the accused admits
to stealing a knife from
Kmart, to holding the complainant's hair and asking for his keys, grabbing the
keys and then getting in
the car and driving to Cabarita. She denies however,
threatening him with the knife which is plainly false. The accused by the agreed
facts later admits threatening the complainant with the knife.
to the section 28 defence the accused explained to police the reason for her
conduct was because "someone raping my kids
mutilating them... Cutting them up".
She said she needed to get down "there".
the ERISP she was asked whether it was only herself and the two officers in the
room and she said "in human form yes".
from the ERISP, at A69 the accused again refers to her three children being
kidnapped and taken down over a lake to a community
where they torture rape and
molest children and her children. She says she needed to protect her children.
She frankly conceded that
the knife she used was the bigger one of the two in
the package. At A178 she was asked what she was thinking at a point when she
demanding the keys and she replied "it's do or die. I'm not, I'm their mother"
and "I'm having to protect them". At A193 she
answered that the complainant was
an evil person. The accused also described how she sought to avoid detection by
stripping naked
and putting mud in her vagina and bum to make sure the scent
went away. At A329 she talks of the spirit grabbing her hand as she
shown the image referred to above from the CCTV of her with a raised arm with
the knife in it. At question 361 she answered
that she was going to bring the
car back to the police station when she had brought the kids back up and that
she needed the car
to transport the kids. At A387 she said she had been using
meth for about 15 years and smoked it on the morning of the 18th September.
evidence just summarised shows that the physical elements of counts 1 and 2 are
made out. It is therefore necessary to consider
the evidence supporting the
defence of mental health impairment that is raised by the
Defence of mental health impairment
28 is in Part 3 of the Act. By section 27 of the Act that part applies to
criminal proceedings in the Supreme Court and the
District Court. Section 28 is
in the following terms:
28 Defence of mental health impairment or cognitive impairment
A person is not criminally responsible for an offence if, at the time of
carrying out the act constituting the offence, the person
had a mental health
impairment or a cognitive impairment, or both, that had the effect that the
(a) did not know the nature and quality of the act, or
(b) did not know that the act was wrong (that is, the person could not reason
with a moderate degree of sense and composure about
whether the act, as
perceived by reasonable people, was wrong).
(2) The question of whether a defendant had a mental health impairment or a
cognitive impairment, or both, that had that effect is
a question of fact and is
to be determined by the jury on the balance of probabilities.
(3) Until the contrary is proved, it is presumed that a defendant did not
have a mental health impairment or cognitive impairment,
or both, that had that
(4) In this Part,
"act" includes--
(a) an omission, and
(b) a series of acts or omissions.
parties agree that section 28(1) has been satisfied by reason of the opinions
expressed by Dr. Furst and Dr. Eagle (exhibits 1
and C respectively). Notably
subsection (2) provides the question of whether there is the necessary mental
health impairment or cognitive
impairment is a question of fact to be determined
by the jury (and in the present case therefore, the judge) on the balance of
probabilities,
so that it is not enough to make out the defence that the
defendant and prosecutor agree that it is made out. By subsection 3 until
to the contrary the presumption is the defendant did not have the cognitive
impairment at the time of carrying out the acts
constituting the offence.
31 was set out in the passage of Jackson, cited above, but it is convenient to
set it out again here:
31 Special verdict where defendant and prosecutor agree on impairment
The court may enter a special verdict of act proven but not criminally
responsible at any time in the proceedings (including before
the jury is
empanelled) if--
(a) the defendant and the prosecutor agree that the proposed evidence in the
proceedings establishes a defence of mental health impairment
or cognitive
impairment, and
(b) the defendant is represented by an Australian legal practitioner,
(c) the court, after considering that evidence, is satisfied that the defence
is so established.
requirements of section 31(a) and (b) are made out; the parties have expressed
the necessary agreement in their submissions to
the court, and the accused is
represented by Ms Meech of the ALS. What remains, consistent with s28 itself, is
to determine if the
court is satisfied the defence is made out, which as already
noted is a matter which needs to be determined on the balance of
probabilities.
evidence relied on in this regard by the accused was a report of Dr Furst dated
23 October 2024. The Crown relied on a report
of Dr Eagle dated 4 July 2025. It
was accepted by both parties that both these psychiatrists possess the necessary
expertise to express
opinions in relation to the matters asked of them.
note the following from the report of Dr. Furst:
(1) Dr. Furst was aware of the charges now contained in the indictment. He was
asked to assess the accused in relation to her background
history, diagnosis and
other relevant issues including the availability of the defence of not
criminally responsible due to mental
health or cognitive impairment pursuant to
section 28.
(2) The material Dr. Furst had available to him included an assessment carried
out on the accused at the Wayback centre, (a facility
that the accused was
bailed to in 2024), the police facts, the ERISP and BWV footage and reports of a
psychiatrist named Dr. Rae,
and the psychological report of Dr. Perkins.
(3) At the time of her arrest the accused was 41 years old and homeless living
in a tent in Tweed Heads. She has two daughters and
a son aged 20, 12 and 17
years respectively.
(4) There is no history of childhood psychiatric problems. She worked in the
retail sector and in a hotel commencing in her teenage
years. She was married
for seven years to the father of the first two children and then five years to
the father of the third. There
was no indication of postnatal depression.
(5) When aged 33 she was admitted to the Richmond clinic in Lismore. She was
hearing voices at the time and was treated with antipsychotic
medication. She
was admitted on four subsequent occasions. The pattern of her psychotic illness
is recurrent episodes in which she
loses touch with reality and believes her
children are being raped and tortured. She says she hears voices and sexual
sounds as if
the children are being raped and believes the children are passing
messages to her. She feels overwhelmed and hopeless and feels
the need to
protect and rescue the children.
(6) She has symptoms of experiencing foul smells when there is nothing offensive
or odorous and of delusions of reference from the
television. She believes
people in the community are involved in a conspiracy to rape her children and
that there is a pedophile
ring that includes her family. She refers to shape
shifters in the spiritual world replacing people that she then thought were her
children. These various symptoms were described as auditory hallucinations,
olfactory hallucinations and delusions of Frigoli.
(7) Her drug history was of no drug use in her teenage years, adolescence or 20s
but that she was using methyl amphetamines and some
cannabis in her early 30s
when working as a bar attendant. Initially she used small amounts of ice but
over time used more, including
after being evicted from her house and having
lost custody of her children in her mid-30s. She cannot pay the rent because she
spending too much money on ice and became homeless.
(8) Dr. Furst states she never really achieved stability, using drugs, being
mentally ill and being incarcerated at various times
from 2019. There was a
period of abstinence following a period of rehabilitation in 2019 with no ice
being used for three years.
(9) The accused experienced similar symptoms of psychosis to her previous
episodes at the time of the alleged offending including
her belief that her
children were being raped and hearing them being raped. She said voices told her
her children are going to be
sacrificed. She stole the knife and took the car in
an attempt to save her children, not thinking about the consequences at the
She was not taking any psychotropic medications at the time leading up to
that incident. She had been using about .3 g of ice every
second day, 1g of
cannabis every 3 days and drinking about six premixed cans of rum and cola a
(10) Once remanded in custody she received treatment at Silverwater correctional
centre. She continued to experience hallucinations
and paranoia over the initial
months of incarceration. She was treated with Invega Sustenna.
(11) In about June 2024 she was bailed to Wayback, a drug and alcohol
rehabilitation centre. At the time of the report she was still
there with five
months to go on that program. The program to that time had been positive. She
had been abstinent from drugs since
her arrest so by then 13 months.
(12) On examination she did not exhibit any signs of delusional thinking or
hallucinations.
(13) Reference was made to an earlier psychiatric report of Dr. Rae. That report
notes reports of distressing auditory hallucinations
in November 2023. In
January 2024 there were reports of the accused screaming and crying in her cell
and reporting she had been possessed
by an evil spirit. On assessment in January
2024 she said she was hearing voices and her kids being raped. She said it's
that she knows it's not them.
(14) A consultant psychiatrist Dr. Dorney in February 2024 noted bizarre
psychotic symptoms involving beliefs about the sexual assault
of the accused
children. By the following week she was seen by Dr. Ho another psychiatrist who
noted the psychotic symptoms had largely
(15) The observations of Dr. Rae who assessed the accused on March 2024 included
reports of symptoms leading up to her arrest which
included hearing voices
including all of her children requesting help because of being sexually
assaulted; visual hallucinations
of her children in sexual acts; believing that
aboriginal spirits were telling her about her children's plight and believing
spirits could jump into her body; being desperate to return to Lismore to
save her children; and stealing the motor vehicle in an
attempt to drive to her
children and Lismore.
(16) There was reference to childhood adversity including abuse and neglect
without details being given.
(17) There are various references to different medications used to manage the
(18) At page 6 the doctor states that the accused was noted to have developed a
severe and enduring psychotic illness precipitated
by her methyl amphetamine and
cannabis use/abuse. He says her symptom pattern is indicative of schizophrenia.
Dr. Furst is of the
view that Dr. Rae was mistaken to attribute psychotic
symptoms to drug induced psychosis particularly as there had not been drug
in the five months preceding that opinion and she was still hearing voices
(19) A 2019 psychological report of Dr. Perkins noted a history given including
sexual abuse at the age of 13 and 14, exposure to
domestic violence and alcohol
abuse in the home. The accused engaged in binge drinking from about the age of
16 or 17. She suffered
a serious sexual assault in 2012 at the age of 29. She
said she heard voices when she was young well before drug use and this is
to support a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
on that information Dr. Furst makes the diagnosis of schizophrenia, substance
use disorder (cannabis methamphetamines and alcohol)
and borderline personality
traits. The schizophrenia diagnosis is based on the persistent and recurrent
nature of the psychotic symptoms
both when using drugs in the community and
without drugs when in custody. The symptoms are the delusions and hallucinations
on the themes of her three children being raped and tortured.
Furst then gives a description of what schizophrenia is, including that it is a
chronic and severe mental disorder characterised
by distortions in thinking,
perception, emotions, language, sense of self and behaviour. Hallucinations and
delusions and thought
disturbance are common symptoms.
answer to some specific questions the doctor expressed the following
(1) That the accused was acutely psychotic at the time of the alleged offending
and continued to exhibit signs of symptoms of psychosis
after her arrest which
he says is indicative of an exacerbation of her long-standing/chronic
schizophrenic illness. That is a mental
health impairment within the meaning of
section 4(2)(c) of the Act (which I note provides that a mental health
impairment may arise
from a psychotic disorder).
(2) With reference to section 28 and in particular subsections (1)(a) and (b)
the view is expressed that the accused was aware of
the nature and quality of
her actions; subsection (1)(a). Dr Furst goes on to say that the accused "had
impairment in her ability
to reason about the wrongfulness of her alleged
actions with a moderate degree of sense and composure because of her acute
ie about whether her alleged act, as perceived by reasonable people,
was wrong because she was psychotic and delusional in her thinking."
accepted then the defence under section 28 would be satisfied as subsection 1(b)
would be met.
are then recommendations concerning the future treatment which are matters that
should be addressed following the determination
of the section 28 issue and when
considering the appropriate orders to make including consideration of section
report of Dr. Eagle was dated 4 July 2025. Dr. Eagle carried out a psychiatric
assessment of the accused on 25 June 2025. She
had available to her the
materials set out at paragraph 7 of the report including the Crown case
statement and brief of evidence
and the reports of Dr. Furst, Dr. Perkins, and
Dr. Rae and medical records.
note the following from the report:
(1) The accused confirmed she was 41 years old, not in a relationship and living
in South Lismore in a temporary private rental.
She had three children living in
Lismore and Ipswich the youngest being 13. She described her mood as down and
depressed. She said
the injection makes her tired which I infer is a reference
to her current medication. She does spend time with her children in person
the phone frequently.
(2) The accused said previously she had been in a "total different reality". She
believed a paedophile ring was responsible for raping
her children and her
family were part of it. She said she did not believe this anymore. She no longer
heard voices informing her
of this or messages to that effect. She denied
delusions. She says she feels better now compared to when these things were
Previously she said "every second of the day I was hearing voices and
they were replicating my children getting raped and stuff".
(3) She confirmed she had been completely abstinent since her arrest. She no
longer consumes alcohol. She attended Wayback when released
from custody and
learned coping mechanisms and a lot about addiction.
(4) The accused described her way of life before the offending as a horror
story. She said she would hear a voice by way of example
that would say "smell
that? That's us fucking your daughter up the arse". She said when she heard that
there was a smell like faeces.
She said she knew she needed to get down to her
children and there was no planning involved.
(5) At the time of the offending she had been off medication for about 9 to 10
months. She realises now she needs treatment for the
rest of her life. She had
lost her accommodation during the 2022 floods and was homeless. She gives a
similar history to that given
to Dr. Furst as to her drug use.
(6) The symptoms such as voices started after using methamphetamine. She then
thought the drugs would drown out the voices. She said
she still believed the
voices were of living beings and were to taunt her. She said messages were
received by radio and television.
She also believed there was a pedophile ring.
She thought they were mimicking her children getting raped to taunt her and in
she came to believe they were not mimicking her and that her children were
being raped and she snapped.
(7) She had used methamphetamine for about 12 months before she started to
experience symptoms such as the voices. The voices were
always about her
children being raped. She could not say when she was first admitted to a mental
health unit but said she had about
four admissions in the past. She said she
stopped her medication due to an adverse effect.
(8) There was an occasion of self-harm involving her cutting her throat when
depressed. This was when she was in custody and she
said she could not take the
voices anymore.
(9) She now sees a psychiatrist every two weeks and is treated by an injectable
antipsychotic medication. The accused volunteered
that none of this would have
happened if she had not taken drugs and had taken medication. She said "I didn't
know what was right".
(10) Based on a discharge summary from 2024 diagnoses of PTSD and DIP
(presumably drug-induced psychosis) and MDD were made, which
reformulated to schizophrenia, treatment resistant. There is a diagnosis of
borderline personality disorder. A significant
history of trauma was noted.
(11) It was in September 2024 that the accused self presented with a support
worker to Westmead hospital. She reported worsening
constant auditory
hallucinations over three weeks and associated olfactory and gustatory
hallucinations. She reported persecutory
thoughts that her children were raped
in the spiritual world by everyone in the world. She was thus seeking help with
good insight
into her illness and she was admitted as a voluntary patient for
(12) She told Dr. Eagle that she started using cannabis in her late 20s and it
would seem not long after was introduced to methyl
amphetamine. She had consumed
alcohol since 18 and would binge drink on weekends. She said she had been
abstinent since attending
the Wayback program for nine months. That this is
somewhat different to what she told Dr. Furst and earlier told Dr Eagle, namely
she said she had been abstinent since arrest. No point was made of this in
submissions, and in my view nothing turns on it. If the
later date was used, the
period of abstinence would be about 12 months.
(13) Her brother has a history of schizophrenia.
(14) As to her account of the events in September 2023 the version given is
consistent with what she told Dr. Furst. Namely, she
had no plan and was
experiencing intense voices and symptoms making her believe her children were
being raped and tortured. She could
hear the screams and smells and associated
sounds (presumably odours is meant). She said she needed to get down to her
children and
see what was going on and that she planned to protect them and take
them to safety. She had smoked methyl amphetamine that morning
cannabis and had bought a six pack of Jim Beam cans. She said she didn't know
what she was doing. She said she got the
vehicle and drove somewhere to a native
forest reserve because she thought that's where they were being held captive.
She did not
know why she returned to Kmart the following day. She said she was
experiencing symptoms during the arrest with police which is consistent
remark about "in human form".
(15) Dr. Eagle then considers the Crown case statement and recorded interviews.
She notes the criminal history commencing in November
2016. The accused says
that these problems, that is committing offences, started after she began
hearing the voices.
(16) In terms of her childhood development there were no reported problems with
developmental milestones. Yet her mother had an alcohol
abuse problem, and
smoked cannabis and the accused had been exposed to sexual assault perpetrated
by her stepfather.
(17) The education, employment and relationship history are in line with what is
set out by Dr. Furst.
(18) The accused describes some attenuated delusional beliefs for example that
the voices were real beings who prey on the vulnerable
but otherwise she did not
display ongoing delusions or other signs of psychosis. She denied
hallucinations. She accepted the need
for treatment over the longer-term and
showed some insight into her psychotic illness.
(19) Dr Eagle then considers various other reports. I note that Dr. Perkins had
scored the accused 9/10 on the adverse childhood
experiences scale and stated
she felt she met the criteria for PTSD, depression, substance use and drug
induced psychosis. That was
a report of 2019.
Eagle states that the accused has an established diagnosis of schizophrenia. She
notes documented relapses of psychosis with the
first episode occurring about
2017. The relapses of psychosis are characterized by bizarre persecutory
delusions as described concerning
her children. She states the relapses of
psychosis have been precipitated by substance use, medication discontinuation
and psychosocial
stressors. Importantly she adds that episodes of psychosis have
continued for several months following abstinence from substances
during the period following the alleged offending. Her level of functioning
since adolescence has significantly deteriorated.
That is she was employed from
14 years to 20 years but after using illicit substances in her 20s developed
psychotic symptoms and
then during that time lost the care of the children,
could not gain employment and became homeless. She continues to present as a
person requiring psychosocial support and being socially isolated and cannot
maintain stable employment; on the other hand she appears
to have had a
significant clinical improvement in symptoms on the injectable antipsychotic
medication in the absence of substance
diagnosis is made of substance use disorder in sustained remission. It is said
the use of cannabis, methyl amphetamine and alcohol
exacerbated psychological
vulnerabilities and contributed to the offending behaviors. The view is that the
serious mental illness
has been exacerbated by the abuse of substances.
Eagle is not confident in a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder but
says the accused has a chronic psychotic illness that
has been exacerbated by
substance use.
conclusions reached by Dr. Eagle were as follows:
(1) At the time of the alleged offending the accused suffered from and continues
to suffer from a mental health impairment within
the meaning of section 4 of the
Act, specifically schizophrenia. That illness results in relapses of psychosis
giving rise to hallucinations
of the type described by the accused.
(2) This illness causes recurrent relapsing disturbances in thought mood and
perception.
(3) The illness has been exacerbated by the use of illicit substances such as
methyl amphetamine but it is not the temporary effect
of ingesting a
(4) Dr. Eagle then refers to the provisions of section 28 of the Act and states
that the accused appeared aware of the physical nature
and quality of her
actions at the time.
(5) She also expresses the view that the accused could not reason with a
moderate degree of sense and composure about whether the
acts giving rise to the
alleged offences as perceived by reasonable people was wrong within the meaning
of section 28(1)(b) of the
Act. This is then explained by reference to the
accused being acutely psychotic at the time of the alleged offences due to a
of schizophrenia. She was experiencing hallucinations as described
above. Based on those delusions and hallucinations she formed
the view she
needed to go to help her children.
(6) The accused continued to present as acutely unwell with psychotic symptoms
for several months after being taken into custody.
(7) The accused has displayed signs of psychosis since about 2017. These
commenced in the context of substance use but have continued
for several months
including during periods of abstinence.
(8) She has improved on antipsychotic medication since going into custody. She
did have a relapse about one year after the alleged
offences including suffering
the delusion at that time that her children were being harmed.
(9) Her conduct at the time of the alleged offences appears to be motivated by
her psychotic belief that her children were being
sexually assaulted and
tortured and she needed to go to them. Dr. Eagle states it is apparent from a
psychiatric perspective that
her reasoning was significantly impaired by these
psychotic symptoms. Such symptoms prevent an individual from distinguishing
from non-reality. They can also cause a heightened emotional response
that can further impair capacity to reason and judgment.
(10) In the opinion of Dr. Eagle the accused is not capable of reasoning with
composure, due to the symptoms of her mental health
impairment, as to the moral
wrongfulness of her actions at the time of the alleged offences. She felt under
an imperative to reach
her children and save them and was not capable of
considering other options and could not recognise a distorted reasoning. She
not recognise she was potentially harming the complainant. She notes in
support of this the accused's description of the complainant
in the ERISP as an
evil person despite the fact he was a stranger to her which is consistent with
impairments of reasoning arising
from her psychotic state.
addition to the psychiatric evidence of Drs Furst and Eagle, I would note in
relation to the s28 defence the following from the
above summary of the
(1) The accused explained to the police that somebody was raping her children
and she needed to get down "there". There are at least
three references in the
interviews with police to matters that the psychiatric evidence shows, and I
accept, are the product of psychosis,
and thus her mental impairment.
(2) Similarly, she refers to the complainant, whom she has never met, as an evil
person, as noted by Dr Eagle.
(3) In her ERISP when asked if she agreed if it was only her and the two
officers in the room, the accused replied "in human form
(4) The accused stated the spirit grabbed her hand when she had the knife.
is thus good evidence from the interviews of the day of and the day immediately
after the alleged offending consistent with
the accused suffering psychosis at
the time of the alleged offending.
reports of both Dr. Furst and Dr. Eagle are very similar and reach the same
conclusion. Each has considered not only their own
examination and history taken
from the accused but also the medical records and opinions of earlier
psychiatrists. Whilst there has
been a variation between Drs Furst and Eagle on
the one hand and a view expressed by Dr. Rae who attributed the accused's
psychotic symptoms to drug induced psychosis (see eg Dr Furst's report
at page 6), there is an overall consistency in the assessment
of the mental
state of the accused since 2017, namely, she suffers from schizophrenia, and
periodically suffers delusions and hallucinations
of the type described
involving her children. Whilst the earlier records are largely based on the self
reporting of the accused there
has been no challenge to the factual basis of the
opinions being expressed by Dr. Furst and Dr. Eagle. Nor frankly is there any
basis to doubt the history given by the accused over the past 10
accept the factual basis of the reports and the conclusions reached and opinions
expressed. The conclusions reached by both Dr.
Furst and Dr. Eagle are that at
the time of carrying out the act constituting the offences the accused had a
mental health impairment
that had the effect that she did not know that the acts
were wrong, that is that she could not reason with a moderate degree of sense
and composure about whether her acts as perceived by reasonable people were
wrong. As stated by Dr Eagle and set out at [45.5] above
this is because the
accused at that time was acutely psychotic due to a relapse of schizophrenia.
The diagnosis of schizophrenia
is based on, inter alia, the various psychotic
episodes experienced by the accused since 2017. A consistent feature of the
psychotic episodes are the hallucinations and delusions of the
accused's children being raped and tortured and her delusional belief
must act to save them. That was her state at the time of her conduct
constituting the physical elements of counts 1 and
2, and as explained above,
also count 3, though the s28 defence need not be considered in relation to count
3 if there is the special
verdict for count 2.
follows therefore that I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
accused had a mental health impairment that had
the effect as set out in section
28(1)(b). The requirements of s31 of the Act are made out, and the special
verdict may be entered.
Consequences of finding special verdict
established
33 of the Act provides for the orders that may be made when the special verdict
is returned. Such orders include whether the
accused be remanded in custody, or
released on a conditional or unconditional basis. Section 33(2) provides that
the court "may"
request a report of a forensic psychiatrist who is not currently
treating the accused as to the condition of the accused and "whether
the release
of the defendant is likely to seriously endanger the safety of the defendant or
any member of the public". Section 33(3)
provides an order for release of the
accused "must" not be made unless the court is satisfied, on the balance of
probabilities, that
the safety of the defendant or any member of the public
"will not be seriously endangered by the defendant's release".
reasons will be delivered on 30 October 2025. Also on that day, Dr Eagle will
provide evidence going to the issue of what orders
are appropriate to make under
section 33. The parties also propose leading some further evidence on this
issue. Both parties have
requested that the formal return of the verdict of the
special verdict be deferred until the question of what orders to make under
section 33 is determined. That request is a reasonable one in all the
circumstances, and the court will accede to it.
Accordingly
no formal orders will be made upon the publication of these reasons on 30
October 2025. On that day, the court will hear
the evidence and submissions of
the parties concerning the appropriate orders to make upon the return of the
special verdict, and
will then on either that day or an adjourned day, return
the special verdict and at that time make such other orders as are found
appropriate.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (298 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter