URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1323.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v Liberty Mutual Insurance Company [2025] NSWSC 1323 (7 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v Liberty Mutual Insurance Company
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1323
Hearing Date(s):
03 November 2025
Date of Orders:
07 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Equity - Technology and Construction List
No order made for determination of a separate question
Catchwords:
PROCEDURE – defendants’ application for determination of a
separate question – no order for a separate question
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Limitation of Actions Act 1958
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
Cases Cited:
Allandale Blue Metal Pty Ltd v Roads and Maritime Services
[2013] NSWCA
195 LGERA 182
CBS Productions Pty Ltd v O’Neill
(1985) 1 NSWLR
Commens t/as Subsonic Music v Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters
subscribing to Policy No ALTCNX1900332
[2023] FCA 1434
Doyle’s Farm
Produce Pty Ltd v Murray Darling Basin Authority (No 2)
(2021) 106 NSWLR 41
[2021] NSWCA 246
Idoport Pty Ltd v National Australia Bank Ltd
[2000] NSWSC
Mehmet v Carter
[2018] NSWCA 305
Metlife Insurance Ltd v RGA
Reinsurance Company of Australia Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 416
Prestige Form Group NSW
Pty Ltd v QBE European Operations Plc
[2023] FCA 749
State of New South Wales
[2019] NSWCA 47
Strathfield Municipal Council v Poynting
116 LGERA 319
Tepko Pty Ltd v Water Board
(2001) 206 CLR 1
Wardley Australia Ltd v The State of Western Australia
(1992) 175 CLR
[1992] HCA 55
Texts Cited:
Procedural rulings
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd (first plaintiff)
John Holland Pty Ltd (second
Liberty Mutual Insurance Company (first defendant)
AAI Limited
(second defendant)
XL Insurance Company SE (third defendant)
Australia Insurance Limited (fourth defendant)
Catlin Australia Pty Ltd
(fifth defendant)
Great Lakes Insurance SE (sixth defendant)
International SE – Australia Branch (seventh defendant)
International SE Singapore Branch (eighth defendant)
MTR Corporation (Sydney)
NRT Pty Limited (interested party)
UGL Rail Services Pty Ltd (interested
Representation:
P Braham SC; M Sheldon; K Woodforde (plaintiffs)
SC; M F Newton (defendants)
H Chiu SC (interested
Solicitors:
King & Wood Mallesons (plaintiffs)
Kearney (defendants)
Herbert Smith Freehills Kramer (interested
File Number(s):
2024/449461
Publication Restriction:
proceedings involve a claim by the plaintiffs against various insurers. The
claim arises out of the design and construction
of a railway line in Sydney,
called the Northwest Rail Link.
a notice of motion filed on 9 July 2025, the defendants seek an order under r
28.2 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) that a question be
determined separately from and before all other questions in the proceedings.
The plaintiffs oppose the
The proposed separate
proposed question is as follows (omitting footnotes):
If the Plaintiffs are otherwise entitled to indemnity from the Defendants under
Extension clause 3.2 of the Policy for the following
(a) in respect of the example claim identified in paragraphs
C47 to C52 (‘Issue 3’) of the Amended Technology and
Construction
List Statement:
(i) the Down Under Pipeline invoice number 7327 dated 23 August 2016 as
identified in the Affidavit of Ryan Madden dated 31 January
2024 at paragraph
(ii) the Infraworks Rail invoice number 18167 dated 20 November 2016 as
identified in the Affidavit of Ryan Madden dated 31 January
2024 at paragraph
(b) in respect of the example claim identified in paragraphs
C113 to C118 (‘Issue 16’) of the Amended Technology and
Construction
List Statement:
(i) the Select Quarry Materials invoice number 24495 dated 4 May 2018 as
identified in the Affidavit of Chris Byrne dated 30 January
2024 at paragraph
(ii) the Select Quarry Materials invoice number 30571 dated 8 March 2019 as
identified in the Affidavit of Chris Byrne dated 30 January
2024 at paragraph
what was the date on which the Plaintiffs’ cause of action in relation to
those expenses accrued within the meaning of section
5(1) of the
question is framed in terms of the application of the
Limitation of Actions
(Vic). However, the defendants contend that what the question
raises, as a matter of substance, is a short question concerning the
construction of the contract of insurance. The plaintiffs oppose the separate
question, but contend that if there is to be
a separate question, there need to
be some changes to the question propounded in order to draw out the issue of
construction. The
precise form of any changes has not been ventilated.
defendants do not contend that the determination of the separate question will
entirely dispose of the proceedings if answered
favourably to them. They contend
that the answer to the question, if favourable to them, will result in real cost
savings in preparation
and hearing time. They assert that a favourable answer
will mean that a significant part of the plaintiffs’ claim will be
barred and will not need to be addressed at a final hearing. They also submit
that an answer to the question will contribute
to the possibility of
settlement.
The claim on the insurance policy
relevant insurance policy is styled as “Professional Indemnity Insurance
for Construction Projects”. It is a project
specific policy. Various
companies are named insureds. The policy limit is $100,000,000. The policy
includes a loss mitigation and
rectification extension.
plaintiffs claim under the extension. The relevant policy wording is in clause
3.2, which provides:
3.2 Loss Mitigation & Rectification
will pay to the
the reasonable direct costs and
expenses incurred by the
in taking action necessary to rectify,
or to mitigate the effects of, any act or omission of the
in the performance of
Professional Services
otherwise result in a
covered under the
always that:
first discovers such act or omissions during the
Policy Period
and notifies
of such act or omission during
Policy Period
Policy Period
of its intention to take such action and obtains
consent (which shall not be unreasonably withheld) prior to incurring any such
direct costs or expenses.
No cover is provided for:
(i) indirect costs and expenses such as loss or diminution of the
profit, bonus, incentive payment or opportunity cost;
(ii) costs and expenses of material or
Professional Services
result in an increased quality or standard from that specified in the design
parameters of the relevant contract.
Notification under this extension must be given to
in accordance
with Claims Condition 5.1(a) and the
such information and cooperation as it may reasonably require in accordance
with Claims Condition 5.1(b).
proceedings were commenced on 3 December 2024. It does not seem to be disputed
that the claim is founded on a simple contract
and that actions cannot be
brought after the expiration of 6 years from the date on which the cause of
action accrued: see section
Limitations of Actions Act 1958
(Vic). Causes of action that accrued before 3 December 2018 are statute
proceedings concern a significant number of items of costs and expenses. It is
common ground that a large portion of those costs
and expenses were incurred
prior to 3 December 2018. The defendants have estimated that slightly less than
15% (or $23,410,201.47)
of the pleaded total claim reflects costs alleged to
have been incurred after 3 December 2018. Those calculations were not
contradicted.
defendants contend that any cause of action the plaintiffs have against them
accrued as and when the costs and expenses were incurred.
They contend that
approximately 85% of the claims by value are time-barred. They submit that the
evidence to deal with all of the
time-barred claims would be complex and
detailed and would involve months of Court time at a hearing to resolve.
plaintiffs contend that the defendants’ liability to give indemnity under
clause 3.2, and hence any breach, did not occur
until the defendants gave notice
of the relevant act or omission. Notice was not given until well after 3
December 2018. Hence,
the plaintiffs contend none of their claims are out of
proposed separate question is intended to tease out whether the plaintiffs or
defendants are correct about when the relevant causes
of action, or cause of
action, accrued.
The principles
exercising power under UCPR r 28.2, the Court must seek to give effect to the
overriding purpose of the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW), which is to
facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the
proceedings: see
section 56.
plaintiffs referred to various statements in the authorities about when the
Court should order a separate question, being:
(a) “when there is a critical matter which if dealt with in a preliminary
hearing will far more likely than not be convenient
and save significant
Strathfield Municipal Council v Poynting
[2001] NSWCA
116 LGERA 319
, per Young CJ in Eq;
(b) where it results in the “disposal of the whole action”, or where
it “narrows the issues for trial substantially”:
CBS Productions
Pty Ltd v O’Neill
(1985) 1 NSWLR 601
at 607, per Kirby P;
(c) where its “utility, economy, and fairness to the parties are beyond
Tepko Pty Ltd v Water Board
(2001) 206 CLR 1
, per Kirby and Callinan JJ; and
(d) where it is possible “to clearly see that it will facilitate the
quicker and cheaper resolution of the proceedings”:
Idoport Pty Ltd v
National Australia Bank Ltd
[2000] NSWSC 1215
, per Einstein J.
plaintiffs drew particular attention to the remarks of Kirby and Callinan JJ in
Tepko v Water Board
at [168] (with which Gaudron and McHugh JJ agreed at
[52] and [90] respectively, and which the majority did not consider):
The attractions of trials of issues rather than of cases in their totality, are
often more chimerical than real. Common experience
demonstrates that savings in
time and expense are often illusory, particularly when the parties have, as
here, had the necessity
of making full preparing and the factual matters
relevant to one issue are relevant to others, and they all overlap.
These remarks have been applied by the Court of Appeal in several cases,
Allandale Blue Metal Pty Ltd v Roads and Maritime Services
[2013] NSWCA 103
195 LGERA 182
, per Ward JA;
Mehmet v Carter
[2018] NSWCA 305
, per Bathurst CJ;
State of New South Wales v
[2019] NSWCA 47
, per Leeming JA; and
Doyle’s Farm
Produce Pty Ltd v Murray Darling Basin Authority (No 2)
(2021) 106 NSWLR 41
[2021] NSWCA 246
, per Leeming JA.
plaintiffs also referred to the following observation in
Wardley Australia
Ltd v The State of Western Australia
(1992) 175 CLR 514
[1992] HCA 55
533, per Mason CJ, Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ:
We should, however, state in the plainest of terms that we regard it as
undesirable that limitation questions of the kind under consideration
decided in interlocutory proceedings in advance of the hearing of the action,
except in the clearest of cases. Generally
speaking, in such proceedings,
insufficient is known of the damage sustained by the plaintiff and of the
circumstances in which it
was sustained to justify a confident answer to the
defendants have referred to the practice in the Federal Court of
Australia’s Insurance List. They contend that although
the Federal Court
contemplated that the List was principally intended for “short
matters”, the utility of the List and
its procedures is not limited to
Prestige Form Group NSW Pty Ltd v QBE European Operations Plc
[2023] FCA 749
, Jackman J at [2] described it as the “usual
practice” in the List for parties to identify a separate question to be
determined separately from and prior to other questions in the proceedings. In
Commens t/as Subsonic Music v Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters subscribing
to Policy No ALTCNX1900332
[2023] FCA 1434
, his Honour spoke of the:
...strong inclination in case management of the Insurance List for the
identification and determination of separate questions ...,
in the expectation
that that will be the most efficient way of dealing with the proceedings and
will also increase the prospect of
compromise of the other issues which may be
time consuming and expensive to litigate.
The defendants submit that these considerations should equally apply to
insurance proceedings conducted in the Commercial List and
Technology and
Construction List of this Court.
note that in
Prestige Form Group v QBE European Operations
, the parties
joined in identifying a separate question which concerned a short question of
construction. In
Commens v Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters
separate question that was ordered to be heard meant that questions of
quantification would be heard separately and subsequently
to the other issues in
dispute. Jackman J took into account that there was a real prospect that
questions of quantification may be
suitable for referral pursuant to
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth). In both cases, it appears
that an order that separate questions be determined facilitated the just, quick
and cheap resolution
of the real issues in the proceedings.
cannot be said that it is the usual practice in the Commercial List or the
Technology and Construction List, when dealing with
insurance proceedings, for
the parties to identify a separate question to be determined separately. That is
not to say that the Court
will refuse to order or even discourage the
identification of separate questions in the conduct of insurance proceedings.
proceedings may lend themselves to the determination of a separate
question where, for example, there is a discrete question of construction
can be answered without reference to extensive or contentious evidence. This was
the approach taken by McDougall J in
Insurance Ltd v RGA
Reinsurance Company of Australia Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 416
recognise that there will be occasions when it is possible to identify a
discrete question which can sensibly be decided separately
and in advance of the
hearing of all other issues, and the overriding purpose is served by answering
the question. Relevant considerations
to take into account include the time that
will be taken to address the separate question, whether there is a prospect that
will dispose of the proceedings, the length and complexity of the
remaining issues and the risk that credit issues of the same persons
in answering the separate question and in a hearing of the remaining issues. The
prospect of delays occasioned by an appeal
against a judgment on a separate
question will often have to be taken into account.
best candidates for separate questions are often those that the parties advance
on a consensual basis. The parties are under a
duty to assist the Court to
further the overriding purpose. That duty requires them to consider whether a
separate question will
facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the
real issues in the proceedings. It is a breach of that duty if a party rejects
proposal for a separate question because they perceive that their forensic
purposes are best served by a slow and expensive resolution
proceedings.
approach my task on the basis that I am required to focus closely on the
particular circumstances of the case and to come to a decision
facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the
proceedings. In doing so, I am mindful
that it will often be the case that the
allure of saving the Court and the parties time by ordering a separate question
to be a false economy. Nevertheless, there will be cases where a
separate question will have utility. I am mindful of the practical
realities of
modern commercial litigation, including the obligation on the parties to assist
the Court to further the overriding
complications
the hearing before me on 3 November 2025, the defendants sought leave to amend
the notice of motion to seek to add a further question
as follows:
2. Is the ‘Limit of Liability’ (or maximum amount payable by the
Defendants collectively) provided for under clause 6.2
of the Policy:
(a) progressively ‘used up’ as and when each cause of action accrues
for an amount payable under the terms of the Policy
subject to the Limit of
Liability; and
(b) reached when a cause or causes of action have accrued for an amount or
aggregated amounts of $100,000,000 payable under the terms
of the Policy subject
to the Limit of Liability?
3. If the answer to question 2(b) is ‘yes’, after the Limit of
Liability has been reached, can any further causes of
action accrue or amounts
become payable under the terms of the Policy subject to the Limit of Liability?
The defendants contend that these questions should be answered as follows:
2(a) – yes; 2(b) – yes; 3 – no.
proposed amended notice of motion also seeks the following order:
1A. Pursuant to rule 6.24 of the UCPR, MTR Corporation (Sydney) NRT Pty
Limited and UGL Rail Services Pty Limited be joined as defendants
proceeding.
plaintiffs only received notice of the proposed amendments late on 29 October
2025. At the hearing before me, the plaintiffs contended
that the application
caught them by surprise and that they had asked the defendants some questions
that had not been answered. I was not disposed to
compel the plaintiffs to deal with the amendment given that it was served
before the hearing. I indicated to the parties I would hear argument on
the notice of motion that had been fixed for hearing.
during the course of argument, senior counsel for the defendants explained the
connection between the separate question that
was originally propounded and the
new separate questions and the application to join other parties. It became
apparent that this
gave rise to some complications.
defendants wish to join to the proceedings two other companies, MTR Corporation
(Sydney) NRT Pty Limited and UGL Rail Services
Pty Limited, who are also
insureds under the policy (and are generally referred to together as
“SJV”). There is evidence
that they have made claims on the policy.
The evidence is that the $100,000,000 policy limit has been eroded and the cover
is limited to $40,000,000. The claims by the plaintiffs comfortably
exceed $40,000,000. Accordingly, there is a prospect of a priority
between the plaintiffs and SJV.
defendants contend that the priority question arises on the plaintiffs’
current Technology and Construction List Statement
and the plaintiffs should
have joined SJV as necessary parties to the proceedings. The plaintiffs do not
accept that contention.
This is not something I need resolve for present
proposed second and third questions are directed to the priority dispute. It can
be seen from the form of questions that an issue
that would arise in answering
them is the question of when a cause of action accrues relevantly for the
operation of the policy.
The issue of when a cause of action accrues is also
relevant to the separate question posed in the original notice of motion. This
suggests, at least as a possibility, that SJV would be interested in the answer
to the original question. It also suggests that the
question of joinder of SJV
should be resolved before the Court contemplates any separate question.
defendants have also made an offer, subject to conditions, that if the first
question is answered in the plaintiffs’ favour
and if the proposed second
and third questions are answered as the defendants contend, they will accept
that they are liable to pay
the remaining $40,000,000 to the plaintiffs. One of
the conditions is that SJV is joined. There are other conditions, including in
relation to costs. The plaintiffs have not had sufficient time to absorb and
respond to the offer. They contend that they need to
know more about the SJV
were represented at the hearing. I was told that they do not oppose the joinder.
Joinder was opposed by the plaintiffs, but really
on the basis that they need
some more information and time to consider their position. I consider this to be
a reasonable position
for them to take (for a short time).
prospect of the first question being an appropriate one may be enhanced if the
second and third questions are also determined
separately and if there is a
likelihood that answers to the questions will (if answered particular ways)
bring the proceedings to
an end. It is too early to say whether that may be the
is possible that the wisdom of the separate question raised in the notice of
motion now before the Court will be affected by a
joinder of SJV and proper
consideration of the new proposed questions. It is possible that the attitude of
the plaintiffs will change
upon further reflection. Their position may change
once they have been given an opportunity to refine the questions and negotiate
aspects of the conditional offer made by the defendants (which could result in
payment to them of the balance of the insurance cover).
As I have said, the
plaintiffs are obliged to assist the Court to further the overriding
else might be said about the separate question propounded by the defendants, I
do not consider that there should be any order
that the question be decided
separately before the status of SJV as a party to the proceedings has been
Observations about the merits of the separate question
things currently stand, I would not be inclined to make an order for the
determination of a separate question, even apart from
the complications that I
have just addressed.
I have noted, the defendants contend that the answer to the question, if
favourable to them, will result in real cost savings,
for the parties and the
Court. They recognise that the answer, if in their favour, will not dispose of
the proceedings, but they
say it will significantly reduce the issues that have
to be determined, which means less evidence to be prepared and possibly many
weeks of saved hearing time. The plaintiffs have served their evidence but the
defendants have not yet done so.
plaintiffs submit that it is not so simple. They accept that there is a
possibility, perhaps even a likelihood, that the trial
would be shortened if the
separate question is answered in the defendants’ favour. But they say that
there are reasons why
the trial would not be any shorter, or why there is at
least uncertainty about the complexion of the hearing of the remaining issues.
The plaintiffs’ contentions can relevantly be distilled into two main
they submit that if the question is answered in the defendants’ favour, it
would not mean that matters relating to costs
and expenses were incurred prior
to 3 December 2018 can all be put to one side. That is because they make
substantial claims for
what are said to be “thickening
preliminaries” and “labour and plant disruption”. They submit
that claims
under these categories arise from design deficiencies that occurred
prior to 3 December 2018, with the consequence that much of the
concerning the alleged pre-December 2018 design deficiencies will still be
relied on by them, even if the defendants have
the separate question determined
in their favour. The plaintiffs contend that even if the defendants are
successful at the hearing
of the proposed separate question, evidence from the
affidavits of 44 of 51 lay witnesses will still be pressed and 15 of 17 expert
reports will still be relied upon. The defendants contend that large parts of
these affidavits and reports will become irrelevant.
The plaintiffs did not
disagree with that contention. But the point remains that there is the prospect
of significant live issues
in the proceedings about pre-December 2018 design
they submit that there is good reason to suppose that at a final hearing
(without any separate question) the defendants may
not, acting rationally and
reasonably, take a position that is all that different to the position that they
would take if there was
a separate question and it was determined in their
favour. That is for several reasons. One is because the defendants could take
the view that they have the limitation point that can be advanced at trial and
proceed on the basis that either: (a) the limitation
point succeeds and
pre-December 2018 claims will fail; or (b) the limitation point fails in which
case the damages are likely to
be so far above the $40,000,000 limit that it is
not worthwhile contesting the pre-December 2018 causes of action. This means
there may be little incentive for the defendants to agitate the
pre-December 2018 claims at trial (or all of them). The plaintiffs
contend that
it is not necessarily true that an answer to the separate question in the
defendants’ favour will result in cost
and time savings.
plaintiffs point to delays that may arise from applications for leave to appeal
from the answer to the separate question. This
is partly addressed because the
defendants indicated that they are willing to undertake not to make such an
application (reserving
their right to appeal against the interlocutory decision
after judgment in the final hearing). However, if the plaintiffs fail at
determination of the separate question, they would be likely to seek leave to
appeal and may expect to have reasonable prospects
of obtaining leave given the
significance of the answer to them. This may occasion delay. I do not consider,
however, that delays
would be lengthy. That is because the parties agree that
the hearing of the separate question would take 1 to 2 days. That could
be fixed in the reasonably near future. Any application for leave to appeal and
appeal after that could probably be determined
within a matter of weeks or
months. The overall delay would likely be measured in months, not years. But it
is still delay.
is also relevant to note that the defendants contend that they understand the
plaintiffs’ argument on the separate question
involves the proposition
that the plaintiffs can sidestep the operation of the limitation statute by
their own conduct, being the
failure to comply with the notification provisions
in clause 3.2. This raises a possibility that the character and consequences of
the plaintiffs’ conduct in respect of notification will arise as a
relevant consideration at the hearing of the separate question.
am not going to order that the question identified in the defendants’
notice of motion be heard separately from and before
all other questions in the
proceedings.
is at least premature to fix the question for determination while the position
of SJV as parties remains unresolved. Moreover,
I am not presently persuaded
that the question will facilitate the overriding purpose. Given the uncertainty
of how an answer to
the question will impact the conduct of the proceedings more
generally, I am not presently persuaded that there is wisdom in fixing
proposed question for separate determination.
is possible that considerations will change if SJV are joined and if questions
resolving the issue of priority can be advanced.
It may be that in those
circumstances there will be questions which could, if resolved one way, bring
the whole proceedings to an
end. The attitude of the plaintiffs may change.
SJV is joined, it would be desirable for the List Statements of the parties to
draw out the priority dispute (assuming there is
one) so the Court and the
parties are properly informed about the issues that relevantly arise. It is
probably desirable to consider
proposed changes before deciding whether there
should be a joinder.
my view, the most efficient way forward is to give the defendants an opportunity
to serve any evidence in support of their application
to amend the notice of
motion filed 9 July 2025 to join SJV and (if it wishes) to refine the wording of
the proposed amendments.
The plaintiffs should have a chance to respond. The
matter can come back before the Court after that time so that the Court and the
parties can consider the most efficient way to advance the matter.
parties should confer about the future conduct of the matter, including in light
of the matters raised in these reasons.
should be reserved because the orders I propose will not dispose of the
defendants’ notice of motion and the issue of
costs is best addressed in
the context of the final disposal of the notice of motion.
make the following orders:
(1) The defendants are to file and serve any proposed amended notice of motion
and any evidence in support by 14 November 2025.
(2) The plaintiffs are to file and serve any evidence in response by 20 November
(3) The matter is listed for directions in the Technology and Construction List
on 21 November 2025.
(4) Costs reserved.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (279 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter