URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSSB/2001/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Newton v Owners Corporation 20154 [2001] NSWSSB 3 (22 June 2001)
Newton v Owners Corporation 20154
[2001] NSWSSB 3
APPEAL NO : SB00/00767
STRATA SCHEME : SP 20154
STRATA SCHEME LINDFIELD NSW 2070
APPELLANT : P A
RESPONDENT : The Owners Corporation – Strata Plan 20154
THE APPEAL : Appeal against an adjudicator’s order
dismissing an application for an order under
section 158 of the Strata
Management Act 1996.
APPEARANCES : Mr Loofs of counsel instructed by Williams Woolf and Zuur,
Solicitors, for the Appellant; Mr J Doyle, Solicitor for
the respondent.
The appeal is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE NOTICE OF APPEAL
On 29 November 2000 P A Newton, the owner of Lot "..." in the scheme,
lodged a notice of appeal against an order dismissing her application
order under
section 158
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
prescribing the making or amendment of an exclusive use
She had claimed in her original application that when she
purchased Lot "..." in 1984 her lot was the beneficiary of an exclusive
by-law which provided as follows:
"The Proprietors of Strata Plan No. 20154... to hereby grant and confer,
subject to the terms and conditions contained herein, on
the Proprietor for the
time being for Lot "..." comprised in a set plan a right of exclusive use,
possession and enjoyment of that
part of the common property as
All the garden area to the rear of villa home known as Lot "...".
Terms and conditions referred to –
To the Proprietor of Lot "..." – the garden area designated part Unit
"..." in the said plan. The proprietor shall have the
right to erect all types
of fencing, plant trees, shrubs, flowers and construct swimming pool, tennis
court and extension of residential
dwellings of Lot "..." and rock garden within
the boundaries of their said garden areas in a form approved by the Ku-ring-gai
Council. The cost of erecting such fences, plants, trees, rock
gardens construct swimming pool, tennis court and extension of residential
dwellings of Lot "..." and maintenance of same in good state of repair is the
sole responsibility of the owners of the unit concerned
and no claim shall be
made on the body Corporate in respect thereof."
The appellant’s claim was that the grant of exclusive use was one of the
attractions when she bought the property. As she
was now considering selling
the property she wanted the terms of the by-law to be clarified. Accordingly,
Ms Newton had sought an
amendment to the by-law at the annual general meeting
held on 11 July 2000. As summarised by the adjudicator, the proposed amendment
would have replaced the words "designated part unit "..." in the said plan:
"with a lengthy definition of the area based on lines in the strata plan
identified by notations along those lines together with crossed
hatched area
marked on the plan."
As described by the adjudicator, the parcel is a long rectangular block Lot 1 is
to the south or south east and Lot "..." to the
north and northwest "behind or
to the north of Lot "..." is an area of common property adjoining a strip of
common property running
along the western boundary this northern area which is
significantly larger than Lot "..." (including the two courtyards marked on
strata plan) is the area which is subject of the present dispute.
The Adjudicator dismissed the appeal and gave the following as the reasons:
"There are a number of problems with this application. First, it is made
against one lot owner, not against the owners corporation.
It is the owners
corporation who makes, amends and repeals by-laws. Second, the plans submitted
are so small as to be unclear.
In particular, it is difficult or impossible to
discern the notations identifying the lines with reference to which the
defines the area over which exclusive use is sought. Third, I have
grave doubt about the validity of the original by-law. A by-law
giving special
rights over common property to a lot owner is usually couched with some
specificity so that all concerned can see
exactly what activities are allowed to
be carried out in relation to the piece of common property. In this case, the
been drafted so as to allow almost any activity on the common
property. Fourth, the application is, to some extent, hypothetical.
clear from the application that the applicant has any real dispute to be
THE REASONS FOR THE
The reasons given for appealing are that the Adjudicator erred
"a) failing to properly construe the terms of the subject by-law;
b) failing to have due regard to the plans accompanying the said
c) having failed to properly construe the by-law, failing to make the orders
sought by the Applicant;
d) taking into account irrelevant considerations, namely the terms of the
Development Consent granted March 1983 in purporting to
construe the said
e) purporting to construe the said by-law by reference to what the
Adjudicator considered ‘usual’ by reference to by-laws
special rights generally;
f) finding that the dispute was ‘to some extent, hypothetical’
when it involved the construction of a by-law affecting
present rights and had
been the subject of a body corporate
In both the original application
and in the appeal the named respondent was Mr C Iacono the owner of Lot "..." in
the scheme. However,
on 18 January 2001 it was resolved by the three lot owners
in the scheme, that there would be no objection to an amendment to the
indicate that the respondent was the owners corporation and not Mr C Iacono. Mr
Doyle of Cowley Hearne Lawyers then announced
his appearance for the owners
corporation.
At the hearing of the appeal on 1 March 2001 the
representatives of the appellant and the respondent presented their respective
in the form of submissions, both oral and written.
The matter was
adjourned for further written submissions to be filed. Final written
submissions were received on 27 March 2001.
THE APPELLANT’S CASE
On behalf of the appellant written submissions filed in support of the
appeal commenced with the proposition that the amendment that
Ms Newton seeks to
by-law 28 is one which clarifies the meaning of that by-law. The appellant
contends that the by-law as it stands
entitles her to exclusive use of the
garden area to the rear of her unit, which she tended and cared for since
purchasing the unit
The proper construction of the existing
by-law which the appellant seeks clarification is that it gives the appellant
the rights referred
to over the common property land as clarified in the
proposed amendment.
Counsel for the appellant contended that there can be
no real doubt as to the intended meaning of by-law 28. The area expressed to
the subject of the by-law, was all the garden area to rear of villa home unit
known as Lot "...". It was the only area outside
the courtyards of each unit
which could be a garden in the physical sense. No other area could readily fit
the description. The
ordinary meaning of the word ‘rear’ would
require the area to be at the back of the unit. Given the permitted uses
by the by-law (erection of a swimming pool, tennis court etc) the only
land which would accommodate such uses is the common property
When the appellant in 1984 purchased the lot she had paid a
premium for it because of the exclusive use by-law. This gave her a valuable
right. It wasn’t the case of the appellant seeking a windfall. She was
simply asking the owners corporation to clarify the
position in order to
preserve the rights for which she had already paid. It was therefore
unreasonable for the owners corporation
not to consent to such
clarification.
In relation to the proposition that by-law 28 itself is in
conflict with the development consent because of condition 1 referred to
the development consent condition may not now be operative and even if it is the
Council may not insist upon it. The consent
was in fact varied on 2 March 1988
to allow Ms Newton to erect a garden shed. At the time the Council required her
to seek a variation
of Conditions 1 and 2. Having considered that issue and
having all the relevant material before it the Council varied the consent
March 1988 to remove the conditions and to permit Ms Newton to use the land
exclusively. Therefore there is no conflict with
the development
If however one takes the Council action on 2 March 1988, to
simply be a variation of Conditions 1 and 2 for the purpose of allowing
application in relation to the garden shed this never the less means that the
full force of Condition 1 no longer appies. Accordingly,
rather than dismiss
the application, the Board could still make the order sought by Ms Newton and a
make it conditional upon her
obtaining a further amendment of Condition 1 of the
original consent.
In further submissions, received on 27 March 2001
counsel for the appellant reiterated the contention that there was no conflict
the development consent. If there was a conflict, between the proposed
by-law and the development consent, then it must be assumed
that the Council is
aware of the by-law and of its apparent conflict with the development consent.
There is no suggestion that there
have been any attempts by the Council in
prosecuting the owners corporation nor anyone else as a consequence of this
apparent conflict.
The position was that the by-law has remained for more
than 15 years. Therefore the suggestion that the owners corporation would be
liable to prosecution for illegality is not one which has any real substance.
Any illegality complained of must be real and not
Counsel for
the appellant suggests that to avoid any question of there being a conflict
between the by-law and the development consent
a further order that it is not to
would simply make an order which would be subject to take effect unless, and
until, the development
consent granted on 24 April 1984 by Ku-ring-gai Council
is varied so as to permit by-law 28 being in force.
THE RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
The respondent owners corporation’s submission was as
The order that the Board make
the by-law in the terms sought by the appellant was beyond the jurisdiction of
the Board because such
a by-law would be in breach of the development consent
which approved the subdivision. The owners corporation would be liable for
prosecution if it sought to make such a by-law because by development consent
403-82 (17 March 1983) Ku-rin-gai Municipal Council
consented to a strata
subdivision on condition:
"that all of the curtilage land to the west and north of the building
containing the driveway and landscaped areas, be common property
strata plan and not form part of the proposed allotment three in the plan of
subdivision."
Section 76(a)
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
provides that development must not be carried out unless the
development is carried out in accordance with the consent.
The Strata Schemes Board
cannot conceivably make a finding that an owners corporation is acting
unreasonably in refusing to make an
amendment which would result in the owners
corporation committing an offence.
The power of the Strata
Schemes Board is limited to making lawful orders consistent with the development
The by-law does not have the
meaning ascribed to it by the appellant in any event as the terms and conditions
of the by-law describe
the area granted as "the garden area designated part unit
"...", in the said plan". SP20154 does not show the area now sought to
subject to the exclusive use by-law as being part of Lot "...". If it did it
would not have received the sub-division certificate
because it would have been
in breach of the consent.
The proposed amendment would
financially benefit the appellant at the expense of the other owners, without
compensation. The proposed
amendment would deprive the owners and occupants of
Lots "..." of a significant area of landscaped open space intended under
development
consent to the subdivision to be available to
The determination of the
owners corporation was consistent with the planning and decision of Ku-ring-gai
Council and therefore it
is presumed to be
reasonable.
The amendment requested by
the appellant is in fact a request for a new by-law which is beyond the power of
the Strata Schemes Board.
The adjudicator did
not err according to the respondent. The adjudicator did not misconstrue the
by-law. He found that it was too
poorly drafted to construe. Even if the
by-law did mean what the appellant says it did, it would still be unreasonable,
of Condition 1 of the development consent and
ultra vires
the adjudicator to find as the appellant suggests. It is relevant and not
unreasonable for an owners corporation to have regard
to a considered planning
decision of the Council.
In written submissions the respondent further
argues that if the adjudicator or this Board were to find that the owners
corporation
had been unreasonable in refusing to make the by-law, then it would
prescribe amendment of the by-law. Under section 207 such an
order is taken to
be a resolution of the owners corporation and section 208 provides that the
resolution cannot be altered except
by unanimous resolution. The amended by-law
will therefore be taken to be adopted by the owners corporation and the owners
corporation
will not be able to change it to avoid prosecution. If the Board
purports to make a decision that has the legal affect of resulting
in an offence
under the Act, the decision must be
ultra vires,
it is argued
This is a matter of some complexity. The appellant in effect is seeking to have
a registered by-law clarified by an order prescribing
the making of a new by-law
which describes in detail the part of common property which is to be the subject
of the exclusive use
and/or special privilege by-law.
The nature of by-laws should first be considered.
By-laws bind the owners corporation and the owner as if the by-laws had been
signed and sealed by the owners corporation and each
owner; they contain mutual
covenants to observe and perform all the provisions of the by-law. Exclusive
use or special privilege
by-laws made by an owners corporation under section 53
are also mutual covenants between the owners corporation and the owner for
benefit the by-laws are made. However it is clear that they do not create any
interest in land. The common property over
which exclusive use or a special
privilege is granted
remains common property
. An exclusive use or special
privilege by-law such as the present one may be revoked by the owners
corporation in accordance with
a special resolution and either, with the written
consent of the owner of Lot "...", or by order of an adjudicator, if the consent
is withheld unreasonably.
The original by-law 28 purports to confer on the owner of Lot "...":
"A right of exclusive use of, possession and enjoyment of part of the common
property... all the garden area to rear of villa home
know as Lot "...""
At face value I cannot see that this is in conflict with the development consent
condition 1, which merely requires that ‘the
area be common property
within the strata plan and not form part of the proposed allotment 3 in the plan
of subdivision’.
The fact that the by-law gives exclusive use or special
privilege to an owner over the common property, does not mean it ceases to
common property or in some way becomes part of a lot. It is arguable of course
that the effect of the by-law may be an attempt
to circumvent the development
consent condition.
Of greater concern is the breadth and indeterminate nature of the exclusive use
and special privilege in respect of this common property
(which remains common
property) that is:
"The right to erect all types of fencing, plant trees, shrubs, flowers and
construct swimming pool, tennis court and extension of
residential dwellings of
Lot "..." and rock garden within the boundaries of the said garden areas in the
form approved by the Ku-ring-gai
Municipal Council."
This indeterminate and open ended "right", particularly as significant additions
to common property without any limitation or description
appear to be sanctioned
raises the question whether the owners’ corporation has the power to make
a by-law in those wide terms.
Having said all of the above, there is dispute as to which part of the common
property by law 28 makes subject to the exclusive use
and special privilege in
the manner described.
On the one hand there is a lot of strength in the appellant’s submission
that it sensibly could only mean that area described
in the proposed amendment.
Other areas are already part of Lot "..." and not common property. Furthermore,
construction of a swimming
pool, tennis court and an extension of residential
dwellings could only occur in such an area.
On the other hand, the by-law is sufficiently vague and badly drafted to raise
doubts, because it also speaks of the garden area
designated part unit "..." in
the said plan. There is no such area designated on the strata plan.
However, returning to the application before the adjudicator (now the subject of
the appeal before this Board) it is to be noted
that it was for an order under
section 158. The relevant part of section 158 provides as follows: -
158 Order with respect to by-laws conferring exclusive rights or privileges
over common
(1) An Adjudicator may make an order prescribing the making, amendment or
repeal, in terms of the order, of a by-law if the Adjudicator
(a) on application made by an owner, that the owners corporation has
unreasonably refused to make a by-law of the kind referred to
(b) on application made by an owner or owners corporation, that an owner of a
lot, or the lessor of a leasehold strata scheme, has
unreasonably refused to
consent to the terms of a proposed by-law of that kind, or to the proposed
amendment or repeal of such a
(c) .............
It is to be further noted that the only power which I have, or the adjudicator
had, on an application made by an owner, was to
a by-law, not amend
or repeal. The words ‘amendment or repeal’ relate to an application
under 158(1)(b). This is of
some importance as the question does arise whether
the issue is the reasonableness or otherwise of the by-law as a whole or merely
the amendment.
Subsections 158(2) to (5) provide that:
158 Order with respect to by-laws conferring exclusive rights or privileges
over common property
(2) In considering whether to make an order under this section, an Adjudicator
must have regard
(a) the interests of all owners in the use and enjoyment of their lots and
common property, and
(b) the rights and reasonable expectations of any owner deriving or anticipating
a benefit under a by-law of the kind referred to
(3) An Adjudicator must not determine an application referred to in subsection
(1)(a) by an order prescribing the making of a by-law
in terms to which the
applicant or, in the case of a leasehold strata scheme, the lessor of the scheme
is not prepared to consent.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (1), an Adjudicator may determine that an
owner has unreasonably refused consent even though the
owner already has the
exclusive use or privileges that are the subject of the proposed
(5) An order under this section, when recorded under section 209, has effect as
if its terms were a by-law (but subject to any relevant
order of a superior
If I am to deal with this matter under section 158 then I must determine the
application as if it were for an order prescribing the
making of a
by-law in the terms specified rather than simply deciding whether it was
reasonable for the owners corporation to refuse to clarify
the old by-law.
In having regard to the rights and reasonable expectations of the owner of Lot
"...", the history of this matter is, of course, relevant.
In particular, it is
relevant that a by-law had been registered which appeared to give a significant
benefit to the owner of Lot
"...". However, this particular consideration must
be tempered by the further consideration that the limitations and deficiencies
of the terms of the by-law should have been apparent at the time, including any
difficulties with the description of the particular
part of the common property
to which they related.
It may be that the price which was paid for Lot "...", reflect that by-law 28
was in place as contended by the appellant. The by-law
was registered on 3 July
However in determining whether it was unreasonable for the owners corporation to
refuse to make a new by-law, the interests of all
owners in the use and
enjoyment of common property must be taken into account. The area of the common
property as described in the
clarified by-law is of considerable dimension. It
is readily accessible to all owners, not just the owner of Lot "...", and the
potential of its use and enjoyment being available to
significantly adds to the value of Lots "...".
More importantly, leaving aside the question as to whether the development
consent (at least in spirit), is breached by such a by-law,
as I have already
indicated, the rights it purports to give to the owner of Lot "..." are so broad
and open ended, particularly as
they may involve considerable additions to
common property, as to raise real questions as to the power of the owners
corporation
to make it. For all these reasons it does not seem to me to be
unreasonable for the owners corporation to have refused to make such
I have dealt with this matter as an application under section 158. I have also
in passing, considered whether the application could
be considered a dispute
under section 138 on the basis that this is not really a dispute about the
making of a new by-law but simply
a dispute about the meaning of the old one.
Although an adjudicator (and now this Board) has power to make an order under a
of the Act other than that specified in the application, to deal with
the matter under the general power raises procedural fairness
Furthermore, I have some doubts that I can make general declarations as to the
meaning of words in a by-law under section
138. I therefore propose to
determine the matter as an application under section 158. I cannot be satisfied
that it was unreasonable
for the owners corporation to make the new by-law for
the reasons which I have stated above. Therefore I dismiss the appeal.
This of course still leaves the original by-law 28 as a registered by-law. I
regret to say that Ms Newton (or the other owners)
may have to seek
clarification of this by-law elsewhere.
John Bordon
Strata Schemes
Residential Tribunal
22 June 2001
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (48.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter