URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSSB/2001/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Truran v Owners Corporation SP 22049 [2001] NSWSSB 12 (19 November 2001)
Truran v Owners Corporation SP 22049
[2001] NSWSSB 12
November 2001)
STRATA SCHEMES BOARD OF NEW SOUTH WALES
APPEAL NO : SB01/00198
SCHEME : SP22049
ADDRESS OF : "..."
STRATA SCHEME CREMORNE NSW
APPELLANTS : K and K Truran
RESPONDENT : Owners corporation
KEYWORDS : By-laws – keeping of animals
I set aside the decision of the adjudicator made on application
SA01/00794 on 9 March 2001.
REASONS FOR DECISION
K and K Truran ("the appellants") own lot 4 in this strata scheme. They also
own a desexed female Samoyed dog. This appeal is about
whether an Adjudicator's
decision to order the removal of the dog in application SA01/00794 on 9 March
2001 should stand.
The decision of the adjudicator was made pursuant to
section 150
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
. That section
provides as follows.
150 Order relating to keeping of animals
(1) An Adjudicator may order a person who the Adjudicator considers is
keeping an animal on a lot or common property in contravention
of the by-laws
to cause the animal to be removed from the parcel within a specified time,
and to be kept away from
the parcel.
(2) An order under subsection (1) ceases to have effect if the keeping of
the animal on the lot or common property is subsequently
authorised in
accordance with the by-laws.
(3) An application for an order under subsection (1) may be made only by an
owners corporation, a strata managing agent, the
lessor of a leasehold strata
scheme, an owner, any person having an estate or interest in a lot or an
occupier of a lot.
(4) An Adjudicator may, by order, declare that the applicant for the order
may keep an animal on a lot or common property in
such manner as is specified
in the order if the Adjudicator is satisfied that:
(a) subclause (2) of by-law 16 in Schedule 1 (or a provision to the like
effect in any by-laws) is in force in relation to
the strata scheme, and
(b) the application is made with the consent of the owner of the
applicant's lot (if the applicant is not the owner), and
(c) the owners corporation has unreasonably withheld its consent to the
keeping by the applicant of the animal on the lot
or the common
(4A) An application for an order under subsection (4) may be made only
(a) an owner of a lot in the strata scheme, or
(b) an occupant of a lot in the strata scheme, with the consent of the
owner of the lot.
(5) Whether or not an order under this section is consistent with any
by-law, the order binds:
(a) in the case of a freehold strata scheme, each owner and occupier of a
lot in and the owners corporation for the strata
(b) in the case of a leasehold strata scheme, the lessor of the scheme and
each owner, sublessee and occupier of a lot
in and the owners corporation
for the strata scheme, or
(c) if the strata scheme concerned is for a stratum parcel, each person
who is bound by the strata management statement
for the building and its
The relevant by-law at the time of the adjudication,
read as follows:
16 Keeping of animals
(1) Subject to section 49 (4), an owner or occupier of a lot must not,
without the approval in writing of the owners corporation,
keep any animal
on the lot or the common property.
(2) The owners corporation must not unreasonably withhold its approval of
the keeping of an animal on a lot or the common
Subsequently, the by-law was amended to prohibit
the keeping of animals (except for guide dogs and the like). This decision does
not require me to consider the amended by-law.
The respondents (the
owners corporation) have raised an initial jurisdictional point. They say that
in considering this appeal, I
should only consider whether two discrete criteria
were satisfied. The first is whether a person was keeping an animal on a lot
common property. The second is whether that activity was in contravention of
the by-laws. The respondents say that the decision
of the adjudicator was so
limited, and that my decision should likewise be limited. They say that I
should not therefore take into
account matters such as whether or not it was or
is reasonable or appropriate to keep an animal on a lot or common property.
The appellants disagree with that point. They say that in deciding
whether to order removal of an animal an adjudicator (and hence
the Board) must
consider part (2) of the by-law, which they say requires an adjudicator to
decide if a refusal had been unreasonably
I disagree with the
view put by the owners corporation, but I do not unreservedly accept the view of
the appellants. These are my
First, s151(1) imposes a
discretion on the adjudicator. The sub-section uses the word "may". It does
not say "must". Other sections
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
dealing with the powers of an adjudicator use variously the word "may" without
qualification, as in
(1), the word "may" with qualification, and the word
"must": see, for example, the contrasting provisions of
163 Dismissal of application on certain grounds
(1) An Adjudicator must, by order, dismiss an application for an order under
this Part if satisfied that mediation was appropriate
and was not
(2) If the ground for an application is:
(a) the absence of a quorum at a meeting, or
(b) a defect, irregularity or deficiency of notice or time,
an Adjudicator may, by order, dismiss the application if the Adjudicator
believes that no substantial injustice has resulted.
also, for example,
(1) and (2), and
(1) and (2).
satisfied that the word "may" gives the decision maker a discretion. Such a
discretion must be exercised within proper limits
and in accordance with the
scope and purpose of the legislation: see
R v Australian Broadcasting
; ex parte 2HD Pty. Ltd.
[1979] HCA 62
(1979) 144 CLR 45
and purpose of the
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
are clearly to do with
regulating in a harmonious way the interests of those that live in the communal
environment of a strata scheme.
Such regulation includes the ability on a
reasonable basis to keep an animal on such a scheme, unless the by-laws prohibit
the keeping
of animals.
The discretion, in my view, allows an adjudicator
or the Board to consider in making a decision under
the context in which
the application is made, and to consider among other things whether it is
reasonable to make an order that the
animal should be removed. This is not to
is automatically a review of the reasonableness of the
decision of the owners corporation in refusing permission to keep a dog.
from anything else, such a decision does not have to be made before an owners
corporation can make a 150(1) application. In
addition, such a review is
expressly provided for in
The issue of when an animal is kept
"in contravention of the by-laws" is not as straightforward as the owners
corporation’s
submissions would suggest. Clearly if an animal is being
kept and no application for its keeping has been made, there can be no
of written approval, and the keeping is in breach. But what happens when, as in
this case, an approval has been sought
and refused? Does "in contravention of
the by-laws" in such a case only mean in contravention of a reasonable
withholding of approval?
Or does it mean in contravention of any withholding of
approval, even one that is flagrantly unreasonable?
In my view the better
answer is as set out above: that on deciding whether the animal should be
removed I should consider the relevant
circumstances. Those circumstances
extend at least, when an owners corporation has refused permission, to the
reasons for such refusal,
especially when, as in this case, the fact of refusal
by the executive committee was one of the matters put in support of the
application
made to the adjudicator by the owners corporation.
parties spent a great deal of time in evidence over matters which, although
apparently helpful, had in my view little relevance.
The relevant factors in my
view were as follows.
The appellants purchased their lot on or about 29
September 2000, and settled some time around 20 October.
At the time the
appellants purchased their lot, the by-law in force provided that animals could
be kept with written permission of
the owners corporation, which could not be
unreasonably withheld.
At the time the appellants purchased their lot a
"beware of the dog" sign was displayed on the exterior of the scheme, which was
by the applicants, and which lead them to believe that they could keep
their dog in the scheme. This sign, which was not erected
by the owners
corporation, does not in my view estop the owners corporation. But it does make
it harder for the owners corporation
to suggest that the appellants should have
carried out investigations which might have uncovered what Mr Gunn, the
secretary of the
scheme, called a "prima facie ‘no animals’"
policy". (I note that such a policy would not, unless it was in the form
properly made and registered by-law, relieve the owners corporation of its duty
to consider each case on its merits: see, for
example, the decision in
(Strata Schemes Board 11 February 1993, member
The dog has been living in the scheme since about the time the
appellants moved in. (The exact date is not clear, but it would appear
evidence tendered in the adjudication and not contested that the animal has been
with the appellants in the scheme since some
time in October 2000).
September 2000 the appellants posted a request to the strata managing agent
seeking permission to keep their dog in the lot.
The letter read relevantly as
"We do have a Samoyed dog which we would like to join us....Our family
purchased Ulli for our protection after our being annoyed by
intruders...May we
assure you that Ulli is not a yappy dog, completely house trained and of an
extremely gentle nature."
The secretary informally
consulted members of the executive committee, who informally decided that the
request should be refused.
The reasons for refusal are set out in paragraph 16
of Mr Gunn’s statement dated 28 May 2001. They are as follows.
"(1) It was likely the appellants’ dog would bark and, given the close
proximity of the units, disturb other occupants’
enjoyment of their
(2) Samoyeds are quite large dogs and as such, not suited to living in a
Strata Plan such as ours with small outdoor courtyards;
(3) It would set a precedent and make it difficult to refuse other occupiers
from having a dog and hence, may result in the untenable
situation of having
many dogs in a relatively small area; and
(4) The appellants’ dog would foul the common
The secretary also had private reasons for
opposing dogs which he said he did not communicate at that time to other members
executive committee. I will deal with those issues later.
November 2000 the executive committee held a meeting. The appellants did not
attend, although the meeting was brought to their
executive committee resolved formally to reject the request for the reasons
given above.
As I noted above, one of the relevant issues is the
reasonableness of the decision of the executive committee at the time of
The only evidence before the executive committee was evidence
that the dog was Samoyed, not "yappy", completely house trained and
The executive committee had a duty to consider the dog in
question, and make decisions on that basis. They had no right to make
assumptions
assumptions.
It was, I think, open to the owners corporation to decide
that the evidence provided by the applicants was too scanty, and to either
refuse or adjourn the application on that basis. That is not a view which I
would necessarily take, but it was at least arguable.
It was, in my view,
unfortunate that the applicants did not attend the meeting of the executive
committee that decided the issue,
and I do not really understand why their legal
adviser told them not to. But the owners corporation did not refuse the
application
on the basis that the information was insufficient; it refused the
application on the basis of a number of findings of fact made
by the executive
Turning to the reasons given by the committee, it is clear
that at the time the decision was made reason (1) – the likelihood
barking which (b) disturbed other occupants, was not a reasonable basis for a
decision. While it may be safe to assume that
most dogs will bark on occasion,
it is a significantly different matter to assume that the dogs barking will be
of sufficient volume,
timing and frequency to disturb occupants. Subsequently,
there has been an allegation that the dog does bark from time to time,
at night, but no allegation that the barking is of such sufficient volume,
timing and frequency to disturb occupants.
Reason (2) was based on
assumptions about the needs of Samoyeds with no evidence in
Reason (3) was a fundamental misunderstanding of the job of the
executive committee in making a decision. The executive committee
was charged
with the job of deciding about this particular dog on its merits. The same
would apply to future decisions. It was
a fundamental error to refuse the
animal on that basis.
Reason (4) – that the dog would foul common
property - was, again, an assumption made without any basis.
None of the
reasons given for refusal of the dog was reasonable. None would provide a basis
for ordering the dog to be removed or
for upholding the decision of the
adjudicator.
But in my view that is not the end of the story. As noted
above, the application and the appeal are not simply reviews of the decision
the owners corporation.
Was there any other material on which it might be
possible to base a decision to order the removal of the animal?
made at the hearing of the private reasons pertaining to Mr Gunn and in
particular to his wife.
In his statement, Mr Gunn referred to two
additional personal reasons he had for not wanting the dog to live in the strata
They were first that his wife had a longstanding fear of dogs. Second,
that the dog would (Mr Gunn assumed) be kept in the courtyard
which was (Mr Gunn
assumed) too small and therefore (Mr Gunn assumed) would be "lonely, bored,
and/or unhappy" and "may whine and
disturb other occupants".
I will turn
first to Ms Gunn’s fear of dogs. There was significant evidence in
support of this condition, and I accept that
Ms Gunn is frightened of, and
rendered nervous by, dogs.
This was not one of the reasons given for
refusal of permission, but in my view it is part of the context.
has been some dispute about the extent to which this fear is genuine. In my
view it is.
Does it preclude a person having a dog on the scheme? In
my view it does not. I can see no reason why one lot owner's dislike of
should be elevated against another’s affection for dogs. The by-laws in
force at the time make it clear that a dog might
be allowed to be kept on the
scheme. It was not open to the owners corporation to take the view that,
despite the by-laws, dogs
would always be refused. Indeed, it was not open to
the owners corporation to take the view that there should be what Mr Gunn
to as a "prima facie ‘no animals’" policy. If the view of
the owners corporation had been that Ms Gunn’s condition
meant that no
animals or no dogs could be allowed, it has been open to the owners corporation
to change the by-law accordingly.
No change had been made at the time the
application was made by the Trurans.
Further, although Ms Gunn might not
wish to contact dogs, in my view, it would not be difficult for the parties to
arrange their affairs
so that a dog would be unlikely to confront Ms Gunn, or if
agreement could not be reached for conditions to be imposed to minimise
of contact or proximity.
I turn to Mr Gunn’s second reason which,
as I have demonstrated above, depends upon a series of assumptions by Mr Gunn.
untested assumptions do not strengthen the case of the owners
corporation.
It has been suggested that the physical constraints of the
scheme make it undesirable to keep a dog of this type. No expert evidence
support of this allegation has been provided, and I note that a report from the
veterinary surgeon whose patient the dog is dated
3 July 2001 states that the
animal is "extremely healthy and well cared for", and that letters supplied to
the adjudicator from the
occupiers of lots 1, 5 and 7 and dated around December
2000 all three lot owners indicated that the presence of the dog had not caused
any disturbance. I am satisfied that the physical surroundings in which the dog
resides are appropriate.
I am satisfied that at the time of the
application to the owners corporation the dog in question was, as stated in the
letter of application,
not "yappy", completely house trained and extremely
gentle. I am further satisfied that at the time of application the dog had not
caused any nuisance or disturbance on the strata scheme. I am further satisfied
that there was no information before the owners
corporation or, indeed,
available at the time of the application which could give rise to a reasonable
finding that it was inappropriate
to allow the dog on the strata
There was, and remains, no reasonable argument to support the
refusal of permission to keep the dog. There were arguments in favour
approval, albeit somewhat scanty. Those reasons have been bolstered by
subsequent evidence in particular from the veterinary
surgeon, which would have
been apposite at the time.
I have carefully considered all the evidence
given and submissions made. I have taken into account the desirability of an
corporation being able to manage its own affairs without outside
interference.
In my view, having regard to all the relevant
circumstances, it was and is inappropriate to order the removal of the dog.
Richard Phillipps
Residential Tribunal
19 November 2001.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (38.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter